HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

A DISCOVRSE OPENING THE NATVRE OF THAT EPISCOPACIE, WHICH IS EXERCISED IN
ENGLAND.

Wherein, With all Humility, are represented some Considerations tending to the
much-desired Peace, and long expected Reformation, of This our Mother Church.

By the Right Honorable ROBERT LORD BROOK.

LONDON, Printed by R. C for Samuel Cartwright, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Hand and Bible in Ducke-Lane. 1641.

TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS, WITH THE HONORABLE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BURGESSES,
Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN Epistles Dedicatory, sometimes men render an account to the world, by what
Principles they were Led to such a work Sometimes they maintain and
strengthen, what they have done, by New Arguments. Sometimes ad captandam
Benevolentiam, they present their whole Design, in a brief Epitomy, that so
they may invite the Reader. But I shall do None of These.

The first I need not: For if the Ten Kings must hate the Whore, Eat her
flesh, and Burn her with her fire; Will not every good Christian offer
himself a ready Servant to This Work, a Willing Soldier under this Standard?

The Second, I cannot; without questioning my own Diligence, or (which is
worse) my Readers Gentleness: Either of which every Writer carefully shunneth.

The third I will not, left I be injurious to my self: For, Humane Nature is
ever Novorum avida; and the Soul of vast comprehension; the Book therefore
would seem but Crambe bis cocta, to All that read the Epistle; and but create
a nausea to Those that had already gathered all, by viewing the Breviate.

If it be the Glory of a King's Daughter to be clothed in Needle-worke; surely
This poor Birth will need more then Figleaves, to make it Beautiful. When it
is Clothed with its Best Robes, It will not be worthy to appear in so Great a
Presence. How much less then, when presented only in a bare and naked Sceleton?

The Work then of These Lines, is to lay prostrate at Your Feet (most Noble
Lords, and Gentlemen) the Retirements of Your Humble Servant in the Last
Recesse.

If you shall ask me, how I dare take the boldness to interrupt Your more
serious Thoughts, with These Things of Little Worth: All I shall plead for my
self is but This, the bow must be sometimes unbent; and if then This Pamphlet
may be called for, it is all I aspire to. For, Your Protection, and Your
Patronage, not Your Trouble, is My Request: Of which being no whit Doubtful;
with all Humility commending This to Your Noble Favor; Your selves and
Counsels to the Almighty; I crave le^ve for ever to remain

Your most obliged and devoted Servant ROBERT BROOK.

The CONTENTS of the Sections, and Chapters, in the following Discourse.
SECT. I. CHAP. I.
THe Subject Stated Not a Bishops Name, but Office Opposed: nor Office in
general, but Such. Such a Bishop repug^nt to State-Policie; Antiquity;
Scripture. The Method pro^unded for the first Section, containing Arguments
drawn ^^om State-Policie. fol. 1. Chap. II. Of Our Bishops Birth; how
unsuitable to his Office: how Hurtful to Himself and Others: How incongruous
^ State-Policie. 3 III. A Bishops Breeding not fit for his Calling: against
Rules of Policy. Some Objections answered. 5 IV. Of Our Bishops Election;
whether suitable to State-Policie. Of his Office: Principles, or Maxims, by
which he governs: and Practice according to Those Principles. 11 V. Of the
Nature of Indifference; what it is: and in what i^ h^th place: whether in Re,
or only in Appearance to our Understandings. 19 VI. Where the Power of
Indifferent Things seems to be fixed: whether in the Church, or not: or if in
the Church, How far. Of the Churches Deciding Commanding Power. Of Doubts,
and how we must deport our selves under Doubts. 30 VII. Of the Consequents to a
Bishops Office. His Relations Upward and Dependances. Of his Vote in
Parliament. Relations Downward: How repugnant to State Policy. 35 VIII. What
Good our Bishops can do to the State, is examined, whether they have been, or
can be, friends to Monarchy, or Civil Government. 42 IX. How suitable such
Episcopacie can be to Monarchy, is farther considered. Whether the Best form
of Church Government be Monarchical. Whether other Forms may not well stand
with Civil Monarchy. How Church and State Government differ and agree. 48 X.
Who it is that opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God.
Who is properly a Papist: and what is Popery: Why the Pope is most properly
Antichrist: How such Episcopacy differs, or agrees with Popery. 53
SECTION II. Considers how Consonant such Episcopacy is either to sound
Antiquity or Scripture.
Chap. I. Some Antiquities produced by a late most Learned and Reverend Patron
of Episcopacie, are discussed. 65 II. Our Bishops Election, Delegation, etc.
Examined by Antiquity. 69 III. Of Ordination, whether proper only to Bishops:
or equally committed to all Presbyters: discussed by Ancient Authorities. 72
IV. Of the Name and Office of a Bishop in Scripture. How little, or how much
the Scripture makes for, or against Bishops, Diverse Texts are discussed. 75 V.
What form of Church Government seems most consonant to Scripture. Whether
Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall. 81 VI. Of the consequemts that
may possibly follow the change of Church Government. Of the great danger of
Schisms, Sects and Heresies. Of One new Sect to come in the Last Days.
Whether Bishops, can keep the Church from Schisms, Sects, etc. What is, or
who are the Cause of most Schisms among us. 86 VII. The danger of Schisms and
Sects more fully discussed: the Nature and Danger of Anabaptisme, Separatisme,
and Unlicensed Preaching. The conclusion with an affectionate desire of peace
and union. 98
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 24. Affection, for Affectation p. 19. l. 2. Indifferent, for
indifference. p. 26. l. 35. at one any time, for at any one time. p. 5. l. ^0.
Joy for Ivy. p. 56. l. 11. may be the more, for may be more. p. 88. l. 2. of
all Civil, etc. for of all. Civil, etc. p. 94. l. 32. Orders, for Orders from
Rome. p. 98. l. 7. dele now.

A DISCOVRSE OPENING THE NATVRE OF THAT EPISCOPACY WHICH IS EXERCISED IN
ENGLAND: Wherein, with all humility, are represented some Considerations
tending to the much-desired Peace, and long expected Reformation, of this our
Mother Church.
CHAP. I.
IAyme not at Words, but Things; not loving to fight with Shadows. It is not
the Look, much less the Name of a Bishop that I fear, or quarrel with; it
is his Nature, his Office, that displeases me.

Nor yet his Nature, or Office in General; but Such, and so clothed, or
rather veyled, with such and such adjuncts.

Bishop-signifies, either one that is to Preach, Administer the Sacraments,
Exhort, Reprove, Convince, Excommunicate, etc. not only in some one distinct
Congregation, his own Parish; but in many, several Congregations crowded up
together in one strange (and, for long, unknown) word, a Diocese.

Civil Government; which must needs draw on a mighty Train, and cloth it
self with glorious Robes of long extended and magnifique styles, scarce to be
marshaled by a better Herald than Elibu, who could give no Titles.

Overseer, that, over one single Congregation, has a joint care with the
Elders, Deacons, and rest of the Assembly, who are all fellow helpers, yea
servants each to others faith.

This last is a Bishop, of the first Institution; of Christ's allowance; settled
in diverse Churches, even in the Apostles times.

The first is of the second Century, when Doctrine, Discipline, all Religion,
began to waine. For even then Mysterious Antichrist was not only conceived,
but began to quicken.

The second rose last, (though first intended by the Churches Enemy.) Rising up
while the world was busy, looking all one way; as amazed at the new Beast,
successor to the Dragon.

This is now our Adversary; One monstrously compounded, of different, yea
opposite Offices; and those the greatest, both Ecclesiasticke and Civil: for
which he seems no way able, no way fit; and that for many reasons, which may
be brought from Scripture, Church-Antiquity, State Policy.

I shall begin with the last, (as that I now aim at most.) Here let us view
our Bishop a while as a private man, before his Office. Next as a Lord over
Church and State, in his Office. Then, with some necessary Consequents to his
Office; as now it is exercised in this Kingdom. Thus shall we quickly judge
how suitable to true Policy of State, are either the Antecedents, Concomitants,
or Consequents, of this too officious, two-headed Bishop.

Antecedents to his Office, are his Birth, Education, Election, Ordination, etc.

Concomitants, (or rather Ingredients) we may call, that almost illimited
power, both Intensive, in sole Ordination; Jurisdiction ( Directive; by
Injunctions, Canons, etc. Corrective, by Excommunication, Suspension,
Deprivation, etc*) As also Extensive, over so vast a Diocese.

Hither also we may refer his power Iuridicall or Legislative, in
Parliament; Judicial in many Great, yea Civil Tribunals. And (of all monsters
most ugly) his power Delegative: then which this sun has seen nothing more
monstrous, at least as of late it has been exercised.

By Consequents I mean his Relations, (acquired by his office) both Upward, to
his Sovereign, Creator, Benefactors; as Downward, to his own family,
Creatures, and hang-by Dependants.

CHAP. II.
LEt us begin with Antecedents; in them the first. Which we shall find very
unsuitable, to his after acquired office. For the most part he is Ex faece
plebis; humi-serpent; of the lowest of the people (an old complaint.) Now for
such a low borne man, to be exalted high, so high, and that not gradatim, but
per saltum too, as often it is (in one of few, or no School Degrees; which yet
indeed at best are scarce degrees to the Civil honor of a Peer^;) must
needs make as great a Chasme in Politickes, as such leapes use to do in
Naturalls.

A great Evil must it be, and that both in himself, and to himself from
others.

In others eye, his honor will be the object, not so much perhaps of envy, as
scorn: while every man of lowest worth, will still value himself at as high a
rate, and still conceive he wanted not the virtuous desert, but fortunate
reward, a Bishop had. Now every Action will from hence displease, since
unexpected, sudden happiness, is often times fault enough.

Now That fitting deportment, which may but express the just dignity of his
place, and answer the majesty of his high calling, shall be esteemed but
pride, insolence, and at best but affection. And from some such displeasing
action, or gesture, (though but surmis'd on some groundless fancy,) often his
very person comes to be distasted: and then adieu all effectual good, which
his words or actions, else, might soon effect.

Sure the chief Dominion of Gospel Ministers should be in That, the Lord and
master of the Gospel so much requires; My son, give me thy heart. If a
Minister once come to lose the heart, and affections of his people, he may
indeed study some way to force their bodies; but shall scarce ever win a
soul, or save a sinner. Homo duci vult, cogi non potest: if you can fasten any
force on his whole person, it must be that of Love. For sure the Gospel
constraint, is only that of Love. The love of Christ constrains. This, and
this only is an irresistible Attractive, an uncontrollable constraint. Thus is
the Minister, the Bishop hurt, in regard of Others.

In regard of Himself: sudden great changes are dangerous in Nature: the
skillful Grasier, the expert Gardener, will not translate from barren to an
over-fruitfull soil; for this suffocates the Spirits, and destroys the Plant.
The sudden unexpected news of a sons life, (which was reported dead) was the
death of the Parent, as we read in Roman Histories.

High places cause a swimming in the brain: your Faulkners seele a Pigeons
eye, (when they would have her soar high) to prevent a vertigo. I conceive
from this Reason, and mainely from this, it was the good pleasure of the
Spirit, that under the Law, when the Church had an influence into state
affairs, the High Priest should be chosen out of one eminent family, of the
stock of Levy: and some of the Kings of Israel are reproved by God, for that
they chose their Priests out of the meanest of the people. He that is to go in
and out before the people, and is their guide, must be without blemish.

Those Horses which are designed to a lofty Air, and generous manage, must be
of a Noble race. Non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and
Origo plebeia. The Vapors which by the sun are raised to a great height,
even to the second Region, being of so mean a Progeny, are but the matter of
hayle, snow, rain, storm, and tempest, which by Historians are observed to
be the frequent Prognostickes, or at least companions of Wars, and confusions.

CHAP. III.
BUt some will say, this defect (in Birth) may be repaired in Breeding: else
we shut the doors of hope, (and by Consequence of Industry) to Cicero, Marius,
and such other Worthies; who though but of a low Pedigree, may advance
themselves even to the Helm, and there approve themselves men admirable, in
the way of Government.

It Is true, Art oft-times helps Nature: some men of small beginnings, by their
virtues have deserved for a Motto, and impreso, the Poets words, -- Et quae non
fecimus ipsi, Vixea nostra voco -- But when was this seen in a Bishop?

Let us therefore, in the next place, examine their Breeding; and see whither
in probability, that be not as disadvantagious to their Office, as their Birth.

Our Education, (if we intend service in way of Civil Policy) must be in
converse with those who are therein Arts Masters: or in reading their writings:
or lastly, and mainely, in an happy use of both. Neither of the two former,
hardly both together, can make us so expert, as Practice. Scribendo discimus
scribere. Long, Active, costly, and dangerous Observations, are the only way
to make a wise Statesman.

Now when these Gentlemen, I mean, the most refined wits amongst them, (for
others come not within our question;) design the Ministerial Function, they
either lay aside Divinity, and so God is displeased: or else they labor
seriously in the more spiritual paths; and then the Common Weal is by them
deserted. For, these two (so different) studies, cannot go forward pari passu.
A Minister cannot serve God and Mammon.

I know other men think otherwise, (of these Studies) but I conceive the case
is clear: For sure the complaints of good men, Canons and Act^ of Councels
(forbidding Ministers to meddle in State affairs) and the Answers of our own
breasts prove this truth more then sufficiently.

You shall have St. Austin (in his 81. Epist.) complaining, that worldly
affairs distracted his thoughts from his calling: and S. Cyprian apprehends,
those great per^ecutions were but just consequences of the Clergies guilt in
this kind. Gregory the great was much troubled to feel himself under that
load.

Secondly, Canons and Counsels discover their judgments fully in this point;
so Can. 6.8. and 83. of the Apostles. Counsels also do the same; Con.
Carthag. Can. 16. Counc. Calced. Can. 3. and thus still they did while Canons
and Councels did at all study the advancement of Christ's Kingdom.

I confess of later times, Ministers (like Watermen) have looked one way and
rowed another; so that perhaps now you may find Canons of another strain.

But thirdly, (which may answer all Objections) let every good Minister examine
but his own breast, his own heart; and then let him speak.

I am sure, to those who maintain such Prelaticall Bishops, this absurdity
will follow; that to one man the whole power may be given, both in Civilibus,
and Ecclesiasticis: a Thing, which God thought Christ only fit for; and so on
His shoulders only, did he place the Worlds Government.

Yet some will perhaps affirm, Object.
Both these compatible, and this by example from Gods own Injunctions, to some
of the Ministers, under the Law, in the Jewish Polity.

But I answer, Answ. 1.
first; There are Two maine things in which our Ministry, and the Jews (of
old) do differ.

First, all their solemn external worship, (at least most part of it) lay in
Bodily Work, in such things wherein the mind and brain was but little
exercised; as in offering Sacrifice, burning Incense, diverse washings, etc.

Secondly, That which made their members incapable of coming into their
assemblies, was outward uncleanness, (as touching of a dead body, Leprosy,
want of Legal washings, etc.) and from hence their Ministerial watch (one of
the greatest works) became as Easy, as Outward and Visible; so that even of the
inferior Levites, were made Porters; and to these, the Office of restraining
unmeete persons, from their Congregation, did belong.

But, now, the Work of our Ministers under Christ, differs toto Caelo; and
that both in public and private.

In public, it is Preaching, Expounding, Chatechising, etc. which require
mighty workings of the brain, and inward man: specially fith these must be
done with Majesty and Authority, ( Let no man despise thy youth;) and yet with
all sweetness and gentleness, ( for a Bishop must not be fierce.)

In private, his Work is to compose differences, (that they break not out
into public) to visit the sick, to comfort the afflicted, (for Who is sick
(says Paul) and I am not troubled? who is weak or offended, and I burn not?
Yea and many more works of this Nature. And all this, besides the care of his
Family, and besides his private study, a work too great for any man.

If you then con^ider the quantity, the variety, or spirituality, of the
Ministerial Work under the Gospel; you cannot but acknowledge it great, very
great, and much greater than that of old under the Law. Indeed they dispute
sometimes, who have not tried; but a painful Preacher still cries out, Who is
sufficient, who is fit, for These things?

In the Censures of the Church (though indeed the Keys be entrusted with
others as well as himself, yet) by his learning, piety, and prudence, he must
steer all: so that he must always be awake. Caveat Dictator nequid
detrimenti capiat Respublica.

Will any man now say, that the Case of a Priest, and a Minister, is all one?
for, suppose the Priests of old, did intermedle with secular affairs, shall
any Minister now from this example, (when the calling is so vastly different)
take upon him both functions? If he do, let him take heed he be not as one
that has taken up the Plough of the Kingdom of Heaven, and then does the
work of the Lord negligently: If so, his judgment will be intolerable.

Answ. 2.
But, in the second place, I answer confidently, and I hope truly, that these
two Offices, or Callings, did not under the Law, meet in One, except in some
Extraordinary Cases, and persons.

First, the old Patriarchs, I confess, did exercise Both Functions, in some
sense, and in some sense they did not: (I mean as a Calling.) Abraham indeed
swayed the Scepter; but his whole Kingdom was limited to his own Family; and
so he was a King, and no King; for every Master of a Family must in the like
case keep up Government.

I confess he offered Sacrifice; but then, when there was no Law, no Priest:
and others might have done it as well as He, had they been so well inclined.
Thus he was a Priest, and no Priest; for in his Priestly Office, he did but
what every good man would do; at least might have done: and in his Kingly
Office, he was but as a Master of a Family. And so it was in the rest of the
Patriarchs; so that little can be urged from these examples. To which may also
be referred, that old instance of Melchisedech; if at least he were a man, and
not the Second Person of the Trinity, in man's form; as Cuneus, Molineus, and
many others hold.

Secondly, I find Two Judges that were Highpriests also; Samuel and Ely: but
it seems they were thus, by some express, particular, Extraordinary Command:
for God says to Samuel, These have not rejected Thee, but Me: intimating that
he had particularly appointed him to judge, as in an Extraordinary Case, which
may therefore be no president for Ordinary men, in Ordinary Cases. Samuels
special calling appears not only from his being devoted before his Birth,
and strange call of God, after: but most clearly in that he was not (as all
the Priests were to be) of Aarons house; as appears by 1 Samuel 1. Compared with
1 Chronicles. 6. Yea and Ely too, though of Aaron, yet was not of the eldest son;
(whose Line by right ought to have had the High Priesthood) as the Jews
discourse at large; and of late Cloppenburge, in his Excellent School of
Sacrifice.

Now Hoseah may by special License take a wife of Adulteries; Abraham
Sacrifice his child; the Jews borrow Jewels of the Egyptians, and Phineas
do justice by an extraordinary command or instinct, but we may not follow
these presidents.

Some say that inferior Levites did intermeddle in secular affairs. But I
answer, there were Levites of two sorts; out of one sort, Priests were chosen,
(out of Aarons Line;) the others were like the Seculars among the Jesuits. And
these last did (as the Seculars do^) perform the Civil part of those
Religious Services; and nothing else, that I can find in Scripture, or Story.

Lastly, for the High Priests after the Jewish Government was broken in pieces,
I hope no body will bring them for a president: there being then no Vision for
spiritual things from God, no more Government for Civil things, according to
the Rule of God.

Of those times Ios^phus complains, that the Ghasmonei had taken upon them
the Uniting of Priesthood and Secular power, in one person; which could not
be done, but in extraordinary cases, by Gods special command. And thus I
suppose they will get but little from Gods injunctions among the Jews.

But some still will say, that one of these Studies may fit for another. Object.
All truths, Polemicke, positive, whether Politic, Philosophical, or
Theological, are of near consanguinity; and he that is a Gnostique in one,
cannot be a mere Tyrunculus in the other.

Answ. 1.
I confess did they improve their Studies to the ripening of Reason, and
enlarging of their understanding, This might in some sense be true. But they
spend their time in Critical, Cabalisticall, Scepticall, Scholasticall
Learning: which fills the head with empty, aeriall, notions; but gives no sound
food to the Reasonable part of man. Yea their study is mainely laid out upon
books; which they prize, and slight as they please; while they want, Cotem
Scientiae and ingenii, a Real Adversary, that by contradiction might raise
their Parts, and much enlarge their judgments. Their learning is in Terms, it
is but Nominall; and waters cannot rise higher than their Fountain.

But allow that they improve their studies to the best; Answ. 2.
yet this is not enough: For, State Policy is the Daughter of Converse,
Observation, Industry, Experience, Practice; and Books will never Teach That:
but They are but ill Leaders of the Blind, and what will be the issue in that
Case, judge you.

CHAP. IIII.
WE have seen our Bishops Birth, and Breeding, with all his Studies, and
preparations to his Office; to which we have now brought him; only that his
Election, and Ordination Interpose. Of which I might speak much; but because
This is the common Theme of all complaints, I shall pass it here; the rather
because it may perhaps be better examined by Scripture, and Antiquity, than
State Policy, in which I now am.

Yet by the way I cannot but propose it as worthy of State consideration; how
like the inferior Clergy is to yield true Canonical Obedience, to one (that
nescio quo jure, requires it by Oath) though he be often forced on them against,
and never with, their express will; which they cannot express, having neither
positive, nor negative votes in election. Except perchance the whole Clergy of
a Diocese or Province, may be fully represented by a Cloistred Chapter, among
which are usually the very dregs of lowest men. Who yet indeed (themselves)
have no Elective votes; but after the solemn dirge of Veni Sancte Spiritus,
are as sure to find the Spirit in a Conge d' eslire, as others not long since,
in the Tridentine Post-mantile.

Certainly, it is to be desired, that Christians would show as much care and
conscience in setting heads over whole Churches, as some Heathen Emperors did
in setting Governors over private Towns; which yet they would not do, till
at least free liberty was given to the Citizens complaint and rejection, if not
Election, of the party propounded. And this Antoninus learnt from the Jews,
and Christians choice of Their Church Governors in Those Times: though now
Latter ages are grown Wiser. But I must leave This subject.

We are now come to view our Bishop in his Office. Though we may complain (as
one once of Jews the II.) he cannot be fairly limn'd, because still in
Motion: which yet in it self might be, at least excusable; were he not nimium
Dilig^ns, too officious; being made up of Two most inconsistent Offices, the
one of Church, the other of State.

His deportment in Both, we may guess by his Maxims or Rules by which he
goes; which once seen, we shall quickly perceive how well he squares his
Practice by his Principles; and how consonant both be to true Church or State
Policy.

I shall instance but in one or two, for we may know Ex ungue Leonem. The
Climax runs up thus.

First, the Church has power in all Indifferents.

Secondly, the Church is Judge what is Indifferent.

Thirdly, the Bishops (and their Creatures) are This Church.

If a Prince has power to Command the persons and estates of his Subjects in
case of Necessity, and the same Prince be sole judge of Necessity, it will be
no wonder to me, if That People be ever Necessitous.

If the Church have power in Adiaphoris, and the same Church be Judge Quid sit
Adiaphoron; and This Church be the Bishops; I shall not wonder to see those
things that are purely Indifferent, made absolutely necessary, to the
insupportable burden of all men's consciences.

Object.
But some will perhaps say, These Maxims have influence only into Church
Government, and so belong not to the present question of State Policy.

I confess, Ans^.
did they confine the pressing of these, within the confines of the Church,
they could not so properly belong to the dispute in hand: but they run over;
For the Maxim is very large. It is not only Indifferent things in the Church,
but Indifferent things in general, All-Indifferent things; and so they may
take in, what they will.

Again, they do really set Laws in State matters, under the notion of
Indifferent; so that all the Subjects Liberty, or propriety in goods. They
compass with their Net of Indifferency; which they make heavy with the
plummets of greatest penalties.

Yea, though they meddled not at all, with such Things as these, without their
Horizon; yet if they make those Things to be Indifferent which are sinful,
(as they do* I fear) and to These enforce obedience with pretense of Church
Policy, They overthrow all Civil Government.

I take such Maxims, to be the very Hinges upon which our Bishops Practice
turns. I shoot not Arrows of Scorn: For truly I have not in my
intentions, either by ^outs, or jeeres, or by a factious Spirit, to deal with
This Adversary. Michael himself would not revile the Devil: It much less
becomes me, so to behave my self toward These Men (with whom I treat) among
whom I know so many truly Eminent: I desire to speak nothing but Truth. Yea,
I should exceedingly rejoice, if by the Spirit of Meekness, men of that
Learning, and abilities, (which many of them are) might be reduced to That,
which I from my Soul conceive to be truth, and am persuaded will be so
acknowledged by Themselves, one day.

If these then be their Tenets, (as I suppose they will confess them to be) Is
there any thing more Unreasonable? more Unbrotherly? more savouring of Self,
than These Positions?

Unreasonable? For, allow the Church has all power in Indifferents, (which I
dare not yet yield,) who has made the Church a Judge (beyond appeal) what is
Indifferent? Is not this, to bring necessary and indifferent things all under
one notion, If the Church shall judge indifferent things to be necessary, and
necessary to be indifferent? which would to me be a sad story.

But you will say, if the Church be not the Judge of what is Indifferent; who
may be That Judge?

I tell you, asking of questions is no answering of difficulties.

But secondly, (because I love to deal plainly,) I will tell you who shall be
Judge: In expounding of Scripture, the Scripture; but in finding out what is
indifferent, Recta Ratio must be Judge.

But who shall tell us what is Recta Ratio? I answer, Recta Ratio; Will any
man, if the Church shall judge That to be indifferent, which is not, say it is
indifferent? or that my conscience is bound in this case? Ex. great. I do
confess the hour when the Congregation shall meet, is indifferent; if the
Church will appoint hereupon Eleven of the Clock at night, and Five in the
morning (in this Latitude under which we are) I hope no man will say but that
it is ill done of the Church; and that neither my conscience, nor my outward
man, is bound further in This, than to a passive obedience; certainly all
force upon me, in this case, would be sin in them.

Object.
But they will say, this is a thing in its self Unreasonable, and so comes
not into the nature of indifferent thing.

Answ.
But the Church having such power, as is claimed, who may dispute it?

But secondly, this action must be considered either in the universal nature
of it, or else as it is presently to be put in practice. If you value and
balance it in this last sense, nothing is indifferent, no substantial, nor
circumstantiall Being. For we being bound to do That, which hic and nunc is
best, That which is so with the circumstances, will be our guide, and the
Church will have, can have, no power against This.

But if you consider things in the universal nature, (not clothed with these
and these circumstances) then it seems to have some Indifferency; and then,
if ever, it is in the Churches power; and yet even then, the Church can go no
further, than what will be according to Reason. For, for a Church to say, I
will, because I will, is most Papal, Tyrannical, and altogether displeasing
to Christ: but of This, more in another place.

Thus their Tenets seem to me very Unreasonable; They will do more than Adam
did: He gave Names to Things according to their Natures; they will give Natures
according to their own fancies.

Secondly, very Unbrotherly; in that they make themselves the Church, excluding
all others: in which act, (according to their Tenets) they exclude all others
from Salvation; for they say, in an ordinary way, there is no Salvation out of
the Church; and They in this, admit none into the Church, but themselves.

Moses was, upon a mistake, reproved by the Jews, in that he made himself a
Judge, though in that decision he released a Jew. Truly I know not by what
authority these Bishops style themselves the representative Church; for they
must do it either Iure humano, or Divino. By the last we do not yield; That
is the Question in hand: by the first they cannot; for where do the people,
either implicitly or explicitly, elect them and resign up their power to
them?

Is it in their Convocation, that they obtain this privilege? That, by the
Laws of this Land, is not at all obligatory till confirmed by Parliament.

Secondly, the people choose not These Convocation men, but the Clergy, and so
they cannot represent the whole Church.

Thirdly, the Clergy have no free election, for the Bishop will appoint whom
they must choose; and this too Sub poena anathematis.

The Angels (for the whole Ministry of the Church) in the Revelation, seem
to receive some particular honor from the Spirit; yet not the power of a
Representative Body: but Quo jure humano, aut Diuino, Twenty six men shall
challenge to themselves, as proper, That which is not so much as by a
figurative right, given to those Angels, I know not. And is not this
Unbrotherly, to intrude my self, and exclude all others from Their Right?

But lastly it savoureth very much of Self. For certainly he that will
out-doe the Pope, is grown to a pretty height of pride. Now in the Papacy it
is a dispute, whether the Pope alone; or the whole College of Cardinals; or a
General Council; or the People; or All These; or Some of These, with their
joint forces, may style themselves the Church. But Our men without dispute,
(like the Lion in the Fable) challenge All: of whom the Poet is verified; Aetas
Patrum, pejor avo, tulit progeniem nequiorem. And yet, whoever takes up Error
at the Second hand, will have an ill bargain; though he buy it cheap; he
will be no gainer. Error being like the Ierusalem-Artichoake; plant it where
you will, it over-runnes the ground and choakes the Heart.

Thus having with the chains of Indifferency bound up the Peoples Liberty;
they deal no better with their Prince. Only Polyphemus-like, they leave
Ulysses for the last. For, when the People are devoured, Kings cannot escape.
But because Kings are of more prying Spirits, they steal in upon them, with
Sugared Baits: such as That of Theirs, No Bishop, No King. But of This more
anon.

I might instance in many other of their Maxims, which I conceive very
prejudicial, both to Church, and State Policy. But I will rather view their
Practice, according to These Principles of Indifferency. In this I shall be
very short, not meaning to upbraide them with many monstrous miscarriages of
late; the rather, because I am confident that God, his Maje^tic, and The
Parliament, will not permit them longer to transgress in This height.

Only I cannot but entreat you to observe, how by Their Injunctions founded on
Those Maxims, They have imposed as necessary, many things that are but
Indifferent, some things that are Unlawful.

First many Things but Indifferent, they have enjoined as necessary. Some to
Ministers, as Cassockes, Gowns, Tippets, Hoods, Caps, Canonical Coats,
Blackes, and many other. Some to People, as Sitting with their hats off;
Standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gospel, and other parts of service. Weighty
matters indeed, for Grave, Learned, Holy, Reverend Divines, to spend their time
and thoughts upon.

I might perhaps go a little higher; though I must confess in some other
things (now pressed as necessary) They have had Authority above their own
(though I conceive, none for such rigid imposall;) I mean the Highest, granted
by the whole representative State Civil and Ecclesiastical: which yet (with
all duty to that womb which bare me, and Those Breasts That gave me suck
has thought some things indifferent, which (I could scarce ever apprehend
such: at least as of late they have been enjoined on greatest penalties. It
has often made my soul bleed, to see the greatest sins daily committed,
without more than a paper check, (that I may not say countenanced) while
thousands must sigh in private, with loss of ears, goods, estates, livings,
liberty, all; only for refusal of Those things, that at best can be but
Indifferent.

But However these things may be in themselves: sure I am, our Bishops have
pressed them not only beyond the Laws intention, but also much against the
meaning of those good men; who in the first Reformation, did (though perhaps
erroneously) what Christ once lawfully permitted, in almost the same case;
allowing a convenient Time for Burial of those Ceremonies, which yet appeared
not Mortiserae, though Mortuae.

Yea and some things unlawful, by their own power They have forced upon
Minister and People under the mask of Indifferent.

On the Ministers, the Reading of the Book of Sports, (first invented by
themselves) that monstrous and prodigious late Oath, with diverse new Canons,
not enjoined by Parliament, or any other Legal authority. I might add their
bare bidding form of Prayer, Second Service at the Altar, (though it could not
be heard) an illegal Oath of Canonical Obedience, (blind devotion) and a new
form of subscription before Degrees, Orders, Institutions, etc.

On Them and the People, placing the Communion Table Altar-wise; Railing it in;
Bowing to it; Receiving at it, etc. For I will now pass over their most
unchristian Oath Ex Officio, (fouler than the foulest dregs of that cruel
Inquisition) at one blow cutting asunder all the nerves, not only of positive,
but moral, natural Laws; all which (being tender of the least grain of man's
liberty) have entrusted us with this Universal maxim, Nemo tenetur se prodere.

Thus it is manifest, Their Practice is according to their Principles, toward
the People. And they have no less incroacht upon the Crown.

Do they not affirm, that in Civil Government, Democracie, Aristocracie,
Monarchy, are all lawful: and that of These, several people may (at first)
choose which they please. But for Episcopacie, it is still with them, only Iure
Divino: in which they seem to affirm Themselves to stand upon a surer Rock
then Kings. In This they err against much light, (I fear) But, God forgive
them.

CHAP. V.
BUt that we may no longer be imposed upon, by This principle of Indifferent,
give me leave to discover my thoughts in these two particulars.

First, What is Indifferent. Secondly, Where the Power of Indifference is fixed,
Some call those things Indifferent which are neither forbidden, nor commanded:
but here they tell us only what it is not, and Negatives make no Definition.

Those also who affirm that to be Indifferent, which may, or may not be done,
leave us as much to seek, as the former.

I must entreat the Reader to remember, that we are now upon Moral beeings:
where the Two maine Ingredient^, Matter and Form, can be but Metaphysically
Notionall, and therefore it will be hard to give an exact Definition: Seeing
even in Naturals (whose matter occurrit sensibus) it is difficult enough.

Before I assay to give the nature of it in a Definition, give me leave to
present you with some kind of Etymology.

In the word Indifferent, the preposition In, is (They say) purely negative,
though in other compounds (as incipere, inflammare, incitare, influere, etc,)
it bears another sense, which they call augmentative. But in the word
Indifferent it must deny a Difference, as much as non differens.

But under favor of our learned Critickes, I do not conceive that particle in
This place wholly negative. Nor can I think Caninius, Martinius, or other good
Grammarians (when they call this preposition privative) intend to make it
wholly negative: but to my eye, to my sense; in such, and such circumstances.

When a man is said to be Imprudens, incautus, or the like; we may not judge
Him altogether, sine prudentia, sine cautela: for Animal Rationale cannot be
quite devoid of these. And therefore if we take Imprudens (in this proposition,
Hic homo est imprudens) in a pure negative sense, the Predicate is destructive
to the Subject. So that I dare not think our Ancesters and learned men would
give Epithets, or make Compositions contrary to all reason.

Such Propositions are then thus far Negative, as by way of figure, to deny
any caution, any prudence, whereas indeed they must allow both; except in such
or such a particular, such or such a sense.

Such doubtless is the sense of this Preposition, in the word Indifferent: not
purely Non differens, but in such, or such a respect, it Differs not. Though
in another respect, it may, and does Differ; even from the very same Thing with
which yet in other respects it Differs not.

This Etymology I choose the rather, because I see the Critics, in all their
Etymologies, love to give to each part (in the composition) a Positive
signification. Which I cannot do here, unless I translate Indifferens,
Differing, and yet not differing: a sense which also the Greek word (...) will
fully bear; For (if by other employments I have not lost the smattering once I
had in that Tongue) the phrase seems best applyable to a Medium, that does not
fully, or wholly, carry it self off from both the Extremes, but participates
of either.

Such an Indifferent-difference has clearly place in all those Natura's, which
between two positive extremes (such as Black and White; Hot and Cold) have a
positive Medium, Participationis (because it participates of both extremes) and
Negationis too, because it is neither. This Medium is properly Indifferent to
either Extreme; from which it Differs, and yet it Differs not: because it
is neither of the Two Extremes, yet participates of Both. Thus Lukewarm, as
Warm, Differs not from Hot, yet Differs as Cool: and therefore is
Indifferent.

This sense of Indifferent, being thus made good in Naturals; some would borrow
and apply to Moral, Theological Beings also. So that between Good and Bad*
they fancy an intermediate Entity, neither Good nor Bad, but Indifferent to
either. As once a Moderator in the Schools, being to determine whither
Eucretia did well in stabbing herself; seeing that Action Good in many
respects, and Bad in as many more, concluded thus, Nec been fecit, nec male
fecit, sed Interfecit.

But I conceive, such Indifference, will not, cannot be found in Morals, as it
is in Naturals. The reason is, because the two extremes are not here (as in
many Naturals) Both Positive Beings; so that a Medium may really participate of
Both. White and Black indeed are Both positives, but so is not Evil; but
only the privation of Good, which is the other extreme.

Moralists dispute how Passions are Indifferent, but they are put on great
straits; and limit it only to passions in specie (indeed only in a Notion)
which yet in sensu composito cannot be said to be ever Both Good and Bad, or
neither Good nor Bad, but being still Good naturally, may be morally either
Good, or Bad, in individuo, but in sensu diviso, not Composito.

For the same individual action, or passion (in man) cannot be said both Good
and Bad (take it in actu exercito) in the same respects; yea, if in any One
moral respect, it be truly Bad, it cannot at all be said to be properly Good.
For an Error or Defect in any one Moral (though but so much as a Circumstance)
truly donominates the whole action Evil; but only a perfect and universal
concatenation of all essentials and circumstantials too, denominates it Good.
Even as in Logic, any one negative proposition makes the whole Syllogism
such; when to an Affirmed Syllogism, every part must be affirmed. So it is in
Morals too* And hence perhaps the old Stoickes affirmed, Omnia peccata to be
paria* Which is one of Tullies Paradoxes: because says he* One Step beside
the Line, may as truly be said to to be a Transgression, as a thousand, or
running a thousand miles from it. It is well observed by Aquinas, that as a
Body is not perfectly set in suo been esse naturali, by a bare form without
Accidents; so neither an Act in been esse morali, by only object and end,
rightly fixed: except also every Moral circumstance, of ^ime, place, etc.
rightly concu^re.

They who will have our Virtues equally distare ab extremis, are much more in
the right, than they who will have an Indifferent thing (speaking of Morals) to
part^ke of Both extremes. Indeed Virtue f^ying from o^e extreme, when it is
^ancountred with an equal Evil, is arrest in medio: as Iron when accoasted by
two L^adstones of equal virtue on either side, not daring to embrace either,
hovereth in medio, between Both. Or as the Magneticall needle about the
Azores, keeps it self directly parallel to the Axis of the world; and
admits no va^^tiv^s: because in medio, between the two great Continents (of
Europe and America) to which some great Philosophers ascribe the Magneticall
virtue, with better reason perhaps then others did, before, to the Northern
pole, or North rne Climates.

From all these premises, we will now assay to draw some conclusions that may
help us in judging what may be Indifferent.

First, it must be in it self Good, whol^y Good. For if it have but one dram
of Evil, it is wholly Bad (as was proved before) and so not Indifferent. We
have found the Genus of it; it is Good, Lawful.

In the second place, to make our approach a little nearer (if we can) and to
descend more particularly into the Differing nature of it; We must confess it
lies mainly in the seeming equality of Use. So that it may be thus described, a
thing Lawful and Good, which (as we think) may be Used or not: may or may not
be done.

But here we must take heed we lose not our selves in Terms: For if they
mean that some things at one time may be done, and at another may not; I yield
this True: For perhaps This year I may not marry, and yet next year I may,
and in some circumstances must, else I sin. But in this Hypothesis Marriage
is not generally Indifferent, because not generally Lawful; but at some time
lawful, at sometime not.

If they mean the same Thing, (the same Act) at one and the same time by the
same person, may, or may not, be done ad placitum, without offense: I must
crave leave to dissent, till I see more, than now I see.

For I conceive two direct contraries, (as to marry, and not marry) at the same
time, to the same person, cannot be so equally circumstantiated, that one of
them, at least in one circumstance (which is enough) shall not be Better than
the other. And if one be Best, I conceive it past scruple, that I may not
reject that Best, and choose the Worst.

Now, if I mistake not, I am near the Apex of this question, which yet (
Pernassus-like) has a double Vertex.

The one is, whether in two contraries (as Doing, not doing) one must not needs
be Better than the other.

The second is, whether in this case I am not tied to take, and do the Best,
but am equally Indifferent to B^th.

I will begin with this last first. In this I know I have many opposites, who
stiffly maintain, that Optimun^^no^ estisemper faciendum: amongst these is that
good man lately deceased, (to the Churches great loss) Reverend M. Ball, in
his Friendly Trial of Separation.

I think it a subtle dispute, worth the discussing; for if they mean thus,
That which is Best, is not at all times Lawful to be done while it is best;
This sense cannot be true: for here the Predicate is destructive to the
subject; For, that which is unlawful is no^ good, much less Best, at the time
when unlawful.

Or if they mean, that (...) Best (in Re) is not always Possible to be done,
they say ^rue, but tell me no^ new thing. For all men will yield This; and in
This case I must consider, what is Best possible to me; because I cannot do the
Best in Re.

I suppose then they mean that which is Best, and possible to me, is not still
necessary to be done, even while it is best: but though I may do it, yet I may
also leave it undone, and do that which is less good.

Here also they may deceive us with Terms. For they may mean either Best in
Truth, or Best to appearance. And when these two cannot be reconciled by all my
search, I must consider that which seems (though perhaps is not) the Best.

We shall now soon join issue. And the case is; whether, when I must of
necessity either do, or not do, or when I must do either This or That; I be
not bound to do what is Best, (or at least on exactest search, seems Best) if
it be possible to be Done by me.

If they take the Negative part (of this question so stated) I hope yet they
will give me leave to hold the affirmative, and yet without offense, till my
judgment may be better informed.

My grounds briefly are these, First it is Lawful to do This Best; else it is
not Good, much less Best, as was said before. Again, it is expedient to do
this Best: or else some thing (at least some one Ciocumstaice of Expedience) is
in the other good, which is not in This, and so This is not Best, but That, at
this time, though at another time, perhaps, This may be Best, it is not Best
now, because not best expedient and most convenient.

And now this case comes not to our question, which is of Best in all
circumstances; for we know one circumstance may so alter the case, that now
That may be worst, which else would have been best, as was said before. So
that at this time, This cannot be Better than That, except This be not only in
it self expedient, but also more expedient than That is at this p^^^^t: for
one grain of more expedience makes that to be ^est, which else would be Worst.

I demand now how I can be determined to That which is less expedient? though
supposed equally lawful by Right Reason? All Philosophers yield, (and it
needs no dispute) that the Vnderst^nding rectified still dictates to the Will
Optimum faciendum. And how is it possible I should do well, if I follow not the
Dictate of Right Reason? Video meliora, proboque; deteriora sequor.

See now to what a strait I am brought; If I follow the Dictate of Right
Reason, I must still do what is Dictated, as now Best. And Right Reason must
still (where some Action is necessary) dictate That to be done, which is (at
least, seems) Best.

For, if Right Reason should ever (though but once) dictate, that This which is
Best, is not Now to be done, but somewhat Worse; It may much be suspected Right
Reason may never dictate the Best to be done.

For, by this Case (of one such Dictate) it would appear, that when ever
Reason does happen to dictate Right, it is but by chance, or some fancy of its
own; not by any certain constant Rule, taken from the Nature of Things,
rightly stated in such and such circumstances; For if so, it must still judge
eodem modo, of That which is so circumstantiated. And, if it once vary from
this Rule, it will seem to have no Rule, but its own fancy. And in this Case,
we shall be under Reason, as under a most corrupt Judge, that will follow no
constant Rule (founded on the Nature of Things) but only his own humor; which
will give very Different judgments on the very same, or like Cases, in all
circumstances.

I see but Two Things can help them out of This strait. Either, that (though
Right Reason cannot but dictate that the Best in all circumstances, must still
be done, yet) we are not bound to follow Right Reasons Dictates, when we see
them. Or else, we be not bound to ask Right Reason, what it will dictate; but
may do (hand over head as they speak) without any Dictate of Reason, Right or
Wrong.

But, Both These seem to me very strange Doctrine. For,

First, If I may but once go against the Dictate of Right Reason, and yet not
sin; I may go ten thousand times, yea Ever against it; and so all my acts
may be Irrational, and yet not sinful: a strange Tenet: and sure a Case never
to be found but in a distracted man; who sins not though all his Acts be
against Reason, because His Reason is not able to direct him; or at least He
not able to follow Reason; and in this case God requires it not.

And the Case is even the same; when I Act without asking Reasons Dictate, as
if I acted against Reasons Dictate. For till I see I act with, for ought I
know, I act against Right Reason; and so I sin.

Not yet, that I think a man bound before Every (though the most common)
Action, to stay disputing for some hours or days, till Reason has given its
final Dictate. For, this were to turn all practice into bare and nice
Speculation. There are many Things by common use, and by themselves, so clear
that at first view Reason presently determines. Yet if there rise but the least
scruple at the first glimps; Then, man is bound to discuss it, till Reason
rectified dictate the Action Lawful, and Best to be done: And till This
Dictate, the Act must be suspended. For I still thought That a dangerous Maxim
in State policy; first, to Do matters (not like to sound well) and then to
dispute Them: and it sounds worse in Matters of Religion.

I have done with the first Great Question, whether Optimum sit semper
faciendum.

I come to the Next, whether amongst diverse Things (to be done) There be still
One Optimum. I must mean whether there be any Optimum, for more than One there
cannot be at one time.

We may briefly State the Question Thus. Whether at one any time Two, or more
Things, (suppose to Marry, and not to Marry) can possibly be so Equally Good to
me, that One of them is not Better than the Other.

I Think not. For, I dispute thus; I must be determined to one of these Two,
(having no medium) I must Marry, or not Marry. Now I ask what shall determine
me to either? Right Reason (they must answer) or my own Fancy, Will, or other
Thing.

I rejoyne; if Right Reason determine me; either it does so on no good ground;
(and then I do a groundless unreasonable Act, in following Reason) or on some
Ground, whose foundation is in Re. For, if we once grant Reason any Rule, or
Ground, but that Certain, Constant Truth, which is fixed in the Nature of
Things; we shall make it, of all Judges, most uncertain, most corrupt. If once
I see my Reason judge point blancke against Real Truth, I shall suspect it
still.

Well then, it must be granted, Right Reason has determined me (not to Marry)
on some good Ground, taken from the Nature of Marriage; (not in General, for
This would deceive me, but particularly considered with all circumstances pro
hic and nunc;) so that it must also be granted, There was one or more
circumstances, which made Marriage more unfit than non Marriage (else Reason
has made, not found a Ground in Re, which it must never do;) Ergo, of
Marriage and Non-Marriage, One still is Best in re, (at least to Reasons eye)
else Reason does unreasonably determine me not to Marry, or to Marry.

And if Right Reason have not, or cannot, determine me; to which side so ever I
incline, and rest, I sin; because I act Unreasonably: being determined by
humor, fancy, passion, a wilful Will, and not Right Reason; The Candle of
God, which He has lighted in Man, left man groaping in the Dark should
stumble, and fall.

I may now step a little higher; and affirm, that of Two Contraries, or any
Two Extremes, Both are so far from being Equally Good, that pro hoc statu,
in these Circumstances, Both cannot be Good at all or Lawful.

For, if of These Two, One must be Best, and but One; and this One now
necessary to be done (because Best) as was proved before; It will follow that
the other extreme is now, in these circumstances, not Good at all to me;
because unlawful to be done, while now there is a better in view; though else
in it self, with other circumstances, it would have been Lawful, Good, and
Best.

If Right Reason determine it be better not to Marry; at this time, and I be
still bound to do what Right Reason shall dictate Best (as was proved before:)
Now, in these Circumstances, Marriage is unlawful to me, and so not Good at
all, at this time, because less Good than Non-Marriage. so Achitophels
Counsel was Bad, being not good for That time, because not Best.

For as Moralists say, if it be possible Man could be necessitated to choose One
of Two Evils; in That case the Less evil, would be Good: So, when I am
necessitated to choose One out of two (supposed) Goods, the less Good would be
Evil, and unlawful to me, who am still bound (for ought I can yet see) to do
Optimum pro hoc statu.

The Conclusion I aim at, through all these Premises is This. There is no One
Thing, no One Act, in all the World, That I may do, or not do, ad placitum,
all Circumstances considered.

For, This Act (so propounded) either is Best for that time, and so must needs
be done: or not Best, and so must not be done; because in these Circumstances,
at This Time, it is Unlawful; as not being Good while a Better is in eye: as
has I hopefully been proved.

From This, results our final Determination concerning Indifference (which is
our Subject in hand:) No Thing, No Act, is Indifferent in Se, in Re: but either
necessary to be done (if Best) or unlawful to be done, if Bad, or less Good,
pro hoc statu.

What shall we say then; has the World talked so much of Indifference, and the
power in Indifference, And yet no Indifference, at all, be in the World?

Give me leave here freely to propound my own thoughts, without offense; being
still more desirous to learn, than to Dictate.

I conceive that all the Indifference (in the world) lies in our
Understandings, and the Darkness thereof, (which makes them wavering
sometimes, and doubtful whether to do or not, so that in Them seems some
Indifference to either extreme) but there is none in the things themselves, or
Actions; which are still either unlawful, or necessary (if Lawful, at this
time in these Circumstances;) never Indifferent in Themselves.

As then it is in the point of Contingence, every thing is either True or
False; Certainly to Be, or not to Be; and in one of these still Necessary in
Re, and never Contingent; yet to M^e, (who cannot see the whole Chain of
Causes) some things seem Contingent, that are necessary. So for Indifference.
All Things, All Acts, are in Re, either Necessary to be done, or Unlawful; but
to my blind judgment, (while I cannot discern whether I may Act, or may not)
some things Seem, but are not Indifferent; and so we think (but erroneously)
that These may be done, or not, as we please.

For example sake, suppose an unskilful Physician have two Simples by him, one
of which is poison, and the other a precious Cordial; will any man living say,
These are Indifferent for a sick man's cure; so as he may use them, or not, ad
placitum, without peril? And yet now suppose the Physician ignorant of both
their Natures: they may be said to be Indifferent (though not in themselves)
yet to Him; who not knowing either, is Indifferent to Both; and thinks he may
apply which he will, without offense; yet if he apply the one he erres, because
it is poison.

So it is in all the Things, or Acts we think Indifferent. In themselves they
are poisons, or cordials, very Good (and so necessary) or very Bad, and so
unlawful: But while our judgments are clouded, so that we see not the Nature
of these Objects, or Acts: we are Indifferent (because wavering) between Them;
but They are not so in se; or Really to us.

I may conclude then, Nothing is Indifferent in Re, in se; but to our
Understanding some things seem so, for want of Good light.

CHAP. VI.
I Have now done with the Nature of Indifference, in which I have been the
more large, because I found it more abstruse than it seemed at first view. I
come now shortly to examine What power may determine in Indifference, and where
this Power is fixed.

To All, I may answer briefly thus. By Divine Right, This Power is, and is not,
in the Church. The Church has, and has not, power in Indifferent things.

First, the Church has no power to make any one thing Indifferent in it self:
(that is, to make it, at one, and the same time, lawful to be done, or left
undone, positis omnibus circumstantiis.) For all Things and Acts, are in
themselves necessarily Good or Bad, and cannot be Indifferent in Re, as has
been proved at large.

Again, we cannot say the Church has power to determine what is Indifferent.
If at least All Indifference comes only from the Darkness of our
Understanding (as before;) It then lies not in the power of all other men
living, to determine what seems Indifferent to one man's Understanding, since
He may perhaps not see, what they all see; and e comrario.

We are now reduced into a narrow compass, having only left to be considered,
Those Things which generally seem Indifferent (For there is no Indifference in
Re, but only in appearance unto us;) because neither Scripture without, or
light within, has fully cleared, whether such things should be done, or not:
or if done, whether in such, or such a time, place, etc. and in such cases only
Things seem Indifferent.

Now in These seeming Indifferents (which sure are not so many as some pretend)
the Church has, and yet has not, power to determine.

All (though but Seeming) Indifference, is as it were in medio, between Two
Extremes, as was said before. Now, when Neither of these extremes is necessary,
There, (specially where Both extremes are doubtful) I conceive the Church has
not power to determine to Either Extreme.

As suppose Black and White colors should be Doubtful, whether both or
either, or neither, were Lawful: In this case (for ought I yet see) the Church
has no power to determine (any one so doubting) to either Black or white. The
Reason is, because Neither of These extremes are necessary, there being so many
intermediate colors between Both.

But when One of the extremes (between which we waver as Indifferent) is
necessary to be embraced, (as in most cases it is;) Here all the Power Lawful,
I conceive, can do no more but resolve which of the Two extremes is Best;
whether it be safest to Do, or not to Do (whereof one is necessary;) to do so,
or so, if I must do.

This Power (wherever it be) must be very warily exercised: since of All Two
extremes, only One (as was proved) can be Lawful: so that one is wholesome,
but the other poison.

In These also the Church has, and has not power. If you please, Thus; It
has a power Iudicative, (or if you will Iuridicall,) but not Legislative. It
may and must determine; (for ought I know, beyond all external appeal) yet
again it must not determine, What, and How it Will, because it Will. No, It
also has its bounds, a Rule to go by, a constant Law (and that non factam,
sed natam) Right Reason.

So that the Church is like the Judges on the Bench in Westminster Hall (that
have a Iudicative, or Declarative power, being entrusted with the explication,
application, and execution of the Laws:) but not as the King and Parliament,
who have a Legislative power: and so not only to declare what is Law, but to
make new Laws. And yet even This High Court has one Rule, or Law to go by,
(and this is also the Law of the Church, even Right Reason.) And if they or the
Church, should err from This Rule, (which God forbid) we must obey indeed, but
Patiendo, I will, I must give Passive obedience to Lawful Authority; even
there where I dare not, I cannot, I may not, give obedience Active.

By the Church here I mean, not only One, or Two, or a Few, of what Rank
soever; but All, even every True Member of the whole Church. For I conceive
every such Member has de jure a Vote in This Determination.

But what if after the Determination, I yet dissent from the judgment of the
greater part of the Church, which in all doubtful causes, seems justly to
challenge (even by the law of Nature) a decisive power; What shall I do in This
Case? shall I make a Rent, Schism, Faction that may fire Church or State?

God forbid; no, I must Read, pray, discourse, and confer with all humility
s^bmitting my self to the Reason of any man that will teach me; much more to
the Judgments of many together eminent for learning and piety. And yet if after
all This, I cannot be satisfied in my Doubts (which must be Real, and not
pretended scruples of a factious spirit) In this case, which sure will be very
Rare (where Right Reason is made supreme Judge) I must suspend till my
judgment be cleared, left That which to another is Lawful, become sin to
me: Who cannot Act in Faith, while I act against or with Doubts, or Scruples.

However in the mean time, I must quietly deport my self without faction,
turbulent commotion, or uncharitable censure of Those who dissent from me, both
in Judgment and Practice; well knowing that the same thing may be Lawful and
necessary to one that sees it so; which yet to me is unlawful, while I so
doubt.

In This Case, I conceive no Power on Earth ought to force my Practice more
than my Judgment. For I conceive the Churches utmost compulsive power (which
must also very warily, and bu: rarely be used) is but Expulsion, or
Excommunication: which yet I suppose may scarce ever be exercised on one that
so doubts: much less Fine, Imprisonment, loss of member, or life: Except
his dissent in practice has necessarily with it a destructive influence into
the State also, and Body Politic. Which case I think hardly ever possible,
in Those Things which can be objects of Rational Doubts: which are only such,
as the Scripture has not determined. And in all things not determined by
Scripture, (which sure must needs be of less consequence) One that Doubts
with reason and humility, (may not for ought I yet see) be forced by Violence.

Give me leave by some Instances to clear my meaning, in all the premises
concerning the power in Indifferent Things.

Time, Place, and Deportment of our selves in the Congregation, are the maine,
if not sole Things, which bear this acceptance of Indifferent: The Scripture
not having laid down express Rules for all particular cases of This Nature.
So that we seem least Indifferent to the use of This or That Place, This or
That Time, This or That Gesture, etc.

In These Things (not determined by Scripture) there must be some
determination, because one of the extremes is necessary, (We must use some
Place, some Time, some Gesture) else all limitation here were needless, if not
unlawful, as was said before.

The Church then Doubtless has power to resolve here, What Time, what Place,
what Deportment, etc. and what they do herein (though it should prove to be
Evil) They do by power which God has entrusted them with.

And yet again, The Church here must not command what she will, because she
Will; but must go by her Rule, which is Right Reason: if she swarve from This,
she erres. And He that sees Her error, or Doubts, sins also, if (while he
so doubts) he yield her more than Passive Obedience: and if she force one so
Doubting, I think she sins more.

Now, I need not rip up the foulness of our Bishops miscarriage in t^eir
practice about Indifferent Things; which yet has fully suited with their
principles, as was touched before.

For though I should grant (which I never shall) that only they, and their
Creatures, were the whole Church: Yet would they be so far from a power of
Making things Indifferent, (which yet some seem to challenge or at least to
exercise) that indeed they have no power to determine what is Indifferent:
since it may be very easy for some men to think That Indifferent, which to
others seems clearly either unl^wfull or necessary.

Again, in things seeming (generally) Indifferent, they have no power
peremptorily to determine to one Extreme, when there is a medium between both
extremes, and so neither is Necessary.

In things seeming Indifferent, where One extreme is necessary, They cannot
determine pro arbitrio, (but by a constant Rule of Reason) much less by a
Tyrannical club Law force us to do (though we rationally, and modestly doubt
whether it be Lawful) what they first Make, rather, than find Indifferent; and
then (by their wonted maxims in Indifferent Things) make Necessary, on pain
of Imprisonment, loss of Ears, yea life it self.

Which yet might be more tolerable, if they only took a Dictatorlike power to
direct our judgments, in things that seem most abstruse, or doubtful (in
which yet they make themselves Gods; for none but God can fully clear (much
less force) my Judgment;) But they scruple not, point blanke to contradict
our Reason, and force our consciences, in things extremely manifest; as in
Bowings, and many other things, which one as blind as he that so much commended
Rhombus, may see to be unlawful.

CHAP. VII.
WE have seen the Antecedents, Concomitants, or Ingredients, to Our Bishops
Office. Let us a little view some of the Consequents, that result from his
Office.

We shall consider but Two, or rather One with Two Heads, (like himself,) at
least looking two ways; His Relations both upward and downward.

First, Upward. Nescio quo^ fato, Our Bishops have still depended on an others
Beck. In the time of Popery, they were wholly molded to the Popes Will; which
often produced such wilful and stubborn deportment (both toward their
Sovereign and equals) that wise men of those times began to perceive how
insufferable such foreign dependence would still be in any free State.

Winchester was not the first, though One, that in Edwards the first Time,
professed such universal Obedience to his Creator the Pope, that he quickly
learned to refuse (that I may not say, disdain) to call the King his Lord. And
his Treasons against the Kings Person, made all men see how easy it was, and
still would be, to reduce such Principles into Practice.

Edward the third summoned a Parliament to enable himself for the wars he
designed: But the ArchBishop Stratford (fearing it might injure the Popes Title
if he might not be permitted there to erect his Cross) refused to come,
detained his Bishops, and prided himself in hindering his Sovereigns design.

Norwich handled the second Richard with the same pride and Insolence; Levying
Soldiers at the charge of the Kings Subjects to fight the Popes Battles.

We have not forgotten Becket, and diverse other of his temper, but reserve them
to another place.

Under the Reformation; if they have indeed cast off the Pope, (which may be
doubted in most, but is past doubt in some) yet they have ever been at their
command, by whose favor they stand, though (with that unhappy bird) they
design the Death of Those that give them Life.

This Dependence appears in a threefold Gradation*

1 The Calling (of the Bishops now in dispute) being only Iure Humano, they
must therefore comply, not only to fix their Persons, but their Callings. 2
When they are invested in their Sees, the smile or frown of the Court, adds
or detracteth much from their splendour, comfort, and emolument. 3 Their further
advancement, either to a better Bishopric, or Archbishopricke, wholly depends
on the Princes Will.
Naturalists observe, there is not so much appearance of change in many degrees
of Entitie, acquired by a second motion; as in one degree, at the first step
from Non Ens, to Entitie. But Moralists find that one little step of new
preferment makes more impression upon low spirits, than their first Creation
out of Nothing. Both are well reconciled in our Bishops Rising. For what can so
sudden unexpected advancement (from Nothing to such an Height of Being) seem
but a new Creation? so that hence such a dependence must needs result, as is
that Relation which Nature fixes in the Creature to his Creator.

Courtesies and Hopes are the most oily Bribes, and Bribes blind the eyes of
the most wise. With what nature soever Obligations meet, they have an
irresistible force. If they descend so low as men of base spirits, They there
get a species of Profitable; and so become like Lime-twigs to Little Birds. It
was doubtless most feelingly spoken by the Slave in Plautus, Esculenta Vincula
sunt firmissima.

If they meet with men of high raised, Generous, Noble thoughts; they yet
work much more, (though out of a more ingenuous Principle) while a true Noble
spirit cannot breath under the least shadow of Ingratitude: having first
learned that old Proverb, Ingratum si dixeris. --

How hardly then a Bishops Conscience, Judgment, Reason, or Will, can be his
own; under not only so many Obligations, (for the greatest engagement past)
but Hopes also for new favors to come, (either in higher advancement, or at
least in continuance of His smiles, whose first frowns may quickly reduce Them
to their first principles of Nothing) I leave it to wise men to judge.

To whom also I humbly propound, (as worthy mature Consideration) how fit these
Spiritual Lords may be to sit as Lawmakers in That Highest Court, by whose
fundamental Orders (as also by the Law of nature) None ought to have Vote, but
Free men.

And how can They possibly be deemed Free, that wholly depend on another
Thought, (for I need not say, Beck, Smile, or Frown) not only for their
first Creation, but continual Preservation in This State, and power of giving
Vote in that Court?

But They say, This may be also objected against other Lords, Created by his
Majesty's favor; Especially Officers of Court, which yet are not Excluded from
Votes in Parliament.

I answer first, Incommodum non solvit argumentum.

Again, If the Case were alike in all These (which I yield not) Because we are
under One (perhaps invincible Difficulty) must we needs run and plunge our
selves into another? Or being once in, may we not get out if we can?

But Thirdly, There is a Vast Difference between Those who cannot but still be
affected with Noble, generous, and most virtuous deportment; (being still to
live in their Names, Honors, Posterity) and Those, who in Their height, are
but as Meteors, that must quickly blaze out, vanish, fall, and be no more.
Between Those whose Birth and Breeding has filled their veins with Heroic
noble blood; and Those that are so much disadvantaged both by their Birth and
Breeding: though Their Birth is nothing so Ignoble as their Education; Compared
with that Breeding a true Statesman should have.

For, will any wise man living think them fit to give Counsel in Princes
Closets; to make Laws in Parliament; and sit Judges in the Highest Tribunals
of Civil Justice; that all their life time, (before the Conge d'eslire
diverted their thoughts) were wholly taken up in turning (rather then reading)
Aquinas and Scotus, with some other school Trifle^s, before they came to some
Church Benefice, where ever since they have spent all their time (that might be
spared from Tything) in Liturgies, or Canons; Except some new scruple with some
of their Neighbors, have called them to peruse some Author de Decimis?

If you view their Civil Converse, they have practiced little, but to wrangle
down a Sophister, or to delude a Proctor, in the University; to say Grace to a
Gentleman, or acquaint themselves with a Reading-P^^, in the Country. In Cases
of Conscience, they have studied little, but how, with most compendium, to
digest the Oath of Direct and Indirect, in point of Simony; and to swallow the
Vow of thrice Nolo Episcopari, when God and their own Consciences well know,
many of them are not so solicitous for Heaven, as for a Bishopric. And are
These men fit, not only to rule the whole Church; to Ordain, Censure,
Suspend, Deprive, Excommunicate, ad placitum; to govern our Consciences, by
Articles, Canons, Oaths, (and what else a Lawless Convocation may invent;)
but also to direct and advice (I might say more) in the Privy Juncto's; to sit
at the Helm, to dictate Laws; and tantum non to sway the Scepter; which if
they forbear to touch, It is but as Mercury once spared Jupiters
thunderbolts, which he dirst not steal, lest they should roar too loud, or
at least burn his fingers.

In the last place my Answer shall be thus. Though the Birth, Blood, Thoughts,
Breeding, and all, of a Bishop were as noble as any One, or all the Peers;
(which none dare say) Yet are not, cannot, Bishops be possibly so free, (and
so, not so sit, to fit and Vote in Parliament) as other Lords, and members of
that Great Body.

For First, They that have large Estates by Inheritance, and to continue their
Names and Families to the same Inheritance, are in all reason probable with
more impartial freedom to provide for the Good of the Commonwealth in
general; than those that having little or no Estate of their own (at least,
to leave to posterity) are not like much to look after the Weale-publike, or
Good of posterity; but rather will seek to humor the present times, (being
truly Filii unius Horae) especially to insinuate themselves into more and more
favor with their Creator, and Preserver, on whose smile wholly depends more
than their Been Esse.

My Judgment in This is much confirmed by the observation of a truly Noble
Gentleman, and most-highly-well-deserving Statesman, (R.Ea. of E.) who said,
he had now served thirty years in Parliament, and in all that time never knew
but Two or Three Bishops stand for the Commonwealth.

Again, though all the Branches of Nobility first sprouted out from the Root
of Royal^y; (Honors being in all Good States, Appendices to Majesty, and
wholly disposed by the Royal hand;) Yet Estates and Revenues did not; which
are the Parliaments and Supporters of Noble Honors. And These also in Bishops,
depend on the Princes Will.

Yea, Our Honors and Baronies, though first they were granted by the King; yet
now being so invested in Our blood, and become Hereditary, They cannot be
revoked. In This therefore we are Freer then any Bishop, whose Baronies are
only annexed to their Office, and not invested in them by blood.

We have seen our Bishops Relation upward; Let us now view it looking down to
his own Family, Creatures, and Dependencies. We shall see all these
Consequents, as unsuitable to State policy, as were the Ingredients, and
Antecedents to his Office.

A Bishops Title and Place is High and Splendid, but his Estate (for the most
part) Mean and Low: at least That which may be left as Inheritance to
posterity.

Now to what unworthiness will not Ambition and Avarice carry them? When they
look on themselves as Peers and Grandees of the Kingdom, and again reflect
on their Wives and Children, as those which (after Their Decease) must soon
be reduced from such an h^ight (like falling Stars) into their first
principles; Must not This be a Great Temptation, by any means, right or wrong,
to seek the private inrichment of themselves, and Families, even much before
the public Good of the Commonwealth; which is never more injured, then when
it is made to stoop and veil to the boundless Ambition of some private, low,
base, sordid spirit?

Or suppose, by penurious Living they may in many years gleane up a mean
Estate to leave to their House, to preserve their name: how miserable and
sordid must be their deportment? how base their Housekeeping? how Little their
Hospitality? Which yet not only by Scripture, but Reason, seems much (if not
most) to be required of the Clergy. Such a Bishop must be as much given to
Hospitality, as Blameless in other particulars. But alas, how can Ours be so?
Except, They can be content to live without any Retinue of Attendance; or be
Cursed by Posterity, brought up perhaps as Lords, but left as Beggars.

Except then it might be with our Bishops, or Bishops Children, as once it was
with that Roman Dictator, who being brought from the Plough, was content again
to return to the Plough, (after he had with all humility, fidelity, and
success, served the Commonwealth in the Highest Office That State at that
time did afford) I cannot see why They should so ambitiously desire a Lordly
Prelacie; which they can neither leave to posterity; nor carry down to the
Grave; nor yet are sure to keep all the time they live: for of all Riches,
Those of a Bishop, may soonest fly away.

If therefore Our Prelates would seriously reflect on their own Peace, Credit,
and Esteem; Or the Good of their Family and Posterity; (though they would
despise the Church, and trample on the State, with the Weal, peace, and
flourishing prosperity thereof) sure they would leave the Commonwealth to
Statesmen; and think it honor more then enough to serve the Church, and
wait on Gods Altar* I mean That Holy Table, which may be served by Them that
attend the Word and Sacraments; though they must not neglect This, and serve
any Other Tables.

But Venales Animae will do any thing to Rise. Yet I hope Our Bishops do not,
at least Will not do so any more. If so, Let them know the Wheel of
providence can run as fast backward as ever it did forward. In its descent,
they may perhaps sadly reflect on a serious dying speech of one of themselves;
Had I served my God, as I have served my Prince, I should not have been so
deserted now. Though I must confess I doubt they have well served neither G^d,
nor the King. But this shall be discussed more an^^.

CHAP. VIII.
WE have seen how much our Bishop makes against State Policy; Let us now see
what he does, or can do, For the State; For, Both parts must be heard.

It has still been the practice of These men to buzze into Princes Ears,
that They strike at Monarchy that are displeased with such Episcopacie: Like
one of the old Queen's Jesters, that would box and pinch any that stood near
him: and if they returned the like, he would step before the Queen, and cry,
Madame here comes a Traitor to strike at your Majesty.

I know it is one of their first Canonical principles, No Bishop, No King. On
this Axletree the whole body of Popery is wheeled about. A specious show
indeed, and One of their Master-peeces of Policy; to acquaint and persuade
Kings, of what use they are to Them:

Sed Timeo Danaos, and Dona ferentes.

It is but a Trojan Horse. Mors est in Olla. While they seem to please Kings,
they weaken Crowns.

Powers are Gods Ordinances; and set over us for Our Good: And Kingdoms
certainly have more for them in holy writ than any other Government: Shall
Royal Crowns then come and stoop to a Miter?

La France ne tomb pas en Keneville. With Them a Woman must not bear the
Crown, and shall the Scep^er, with us, bow to the Cros^ers Staff* Let it not
be spoken in Ashkelon, nor published in the streets of Gah. Has Christianity
abated the Glory or power of the Diadem? Bishops would, but Christ will not.

In short, What is the sense of this Maxim? What can it be other than This,
that the Strength, nay the Being of a King, depends wholly upon a Bishop?

Prodigious State-Blasphemie! Kings have been when Bishops were not, and shall
be yet much more Glorious, when such Bishops shall be no more. Which shall
still be my desire for all Kings; but especially for Ours; whose Good and
Gracious Government, I shall pray, may yet endure long, and long amongst us.

It is much rather true, If any such Bishop, no King; as I shall make good in
my subsequent discourse. Otherwise, (had These been only Metaphysicall
No^ions, or Mathematical sp^^^lations) I should not have been troubled more
with a square Cap on a Bishops Head, than I am with a Circle squared in a
Mathematical brain.

It is true, their Grand M^ster the Pope, seemed very officious in setting up
the German-Franck Emperor, (the Image of the old beast,) But it was not long
before he showed his Ends. Turn your Eye but a little about, and you shall see
an Emperor stand barefoote at his G^ute: Here One kneeles to kiss That foot
that spu^^^^th off His Crown: There one holds the stir^up; while that Proud
Bishop steps up into the saddle.

And have not our Bishops the same Designs with their Holy Father? Even to
free themselves from all Power, and ^^ bring all things under their own Power?

What means of his Maxim of Episcopacie, that a Clergy man cannot fall
under the Execution of a Civil Magistrate, Except they first degrade him;
which they may refuse to do as long as they please? Is not This to Exempt
themselves from all Civil Jurisdiction?

What is the sense of This, that for breach of Their (Church) Injunctions, they
may Excommunicate people, Ministers, Lords, Kings themselves, whom they please;
But shortly This, to reduce all men, (Even Princes as well as others) to
plenary Obedience to themselves? And when Once They have passed that sentence
on their Sovereign, at their own fancy, I doubt not but some of Them would
be ready to receive the Crown from their kneeling Prince, (as of old) If any
King would again so far forget himsel^e, and lay his Glory in the dust to be
trampled on by such proud insulting Prelates. Which God forbid.

Their Insolent Words and Actions, vented lately against the Crown, are very
suitable to these Principles.

Some of themselves, in open Court of Judicature, have dirst to affirm, They
were beholding to none, but Christ, for the place they held.

Others of Them (and Their Creatures) have said They are under no Law of man.

Some have preached point blanck, that Their standing did not at all depend on
the Crown.

Others have flatly denied the King to be Head and Governor in Ecclesiastical
Causes, over all persons: though they cannot but know that This Title was given
mainly to Exclude any other Earthly Head, as it is Interpreted by Order of
Parliament.

All of them Erect Episcopal Courts, send out Summons, Exercise Jurisdiction,
Sentence, Fine, Imprison, do what they list, in their Own name. Though All
the Bishops put together (and Vis unita est fortior) da^e not to do so; (for,
the High Inquisition had a Commission under the Broad Seal) and yet Every
particular Bishop Exercises Jurisdiction under their own seal, by their own
power, in their own name; without any Commission, directly against Statute, by
which they all incur a Praemunire.

Indeed they have learnt to faune upon Princes, and would make them believe all
This is for their Honor, and Advantage; yet they are but Impostors; This is
but to stroke the Horse (as the Proverb is) till they are well up in the
Saddle: for, at That they aim, and thither would they come; which God forbid.

I could heartily wish, the Kings of the Earth would be pleased to read Master
Broughtons Epistle in his Refining the Roman Fox. Or Ni^hol. de Clemengiis, in
his Excellent piece de Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu. Or that Noble Learned Lords
incomparable Mysterium Iniquitatis; presented to Our Late Learned Sovereign
King James; though in some late Prints It has been refined by an
English-Romish Index Expurgatorius, yet It will still (with the other)
represent the sleights of this kind of Episcopacie, in such lively Colors,
that I believe no Prince would trust them again.

I need not go far to seek instances that may fully represent how much Our
Bishops have in all ages promoted the Weal, Peace, and Honor of This Kingdom
and Cowne: For their Treasons against the State and King, want not a Register.
I could briefly present you with a true Emblem of Episcopacie ab ovo ad malum;
and yet not go higher than the Conqueror.

Lanfranck would have conquered the Conqueror: and by gentle insinuations have
persuaded him to submit his Scepter to the Triple Miter: but, Etiamsi suasit,
non persuasit.

Art could not prevail, and therefore Anselm went more rudely to work; Though
Rufus forbad him, yet with many thanks and much honor from the Pope, he went
to Rome for his Pall. After he had oftentimes bearded the King in many matters,
he succeeded so well, that he attempts the same against the First Henry: and
left not till he had caused the Scepter to bow, and the Crown to totter.

In Stephens time, Two Great Prelates dispute about Precedencie, and at last
passing by the King, they call the Pope to be Moderator.

B^ckets heights are well known, and scarce paralleled in amy Story: Only as
Henry the second (that Great Prince) did suffer sore stripes here; so did the
Duke of Thoulouse in France, for joining with the Albigenses. That was done by
a Pope, This by a Bishop.

King John fell (with his whole Kingdom) under an Interdict, for some quarrel
betwixt himself and Two or Three Prelates: nor could he buy or beg his peace
but on his knees, resigning his Crown ^o proud Pandulph.

In Edward the seconds time Gaveston was much abetted by Coventry, in this a
Traitor to his Country.

What prankes Winchester played with Edward the First, Stratford with Edward the
Third, and with the second Richard, Norwich, was touch the ^ore.

Henry the fourth was ill handled by York, that waged war with him: at the
same time Arandell vowed he would not leave a slip of that Religion which then
he saw Dawning in England.

In Henry the sixts time, Yorke^ Quarrel with W^^chester, lost all that
England had gaine^ from France* at last York sides with Warwick against the
King.

Edward the fourth had little r^^rse no pardon the new Archbishop.

Ely ended better then he began, but it was per accidens; for first he
persuaded Buckingham to claim the Crown, but He refusing (at least not daring
to stir for himself) sets him on Richmond, the true Heir.

But you will say, These were all Papists, and lived in the dark times of
Popery.

True, and were not Their Sovereigns such also? were not Kings and Bishops of
one Religion then? Are they more now? has a Protestant Prince now more reason
to trust a Protestant Prelate, than a Popish King a Popish Bishop? Let all the
world judge Seeing in Those times it was no difference in Religion, But
Malignance against Civil Government, that produced Th^se Commotions, in Those
Bishops.

But since the Pope, and Popish Religion is confessed to be the Cause of all
those Treasons and Rebellions, what if I prove Prelacie and Popery to be the
same in re, and only to differ in name? This we stall Essay anon. In the mean
time It is worth considering whether Our Prelates be not more like to s^de with
the Pope against a Protestant, then Popish Prince.

I will over-looke the dark times of Popery; Let us begin with the
Reformation, (which yet could hardly have entrance, for that strong Opposition
the Prelates still made) Alas what Commotions have they still raised in
Scotland, ever since the Reformation? We have felt, what Our Parents only
saw. They Eat (at least suffered) a sour grape, and Our Teeth were almost all
set on edge. But blessed be God that has delivered That Church and state from
Tyrannical Prelates; and will ere long deliver us also.

They did the same in Denmark, till One of their Kings did persuade the people
to Choose another Church Government: After he had in publke read a Charge for
three hours long, containing Their Treasons, and Rebellions even since the
Time that the Pope was cast out of that Country.

When I call to mind their Carriage and miscariage here in England, I must
begin with that of the Poet,

Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorum.

Our first Reformation was much opposed by Bishops. Gardener, Bonner, and some
others were no Changelings. Yea we shall find some Good men were Bad Bishops;
and the Evil were intolerable. Ridley was too fierce in maintenance of
Ceremonies. Cranmer and Ridley both were for allowing Mass to the Lady Mary:
but That Admirable young Prince, was even in his Infancy, with King David,
wiser then his Teachers; and could weep, though not yield to Their persuasions.

What Our Bishops did in Queen Mary's days (Bloody Times!) we all know; sure
it was an unhappy Proverb that was then learnt, The Bishops foot has trodden
here. What they intended under the Old Queen; Essayed in King James his
Reign; and had well nigh performed under Our Gracious King Charles, to the
Ruin of the Crown, We now begin to know: If at least Knowledge may properly
be said to be wrought by Sense; for, If so, our Feeling was enough to Teach us.
Yet what wanted in This, may be supplied by the Daily complaints we are forced
to hear not only from England, but Ireland also; where yet perhaps they have
more parts to act then One. But he that sits in Heaven laugheth at them, the
most High has them in derision.

CHAP. IX.
I Have scarce done with that Grand Principle of Episcopal policy, No Bishop,
No King. Yet I must now divert you a little from it, or at least lay it aside
awhile, till It come in again at due place: which perhaps may be in This next
dispute.

I am now come to the most moderate of Episcopal men. For even These affirm
that The absolute Best Church Government, under a Monarchy, is Monarchical.

By the Way I must desire it may again be remembered that hitherto I have
contended only with our Lordly Civil Episcopacie, (properly called Prelacie)
I have not yet disputed Ecclesiastical Episcopacie in general, or the
Prelacie of One Minister before another (though I may touch That also before I
conclude:) so that I am not bound to answer this Objection; which sure cannot
mean that the Best Church Government under Monarchy, is Tyrannical, (as indeed
such Lordly Prelacie is even in their own Judgments which are moderate) but
simply Monarchical, scilicet in Ecclesiasticis: against which I have not yet
disputed; though I know This was One of the maine Foundations on which That
Destroyer, That man of sin began first to build.

But I am content to follow them Here also. Yet I must first sift out their
meaning, lest they deceive me with words. Do they mean that All other Church
Governments are destructive to Monarchy? or do they mean, Monarchy is
destructive to All other Church Government^, but Monarchical?

The first sense is even the same with the former Axi^ome we discussed, No
Bishop, no King; except perhaps the^ grant, that every Monarch is a King, but
every King ^ not an absolute Monarch.

But take Monarchy in what sense you please: why cannot it stand with any kind
of Church Government? does the supreme Civil power receive any essential part
of it from Church Monarchy? Is not Monarchy complete even there where is no
Church?

I am by no means of Their judgments who say, None that are without the pale
of the Church have right to any Thing here below. A Tenet almost necessary to
those that use to excommunicate Princes ad placitum, and then stir^ up foreign
Enemies, or Subjects themselves, to dispossess such Princes; but to other
States of very dangerous consequence.

I clearly conceive an Heathen Emperor may be as lawful a Monarch, as any
Christian Prince; And I doubt not, but His Subjects owe as exact obedience to
Him, (if his Civil Title be just) as we justly pay to our Kings and Governors.

To say then that Monarchy cannot stand without Monarchical Discipline in the
Church, is to weaken (if not to break) the nerves and ligaments of supreme
power: nay to say that such a government will best suit with Monarchy, is to
veil the luster and Majesty of monarchy* which like an healthful stomach, can
easily assimulate all things to it self; but is not changed by any.

If they would but speak their own Thoughts, They would turn the Proposition
thus, Church-Monarchy cannot stand without Civil. Here the Mystery is
unmasked. It is true, This Discipline cannot stand, but where Princes will
uphold it. For That which has no Footing in Scripture, must lean upon Humane
Right; and thus it discovers its own weakness. Divine Institution is able
to bottom it self upon it self; but Humane is like the weak Vine or Hop,
which without a pole, must creep, and so rot, upon the earth. Yea some
inventions of Men (specially in matters of Religion) are like the weak
Fruitless Ivy, that must be propt up by some El^^, or mighty Oak, and yet
most unnaturally destroys That prop which holds it up. And of This kind is
That Humane (or rather Demonicall) Episcopacity of which we have treated all
this time.

Our Bishops foreseeing This, (for They are wise in their generation,) thought
best to invert the propositions; and instead of this, that Church Monarchy
cannot stand without Civil; They affirm Civil Monarchy cannot stand without
That of the Church. Thus they delude Silly people.

But to come a little nearer to their Best meaning, (Who stand so much for
Church Monarchy) I would gladly be showed by Reason, what there is in Church
government, why it may not derive it self into several Corporations; where
either more or fewer may bear the sway; still subscribing to those things
which are left by Christ to the Civil government, or Monarchical power. We
see hundreds of Corporations are thus managed: And what there is in formali
ratione of Church government (essential to Church government that will not
endure This; mihi non liquet; Truly I do not yet know, I cannot yet Imagine.

We see ever since the reformation of Luther and Calvin, the Churches of
Christ have had another discipline than ours; under Elective and Successive,
under Protestant and Catholic Princes, as will appear clearly in Poland,
Denmark, in Scotland, and the Palatinate, in France, and Germany. I do from my
heart agree that Civil Governors are Custodes utriusque Tabulae: but what the
Civil Magistrate has to do in Church matters, till the Church has done her
utmost, I could yet never learn.

The government of Christ is spiritual; and He will have his work wrought in
a sweet way; by the power of the Spirit, not by force.

If I err in This, I shall upon better reason recant; In the interim, hoping
that the clearness of my thoughts shall with the candid Reader receive gentle
interpretation, I shall freely declare my opinion in This point.

Christ (as I shall more fully prove hereafter) has clearly unfolded to us the
Two main things of Church affairs: 1 The Doctrine. 2 The Discipline of his
Church.


Who will come in this case to add or diminish any thing?

I appeal to any Ingenuous Reader, of what Religion soever he be (yea of what
sect in any Religion) Whether any power ought to force a Church in matter of
Doctrine.

I conceive, what is True Doctrine the Scripture ^ust judge, and none but the
Scripture: but what a C^^^ch will take for True Doctrine, lies only in That
C^u^ch.

Will Rome admit us to expound to them this place, Hoc est corpus meum? shall
we admit Rome's exposition? Will either of us admit force?

There is certainly but one Truth: but what shall be taken by the Church for
Truth, the Church must j^dge.

If you descend to Discipline, will not the Case (...) be the same?

In Discipline consider three things.

1 Admission of members. 2 Excommunication. 3 Officers to execute these, and
other Ordinances.
Whether you will Baptize children, and so ^y administering to them the
Sacrament of Initiation, admit them members of the Church?

Whether you will admit all for Church members that barely profess, though
they be open drunkards, and very ignorant persons?

Whether you will have Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, as your superiors in
this work, or Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, etc. who shall judge but the
Church?

So long as the Church, in her Church Tenets, intermedleth not with State
matters under the notion of Religion, I suppose the Civil power is not to
interpose.

It is most true, if the Church will broach (with the Anabaptists) that they
will have no Governors, nor Government: This is a point not of Divinity, but
Policy; and here the Scepter must set a rule. or with the Adamites (if there
be any such) allow Communion of wives: This takes away property, The sword must
divide this quarrel. or with the Papists, that it is lawful to kill Kings:
that faith is not to be kept with Heritiques: I conceive in all these, (and
cases of the like nature) the decision lies in the Magistrate; for These
tenets overthrow either Civil Government, or civil converse; The Church must
not go out of her bounds.

But if the Question be, how you will expound such a Scripture: what Gesture
you will use in such an ordinance: what man is fit to be excommunicated: what
deserves excommunication: what is Idolatry: what is will worship: what
superstition: what is the punishment of those crimes: who shall judge but the
Church?

The Prince has granted to such a Body by Charter, such privileges, such
offices, who can interpose but the power instituting? Christ has given us a
platform of Church government, with the offices, and officers; who may here
intermedle, but Christ himself?

It is most true when the Church finds any refractary, and thereupon does
excommunicate him, he falls into the hands of the Civil Magistrate, if he
continue pertinacious, and not before.

When Parliaments do consider matters of Religion, they do it to deliver the
Church from some who would impose upon her; who would take the keys from her,
that by the help of these keys, they may wrest the Scepter out of the hand of
Sovereignty, which God forbid.

And whilst Parliaments labor thus for the Church, dealing no further in the
affairs of the Church, than by Scripture they may, certainly they do well; but
if they once exceed their bounds, the issue will be Confusion insted of
Reformation.

Church and State government differ as much as the Sexes Yet as there may
between These be an happy union: (Both keeping their bounds whilst the Husband
has the supremacy;) So may there be between the Church, and State a sweet
harmony. The State having Committed to it the custody of the 10. commandments,
and yet the Church preserving to her self Her rights.

If the Church swallow up the State, as it is in Popery, and Episcopacy, the
issue will be slavish, gross superstition, and stockish Idolatry. If the State
overtop the Church, there will be ignorance and atheism: But give to God that
which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is i^ Caesar's: and both Church and
State will fare the better.

Thus under favor, both by reason and president it is clear, that any Church
policy besides Episcopacie, (though only one by right ought) may stand with
Monarchy.

CHAP. X.
WHen I say, Any Church Government may stand with Monarchy, or other State
Policy, I desire to be understood of any Church Government Well regulated:
Which as I cannot conceive of our Episcopacie, so I must again publicly
protest, that I verily believe This kind of Episcopacy is destructive, not
only to Good Monarchy, but all other State Policy whatsoever.

I mean not now to run over, so much as the Head^ of my former discourse:
Every particle of which is to represent how uncongruous, and incompatible to
True policy of State, Our Bishops Place, Calling, and Office, is, as now it
stands established in this Kingdom.

If any man shall yet dissent from me in this Cause, I shall now only entreat
him to view one place of Scripture, which yet perhaps at first glance may seem
to make but little for my purpose: but it is an old Maxim among Interpreters,
Non est haerendum in Cortice. Let us therefore a little examine the Text, and
if I be not in the Right, I will gladly learn of any that can better inform
me.

The Place I mean, is that which of old in the Primitive Church was wont to be
more perused, and examined, than I think it is now, or has been of late: and
I cannot much wonder, since I see all men view the Sea, and well consider it at
distance, from the top of a Cliffe or Rock; but when they are once fallen into
it, they shut their eyes, wink, and care to see as little as ^ay be of it,
while they have so much round about them.

I must not detain you too long without, left you think my Porch longer and
bigger than my House. It is That of the Apostle to the Thessalonians 2. Epist.
2. Chap. 3. and 4. Verses, specially those words; Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped.

For the understanding of this place, we must premise This, That it must not be
taken as spoken of One single person: but a Compages of many, either existing
together, or else succeeding one another; yet agreeing together in This Great
Apostasy, the maine thing here spoken of. And in This I have but few
Adversaries: None I ^hinke, but some few of the Romish faction, that maintain
the grand Deceiver, False Prophet, or Apostate ^^or so I ^^ther call him, than
Antichrist, though I doubt not al^o but he is most truly Antichrist in Re)
shall come only in the end of the world, and endure but three years and an
half: which yet begins to found but ill among the Romanists themselves.

In the next place I affirm, This Man of Sin (for so I must style him) is
not of the Laity, over whom (even over their Princes and Gods) he exalts
himself; but of the Clergy, For he sits in the Temple of God.

Being come so far (without any Real opposition) I now demand, Who This Man
( Compages or Systeme of Men) is, or can be? The Pope, I suppose will be
answered by most of our Church: And I yield it so; believing Him to be
prncipally intended here. But if I can prove that Popery properly taken, is the
same in Re, with Our Episcopacy; or at least that This is but a Piece and Part
of That Mystery of Iniquity; then I hope it will be granted, that such
Episcopacy is also here intended: and per consequens, that such Episcopacy is
altogether against True Policy of State: because it opposes and exalts it
self above All that is called God, etc.

This therefore is now my Task, to prove that Our Episcopacy, is the same
Really with Popery taken Properly.

Let us first then see what Popery properly may signify: for, for ought I yet
see, the World is scarce agreed in this particular. I cannot conceive that All
Errors or Heresi^s held by some (nay All) Papists, may in proper speaking be
called Popery. Most (I hope All) of the Papists agr^e with us in many Truths,
and All is not Heresy in which they Differ: and yet All Heresy in Them, not
proper Popery. No, not every Error or Heresy in the Pope himself can proprie
loquendo be said to be Popery. There are many Things the Papists hold in common
with many, if I (...) not say, All Heretics: yet none ever properly called
All Heretics by the compendious Name of Papists. Many points are not yet so
fully determined among themselves, but that some of them affirm, and others
deny of the same subject. All of them will not agree about Original sin,
Free will, Merit. etc. In this last (which yet is one of the most fundamental
points of controversy now between us) I see many of them coming so near the
Truth, that one must have a quick sharp eye to see where they come short, for
many of them yield Our works do not properly merit as Ours, but as Tincta
sanguine Christi; yea and some are not rigid in pressing the phrase Merit, in
its proper sense: so that perhaps Their most refined opinion in This, may be
the more dangerous in the Consequence, than substance or form of it.

Nay, before the Council of Trent (before which yet Popery had been long in
the world) most of their Tenets were so much indetermined, that scarce any of
them knew what he was to hold and believe yet he was a Papist then, and is so
still, and yet to this Day I think there is scarce one Doctrinall point in
which they all agree.

We must then consider what that is which Denominates a Papist, and may
properly be called Popery. It must sure be somewhat Essential (as I may
speak) to that Church, so that without This It could not be called a Popish
Church.

That is doubtlessie such and such Dependence on the Pope: This is in the Popes
subjects truly Popery; and this Dependence on Him, ^s perhaps expressed by
receiving his Name or Character in the Apocalypse. In the Pope himself, it is
not This or That error, This or That Heresy, but such an Independance, such a
Lordship, such a Prelaticall Tyranny, over civil and Church estates, that is,
(...) Popery. And this is it that is so emphatically expressed here in This
place to the Thessalonians, He opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, etc. And the exercise of This Popish Tyranny is lively limn'd out
in Apoc. 13. verse. 16, and 17. And he caused all, both small and great, rich
and poor, free and bond to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or
the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

This Tyrannical Prelaticall Power and Dominion, which the Pope ufurpeth and
excerciseth (contrary to Gods Word) over Clergy and Laity, Princes and
Subjects, in their estates and consciences, is in Him, (as in His Clients,
yielding and submitting to this Popish Prelacy) True Proper Popery. And This is
the Giving, Imprinting, or forcing of a Name, Character or Number, on the Popes
part, as Receiving This on the part of Papists: though I have not now time, at
least not opportunity, to discuss how much the Popes Name, Character and
Number may differ. I doubt not but all are parts of That Prelaticall, usurped
Power which is truly Popish; and received by Papists, as Servants, and
Soldiers of old received their Lord's and Commanders Tessera, or Character in
their hands and foreheads. But God also has impressed his Motto on them all,
let them read it and tremble; Apocal. 14.9, 10. And the third Angel followed
them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and his image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the
wine of the w^ath of God, which is powered out without mixture into the cup of
his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.

God has been pleased to parcel out Church and Commonwealth as several and
distinct Governments: yet so that Princes should be Custodes utriusque Tabulae,
as was said before.

God has been pleased to make, appoint, and leave the Ministers of the Gospel
Brethren, and has permitted none of them a Lordly Prelacy above another.

But now the Pope comes, with a wide mouth, and swallows down at once, all
Civil and Ecclesiastical power; Challenges to himself, not only the Keys,
but the Sword; not only Papal Dominion in Ecclesiasticis, but Regal also in
Civilibus. This Usurpation of His, is properly Popery; and this robs Christ
of his Regal Office.

As every sin breaks all the Commands, (the whole Law) yet some sins do
more properly entrench on some particular command: so also is it in all Hereses
and errors. All someway oppose the whole Law of Christ, and all the three
Offices of Christ: yet some more properly One of these Offices, some another.
As the Doctrine of Merit de Condigno, and Congruo, encroacheth on Christ's
Priestly Office; the Al^horan mainly against his Prophetical. But Popery most
properly strikes at his Kingly Office and Authority. For it is Christ's Kingly
Office to bind Kings in Chains, and Princes in Fetters of Iron, if they resist
him. And He that usurps this Power and Privilege, labors to unthrone Christ,
to s^t above him, and so properly opposes and exalts himself above all that
is called God, or is worshipped. This is the Pope; and this is Popery. Yea I
may add, This is truly and most properly Antichrist; though indeed perhaps not
That Antichrist of whom S. John speaks in his first Epistle Chap. 2.22. and
4.3. who, it may be, was Ebion, or Cerimbus, or some other: though perhaps also
Saint John might speak that of some Lordly Prelacy, which began (though but to
dawne, if I may so speak of that dark mystery beginning to show it self)
even in Saint John's days: for in some respect we will not stand to yield a
Bishops Pedigree might perhaps extend so high: for even then Antichrist was
conceived.

However, I doubt not to affirm the Pope is now most Really, Truly, and
properly, The Grand Antichrist. For such is He most properly, that encroacheth
on Christ's Regal Office. This being It which now (of all the three) is most
proper to him in his Glory: and This he has received as a most glorious Reward
(if I may so speak) for all his sufferings in his humane Nature: and This I
think the Scripture Language ( Esaias 53.12. Psalm. 110.7. Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
1 Cor. 15.27.) His Priestly work was for the most part accomplished in his
Death; His Prophetical Office, as it were resigned over to his Holy Spirit;
But his Kingly Office is his own propriety, (till the end come) and so He that
opposes This, is most truly Antichrist. This is the Pope, and this is Popery.

Now on the other part if any man please to survay Episcopacy with an
unpartiall eye, he shall find this kind of Episcopacy, and Popery to be all one
in Re, for they have the same Rise, the same Media of their progress, and the
same End.

The rise of Popery, was by overthrowing Christ's ordinances, and setting up of
his own. That this may appear the more distinctly, give me leave to show you
the Bishops boldness in the particulars of it.

Christ's ordinances in the New Testament are either concerning Doctrine, or
Discipline. I confess the Pope has made great assaults upon the doctrinall
part; but what he has done in that kind, he has done many times by gathering
up the negorgements of others, and so they are not his own: or as an
Heretic, but not as Pope, for the reasons which I have even now mentioned.

But he has played his part mainly in point of Discipline: This most properly
belonging to Christ's Royal Office, as Doctrine to his Prophetical.

In the Discipline there are two things considerable, 1 That which concerns
the Officer. 2 That which concerns the Nature of his office. In the case of
the Officer, you have his Access to his Office, and his Execution of the
Office. In the first Election and Ordination are considerable.


By Gods rule his Election is to be by the people; his Ordination from the
people by the hand of the Presbytery. By the rule of Popery a Minister is
Ordained by the Pope, and his substitute, and is elected by the same power and
in the same way. And as their School darkens (with a mist of their terms)
what they cannot clear: So do These; to cloud their swarving from Christ's
rule, They raise up new terms, and instead of Election, have Presentation,
Institution, and Induction. The first is done by the Patr^n, the second by the
Bishop; a way which Christ never knew. It is so well known to all men that
Episcopacy traces these very paths of Popes, that I shall not need to say more
for this part of their Identity.

In the execution of his O^^ce there are Acts of 2. sorts: some wherein he has
a Joint power with other; some wherein he is a sole Agent: he is sole in Church
preaching and in administration of the Sacraments: he is coadjutor to others in
Admission of members, in Excommunication.

Under the Papacy the Minister or Priest has the power of Preaching, and
Administration according to Gods Law (and this only with relation to the
Bishop who in his Church superintends:) But in the other he has no power at
all; it is wholly given up to the Pope, and by him committed to the Bishop. And
thus the Pope may truly (while he is Dominus Dominorum) style himself servum
servorum: for he impropriates all offices to himself; and in liew of
coadjutors given by God to the Minister, the Bishop has Officers appointed him
by the Pope.

The Coadjutors of the Ministers by the Word, in some cases were the People, in
some cases the Elders and Deacons, and sometimes people, Elders and Deacons:
but the Pope in lieu of these has instituted another generation of helpers;
and lest that true name should reduce true Officers, he has given them yet
another title, as Apparitor, Surrogate, Chancellor, Official, Commissaries,
Deanes, Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor. In all which Episcopacie and
Popery have so twin-like a frame, that seeing one, you see both; Nec Sofia
Sofiae similior, nec simiae simia. And so I leave that point, which concerns
the Officer.

In the Nature of his office it is considerable, 1 What the work of his Office
is: Secondly, from what power: and thirdly, in what manner he does it.

For the first, the subject matter of his office is Administration of the
Sacraments, Preaching, Admission of members, Excommunication. In reckoning
these, the Pope conformeth to Gods Word, and so does Episcopacy; for if we will
err, we must sometimes go right, and then we may transgress with less
suspicion.

But Consider from what power the Minister of the Gospel Acts. He ought not to
borrow his Commission from any but from Christ, from Scripture; and he ought to
keep close to That: now the Papacy is wholly steared by Traditions,
Decretals, Councels, Canons, College of Cardinals, and the Pope in the Chair,
where he cannot err in matters of Faith. The Pandects of the Civil Law are
too too boystrous, and of too great extent for any Civilian to comprehend; and
yet that body of their learning is boiled up to such a degree, that it runs
over, and no memory is able to attain it, more than to compass perfection in
the learning of the Chin^es, where the A. B. C. amounts to 10000 letters.
Constitutions cross one another, and almost all fight against the Gospel of
Christ.

Does not Episcopacie ( Si magna licet componcre parvis) according to its
modicum, do the same? I confess, with them the Scripture is the rule: but who
must expound this Scripture? Synods, Counsels, Convocations, Bishops,
Archbishops. Some of these sometimes, sometimes All of them: And though by
their own confession, These bind not men's Consciences, yet They bind them to
obedience: which obedience they do precisely Challenge, and when they fail
thereof, they do without the least scruple of conscience, proceed to
excommunication, fine, imprisonment, deprivation, and what not? In the mean
time it is held a sin for a Lay man at all to think of these studies. The
Priests lips (they say) must preserve knowledge: It is a sad case (say they)
when men with unhallowed hands will touch the Arc, and with unsanctified eyes,
pry into these mysteries. and so These men, making the Scripture a Rule in
appearance, do in truth Monopolize all to themselves: This is just and flat
Popery.

In the last place, The Manner which God has prescribed, is that every thing
be done in decency and in order: with what singleness and plainness may be:
without any addition of men's inventions. The Pope carries on his Jurisdiction
with pomp and much outward glory; They have co^missions, Injunctions,
Charters, Seals, Secretaries, Clerks, and 1000 other inventions, to grind the
face of the poor. Episcopacie has its Courts, Summons, Clerks, Seals, with
other Ceremonies of the like nature.

Christ's rule is that Ministers of equal rank, shall all have equal power.
Apostles indeed were above Evangelists, and Evangelists above Pastors; and
Teachers: but one Apostle was not above another, nor one Pastor did not
superintend another. The Pope has Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, Primate,
Patriarch, Cardinal, Pope* and Episcopacie has Ministers (now called Priests)
Deacons, Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, etc.

The Scripture commands Preaching in season and out of season, but with the
Pope, and our Bishops, All preaching is now out of Season, I am sure out of
fashion in themselves; and cried down in others: for with them Ignorance is
the mother of Devotion.

The Scripture allows but two Sacraments; the Pope adds five; and our
Bishops are ambiguous: Two only (they say) are generally Necessary to
salvation; which may clearly intimate, that there are More than Two; though
perhaps not absolutely Necessary to Salvation, or though necesary, yet not
Generally necessary, to all men, in all times, states and conditions
whatsoever. and so much the Papists yield of Their five Sacraments, nay of fix
of their seven: For, only Baptism (they say) is absolutely and generally
necessary to salvation; the Eucharist even with them, is not Necessary to
Infants, much less Matrimony, Orders, Confirmation, Penance, V^ction. In what
do our Bishops then differ from Papists in This?

How do they differ in Baptism? Both Pope and Bishops hold it necessary,
absolutely necessary to salvation. Yea the most Moderate of Both, maintain a
general Baptismall Grace, Equally conferred to all partakers of that Sacrament.
Indeed Our Bishops do not openly use Salt and Spittle, but yet they retain
the Cross, (perhaps much worse) and begin to Claim spiritual alliances as
the Papists do.

In the Lords Supper, the Pope makes (rather than finds) an Hostia, an Altar,
a Priest; and This Priest must offer for the sins of the Quick and Dead. Our
Bishops must have Priests, Altars, a Sacrifice, Corporals, and what not that
Papists have? to say nothing of their Times and Gestures, which sure the
Scripture never so determined, much less excluded any that could not yield to
such and such circumstances, which none ever thought could be more than
Indifferent.

In all Ordinances the Scripture now speaks of no other Holiness, then That
which is Spiritual, Rational, the Holiness of the whole man. The Pope has
found out new Holiness, which he puts on Places, Times, Vestments, Bells,
Tapers, Water, Wafers, Copes, Basins, Pots, and Cups, with other Vtensles.

And do not our Bishops so also? What means such rigid pressing of Holy
days? Bare heads in Churches? Holy Surplices? What mean they else by their
Holy Chalices? Holy Knives? Holy Patents? Holy Vtensles? all which may be so
sanctified by a devout Priest, that they may become profitable to the Souls of
those that use them. How then do our Bishops differ from Papists in
administering Sacraments, Manner of all Ordinances?

And is there any Greater Difference in Admission of Members, and
Excommunication? This last being the last and Greatest Censure of the Church,
by both Bishops and Pope is made not only most Common (as the humor moves
them) but also most Ridiculous; being the usual appendix of one groat short in
our Reckonings with our Lord Bishops Register, Proctor, or Apparitor.

I would not be mistaken here; I bring not in These Things of Doctrine, or
Discipline, as if by agreeing in One or Many of These, I might convince Bishops
and Papists (or the Pope) were all one. The maine thing I drive at in all this,
is the Original fountain from whence All These spring, and all the banks
that keep in These Rivulets; That virtue and power which moves and actuates
all these in their proper Channels: And This is Papal.

For, what ever the Pope does of his own head, by his own Power, Dictating to
his Vassals, as Head of the Church, This is truly Papal, and such is the Power
by which They usurp so much over men's persons, and consciences, in injoyning
and pressing such or such Doctrine or Discipline.

So that a Bishops wearing a Surplice, Cope, Miter; using the Cross, Bowing to
the Altar, and many such Things (though they may be Errors, yet All These, or
One of these) makes him not a Pope, a Popeling, or properly Antichristian: But
Receiving These from the Popes Dictates, doing them because he commands,
acknowledging his power in commanding; This makes a Papist: and Commanding
them, Pressing them on Others, in such Despoticall power, makes a true Pope, a
Real Antichrist.

Nor may Our Bishops Evade by This (which I easily see will be answered) that
though indeed they do these things, and command these Things; yet they neither
do them from the Popes Command, nor Command them in the Popes Power.

Though I should grant This, which yet many wise men will not grant, (for, Our
Bishops first Power came from the Pope, and of late also We have found letters,
advice, commands, Dictates from the Pope, to some of our Bishops; and that in
Matters of greatest Consequence, both for Church and State; But grant all They
say, yet they may be Antichristian, and so such in Re, as the Pope is; though
not literally Romanists, Except they do, or command, in the Power of Rome.

This I shall be bold to affirm, and maintain, till I see better Reason, that
He (whoever he be) that Commands the least title of Doctrine or discipline,
merely Ex imperio Voluntatis, in his own Power, and Authority; without
License or Warrant from Scripture, or Right Reason, (where the Scripture has
been silent) though the Thing he so commands should happen to be good in it
self: Yet He in his so Commanding, is not only Tyrannical, but
Antichristian, properly Antichristian; Encroaching on the Royal Office of
Christ, which is truly High Treason against God; and most properly
Antichristianisme. I care not whether we call him a Pope, Papist, Romanist, or
any other name; I call him Antichrist: and if you will call Antichrist by the
name of Pope, I call such an Imperious Commander among us, (though he have no
shadow of Dependence on Rome, or Romish Pope) an English Pope; I mean an
English Antichrist.

I need not spend much time in showing by what means Either the Pope or Our
Bishops began, and continued to be so Antichristian: Du Plessis and Others,
have saved me This labor. In a word, they have been These. With One hand they
have laid Pillowes under Princes, and all Governors (appointed by God) that so
they might fall softly, while they thrust them down with the Other (the
stronger) Hand, Arm and all. When These have been so surely, though gently,
laid down asleep; They have been bold to tread on them, (yet with Plush
Slippers, lest they should chance to wake, stir, and get up again) and by
Them, as so many stairs or steps, mount up themselves into this Height of
Tyranny. Thus have they still opposed, and advanced themselves, against and
above All that is called God, or is worshipped. And If with your own thoughts
you will please to go on in the Chapter, you will find some other Media (as
Lying Wonders, and others) by which they have ascended.

I shall not need to parallel Popish and Episcopal Media to Their Height. All
the world sees them now, For, they were not done in a Corner.

What means their Crying up an unjust and illimited power in Princes? Is not
This their bleating out of an illegal unwarranted Prerogative (with which all
Our pulpits have rung of late) intended to tickle Princes till they be luld
asleep? or to sow pillowes under them, till. They themselves can thrust them
down; not only from that Tyranny which Bishops would persuade them to usurp;
but also from their wholesome and lawful prerogative.

What means their Buzzing in Princes Ears, That Kings cannot stand without
such Bishops? that if they should be put down, the Church and State too, must
needs be Ruined? to This purpose they cry Blood, Blood; They can never fall
without Blood: so some of them have vaunted. But Let them remember what Christ
said to One (to whom they so much pretend) He that smites with the sword,
shall perish by the sword. They know also whose Coat was sent home to their
Holy Father, with this Inscription (written with his own blood) Judge Holy
Father whether This be Thy Sons Coat or not.

I have not forgotten how they have dealt with the People, Ministry, Gentry,
Nobility, All sorts of men: For they have many stairs to step up by, to such
an Height; but Princes are their highest steps, their first Aim.

That which they have most sounded in the Peoples Ears, is the Church, the
Church, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord! by This, as by a
stalking horse, they have come much nearer then else they could. But now their
Vizard begins to fall off; and Men begin to see the true power of the True
Church; and the Tyranny of that Antichristian Mock-Church; which under the
Mask of Indifference, has brought in most abominable Superstitions, and most
intolerable slavery on the Persons, Liberties, Bodies, and Souls of Men. For
they have pressed Consciences, even unto Gasping: yea, and would not be
satisfied, though they daily heard the sighs and groans of those bleeding
hearts, which themselves had stabd with the poisoned sword of
Church-Indifference.

Indeed they have used Both hands, and have stricken with Both. What the Keys
could not break, the Sword has cut. And it had been much more tolerable, If
This Sword had pierced no farther then the Ears of Men: with which they have
yet been much more busy then He was, whom they brag to have been their
first Predecessor. Yet methinkes it was a sad Omen that this Sword should cut
off the Ear of Malchus, which signifies (they say) a King, or Kingly
Authority. At This they strike indeed, through the Ears, and Hearts of so many
Loyal Subjects.

We need not seek their End, in all This. It cannot be doubted, but by all
These Means, they aim at One End, (which is also the Popes) to pull down all
Other Power, and set up their own. Thus, Thus they Oppose, and Exalt
themselves above All that is called God, or is Worshipped; as is more fully
represented in another place of this Discourse.

Now let any man Living speak: Are These Bishops, These Usurping Prelates to
be suffered in a Church, or State, where there is any respect to Right Church
Government, or True State Policy? since it is Evident They are truly Papal,
most properly Antichristian; and as Antichrist must Oppose and Exalt themselves
above all that is Worshipped, or Called God: Which is most True Popery, (as
has been demonstrated) And as Popery, Destructive to all Church and State
Policy.

Doubtless some such Apprehensions as This, wrought in their Breasts, who
being offered, have refused Bishop-ricks; and being possessed, could not rest
till they had Disinvested themselves again.

Histories are full of foreign and Domesticke Examples of This sublect. Such
was Niceph. B^emnides chosen Patriarch of Constantinople. Weringbaldius chosen
Bishop of Triers. Theophilus Bishop of Adiana. Aminonius cut off his Ear,
(being Bishop) that so he might be incapable of That Function. Eugenius (the
Philosopher) left his Ministry rather than he would be a Bishop. Bassiances
an Elected Bishop, was by Memnon whipped before the Altar (three hours
together) because he would not be made a Bishop. Adrian (with us) refused the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury, being pressed thereunto. Two or Three Popes
might come into this Catalogue; Clement the first was One: E^ quis fuit Alter?
Shall I name Marcellus? He neither refused, nor resigned the Papacy; yet
solemnly professed be saw not how Those that possessed such high places could
be saved.

O but had These piously considered what Good they might have done in such high
places, or duly remembered their Own, or their friends, advancement, they could
never have dome This: But Ignoti nulla cupid^.

For answer to This Objection, I shall give you some instances of Those that
have resigned up their Bishop-ricks after they had held them long enough for a
full Trial. Yea perhaps there be more of This kind than of the other, though
the Proverb be, Aegrius Ejicitur quam non admittitur Hospes.

Of These were Vlbranius Bishop of S^etune, Arnulphus Bishop of Ment^, Add^
Bishop of Lions, Vi^erbus Bishop of ^atisbone, Henger Bishop of M^^^s, Michael
Bishop of Ephesies, with many more.

Amongst our Own was Edmund Boniface, and Robert Kalwarby, (Both Archbishops
of Canterbury) Will. Beavose and William De Sancta Maria (Bishops of London.)
One of Lincoln, and Two of Coventry. I may add Miles Coverdale, who being
deprived in Queen Mary's days would not be reiny^sted in Queen Elizabeth's,
but taught a School. There is One Pope Cornelius: And Gregory the Great, must
not be forgotten; who said, He that affects the Primacie of the whole Church,
must be Antichrist, or His Predecessor.

If some few Walloons, or men of Geneva, should declaime against Episcopacie,
They would prevail but little, because it would be said of Them, perhaps (as
of That great disturber of the Church of old) Insaniunt, quia non sunt
Episcopi: But now Ex Ore Tuo judicaberis, Bishops contend with Bishops: not
with Words, but Deeds. I beseech you consider that Flesh and Blood is not wont
to refuse, or part with such great Advantages: Sure we may conclude there is
somewhat that stings within, Latet Anguis in Herba. These Good men, doubtless,
found a Sting, and they would not kick against Pricks.

When Saint Paul (a Great Philosopher) bids us beware lest we be entangled with
Philosophy: When Solomon (who had tasted all the dainty Cates Nature could
provide or dress) cries out, All is Vanity, All is Vanity: When Bishops
themselves (who have fully enjoyed all the sweetness a Bishops Honor can
afford) shall pause and cry, It is Enough, It is Enough, Non iterum bibam
veneunm, (as once Dioclesian, of his Empire) Sure there must be something
worth reflecting on; a fair warning for our Present or Future Bishops.

O you Judges of the Earth, why will you not be wise? O you Senators (for such
our Bishops are) why will you not learn Wisdom? God forbid that of You should
be said (what the Spirit speaks of some) Why should they be smitten, They
rebel more and more? Why should they be reproved, They will still do
follishly?

Yet but for a little while; For I am Confident yet within few Years, if not
Months, if not Days, the God of Peace and Truth will deliver his Church of
This heavy yoke, from which (with the Letany Give me leave to conclude) Good
Lord deliver us.

SECTION II.
CHAP. I.
HAving clearly proved how uncompatible Our Episcopacy is to Civil Government
in State Policy; let us now consider whether It may shelter it self under the
Mysterious Covert of Antiquity.

I could heartily wish, that in matters which receive their being from
Scripture, so immediately as Church Discipline does, we might make the
Scripture (which is a sufficient rule) our sole guide, our sole moderator. But
as Heretics in the day of Judgment shall cry to the mountains to cover
them; so Heresies now also, fly to the craggy rocks of remotest times: and in
such dark corners hope to shelter themselves.

Thither also we will follow them, quo fata trahunt, we will advance. Not
doubting but to unkennell those little Foxes: hoping even with Goliah's sword
to lay Goliath in the dust, and bring the five uncircumcised Princes of the
Caenaanites, to their just censure, before the King or Captains of the
Israelites.

There is a most Reverend man, famous for learning, (especially for that
learning which is not open to every eye) has taken upon him the defense of
This Cause: I shall therefore in few words present to Him my thoughts upon
those His determinations; Concluding with Philip of Macedon, that if I can but
win the chief City, the whole Country is gained: Then I shall see whether
Those things which are pressed by others, be not altogether ineffectuall to
determine the point which they dispute. And so I shall leave the decision of
This, to the judgment and opinion of the learned.

Before I consider that Treatise in the parts of it, give me leave to say that
which is most true, and I hope will satisfy all men; If every word of that his
book were true, yet it is little to the point: For the Question is not,
Whether there have been Bishops ever since Christ's time; but, Whither these
have had power over their brethren: or, Whether one Bishop has had
Jurisdiction over another. And this Question is double:

First, Whether they have had any superintendence one above another.

Secondly, Whether this has been mixed with that Lordlinesse which now is
used; forcing obedience by the edge of the Sword, where the Keys can give no
entrance: And of this, in the whole book there is not the least hint, ne gry
quidem. Though this also were not enough for our Question; which is not only of
their Lordly power in Ecclesiasticis, but also in Civilibus.

In the first Querie, we shall quickly join issue; agreeing with our
Antagonists, that there have been Bishops ( viz. Ministers of the Gospel) who
have had a Scripture power in matter of Government, over particular flocks; but
the other we do absolutely and confidently deny.

First, He endeavors to prove the succession of seven and twenty Bishops,
in the seat of Timothy: and this he essayeth by one single (not to say simple)
witness, a certain man named Leontius; whose writings have not delivered him
famous to us for learning, nor his exemplary holiness (mentioned by others)
famous for pi^ty.

Truly, a man of greater authority than he, (as Papias, Ignatius, Polycarpus,
who, almost all, knew the Apostles) shall not be of credit sufficient to sway
my faith in this point: Not but that they were most worthy men; but because all
Antiquity has passed the refining pot of the Index expurgatorius, I shall
consider well before I subscribe. And shall I then give credit to an unknown
Author, in those things that were acted almost five hundred years before his
birth? Let the world judge whether it be equal.

Neither is this Author quoted, from witness of his own; but out of a
Council. Now, how Counsels have been abused, those who have ever had place
or note in great Assemblies, can too well tell: where there is almost no Order
drawn up, but after a serious review, reducing the mistakes of the Clerks, to
the sense of those who did frame the Order, which might else come forth most
disorderly.

By what I have already said, That other testimony brought from a fatherless
Treatise of Timothy's Martyrdom, cited only by Photius, (a learned man, who
lived seven or eight centuries after Christ) will be of no weight: for Photius
does but say he read it. Hearsay in matter of judicature is no good testimony:
and reports in matter of opinion, at the second hand, are good to amuse those
who defy venerable Antiquity; but will never edify those who desire to
bottom their resolutions upon sound Reason.

The testimonies of Faelix, John of Antioch, and Theodore, are not of age
sufficient to be registered among the Ancients, or to be valued, because they
are old. I confess, I set a greater value upon Ignatius, and Irenaeus, who
affirm, Polycarpus was made Bishop of Smyrna, by St. John; but this must not be
of undeniable authority.

For of Ignatius I shall affirm this, that All those who are any whit learned
in Antiquity, know that five of his Epistles are spurious; and how unmingled
those are which we allow to be his, we do not know, who look upon Antiquity
at such a distance. But allow it to be true, that Onesimus was Bishop of
Ephesus, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, etc. This may be true, but evinceth in no
measure the Question in dispute: Which is not of a Bishop in general, but such
a Bishop.

The Authority of Tertullian also, is of the same credit: He tells us that
Polycarpus was placed by St. John at Smyrna; and at Rome Clement by St. Peter.
This no body will dispute; (though I am not bound to believe it.) But where is
the stresse of this Argument?

In the last place, that of Clement Alexandrinus, is as much questioned as all
the rest. But allow it to be true, that John did appoint Bishops, they have
gained nothing; for I shall allow that Christ also has instituted Bishops, and
that Bishops are Iure divino; yea, I will allow that they are to feed Christ's
flock, to rule Christ's inheritance, in Christ's sense; but I shall never allow
of these Bishops, which are now the subject of our dispute.

There are Three sorts of Bishops, as Beza says: There are of Gods
Institution, and they are those who have a power over their proper flock, with
the rest of the Church, and no other. There are also of Man's Institution; and
this ever overfloweth into the Neighbor parish. And lastly, there is a
Demonicall Bishop; and this is he who challenges the Sword, as well as the
Keys.

This last may well be styled Demonicall; for sure God never erected This
order; nor Man in his right senses: Where it will then fix, is clear enough.
Even on him, Whose dark Mysteries, most of these men have been very well
acquainted with.

The long Robe and the Sword do not well agree. To see a Lawyer tied to his
Sword till he put off his Gown, is not so comely; but to see a pair of Lawne
sleeves to stifle a Scepter, if it were but on a stage, I would cry out,

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis?

SECT. II. CHAP. II.
THus having run through that little Treatise, (yet with some wonder, that a
person of his profession, piety, and known learning, should do That, which
might in any sense, seem to impose on those whom he loves.) I proceed to
some other things, which I find produced from Antiquity, by the greatest
Patrons of that kind of Episcopacy which we now oppose.

Yet by the way, I must note here also, That either none seem to state the
Question (between us) right; or else, all seem to dissert it.

Our Question (as I have often said) is not of the name of Bishop, or his power
in Ecclesiasticalls only; but also, and mainly, of his Civil power, and
Temporalls. Which all the Patrons of Episcopacy seem to shun, as a dangerous
Rock; and hovering aloof off, go about to prove by Antiquity, that Bishops
had this Name, and some power even in the Primitive Church; which (though I
think none can force me to believe, yet) I dispute not: But demand, Whether
any Bishops had such power in Ecclesiasticis, and Civilibus, as ours now have
in England.

Yet; because they insist so much on Antiquity, for Ecclesiastical Episcopacy,
I will be content to follow them there also; believing we shall find no one
foot-step (in true Antiquity) of such a Bishop as we now have established in
England, though we should strip him of all Civil power, and consider him only
in Ecclesiasticis.

Shall I begin with his Election? which indeed is somewhat higher than they use
(perhaps dare) to begin. I can produce many Antiquities to prove the Election
of all Church Officers, was in the People; yea, and that for diverse ages after
the Apostles; who indeed at first appointed These themselves: and good reason
why, when there were no People to choose their Officers, till converted by the
Apostles; who afterward left This Power to the Whole Church, rightly
constituted. And This continued in the Church for diverse ages: as appears by
Constantines Epistle to the Church of Nice; Athanasius also ad Orth^doxos; and
St. Cyprians sixth Epistle: with many instances m^re, which might be, and
daily are produced.

It is true, that after the Apostles, and purer times of the Church were gone,
the Clergy began to lord it over the people, and to bereave them of their due
privilege; yea often times agreed among themselves to choose One Superintendant
(as we may call him) whom they called Father, and Bishop; and in This perhaps
they did not amiss, if This Bishops power rested only on the Clergy, and never
reached to the people; who else sure by all reason should have had a vote in
choosing any Officer, much more such a great Commander.

But let all the Patrons of Episcopacy produce me one found Antiquity for such
Election as is now in use with us. Let them from undoubted Antiquity for three
hundred years after Christ, (nay much more, for I easily see their evasion)
let them, I say, show me but one instance of our Conge d' eslire: It is the
Thing I speak of, not the Word.

Let them show me (except in the dark times of Popery) power given to ten or
twelve Men (except all the Clergy explicitly consented) to choose such a
Bishop. And yet This is not half that which lies in our Elections; whcih
indeed are not at all made by so much, as the Chapter of any Cathedral, but
received only by Those who dare not refuse it: but of this I spoke before in
the first Section.

I am content to pass their Election, (which I perceive none of them care much
to examine;) and come to the Execution of their Office. In which I might
instance in two or three maine points; as sole Ordination, sole Jurisdiction,
Delegation, etc.

I meet with none that take upon them to defend this last; which as a Great
Statesman observed many years since, was a Thing at first view, most
monstrous, and unreasonable. For, will any man living think it reasonable my
Lord Keeper should, ad placitum, delegate whom he will to keep the Seal, and
judge in Chancery, without consent of his Majesty and the State, that
entrusteth him with this Great Office? Yet These Men hold it fit to entrust a
Vicar-Generall, Chancellors, Officials, Surrogates, (and yet under Officers;)
to keep the Seal, yea we^d the Scepter of Christ, and all the Church, which
yet they say is entrusted with them. But with whom have they left the sheep in
the Wilderness? Were there nothing else but This, I cannot but hold our
Episcopacy an intolerable Tyranny; s^eing a Bishops Dog, (I am not much amiss)
lording it over the People, Ministers, Gentry, Nobility, All: while his Master
is perhaps Revelling, Dicing, or doing Worse; for, worse they do.

Nor is this any way to be helped, 'while to one Lord Bishop is granted so vast
a Territory. Which yet he commands as absolutely under that most significant
term of Diocesan, Primate, or Metropolitan, as any Temporal Prince can do, by
the name of Earl, Duke, King, Emperor, or any other.

I often remember the dry Oxe-hide, that was brought to represent Alexanders
great Dominions: But I see them so far from standing on the middle, (to keep
down all) that indeed they often touch is not at all; but are acting the Lord
Temporal (I might say more) remote enough from their own Diocese.

Which yet of it self is often so large, that no one man living could
sufficiently Visit and Over-see it; except he could get the Pope to
Transubstantiate him also, and so get a Vbiquitarian Body. To supply which, he
is often forced to puff up his wide sleeves, and look very big: And yet much,
yea most of all his Office, must be done by Delegates; who are often, yea
usually, the lowest dregs of basest men.

In good earnest, I would thank any man, that can show me one good Antiquity to
countenance such Delegation of an entrusted Office, to Deputies, specially to
such Deputies, as themselves do not, cannot trust.

Does any man dare, or can any man think it fit, to Delegate the Tuition or
Education of a tender Prince, committed to his Charge or Care, by his Royal
Father? I beseech you; Is not the flock of Christ styled by the Spirit of
Christ, An Holy Priesthood, a Royal People? Shall it then be fit, or lawful;
For any man to transmit this Trust to any whomsoever? especially to such a crew
of faithless Hirelings? God forbid.

SECT. II. CHAP. III.
I shall pass their Sole Jurisdiction also, being the Common Theme of all
that write of this Question; specially when I find some of themselves
disclaim that Epithet of Sole: and if they can be content to leave This out,
I have less to speak against them.

We come to Ordination; or to speak as they use; (though some of them love not
to hear of it) Sole-Ordination. This is the main and Masterpiece of all
Episcopacy. All things else in the Church, they yield equally committed to
Presbyters; only Imposition of Hands, they say, is solely retained to the
Bishop; so Downham, Bilson, and of late One of their own, that offers to yield
the Cause, for one example of Lawful Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop.

One Example? what dare he say, France, Belgium, no parts of Germany, has
Lawful Ordination, though by sole Presbyters, without Bishops? Downham is
somewhat more moderate, and yields such Orders Lawful; but in case of
Necessity, or at least some great Exigency: in which he has the Charity to
include the Reformed Churches abroad, though, as he says, They are of age,
and might speak for themselves.

But they urge us to show Antiquity allowing any such Ordination without a
Bishop. It has been showed, and yet never answered (that I know:) that some
Councels have intimated enough; Presbyters were wont of old to Ordain without
Bishops.

As that of Ancyra, Can. 1^. It shall not be lawful for Choriepiscopi, or
Presbyters to Ordain, without consent of the Bishop, (...); (for so the words
are in Balsamon, though some of themselves translate the words very strangely.)
Which clearly intimates, That before this Canon, Presbyters and Choriepiscopi
(who had not still Ordination from three Bishops, though some had so,) did
usually Ordain without the Bishops leave, (much more without his presence;)
and that too in Other parishes besides their Own: Else it is strange the
Council should now forbid it, if It had never been done before. Nay, the
Canon does not now absolutely forbid it, (which is much to be marked) but
only commands, the Bishop's leave should be asked to all such Ordinations.
But if This Imposition of hands were a Sole property of Bishops, (as now some
make it) the Bishop could not give leave, or depute others to do it. For,
This, even among themselves is a received Axiom, Episcopus potest delegare ea
quae sunt Iurisdictionis, non ea quae sunt Ordinis.

Hitherto also may be referred all those Canons that require Presbyters to Lay
on their hands with the Bishop in Ordination: As, Can. 3. Council. Carth. about
the year 418. and that of Aken, 400. years after: Yea, and this was the
practice of the Church in St. Cyprians time, as appears by his 6. and 58.
Epist. So Jerome in his Epistle to Rome; and St. Ambrose among his Epistles
Book. 10. Yea, and This is our Law also; which requires ^^oadjutors to Bishops
in Ordination: Consonant doubtless to the most Ancient practice of the
Primitive Church, even in the ^postles Times; as appears by that of Paul to
Timothy, on whom were laid the Hands of the Presbytery; not of the
Presbyterate, or one Presbyter, as learned Mr. Thorndick not only yields, but
proves; who yet is no enemy to Bishops.

Neither could I ever find one good Antiquity against Ordination by
Presbyters, or for Sole Ordination by Bishops. I find indeed Collythus, and
some others, Unpriested by Councels, because Ordained by Presbyters alone; but
That Act of the Presbyters was done in faction, against the Bishop, and their
fellow Brethren. Yea, and in most cases, if not in all, Those Orders (so
annul'd by Councels) were conferred by One Priest alone, and so were indeed as
unlawful, as if by one Bishop alone.

I might add, that some Great men of good Note, have strongly maintained, all
those Councels erred, which so Unpreisted Those that had been Ordained by a
Presbyter, or Presbyters, without a Bishop. Amongst These are some of Note in
the Popish Church; It being a Common Instance among the Schoolmen, disputing,
Whether Orders once conferred could be annul'd; and they all conclude the
contrary. Yea, and many of These also strongly prove, that Priests may as well
Ordain as Bishops; and their Reason seems very good; for, say they, Seeing a
Priest can Consecrate, and by Consecration Transubstantiate, (which is more,)
Why can he not also Administer the Sacrament of Orders, which is less?

Yea, and some of them dare affirm, Neither Bishop nor Pope can license
Priests to give Ordination, except The Power of Ordination be de jure, in
Presbyters: For, They all yield the Pope himself cannot license One that is
not a Priest, to Consecrate the Host; because none but Priests have That Power
of Consecration. And a License does not confer Orders without Imposition of
hands, as They all grant.

F^r my own part, I ever thought That of Bucer most Rational, Deus non
simpliciter singularibus Personis, sed Ecclesiae Ordinandi potestatem tradidit.
For so indeed it seems the Work of the whole Church, who are to Elect, to
testify also and seal their Election by Laying on their hands: And the
Presbytery are but the Churches servants in This Act. I could heartily wish It
were reduced to This again, which I fully conceive to be most agreeable to
Right Reason, Scripture, and All Good (untainted) Antiquity. Yet till This be
again restored, I much desire the Prelates would leave off some of the
Ceremonies, which I hear they use in it, (though not by Law I think,) lest they
drive all good men from taking Orders.

SECT. II. CHAP. IV.
I Shall now pass from this kind of Church Antiquity, and pass to the best
Antiquity, the infallible Truth of God, in Holy Scripture. In it I shall show
there is little for, much against Bishops; whether we consider the Name, or
Office of a Bishop, as now it is settled.

The Name, I find but four times in all the New Testament: In Two of which,
the Name is so indifferently used, that it makes nothing toward an issue of
This Question. Those are, 1 Timothy 3. verse. 1, 2, 3. and, 1 Pet. 2.25. And what
can be gained from hence, truly I see not.

In the other places it makes against them, as I shall show more at large by
and by.

But the Word Elder, (a true Bishop) is used twenty several times in the New
Testament. And you shall find the Apostles honoring This Name so much, that
one of them styles himself an Elder, but none calls himself a Bishop. Indeed,
Judas is so called; Who (as it were Prophetically) behaved himself so, that
his Archbishopric was given to another. I doubt not but the Spirit foresaw
this Word would be quickly mounted high enough; so that it brands Judas first
with This style.

Of much more ^ajesty is the Word Presbyter, which signifies Senior. Under the
Law Youth was bound to pay Tribute to Gray hairs; and Senatus of old was so
styled, a Senioribus; Whereas Episcopus signifies nothing but an Overseer: And
such indeed Bishops have been for many years.

Perhaps the Name of Bishop is sometimes (though rarely) used, that the
wilfully blind might stumble: But the Name Presbyter very frequent; that Those
who love Truth and Light, might still see such a Glympse that might Enlighten
them in the midst of Egyptian darkness: from which, I doubt not, but God will
deliver all Christendom in due time.

I can find as little also for the Office of a Bishop, as for his Name in
Scripture, yea much less. I can find our Savior rebuking his Disciples,
striving for precedence; saying, He that will be first shall be last. I can
find St. Peter saying, Lord it not over the flock of Christ: And St. John
branding Diotrephes with seeking the Pre-eminence.

But where shall we find the usurped Office of our Bishops in all the
Scripture? Can they find it (by a multiplying glass) where ever they see the
Name of Bishop, though but in a Postscript, of St. Paul's Epistles, Whither I
see many of them fly for their own Name.

I must confess I have found some Praescripts of David's Psalms (and other
Texts) to be now part of Scripture; but never yet found any Postscript of such
Authority. I dare not therefore give it unto These;

Which first, were never (that I could learn) received by the Church for
Authentic Scripture; nor ever fully joined to the Scripture, but by some
distinctive note, till our Bishops times. Yea, some Ancient Copies have them
not at all; as one very old Greek Copy in Oxford Library, if I be not
misinformed.

Again, These Postscripts have many Improbabilities and some repugnancies; as
many Learned men observe.

As, That of the first to Timothy; From Laodicea the chiefest City of Phrygia
Pacatiana. Which sure was never so subscribed by St. Paul, who would not have
spoken of a First Epistle, when as yet there was no Second, nor appearance of
any. Again, the Epithet Pacatiana, came from Pacatianus a Roman Deputy, 300.
years after St. Paul wrote.

The Epistle to Titus is thus subscribed, (or rather superscribed,) To Titus,
ordained the first Bishop of Creet; from Nicapolis of Macedonia: but it should
have been added; Whither St. Paul meant to come after the Epistle, but was not
there at his writing; as appears very probably from the third of the same
Epistle verse 12. But what means that Phrase, Bishop of the Church in Creet?
was there but one Church in all Creet? This sounds not like the Scripture
style; which always expresses National Congregations by Churches in the
Plural. But it may very well be, Titus was Bishop (or Pastor) but of one
Church in Creet: so that we shall not need to contend about This.

Our Adversaries themselves yield, there cannot be much urged from these
Subscriptions. Baronius, Serrarius, and the Rhemists, will ingenuously confess
so much; and Bishop Whitgift also against Mr. Cartwright.

^he Postscripts failing, where will they show either Name or Office of a
Bishop as now it is used? I know their strong Fort, Tit. 1.5. For this cause I
left thee in Creet, that thou should set in Order the things that are
Wanting, and Ordain Elders in every City, etc. Here they think the Power of a
Bishop is set forth at large.

But what if so? Will they be content to be limited to This Power? if so, we
shall the sooner agree. I think no man ever thought, Good Titus had a
Commission here to draw the Civil Sword; or so much as to strike with his
Church Keys.

Let us a little examine This Commission; Which seem^ but a Brief of a large
Patent which Saint Paul had given him before.

If we first examine the Date of This Commission, we shall find it before any
Church Government was settled; and so an Extraordinary Case, not fit, perhaps
not lawful, to be produced as a constant president.

Extraordinary Cases of Necessity, break through the Ceremonial, yea Moral
Law too. The Show Bread may refresh fainting David; Cain and Abel may marry
their own sisters to propagate the World; Samuel may be a Priest, though not
of Aarons House, as was showed before. And why then may not an Extraordinary
way be taken in the first settling of Church Government, where there is yet none
settled? Any man might now in the conversion of the Americans, or Chinois, give
direction how to admit Members, elect Pastors, exercise the keys, etc. This
Titus did, and no more.

But secondly, in what manner his Commission was, I know not; and nothing can
be proved from hence, till that be agreed upon. It is as probable he did it but
instructive, exhortative, and not imperative.

Timothy received his gift by imposition of Presbyteriall hands. If an
extraordinary gift was conveyed in an ordinary way: Why might not an ordinary
calling, and affairs of an ordinary nature, be managed by an extraordinary
man, be carried forth in an extraordinary way? The contrary is not proved, and
so This must till then, be Ineffectuall to them.

But thirdly and lastly, I beseech you consider by what power he did it; by the
power of an Evangelist. There are two sorts of them,

1. Who write. 2. Who proclaim the Gospel in an extraordinary way, as
coadjuters and messengers to the Apostles in this great work.
Of this last sort certainly he was See 2. Cor. 8.23.
. A Bishop he was not; for our adversaries do all agree, that it is the duty
of a Bishop curae sue incumbere, to watch over his charge: now this he did not,
for if Creet was his Charge (which in no way, neither by Scripture nor
Antiquity is proved) he did not attend it; for we find him continually
journeying up and down; he leaves Creet and comes to Ephesus, from thence
he is sent to Cor^nth, after that into Macedonia, from Macedonia he is returned
to the Corinthians. Neither is it to be found in History that he ever returned
to Creet. Thus if I mistake not, the Text is less advantageous than the
Postscript.

Some think to find Episcopacy established in that example of Saint John,
writing to the Angels of the seven Churches. But this is Argumentum long
petitum.

Because Paul endorseth the Letter of a Corporation, or an Assembly, to the
most eminent man in the Congregation; Therefore He shall have sole
Jurisdiction; therefore the Mayor shall have sole power without the Aldermen,
est par ratio.

When Paul writes to the Church of the Thessalonians (1 These. 5. v. 27.)
commanding That Epistle to be read to all the holy Brethren; the Church of the
Thessalonians should have Jurisdiction over other Churches: which truly I do
not think to be a strong Argumentation.

Secondly, the Word is taken collectively for the Assembly and charge of
Ministers, and not for One, as appears evidently, Revel. 2. v. 24. He says,
speaking to the Angel, To you and to the rest in Thyatira: he puts the Angel in
the plural number, which he would not have done had he written to a single
Bishop.

Thirdly, these Epistles are written to the whole Church for the threats and
promises are read to them, and the Epiphonema of every Epistle is this, he that
has an ear let him hear, what is spoken to the Churches.

But yet if this superscription could give any advantage to the Angel, it would
but extend to his own congregation.

The Laodicean Angel has no influence upon the Philadelphian, or the Smyrnite;
and if that be not proved, nothing is gained in the point of Episcopacy, except
it could be proved, that these Angels had in their care many congregations
under these particular Churches: which never has, nor ever will appear. I
hope it is manifest to all men that they cannot establish Episcopacy by
Scripture.

Secondly, there is much in Scripture against them; For the word Elder and
Bishop is all one, Tit. 1. ver. 7. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that
thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in
every City, as I had appinted thee; for a Bishop must be blameless, as the
Steward of God.

First, he shows Titus what manner of man an Elder must be, viz Blameless;
and now proves it, because a Bishop must be blameless. As if I should write
to Thomas to live soberly, because a Man must be sober; it necessarily
follows that Thomas is a man.

So that Phil. 1. he writes to the Bishops and Deacons at Philippi. Is it
probable that a little Town in Macedonia should have many Bishops, when one
Bishop must have many Cities, in his Dioces? Those Who translated the Bible,
foresaw This: And therefore Acts 20. They have translated the word Episcopus an
Over-seer. Yet in other places they translate it Bishop. And the Jesuits say
Piae frauds sunt licitae.

The carriage of the Apostles, in several places is remarkable: when they come
to a City (as Acts 20.) They send for the Elders of the Church, never thinking
of a Bishop, he is so inconsiderable a man. These places I hope make clearly
against them; So now I will endeavor to show what the Scripture holds forth
for Church Government.

SECT. II. CHAP. V.
IN this search you will agree that the Government is fixed there, where you
shall see settled the plenary and absolute power of Election of Officers,
Decision of controversies, and Excommunication of those that transgress.

This you will find ministerially in the Officers, But initiative, virtualiter,
and conclusive, in the People.

The Officers are called Overseers, Rulers, and Elders, etc.

Some of these are to preach and administer the Sacraments, others to watch
over men's manners, others to serve Tables, and look to the poor: All these
are chosen by the People: but whenever by their industry any delinquency is
discovered, the whole matter is brought to the Church, and there the people and
Elders do pass their definitive sentence.

Examine but where election of Officers, decision of controversies and
excommunication of members are recorded, and you shall have them all in the
Church; not representative, but in the whole Church, consisting of Officers and
other members.

As first for election, Acts 1.15. Peter speaks to the People, and tells
them they must choose one in Judas his place, and ver. 23. It is said They
appointed Two. It is true the lot divided which of them two should be the man,
(a course in the like case, not unlawful to us at this day:) But the reducing
of it to Two, was the act of the Church; though Peter was amongst them. So
afterward Timothy received his Evangelicall gift by the Imposition of
Presbyteriall hands; which Presbyters were in this work, the servants of one
present Congregation.

Secondly, Decision of Controversies, either in cases of Conscience, or in
point of manners. In cases of Conscience when Paul and Barnabas had no small
difference about Circumcision, they sent to Jerusalem where the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren meeting together, jointly returned that answer which you
find Acts 15.23.24.2^.

Some would press this place, this act of the Apostles further, and give to
every Synod a Commanding Power; because it is said Act. 15.28. It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no further burden upon you. Therefore they
say a Synod has a commanding and burdening Power.

But I cannot consent to that: for then the major part of the Churches in
Europe, Africa, Prester John's Country, might meet and command all the Churches
of Christ (which God forbid,) in what they pleased; and that jure divino: for
God when he gives a rule to his Church, he speaks to the whole Church of
Christ, and not to any particular Congregation. I only press it thus far,
That the People were joined even with the Apostles, in that Great Synod.

The Commanding power of the Synod lay in this, that the Apostles speak the
mind of the Holy Ghost. But such authority is not left in us; and therefore no
such Obligation upon others: Truly if there were such a power left us, I should
with much scurple resist any act of such Government; whereof I could make a
good construction; For many times the power Commanding is more dangerous than
the thing Commanded: but there is no such power. Neither, as I said before, do
I press it with such a design.

In cases of Civil converse, Mat. 18.17. We must make our addresses to the
Church; and he that will not hear the Church must be as a Publican.

In that place the greatest dispute will be, What is meant by the Church? for
some will say, Here is meant the Church representative; either in more, as the
Presbytery, or in one, as the Bishop; and not the Church at large. But I would
labor to evince the contrary. Weigh either the Context, or the general
signification of the word Church, and I hope the true sense will be manifest.

For, Let us see how Church is taken in the Scripture; It is used sometimes
figurative; and sometimes properly. Figurative, as when a particular house is
called a Church; As, the Church in his house, Romans 16.5.

Secondly, When by Synecdoche, the head is put for the whole; as Christ is
called the Church, 1 Cor. 12.12.

Thirdly, Collective, When all the Churches of Christ are called the Church, 1
Cor. 10.32. It is used perhaps under some other figures, but it will be long
to quote them all.

Secondly, It is used Properly in two phrases;

First, When the Congregation is called the Church; as the Church at Ephesus,
Corinth, etc. Secondly, When the Congregations are called Churches; as the
Churches of Galatia, and of Iadea. Thus it is used Properly, Thus Figuratively;
but no where Representative: scil. the Ministers, the Presbyters, or the
Bishops; or all these, for the Church. You shall find these and the Church
contradistinct; as, To the Saints, the Bishops, and the Deacons, 1 Phil. 1.1.
To the Church, and the Elders, Act. 15.4.

I conceive we are bound to take a word in that sense which is current in
Scripture; except that sense clearly cross the scope and spirit of the text.

You shall meet with that word 48. times in the New Testament, and no where
signifying that which we call the Representative Church; Very often for the
Saints themselves: As, 1 Cor. 1. verse. 15.2 Cor. 1. verse. 1. 1 These. 1. verse.
1. Why should we not then take it in the same sense? Are not we then bound to
expound the word Church in some of those significations which are frequent in
Scripture; and not in that sense, which is so far from being found in the text,
that a Contradistinct phrase is, as I said before, ^ather used?

Again, From the text and context that will appear to be the meaning of the
Spirit, and no other: The text is, Mat. 18. verse. 17. If he shall neglect to
hear Them, tell the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him
be to thee as a heathen man, and a Publican. The context is in the 15. and 16.
verses, If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone: If he shall bear thee, then have thou gained thy
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more;
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

In the context and the text there are three things to be examined, before the
true sense can be found out: First, Who are meant in that Gradation, in the
15, 16, 17. v. Secondly, Who is meant by Them, v. 17. (if he will not hear
Them.) Thirdly, What is meant by Publicans and sinners.

First, Who is meant in that Gradation. In the first place is meant the Party;
in the second is meant the Elders, or the Bishops, the Officers of the Church.

If you say, They are not there understood: yet I am confident you will not, I
am sure you cannot, say, they are there excluded. If then the Spirit pointed at
them, with the other members of the Church, or them solely; It would be an
unnecessary thing, to bring him afterward to them again, as to the
Representative Church.

Secondly, By Thee, ( v. 17.) is not meant only the Party, but every Christian,
every Church member, to whomsoever the news of such a miscarriage shall come:
Else this will be a means to nourish particular parties sidings, (which the
Scripture does exceedingly shun,) If by Gods Law he should be a Publican to
one of the Church and not another: If he be so to every member of the Church,
this will be a hard case, That if a Bishop, or an Elder, one, two, or more,
shall pass the bitter sentence of Excommunication, he must be so to me also,
though I know nothing of it.

But some will say, that must be done before the Church. To which I answer, The
word says no such matter. And thus those who mis-expound the Scripture, must
eck out the Scripture, to make good their own imagination.

But secondly, Why should it be complained of, before the Church, if the
deciding power be in the Officers? Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora.

But thirdly and lastly, If you will have the whole Church hear; it seems to
me against all reason in the world, that the party deputed should have power,
the party deputing being present. The Steward of a Court Leet, or Court Baron,
is annihilated, if the Lord be there. All Officers veil bonnet, when the
party giving them power is present.

Why are Parliaments the representative body of the Kingdom, but because the
Plough cannot stand? but because no pla^e can contain the whole body? But if
all the people could meet in Campo Martio, should Those who now are but
servants, then be more than servants? surely the whole Church being present,
four or five by Gods Law shall not rule all, seeing Gods Law never appoints
any standing Laws against the rules of nature.

In the third place we must enquire after the sense of Heathen and Publican:
sc. the most odious of men. Is it possible that any Christian shall be to any
Christian the most odious of men, for the sentence of a Judge which he never
heard, neither has right to hear?

Thus if you will be bound either by text or context, or the common
acceptance of the word in the Scripture; by Church must be understood the
whole Congregation.

Again, for excommunication of members, 1 Cor. 5.13. S. Paul commands Them,
( sc. the whole Church) to put away that wicked person, and to deliver up such
a one to Satan. 2 Cor. 2. They restore him, They forgive him.

Thus we see every where, That in election of Officers, in decision of
Controversies, in cases of Conscience, in Excommunication, the whole Church
disposes everything, not the Bishops, not the Presbyters alone.

I do not observe the Church has power in other things, but in these, and in
all these, in election of Officers, in decision of controversies and
excommunication of delinquents, the whole power is in the Church.

I conceive then I have clearly and briefly proved these three things: 1 That
there is little in Scripture for Episcopacy; much less for such an Episcopacy
as Ours. 2 Something against them. 3 Another Government clearly delineated.


SECT. II. CHAP. VI.
IT being (as I conceive it is) cleared both from State Policy, Antiquity and
Scripture, how incompatible Civil Government and such Episcopacy are, I hope
we shall never hereafter be choked with that Proverb, No Bishop, no King. I
do most willingly pay very great reverence to a saying delivered to us by many
successions, from the wisdom of our forefathers; But I shall ever crave leave
to question that Maxim which may justly seem to me the birth either of
Ignorance or ends. Antiquity must have no more authority than what it can
maintain, by reason frequent impostures of this nature command us to be
circumspect; did not our predecessors hold the torrid zone inhabitabilem aestu?
till Noah's Dove, Columbus discoverd Land, the world was confined in the Arc of
Europe, Africa, and Asia.

In Divinity, where an error is of most dangerous consequence, we have been
too credulous: how many hundred years did our fore fathers swallow this
pleasant bait, We must believe as the Church believes? And since the light of
Reformation, was not particular assurance of our Salvation delivered us, as an
exact definition of our faith?

We have ventured our bodies as well as our souls upon these sands; for in the
Art of Physic (though our parents at a very great remoteness were wiser) it
has passed for a current position that Phlebotomy almost in any case was more
than dangerous; and that men might pay dear for their learning, they have
been as wise in Tenets of State Policy.

Have not too many great ones closed in with Neroes conclusion, m^ oderint dum
metuant?

Lastly, Episcopacy has been the basis, the superstructure, the All, the
soul of Church Discipline for these many ages: but dabit his meliora Deus.

Some of these Tenets spring from invincible Ignorance; others have been the
base pullulations of spirits enslaved to false ends: This No Bishop, no King
(as I have fully proved) pertakes of both, and therefore has no weight with
me, nor I hope shall ever hereafter be of credit with any body else; for we see
that old received truths are not always to be entertained: and so I leave
them with their maxim to the sentence of every judicious Reader.

SECT. II. CHAP. VII.
THere yet remains an objection or two, which must necessarily receive an
answer, before I shut up this discourse. Object. 1.
1 Obj Allow there are some inconveniences, (yea great ones) in Episcopacy;
yet ex malis minimum, it is better to bear these than groan under worse. If
Episcopacy be taken away, Schisms and Heresies will break in, as armed men;
Tyranny is more eligible then Anarchy; the woeful sense of Anarchy begot that
sad Proverb, It is at it was with Israel, when there was no King.

Ans. I do agree to this, Answ.
that a confusion is a most lamentable condition; and that those times are very
perilous, when every man's hand is up against his brother; Ephraim against
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim: Yea, I do profess the distraction of
Heresies, the most miserable of all Civil conquassations, disjoynt the outward
estate; but Heresies distract our souls, dismember our Churches, stave off Jew
and Gentile, who know not whether part to believe, shake the weaker, cause
heart-burning amongst the stronger, do exceedingly provoke God to wrath and
displeasure. But first, let us consider whether it be possible to be without
Heresies and Schisms. Secondly, whether Episcopacy be not the efficient cause
of the most grievous Schisms, and Heresies. Thirdly, whether Those which may
justly be feared upon the removal of Episcopacy, be of such dangerous
consequence, as to weigh down the keeping up of that Government, rather than
to hazard what inconveniences may there-hence follow.

And 1 to the first of these.

It will be clear both from experience, and Scripture, and reason, that
Heresies must come. Look over all Nations, and all times, and you shall find
them distracted with difference of opinions: How many several Sects do you
hear of amongst the Jews, and some of them extreme gross? the Sadduces, the
Pharisees, the Esseans, Herodians, with many more; though a great Critique
reduce them to Three. Christ had no sooner committed the care of his Church to
the Apostles, Disciples, and ordinary Ministers; but they were over-runne with
Heresies: Yea, in their time, some were of Paul, some of Apollo, some of
Cephas; in the interim Christ quite laid aside. In the Church of Pergamus, were
there not some that held the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans? In Thyatira did not
some of the Church listen to the Prophetess Iezebel, who taught them to commit
fornication, and to eat things offered to Idols? Barnabas and Paul were at
some difference: the Doctrine of works was pressed upon the Galatians, and the
resurrection from the dead questioned by the Corinthians.

Amongst Heathens (where Morality was their God) had you not the
Peripatelickes, the Sceptiques, the Platonists, the Epicureant, and many other
Sects? The Pope and Pap^cy, have been much turmoyled with Schisms; and these
Schisms have produced great confusions amongst them.

In the year of the Lord 420. Boniface the eighth being chosen, the Clergy
chose Eulatius, and there they decreed one another Heretics; Simmachus and
Lawrentius caused the same distraction in the year 499.760. Pope Custantine
being convinced of Schisms and berest of both his eyes, he and Philip (another
Pope) were deposed, and Stephen elected in their places. Thus it was
958.973.995.1047.1058.1062.1083.1100.1118.1124. in the year of the Lord 1130,
the disputes betwixt Gregory and Peter (Both chosen Popes) were so famous that
it was grown a Proverb and recorded in this verse.

Petrus habet Romam, totum Gregorius orbem.

Every twenty years had such changes as these, even till of late, that Church
has been vehemently turmoyled with all their Learned. Amongst the Schoolmen,
some are Scotists, some Thomists: among the Polemiques, some Jesuits, some
Dominicans. And all these wrangle each with other.

In the year of our Lord 1400. there was a great dispute about the Original
sin of the Virgin Mary. Between 1215. and 1294. was that great Faction
between the Guelsians and Gibelines (though both were Papists) One desending
the authority of the Pope, the other of the Emperor. In some points of
Controversy, Bellarmine (one of their ablest Writers) is not to be read
without restriction, and not without License of superiors.

If we survey all Antiquity, we shall find no one Century free from
Heretics. Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion, Samosatenus, Novatians, Sabellians,
Nepotians, Maniches, Arrians, Pelagians, with many others, have troubled the
Church from time to time.

If you descend so low as our days, even among Protestants you shall meet with
too too many Divisions. Luther and Calvin; and the English Church between
both; a Calvinist for Doctrine, a Lutheran for Discipline. The Lutherans are
divided in Rigidiores, and Molliores, and these differ toto Coelo. The
Calvinists have many disputes: How fiercely does learned Erastus contend with
Calvin and Beza, about Excommunication denying the Church any such power?

The Church of England has three maine Divisions; The Conformist, the
Nonconformist, and the Separarist. The Conformist has the Orthodox Divine,
contending with the Arminian, Socinian, Pelagian, Anabaptist, and diverse
others; who yet All style themselves Sons of the Church of England. The
Nonconformist is uncertain what he scrupleth; for some can dispense with one
of the three Grand Nocent-innocent Ceremonies; some with another, some with
neither. The Separist is subdivided too (as they say) into Seperatist, and
Semi-seperatist. Many other Divisions there also be, will be, in Churches here.

Yea, it is clear in Reason, that Divisions, Sects, Schisms, and Heresies,
must come; For, many are apt to advance themselves and undervalue all others:
and Men's Brains being fertile of errors, after they have conceived they must
bring forth; though the Gospel suffer never so much by it. And while This
Temper is among men, you must still expect Schisms and Heresies.

The Scripture has put this out of all doubt, it says, Heresies must come.
Christ came to set a Sword, not only between the Good and Bad, but even among
Professors of the same Christian Religion; that Those who hold out to the End
may have their Honor and Reward. It is to be marked that Christ does not
press his people to seek their freedom, till Rome be falling, and then he
says, Come out of her my People.

Yea, the Scripture foretells of one Heresy that is not yet (perhaps) come;
it may be it is now in the Birth; sure it is not far off, It is mentioned in
the second of Tiothy, the third Chapter and some of the first verses.

2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come.

2 For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthan^full, unholy.

3 Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

4 Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God.

5 Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn
away.

Expositors all agree This misery to be in the Waine: But in their agreement
they differ very much; for some conceive the Papist is here understood; others
apply it to the late Troublers of Israel, the Arminian, Socinian, and the worst
sort of Episcopal men, that under the Notion of indifferent Ceremonies would
have brought us to swallow down all Popery.

But under favor, I doubt neither of These, reach the full meaning of the
Text. It cannot be the Papist, because it is not to rise till the Last Days.
Indeed Popery is clearly expressed in the 1 of ^im. the fourth, verse the 1,
2, 3. ^(as that most Learned and Reverend man Mr. Mead has fully cleared in
his most excellent piece on that Text) yet there they are said to rise in the
Later Times ( viz. of the Roman Empire;) but here these new Heretics come not
out till the Last (not only Later) Days, not only Times, but Days of those
Times.

Again, it seems not to be the Arminian (or any of that Rabble I mentioned but
now.) For first, the Character of their Times is Perilous, as if it would
intimate men indeed should be in danger, but yet escape, the Times being only
perilous: But while Popery bore all before it, forced the whole Church into
the Wilderness, clothed the Witnesses with Sackcloth, and at last prevails
to kill them: sure these Times are more than perilous. But perhaps there is no
pressing force in This.

In the second place let us consider the Character of the Persons. First, they
are expressed as Breakers of the Laws of Civil Converse; and then as
Hypocrites in Religion: the first of these begins at the second, and
contiueth to the fifth verse: The second is in the fifth and si^th verses. Let
us view some passages in both.

Lovers of themselves, Covetous, Proud, etc. And have not men been such ever
since Adam? Why then does the Spirit speak of This as a strange thing in the
Last Days? Mr. Calvin saw this Objection, and therefore often affirms (that the
Scripture may not seem to speak Frigide) Here must be some new strange Crew of
Men that act all These in a most eminent manner, even to the eye of all men.

But some will say, Are not the Papists so? Is not the corrupter part of
Prelates such? Are not the Arminians of this temper? Certainly they are such,
and in an eminent manner; and yet to me they seem not the men the Spirit
points at in this place.

The maine Thing in which these men (here expressed) pride themselves, is not
Learning, or Parts; But (if I be not much mistaken) somewhat beyond and within
all these: That, I suppose, which seems to them to be the Spirit. This, I
conceive, is the Basis of all their vanity, pride, and insolence. They have the
Spirit, and so know more than all the Learned, Pious, Godly Men in the world.
They have the Spirit, they cannot sin, they cannot err; they will not pray,
but when that Spirit moves. Adultery is but an act of the Flesh, but they are
all Spirit, and no flesh. What should these men do with Natural affections,
they are all Spirit? in this case if they be Traitors, High-minded, Heady, etc.
Who will wonder? What may they not be carried up to, by the imagination of the
Spirit? But let them take heed, if they have any thing of God in them; let
them be wise in this their day, for the time may come when it will be too
late. In the mean time I will say as Peter did to Simon, Pray (that if it be
possible) this wickedness of heart may be forgiven.

If we look on the other part of their Character, Having a form of Godliness,
but denying the Power thereof, Creeping into the houses of silly women, Laden
with divert Lusts, etc.

How can these be spoken of Arminians, Socinians, or our Prelates? It were to
be wished that most of These had so much as a Form of Godliness. Sure the
World is now grown too wise to take Duckings, and Cringings, Crossing, and
Crouching, with all of this kind, to be so much as a Form of Godliness.

Do These creep into Women's houses? the Socinians, and Arminians attempt no
such pranks, that I know of. And the Patrons of Episcopacy use not much
persuasion, but Club law: All else is in Corners.

It seems very probable to me, that the Holy Ghost in This text points out some
such, as the Family of Love, the Antinomians, and Grindletonians are, if (at
least) they are not much belyed. And to these, I think, every piece of This
Character will most properly belong. Yea and the Close of it also, or the Issue
of That Sect. They shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall be made
manifest to all men, which can hardly be understood either of Arminianisme, or
Prelacy, since That in several names, This in several dresses, has been in
the world above 1000. years.

Thus you see Sects, Schisms, and Heresies will still come, and must come: And
therefore if by keeping such Bishops we think to keep out all Divisions, we are
much deceived. Which yet I spoke not to take away watchfulness in
Church Governors, (who are still bound to suppress Divisions as much as they
can) but to convince men of This (if I can) that Episcopacy is never like to
prevent Schisms: which I hope to clear more fully in my subsequent discourse.

I could never conceive more than Two ways, that in probability may be like to
quiet us in respect of Divisions. One of These we have no mind to try, and the
other we may not if we would.

The Spaniard indeed by his cruel Inquisition, has inclined his Subjects to a
kind of Unity; but an Unity of Darkness and Ignorance: so that the Remedy
proves worse than the Disease. Neither will, or can Tyranny either Civil, or
Ecclesiastic, bring forth better fruit.

The other Way is That of the United Provinces (in the Low Countries) who let
every Church please her self in her own way, so long as she leaves the State
to her self. And how Religion does flourish There, is known to most men. I
will not dispute This now; only I wish heartily, men would remember, that even
Nature her self as much abhorres a forced violent Union, as a Rent or Division.

BUt in the next place, let us seriously consider, whether the Bishops (as now
they be settled here) be not the Cause of most Sects, Schisms, and Heresies now
amongst us.

Some of them will not deny themselves to be Arminians; and others cannot deny
themselves Socinians. If at least they think we can understand their writings,
printings, yea and Sermons, though These be very Rate.

Yea some do not deny, but they may (at least) receive Orders; they mean a
Pale, Mitre, and Cardinals Hat, if they come. All which we may yet better
construe by their carriage to Priests and Jesuits, both in public and
private, which now we know more than by bare surmise. Many of These they
countenance openly, and never question any, though it be certainly known: we
had (they had) more such in London, than were good Ministers in all England
almost.

All the Livings under most of our Bishops have been committed to the Cure and
Care of superstitious Formalists, Arminians, Socinians, Papists, or Atheists.
Yea the Universities are much corrupted by their malignant influence; for,
Nero-like they think they have done nothing, till they have murdered their own
Mother. In a word, through the whole Kingdom, Preaching, Praying, Expounding,
and the like exercises, both in public and private, are severely suppressed,
and in many places altogether forbidden (except such and such, more pernicious
than profitable;) and all This by the Fathers of our Church, the Lords our
Bishops. And is not This the most compendious way possible to beget and
increase Heresies?

They cry out of Schism, Schism; Sects and Schisms; and well they may: They
make them, and it is strange they should not know them. When they laid such
stumbling blocks (Real Scandals, not only accepta, but data) in the way of
good men, whose Consciences they have grievously burdened, and wounded with
Things (violently pressed on the greatest fines) that are so far from being
indifferent, that many of them were point blank unlawful: have they not by
This even forced their brethren to separate themselves in Judgment and
Practice, till they could find some remote place that might separate their
bodies also? Was not This in Them the readiest way to produce Divisions,
Separations, and (as they call it) Schisms in the Church? Rents are bad, I
confess, where ever they be violent; but yet then worst, when most out of the
eye. Schisms in the Conscience are of greatest danger; and to prevent These,
if I am forct to That, which they please to call a Schism in the Church, Woe
to Him that so forces me. Scandals, Schisms, and Divisions must come; but woe
to him by whom they come. God forgive them in This paticular.

I profess I take no pleasure in ripping up their foul, loathsome sores; I
would they could be thoroughly healed without launcing and opening. I could
give you a strange account of sad Divisions, which themselves have caused both
to Church and State: I could tire you and my self in This, though I should
begin but little higher than mine own Time, mine own Knowledge.

In Queen Elizabeth's Time, many good men were cut off from the Church, some
from the State, a sad Schism! Some by violence laid asleep; Many suspended,
silenced, deprived, cut off (by a strange Schism,) from liberty, livings,
(that I go not higher;) And all This for one word, of their own compounding,
Nonconformity: While they themselves are indeed the greatest Non-Conformists
to all the Reformed Churches in Europe.

Surely, It would have savoured more of Humility, of Christianity, if they had
suspected their own Judgments and Opinions; allowing something to the
Judgment, Learning, and Piety of those holy, worthy, precious Saints, Calvin,
Beza, Bucer, P. Martyr, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, with many more, great,
famous, and eminent Lights, in their times.

If they will stand for Conformity; Let any man living judge, whether it be
fitter for some few Bishops, newly come out of gross Popery, (and still
retaining their old Popish Ceremonies,) to reform, and conform themselves to
the Judgment and Practice of all Reformed Churches; or all Churches to
subscribe to Them.

As they began, so they continued: Christ and they being like parallel lines,
though they should run out in infinitum, they would never meet: Nay rather,
like the Crura of a Triangle, the farther they run (out from the Center) the
more they differ, and are distant each from other.

Under King James, in a few years, four or five hundred Reverend men were
divided from their Livings, and Ministry: And was not this a cruel Schism?
Now also by Them was first forged that sharp Rasor, (or, Book of Sports) with
which they have since made great Divisions of heart.

But in our Gracious Kings Reign, they have come to Cutting off Ears, Cheeks;
and have yet struck deeper, and estay'd many Soule-Schismes; not only in the
Hearts and Consciences of thousands of good men; but whole States also and
Kingdoms, as much as in them lay.

While I hear the sad groans, and see the bleeding wounds of Three Kingdoms
at once, by their Schisms; I have almost forgotten the parting sighs, and
farewell tears of ten thousand poor Christians, by Their Tyranny forced to
abandon their native Country, and dearest acquaintance; while others were here
violently detained in Fetters, some smoothered in Dungeons, some Dismembered,
some driven out of house and Living, and forced to beg: All which yet would
have bin born patiently, had not only all Good men, but Goodness it self,
Learning, Religion, Piety, All that speaks any worth, been altogether, not only
discountenanced, but suppressed, smoothered, and by most exquisite Tortures
almost forced to breath its last.

Yet that these Glorious Princes (under whom such Tyrannies have been
committed) may not suffer in your thoughts, Give me leave to speak some things
on mine own knowledge and experience, others from best intelligence. Queen
Elizabeth, when she heard of Their miscarriages, fell on Them in most sharp
language, threatening Them, if they should ever do the like again to her
Subjects.

King James offered fair discourse to the Non-Conformists; honored Mr.
Cartwright and others of them; disclaimed the Book of Sports: And being asked,
why he made so many Bad Bishops, answered ingenuously, with a strong
asseveration, That he was very sorry, but could not help it; For, no good men
would take the Office on them. And our Gracious Sovereign (since some light
has dawned out of darkness,) has delivered our Sister Church of Scotland
from that unhappy Generation.

For, now I hope the Clouds begin to break away; Light springs up, while
Dark Iniquity is forced not only to shut her mouth, but hide her self and
disappeare. Now the Sun again mounteth up in our Horizon, and quickens the
drooping spirits; so that now many that were Bedridden some months since, now
begin to take up their Beds and walk, leaping up and blessing God.

Fire and Water may be restrained, but Light cannot; It will in at every
cranny: and the more it is opposed it shines the brighter: so that now to stint
it, is to resist an enlightened, enflamed Multitude; which still was, and still
will be Durissima Provincia.

Their mad outrage in all the three Kingdoms, of late, has so incensed the
Common People, that in all men's eyes they are become most vile: and while all
men reflect on their constant trade of mischeivous practices, the wisest begin
to conclude, The very Calling hurt the Men, as much as These disgrace the
Calling.

Thus we have, by too too long, great, and sad experience, found it true, That
our Prelates have been so far from preventing Divisions; that they have been
the Parents and Patrons of most Errors, Heresies, Sects and Schisms, that now
disturb This Church and State.

SECT. II. CHAP. VII.
BUt it may be, the Remedy will yet be worse than this Disease. Let us
therefore, yet more exactly weigh all the Inconveniences that may attend the
Change of This Church Government, which we now dispute.

The Dangers which some have fancied may hence accrue to the State, have been
discussed in the former Section, to which more properly they do belong. We
have here only to consider, such Evils as may have bad influence into the
Church, and Polity thereof.

Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Superstition, Idolatry, Popery, will pack away
with Them; being Their Attendants, as was showed before. What is there then to
be feared? Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Separatisme; nay every body, every Lay man
will turn Preacher.

Suppose all This be true, (which can be but supposed;) Would it not be much
better to hazard the coming in of all These, than still to suffer our souls
and bodies, to be groun'd to powder by these Tyrannical, Antichristian
Prelates, that under pretense of keeping out Separatisme, introduce downright
Popery, and a sinck of almost all Errors and Heresies? Yea, and these Errors of
the Right Hand (which These pretend so much to oppose) owe their birth to our
Bishops also; as was but now, and might yet more fully, be cleared. We all
know, that within these ten years, all the Non-Conformists in England, could
not amount to more than one or two hundred: And now how many thousands there
be, (yea of such that rise one pin higher than Old Nonconformity,)
Themselves, perhaps, know much better than I: Yet our Bishops never were more
active, than in all this time. Whence then arises this New Nonconformity, or
Separatisme, but out of our Bishops Commotions? I will not say, as the Fathers
did of old, Ex martyrum sanguine pullulat Ecclesia; yet I must confess, I
begin to think there may be perhaps somewhat more of God in these (which they
call new Schisms,) than appears at first glympse.

I will not, I cannot, take on me to defend That, men usually call
Anabaptisme: Yet I conceive that Sect is Twofold: Some of them hold Freewill;
Community of all things; deny Magistracy; and refuse to Baptize their Children.
These truly are such Heretics (or Atheists,) that I question whether any
Divine should honor them so much as to dispute with them; much rather sure
should Alexanders sword determine here, as of old at the Gordian knot, where it
acquired this Motto, Que solvere non possum, dissecabo.

There is another sort of them, who only deny Baptism to their Children, till
they come to years of discretion, and then they baptize them; but in other
things they agree with the Church of England.

Truly, These men are much to be pitied; And I could heartily wish, That
before they be stigmatized with that oppr^brious brand of Schismatic, the
Truth might be cleared to them. For I conceive, to those that hold we may go
no farther than Scripture, for Doctrine or Discipline, it may be very easy to
err in this Point now in hand; since the Scripture seems not to have clearly
determined This particular.

The Analogy which Baptism now has with Circumcision in the old Law, is a
fine Rhetorical Argument, to illustrate a Point well proved before; but I
somewhat doubt, whether it be proof enough, for that which some would prove by
it: since (beside the vast difference in the Ordinances,) the persons to be
Circumcised are stated by a positive Law, so express, that it leaves no place
for scruple: but it is far otherwise in Baptism; Where all the designation
of Persons fit to be partakers, for ought I know, is only, Such as believe.
For this is the qualification that, with exactest search, I find the Scripture
require, in persons to be baptized: And This it seems to require in all such
persons. Now, how Infants can be properly said to believe, I am not yet fully
resolved.

Yet many things prevail very much with me in this point.

First, For ought I could ever learn, It was the constant custom of the
purest and most Primitive Church, to baptize Infants of believing Parents; For
I could never find the beginning and first Rise of this practice: Whereas it
is very easy to track Heresies to their first Rising up, and setting soot in
the Church.

Again, I find all Churches (even the most strict) have generally been of
this judgment and practice: yea though there have been in all ages some, that
much affected novelty, and had parts enough to discuss and clear what they
thought good to preach; yet was this scarce ever questioned by men of Note,
till within these Last Ages. And sure, the constant judgment of the Churches
of Christ, is much to be honored, and heard in all things that contradict not
Scripture.

Nor can I well clear that of St. Paul (1 Cor. 7.14.) Else were your Children
Unclean, but now are they Holy. I know some interpret it thus, If it be
unlawful for a believer to live in wedlock with one that believes not; Then
have many of you lived a long time in unlawful marriage; and so your very
Children must be Illegitimate, and these also must be cast off (as Base-borne:)
But it is not so; for, Your Children are Holy; that is, Legitimate.

I confess, This seems a very fair Interpretation; yet I much question,
Whether This be all the Apostle means by that phrase Holy; especially when I
reflect on the preceding words, The Unbeliever is Sanctified by the Believer.
Nor yet can I believe any Inherent Holiness is here meant; but rather That
Relative Church-Holinesse, which makes a man capable of admission to Holy
Ordinances, and so to Baptism; yea and to the Lords Supper also, for ought I
see; except perhaps Infants be excluded from This Sacrament, by That Text, Let
him that eats, Examine himself, aod so let him eat. As Women are excluded
from Church Government and preaching in Congregations, by That of the same
Apostle, I permit not a Woman to speak; Let Women keep silence.

The second thing we fear so much, is Separation, or as some term it
Brownisme; for I am not so well studied in these, as to give an exact
difference between them, or properly to state or phrase either. Yet I think
this also has Latitude, and admits of difference. Before you pass any severe
censure, be pleased to Hear these Poor men (you call Separatists;) Know their
Tenets, and then Judge.

Their maine Tenets (for ought I could ever learn) are about some few Points
in Discipline, in which sure there is less danger, than in Doctrine, of which
they dispute not.

First, they would admit none as members of their Assemblies, generally to
partake with them in all the Ordinances, but such which seem Believing Saints,
and so members of Christ's true Church.

Secondly, they conceive every several Congregation (rightly constituted) has
within it self the power of the keys, committed to it, without dependence on
other Churches: Yet not denying the lawful association of several Churches,
not refusing the advice and counsel of Counsels and Synods.

I shall crave leave to scan the first, and see how much it differs in truth,
from the received Tenets of the Church of England.

I do conceive that England, Scotland, France, all Churches, even Rome it
self will agree in this, that a Church is Cetus Fidelium, Gathered together in
the Name and power of Christ, to wait on him, in the way of his Ordinances
revealed in his Word. In this I suppose we all agree; where then is that
Chasma, that great Gulf of difference, which brands so many with the black
spot of Separation?

All the difficulty lies in Stating who are believing Faithful Saints, for of
these only all agree, a true Church consists. I beseech you let us call him a
Believer, and a Saint whom the Scripture calls so, and we shall soon agree.

The Pope says, he is a faithful Saint, and a true Member of the Church; Who
believes as the Church believes.

The Church of England says, he is a Believer (enough to make a Member of that
Church) that professes the truth, though in his life he deny it.

Those men say he is a faithful Saint who professes the truth, and to all
appearance (for we cannot see the heart) practices as he professes.

Now all men will agree, this last is a Believing Saint: And these will have
none but this to be a Saint; and so none but this to be a Member of Christ's
Church.

I beseech you: Is this such an error, to desire Profession and Practice to be
conjoined in one that is to be a Member of the Church of Christ?

When I desire a good Wife, a faithful Servant, a constant Friend, a familiar
Companion; Am I not as desirous to know the Heart as well as the Head, the Will
as well as Skill, Affection as well as Profession? And why then may I not do
as much in choosing my Spiritual Friends; my constant Companions in the
worship and service of God?

Can any man by right, force me to marry such or such a woman, to take such a
servant, to dwell with such a friend, to choose such a companion? And may any
man force me then to be companion, in the nearest and most intimate converse
of Spiritual Ordinances, with any one or more, whom I dare not, I cannot, I
may not trust, to be either friends to God or me; because what ere their lips
profess, their life and ways deny God, trample on the blood of Christ,
despise, at least profane all his Ordinances.

I could heartily wish some pity might be showed to these poor men's souls.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to his
own Soul. And is it not then much better to keep these men off (as they do
in Scotland and other Reformed Churches) till they give the Church satisfaction
upon good ground of their Repentance and Faith; that so they may not hurt
themselves by Gods holy Ordinances?

Sacraments confirm, but do not confer Grace; if they did so, the case were
altered; but now they are like the Paradise of God, guarded with the Flaming
Sword; so that the Tree in the midst of the Garden, (which is Christ) cannot be
Touched by profane hands.

The other Grand Heresy (men so much cry against) in Separation, is the
Independence of their Congregations, as it was stated before.

But why should the Independence of One Assembly, to a Province, or Nation, be
more Schismatic, than that of a Province, or Nation, to the whole World? Why
may not Geneva be as Independent to France, as France may be to the other
parts of Europ's Continent? In Geneva, why may not one Congregation, be as
independent to All Geneva besides, as Geneva is to all France besides? Does
indeed such a Wall, or River, or Sea, so limit and bound the Church within it,
that it may be independent on any Church without it; and may not one
Congregation within this River be as well independent on all other Assemblies,
within the same River or Sea?

Are there not some sparklings of this Truth even amongst us in England? Have
not we Peculiars? some Congregations exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
within whose Diocese they be? And I think no Separatist desires more than
this, That all Parishes (I mean all Congregations) should be Independent
Peculiars.

Suppose an East Indi- Merchants Ship be cast on some Remote Island beyond China
where there shall be no Inhabitant; may not in this Case, the men of this Ship
gather together, choose out some one or more (of themselves) to Read, Preach,
Administer the Sacraments? is not this a true Church, and so to be reputed
while they believe the Truth, and do what they believe? Is there any one
Essential part wanting to this Church, so Constituted?

If it be answered affirmatively, that there is yet wanting some Essential; I
rejoyn, then it is not a true Church; nay so far from being vera Ecclesia,
that it is not vere Ecclesia: For He is not vere Hom^, that wants something
Essential to Man: nor It vere Ecclesia, that wants any thing Essential to a
Church.

If it be yielded that in such a Case there is nothing Essential wanting to
This Church: I will again suppose that within a year or Two, another English
Ship be cast on the same very Island, and have such another Company or Church; I
demand now whether it be necessary, that Both These Churches must needs join
together, or at least depend One on the Other.

If it be not necessary, I have what I desire. If it be necessary; Then was not
the former Church a Tr^e Church; because it wanted something Essential and
necessary to a Church; to wit, Dependence on some other Church.

If it be said, This Church did before depend on the whole Catholic Church, I
will not gain say it; so They mean only Thus much, that This Church was a
true member of the True Church or Body of Christ; which is but made up of so
many particular Congregations, as man's Body, of its particular members. And so
This will be no more then to say, All the members of the Body are Parts of the
Body, and conjoined together, but only subordinate to the Head. For, I suppose
no man will say One of my hands is dependant on the Other; but both (as all the
other members) dependant on my Head: so are all particular Churches (I mean
Congregations) dependant on their General Head, Christ, but not on other of
their fellow members.

If any man shall say, that Hands depend not only on the Head; but also on the
Arms, Shoulders, and Neck; which are between Them and the Head, on whom they
ultimately depend.

I answer, It is true, the Hands are conjoined to the Arms; These to the
Shoulders; and Both by the Neck to the Head: but yet They depend not on any but
the Head. I mean they are not directed and guided by the Dictates of Arm,
Shoulder, or Neck, but only by the Commands of the Head: so that there is
only a bodily outward Continuity, and no vertuall Dependence, but on the Head.
The Head sends out Animal Spirits, and by them guides my Hand, as my fancy
pleases. This Guiding or Directing Depends only on the Head, not Arm, which
(when I mean to move my Hand) is but as it were my Hands Servant, that must
go and call, and lead my Hand (as a Gentleman Usher) but not command it.

So are also all the Churches, all several Congregations; They are all
members, and are all outwardly conjoined One to another (through all the world)
by the tendons and ligaments of Rivers, Seas, Hills, Valleys, and the like. Yea
and some of These are nearer to Christ their Head, as they keep themselves
purer, and walk more closely in dependence on Him. Yet All these Churches are
but Coordinate, not among themselves Subordinate; They are but conjoined each
to other, not dependant each on other, but All on their Head; which alone can
command and move them. Yea though perhaps some One Church may come between
Christ and another Church (as the Arm between the Head and Hand) yet it is
there but as a servant to call on, lead, help, uphold, (being so commanded by
the Head) but not to command, dictate, or overtop its fellow member.

You see here what Power we give to Synods and Councels, or all other Churches
over one particular Church; ^o wit, a counselling, persuading (which sure is
very prevailing) but not commanding Authority.

I doubt not but Christ does sometimes require One Church to incite, exhort,
admonish, and persuade another fellow Church (though This be not required of
any one Angel in the Apocalypse, toward another Church or Angel, yet I suppose
it may be in some Cases) yea and so that the Other Church may happily sin if
she do not follow This Call and Counsel: yet not because it comes from her
fellow Church, (or any Synod) but because It comes from Christ her Head, that
speaks through This Church to her fellow. As the Hand might justly be styled
rebellious that rejects the Animal Spirits sent from the Head, though they
come through the Arm; Which is here in this Case, not only a servant to the
Head, but to the Hand also.

Yet does not the Hand rebel, because it refuses That which comes from the
Arm, but because it came from the Head, but through the Arm as an Instrument.
For if ever the Arm impose ought on the Hand, which comes not from the Head
(as it does sometimes in a flux of putrid humors from an ulcer in the Arm) in
this Case the Arm erres in so imposing on the Hand, but the Hand rebels not in
rejecting what the Arm so sends: because it comes not from the Head. On which
(and on which alone) all the members vertually depend, and not on any one or
more fellow members.

All this while, though we dispute the Independancie of Churches among
themselves; yet we have not the least shadow of a Thought to withdraw any
Church from the Civil Magistrate; Nay, These men (whom our Bishops brand so
with Separation) most cordially affirm that if Episcopacie can prove greater
or better subjection, or but equal to Them, They will not scruple to subscribe
to Them.

But alas, if we once give way to Dependence of Churches, must not the Church
of England Depend on the Dutch; or the Dutch on England; as much as one Church
in England must Depend on a Provincial Church of Canterbury, or National in
all England?

And if the English Church must Depend on the Dutch, or Dutch on English, which
shall be Inferior? This or That? by This Dispute of Precedencie, we shall at
length ^ast all Churches into such a Confusion, as some of our Bishops Sees
were heretofore, for superiority. Pompejus non admittit superiorem, Caesar non
parem. And now I conceive York is Inferior to Canterbury, Durham to York, not
by any Law Moral, or of Nature, but positive of State.

Yea, by This Dependence, will follow a far greater Evil than This dispute
and confusion about Precedencie: For if One whole Church must so depend on
another, then must also the Officers of This depend on Those of That Church,
And if so, shall not all Church Officers return to the Pope at length, as to
One Supreme Head on Earth.

Question.
If Geneva Depend on France, why not France on Spain? Spain on Italy? Italy on
Rome? Rome on the Pope? And had I begun a great deal lower, I should have
come up higher to This Head.

Perhaps All the Inconveniences that can be objected on Independance, though
they could not be answered (as I conceive they may) will not balance This One
Inconvenience of Dependence. But no more of This.

The next Grand Inconvenience that may be feared on the removal of our
Prelates, is Licentia praedicandi; not only in that sense in which This phrase
is used beyond the Seas, and was in that sense forbidden under our Last Royal
King' James: That was Licentia quoad Materiam; This quoad Personam.

Now they say, Not only Every matter will be preached, what every Minister
pleases, but also Every Person will turn Preacher: Even Shoomakers, Cobblers,
Feltmakers, and any other.

God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion. And if Order is to be observed
any where, It is sure in matter of Worship: For if through the Churches default
Disorder break in, at any craney: you shall find the Breach grow wider and
wider every day: Except the Cleft be stopped, the Ship may quickly sink. And
therefore I shall wholly agree, and join with Them that endeavor with the
first, to allay the very semblance and apparition (less than the least bubling
up) of Disorder.

Only this I could heartily wish, that Fire and Faggot may not determine this
Controversy; that These men may not be dealt with, as were some of the Martyrs
in Queen Mary's days; For often when the Bishops could not reply, They would
start up and swear by the Faith of their Body, that This was a dangerous,
gross, and Heretical opinion: and All This was but a Prologue to That
Tragedy, whose Epilogue was Flame and Faggot, or at least the Fasces to younger
men.

We have often seen some of These Preachers before the highest Tribunal in This
Kingdom; For we thought it unreasonable (with Those in the Acts) to condemn
any before they were heard.

I was not their Judge alone, nor will I be at. This time. Only that it may
appear I attended their pleading (as it becomes any in a Court of Justice) I
will give the world an account, what Those men say for themselves; and so I
shall leave them to be judged by wise men.

First, they conceive there be some Ordinances which are proper only to the
Church, and Church Officers, belonging only to Church Assemblies (such as is
the Administration of Sacraments, the Conferring of Orders, and all of this
nature) These they think Sacred, such as may not be touched by any but
Church Officers; and of These they say, let Vzza^ take heed how he touch the
Arc, though it shake.

But there are other Ordinances (they say) of a Middle nature; as they are
exercised in a Church Assembly, by Church Officers, They may truly be called
Church-Ordinances; yet are such as may be used Out of Church Assemblies, and
therefore probably by Other th^n Church Officers; As Praying, Reading the
Scripture, Catechizing, Exhortation, and the like; which (as they conceive) are
not confined to the Church only, or Church Officers.

1. Because Heathens and Publicans may be admitted, nay ought to be invited, to
These Ordinances. And it seems no Mortal sin, for a Layman in China, to
call together a company of Heathens, and preach to them the Christian Religion,
yet here is no True Church, till a Congregation will Embrace This Doctrine, and
join in serving God.

2. They conceive Our State, by public authority, has and does allow so much
as This. For they see Clerks (even in public Assemblies) Read Psalms,
Prayers, and often some parts of Scripture; Deacons preach, yea and Baptize, and
help to administer the Lords Supper, and yet no man takes them for complete
Ministers: yea of old, and perhaps now also by Law, they are not at all Clergy
men.

3. Former Preachers have taught them, that every Master of a Family, may and
must read, pray, Catechize, and the like, in his own Family, if he have none
there that can do it better than himself. Therefore These seem rather to
come under the Notion of Private Duties rather than Public Church-Ordinances;
though sometime they be performed in Churches, yet other times they may be
performed out of Churches, and by Those that are not public Church Officers.

Therefore These poor men (through their weakness) think such Ordinances
Free to be performed by any Christian, whether of the Clergy, or Laity. And
their Zeal makes them conceive, If God give gifts of Understanding, Memory,
Judgment, and Utterance; and an Earnest Desire to do good with These (lest
they wrap up their Talent in a Napkin) They have the Maine (to wit, an inward)
Call to perform these duties in their own Families: or else where, if They
have an outward Call too.

For they solemnly profess, they hold it not fit to press or intrude
themselves on any Congregation: But if any will come of themselves, either to
their own Families: or send for them, and desire to hear them, among some
Good men, they take this for a Call, an Outward Call, to perform Those duties,
to that Congregation. For, they think the ways of Gods Spirit are free, and
not tied to a University man; so that having an Inward call, they conceive the
desire of any One Congregation, is Outward call sufficient, though the Bishop
call not.

Yea, some Exercises in Gods worship, They think there be, which are warranted
from the Gift that enables, and not from the Call that invites: so that a man
whom God has enabled with Parts and Gifts, might use them, though no man
Living call him. And this also is the Judgment of many Learned men; as of That
Ingenuous, Worthy, Learned man Master Thorndick, of late Touching on That of
the Corinths.

So long then as they Encroach not on Ordinances appropriate to
Church Officers, they think they sin not in performing other duties, where
there are none that can, or will, perform them better. They have learned
Latin Enough to say, Bonum quo Communius, eo melius. They have read of Moses,
wishing all the Lords People were Prophets; and that God would pour out his
Spirit on them all.

Yea they have heard that God promised to pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh,
all Believers (as well Lay as Clergy) so that Young men should see Visions,
and Old men dream Dreams, and though This were begun to be accomplished
Even in Our Saviors time, yet They (perhaps through ignorance) Expect it
should be yet still more and more accomplished every day, till Knowledge Cover
the Earth, as Waters fill the Sea; even till there be no more need that any
man should teach his neighbor, for all men shall know the Lord; and They poor
men Expect a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein there shall need no more
Temples of stone, but all Good men shall be Prophets, Priests, and Kings. In
the mean time they say Waters must flow out of the bellies of all that
believe, till at length the Great Waters of the Sanctuary flow forth without
measure.

Yea, they are much encouraged from the Practice of the Church in the Acts,
where all the members, Every believer, Acts. 8.4, 11, 19.
being scattered by persecution, went about Preaching.

If it be Objected that This was an Extraordinary Case; at the first beginning
of the Church; and in time of Persecution, etc.

They Answer, that they conceive almost as Extraordinary a Case in This Land,
at This Time; Where the Church is so much unsettled, and has been so much
persecuted. In some places they see no Ministers; scarce any in some whole
Shires, as in Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, and especially, in
Wales: Where the Church is even yet scarce ( and ne vix) so much as well
begun to be planted, or the Gospel Preached.

In Other places, where there is some show of a Church, some Ordinances, some
Ministers; Yet even here, they think the Church calls for many more
Ministers, at least for much more, and much better preaching then it yet has.

Specially since the late Cruel Tyranny of some Lording Prelates, has almost
quite put down Ordinances, silenced Good Ministers, and forbidden Preaching;
Having so detained the Truth (and smothered it) by unrighteousness, that there
is scarce left the Face of a True Church. They conceive This an extraordinary
Time, an extraordinary Case, and Call, for all that are Enabled by God, with
Parts and Gifts, fit for such Exercises.

And they conceive 30. or 40. or an 100. Good men of any one or more
Congregations, to be as Fit Judges of their parts and abilities every way, as
One Lord Bishop and his Ignorant (perhaps Drunken) Chaplain; who make scruple
of admitting any to Orders, but Bowers and Cringers, sincks of Superstition;
Yet when they please, they can poze in an Alehouse, and lay hands (well
quickened with angels) on Tapsters, Cobblers, Butchers, and many such, that are
so far from the smell of a College, that they never saw an Abcee or Primer
to purpose, much less a Ferula in a Grammar School.

In the last place they solemnly profess they are ready to hear or read, any
that either by writing, preaching, or private discourse shall inform them
better than now they see or know. They would thank any man that will satisfy
their Consciences, and convince their judgment: For, they profess they are
not acted by vainglory, or faction, but Conscience and desire of propagating
Truth, and spreading the Gospel, as God shall give them opportunities.

And supposing such parts, gifts, and abilities, fit for those duties; They
conceive no man may upbraid them with poverty, or former living in a trade;
which yet they think not altogether incompatible to Preaching: for they have
read of Saint Paul (and others) intermixing his Sermons with making of Tents.

Yea though they have not such parts and gifts as Saint Paul; yet they think
the work of Preaching much more compatible with all works of the Hands, than
with any one other study of the brain, or mind: and yet they see many Civil
Lawyers take Livings, and have Cure of Souls: Yea, and all their Lord Bishops
have Two Callings, Two several (opposite) Studies; and yet for all Those Two,
They can spend as much, or more time at Cards and Dice (or worse) than at
either of their Callings.

Nor are they so tied to their Outward Callings, but if the Church shall think
it fit, they are ready to give up all, and apply themselves wholly to the study
of Scriptures, and work of the Ministry.

In the mean time they follow their Callings, (not living idly, or going up
and down Tatling as Busibodies) but being diligent to serve God both with
their hands, hearts also, yea and tongues too, if God shall call them, and give
opportunity as well as abilities.

I would not be mistaken by my Reader. All this time I am speaking Their words,
not my own; All that I desire is, that they may have a fair Hearing, before
they be severely censured. And I move this the rather, because they are still
ready to say, Most that condemn them never heard them: I could not but do
what in me lies, to remove This scandal.

It may be Expected I should now show my own Opinion; and answer all These
Things, which Those poor men say for themselves. But I must confess I am
already almost tired with relating the Arguments of One part only; so that I
dare not set on the Other.

Neither indeed do I think it needful: Most of That which They say, being
such, that it is not like to do much hurt; and so I think it not needful to
refute it. What must be refuted, may much better be done by Others of better
Parts, and founder judgments: for I know some that in One poor discourse of
Truth, are by their wit able to find all the seventeene Intellectual Sinner;
how much more in a discourse of Error?

Only by the way, I cannot but show how weakly These poor Preachers answer
some strong objections brought against them.

As This in the First place: That by This Course, All Errors and Heresies shall
quickly come to be vented and maintained in the Church, when every man may
Preach that will, and what he will, without Control.

To This Argument, All Their Answer, that I can remember, is This.

First, that They maintain not that Any man may Preach that Will. No; They say
it must be One of Parts, Gifts, and Abilities fit for a Preacher; and that not
only in his own fancy, but in the Judgment of many Godly men: Who (being
many) are as like to be fit and able to judge of Abilities on Their Trial, as
any One Bishops Chaplain; that yet uses to present to his Lord, after little
or no posing, One whom he never heard speak, (much less Preach or Pray)
before he came for Holy Orders.

Secondly, they say, They maintain not that any such man (so Gifted, and
Called, being judged fit by the votes of many) may yet Preach what he will. No,
they are as much limited, and kept within bounds, as if they were licenced by
the Bishop.

For, if he Preach false Doctrine, Either in matters of Church or State, they
say the Bishops Keys, or at least his Long Sword, may reach him as well in a
Parlor, or some little Pulpit, as if he were a Licentiate in a Great
Cathedral. And if he Preach no false Doctrine, must he suffer (say they) for
Preaching True?

It is true, No wise man living will blame (much less punish or fine) a man
that speaks a good True Discourse of Law, or Physic, though he be Licentiate
in neither; But These poor men consider not, the Case is not the same in
Preaching a True discourse in Divinity. Yet let us give way, and they will
speak more.

Again they say, Suppose they did hold (which they do not) that Any man
Living might Preach that would, and what he would; yet perhaps there would not
follow so great Inconvenience as some imagine.

For, All such supposed Preachers, are either Wise men or Fools. If Wise, they
will Preach Wisely, and so do Good. If Fools, Foolishly, and so do no Hurt,
or at least very little hurt: For, it is not for a Fool to broach an Heresy,
and maintain it, or spread it much. No, Arrius, Pelagius, Arminius, and such,
were men of the Greatest Parts, but set wrong.

Yea suppose some of These Non Licentiate Preachers be men of the greatest
parts possible, and so possible to become dangerous Heretics; Does the
Heresy spread it self the more for not being Licensed? Might not This Great
man do as much hurt (yea much more) if he were Licensed, than now he is not?

If any answer, It is True, He is like to do more hurt, if Licensed; but
therefore the Bishop in wisdom will not License him.

They rejoyne: First, is it probable One Bishop in This case will show more
care and conscience, than twenty or thirty Good men in a Congregation, where
This parted Man would preach?

But again, Suppose there be never a Good man (in all his Auditory;) or that
all the Good men there, will not have care to suppress This man from doing
hurt: How shall, how can the Bishop do This? How can he keep him from venting,
and spreading his Heresy?

First, when this man comes for a License to the Bishop, No man can tell how he
means to Preach, (when he is Licensed) except the Bishop perchance be a
Prophet also, as well as a Priest and King?

Either he has Preached, (before his coming for This License) or he has not.
If he have not, No Bishop can tell how he will preach; nor can any wise man
living commend him to the Bishop, as fit to make a Good Preacher: since He that
is the Best Scholar living, and perhaps as good a man as any, yet may prove
but an ill preacher.

If he have preached before, and done well, without License, then it seems it
is lawful to preach without a License: for probation no doubt, (though most of
late have denied This) But I ask how long shall he be a Probationer? how many
years, months, weeks? Though he preach ten good Sermons, no man tan tell, but
in the next he means to broach an Heresy.

But alas These poor men see not how weak all This is. For, Is it not easy
for three or four men, or a Bishops Chaplain to commend a man (be he Scholar,
or Groom, or Butler, or what he will:) let the Bishop without seeing or
smelling This man, give him his blessing blindfold, and seal him a License,
What hurt is in all This? For, if This man preach well, the Church will get
good: if ill, cannot the Bishop as soon pull him down, as he set him up?

They answer, Suppose he may, (which is hard to suppose, since Orders once
given, leave an Indelible Character) why may not ten or twenty men, Good men in
a Congregation, as well set up a man, and try how he will prove? For if Well,
it is Well; he will do good: If ill, These ten or twenty men can as easily pull
him down again, as set him up.

Not so. For the Bishop is still a very wise, discreet, Good, Holy man and
being entrusted by the Church, will have a special care, even more than an
hundred others, to set up a good man, or else pull him quickly down again.

To This they yet answer, The Bishop cannot tell how or what he preaches when
he has set him up, (except he can be present in all places, at least many at
Once, to ^eare all young preachers, that he Liceuseth;) and therefore though he
would pull him down, yet he cannot because he cannot be still present to hear
him. Though he come once, twice, ten times, yet the Preacher may hold in, all
his Herise, till he see the Bishop absent; and sometimes he must be absent.

But may not the Congregation then go and complain to the Bishop, if their
Preacher do amiss? and upon complaint the Bishop will, may and must suppress
that error.

If he do not (they say) They are still where they were. But if he do Censure
This Preacher, on the complaint of the Congregation; Either he sees they
complain unjustly (and then He does injustice in censuring-upon, an unjust
complaint) or else he must yield they complain justly; and then he also
grants, that This Congregation has wisdom enough to judge, whether a man
preach well or ill; and if so, why may not the Congregation censure him for ill
preaching, without complaint to one Bishop?

Sed frustra fit per plura; quod fieri potest per pau^iora. And so I leave
This, and come to another great Question, that is wont still to be propounded
to These poor Non Licensed Preachers.

It is This, why (if indeed they be fit, or seem fit, or do but think
themselves fit to be Ministers, why then) do they not enter into Orders? or at
least present themselves, showing their desire to be in Holy Orders, if indeed
they may be found fit for the Ministry, as they think themselves? Why do they
halt between Two? either let them serve the Church wholly, and so be in
Orders; or else let them forbear, and not meddle with dispensing of Holy
Ordinances.

This seemed to me a very serious Question, and therefore I much desired to
hear their Answers.

Some of them say, they know not yet whether they be worthy, or fit to take on
them Those Greater Offices which follow Orders, only they desire they may have
leave (as Probationers) to exercise, or keep Acts, before the Church; 'till
the Church shall approve of them, and call them out (judging them faithful)
for higher employment, or generally to dispense all the Ordinances. In the
mean time, They meddle only with such Ordinances, as they conceive not proper
to Church Officers only, but in some sort common to all Christians, yea to all
men, as was said before.

Others say, they would gladly (with all their Hearts) be consecrated to God,
and wholly give themselves up to his service and worship in the Ministry; but
they are afraid to take Orders, as Orders are now conferred, in This State. And
yet in the mean time, they dare not abstain from Preaching, (where they have
opportunity, and a Willing Auditory) lest they should detain the Truth, God
has revealed to them; and should be guilty of hiding their Talent in a Napkin.
For they think they may do many Things belonging (though not proper) to a
Minister; though they be not, nor can be (as things now stand) in holy Orders.
Their Instance is David, who was a King, and of the Tribe of Judah, and so
could be neither Priest nor Levite; yet they find King David often Preaching;
else they understand not the meaning of Those Phrases, O come hither and I will
show you what God has done for my poor soul, and the like.

If these men in This be serious, and do not pretend Conscience where it is
some other Principle that acts them, to some low end: I cannot but much pity
them; that if they be fit, they neither may be licensed, nor yet preach without
License. But let us see why they dare not enter into Orders, and so be Licensed
Ministers.

They answer that they have not so much against Orders conferred by our Church,
or the manner of conferring them (though under some Bishops, This has been
very strange, and not warrantable either by Law of God or man, they conceive)
as they have in their judgment and consciences, against the Power conferring
them.

For they doubt not to affirm, that He (who ever he be) that takes on
himself power, which the Scripture has not given him, to appoint, dictate or
command, any one Thing either in Doctrine or Discipline: though the Thing it
self might possibly be good, yet He that so dictates, is Antichristian;
encroaching on the Regal Office of Christ; and so a Traitor in Religion.

Now they dare not touch That, which (how Good soever in it self, yet) comes
in Power and Virtue of an Antichristian Traitor. Yea though such an one should
command them a Thing very lawful in it self, (as to wear a black cloth)
yet if He have not Commission to Command, from Scripture, they conceive He
incurres a Praemunire with God; because he takes on him to do that (as an
O^ficer) for which he is not fore-armed with lawful authority. In this case
they think they ought not to obey Him so commanding: because though the Thing
in it self be lawful to be done, yet they think him an unlawful Commander,
and so dare not obey; if for no other Reason, yet for This, that by obeying
here, they shall betray not only their own Privileges, (which yet are very
precious) but also the Liberties and privilege of all the Subjects of Christ,
even of the whole Church; so that they become Traitors to their spiritual
Commonwealth.

They give This Instance in Civil Things. Suppose a Sheriff, that is a
lawful Officer, come and command me to give him forty pound, of his own head,
without lawful Authority to beck his command. they say, if in This Case I give
him forty shillings, I betray not only my own privilege, (which perhaps I
may do) but also the whole Liberty of the Commonwealth, and so become ( in Re)
a Traitor to the State: though in it self it be lawful to give forty
shillings to any man that asks, yet now I must not do it, because This officer
commands it by unlawful Authority, and so without Commission.

Not yet that they think it necessary to stay disputing the Authority of a
Commander, there where is no appearance of Ground for a Doubt. But if once they
see and know the Command is grounded on no lawful Authority; or do but really
doubt whether the Power Commanding, or the Thing Commanded be Lawful: They
conceive themselves bound to abstain till their judgment be cleared, (which
they profess to desire, and by all lawful means to endeavor) lest while
they do, they be condemned in their own consciences, because they do not act
in Faith: and what is not of faith is sin.

I must leave These Things 'to be discussed by men of better judgments. In the
mean time I humbly desire again I may not be mis-understood; for it is not in
my thoughts to abet the least miscarriage in any one of these poor men: nor by
any means to countenance any of them, in a way of exercising those Duties that
are too high for their parts, and abilities which God has given them. yet if
there be any of them that have extraordinary parts, and endowments of
judgment, memory, and utterance; if God stir up these to improve their Gifts
to the best advantage, yet with all meekness, and humility; I dare not
condemn them till I hear them: for I know the Spirit of God is not tied to
our Fancies, but yet the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets.

I take not on me to warrant all the paths which some cut out to themselves:
Yet I most affectionately entreat men not to contemn all things in those they
now brand with their usual stain of Separatisme; which phrase many use in
such scorn, as if with one stab (of that Italian dagger) they could run through
Body and Soul at once.

Light was one of the first Creatures, and yet not perfected till the fourth
Day, (and perhaps not fully then) so was spiritual Light the beginning of
Reformation, That New Creation; yet it was not perfect at first dawning, but
increases still by degrees, till it have quite chased away darkness, and
there be no more Night. All men yield there must be an increase of light in the
world; Now whether That be more probable to be in Doctrine or Discipline, judge
ye.

At the first Rising out of Popery, the Church-lesse Church of the Albigenses
and Waldenses, (Holy Good men) began an admirable Reformation. This was much
advanced by Jerome of Prague, and John Hus. Luther had many gross errors, yet
must not lose his place among These glorious Lights. After these appears
Calvin, shining yet brighter both in Doctrine and Discipline. Since Him Our God
has raised up a more glorious Light among These Northern Isles. And yet some
went from us lately with a candle burning, brighter perhaps than Ours; though
it were lighted here. Thus Light dilating, and enlarging it self, seems to
become more pure, more Light, more Glorious; and yet it seems not to be Noone.
The Light still will, must, cannot but increase; why then do we shut our eyes?
Let it not be said of us, that Light came in, and grew up among us, yet we
would not use it (for we cannot but receive it) because we loved darkness.

Godly men may not only neglect, but abuse light; Yea they may both grieve,
and quench Gods Holy Spirit. A sad case! yet are they not still in some part
Carnal? and the Flesh not only lusts, but warreth against the Spirit.

We are too too apt to slight the sweet breathings of Gods Spirit, which He
is pleased to communicate to others when we are destitute of the same Workings.
Some Christians are as it were wholly legal; they Fast, they Pray, receive
Sacraments, hear Sermons, pay every one his own, live inoffensively: This is
well done, but This is not All; yet This they take for enjoying God in Christ
Jesus. But alas! Quantum distat ab illo? Non est vivere, sed valere vita. These
men may well be saved hereafter, but in the mean time, they lose the sweetest
part of their life here.

On the other side, if God please to communicate himself in any manner of
sweetness, so that a man begins to taste and see how Good Communion and
acquaintance with God is; how easily it is interrupted by loose walking; how
sweet it is while enjoyed; so that it ravisheth the soul, and fills the
whole Heart, that it cannot but flow out at the Lips, in sweet breathings of,
for, and after God in Christ Jesus, God in Christ Jesus. This man is presently
stained with a taint of Madness, and I know not what Enthusiasme. If one that
has tasted and experimentally found the sweetness of Peace of Conscience, and
knows how unpossible it is to keep it, but by close walking with God; how
easily it is broken; and how hardly it is made up again when broken: so that
he is content to leave Friends, Living, Liberty, All, rather than to break his
Peace, wound his Conscience, sin against God, in sinning against Light, or
acting against Doubts. O this man is beyond all Rule of Reason; He has a Tang
of Frenzy; one puffed up with a spirit of self conceit; a Rank Separatist.

But sure it should not be so among Christians. Can we not dissent in judgment
(specially in These lower points of Discipline, while we agree in Doctrine) but
we must also dis-agree in Affection? A Hard Case!

I confess there are many now that turn the Light of Truth, into a Life of
Looseness, vanity, and profaneness; and we are all too too prone to This.
There are some Enthusiastickes, who profane the Spirit. This I would resist
with all my might. But let not all suffer with the wicked. Some without warrant
run away from their callings, and take up a bare, empty, fruitless
Profession of Christianity, without the least dram of life or power; These
men my soul hates.

But when God shall so enlarge his Hand, and unveile his face, that the poor
Creature is brought into Communion and acquaintance with his Creator; steered
in all his ways by His Spirit; and by it carried up above shame, fear,
pleasure, comfort, losses, grave, and death it self; Let us not censure such
Tempers, but bless God for them. So far as Christ is in us, we shall love,
prise, honor Christ, and the least particle of his Image in Others: For we
never Prove our selves true members of Christ more, then when we embrace his
members with most enlarged, yet straitest Affections.

To This end, God assisting me, my desire, prayer, endeavor shall still be,
as much as in me lies, to follow Peace and holiness. and though there may
happily be some little dissent between my dark judgment, weak conscience, and
other Good men, that are much more clear and strong; yet my prayer still shall
be, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And as many as walk
after This Rule, Peace I hope shall still be on Them, and the whole Israel of
God.

FINIS.

