AN ARC FOR ALL GODS NOAH'S In a gloomy stormy day; OR, The best Wine reserved
till last. OR, The transcendent Excellency of a believers portion above all
earthly Portions whatsoever:

Discovered in several SERMONS, which may be of singular use at all times, but
especially in these Breaking times, wherein many have, and many daily do break
for more than their all, and wherein many thousands are turned out of all, etc.

By THOMAS BROOKS, late Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets New Fishstreet, and
still Preacher of the Word in London, and Pastor of a Congregation there.

I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, I cried unto thee, O Lord, I
said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living, Psalm.
142.4, 5. London, Printed by M. S. for Henry Cripps, at the first entrance into
Pope's Head Alley, next to Lombard Street, 1662.

TO All the Merchants, and Tradesmen of England, especially these of the City
of London, with all other sorts and ranks of persons that either have, or would
have God for their portion, Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied.
Gentlemen,
THe wisest Prince that ever sat upon a Throne has told us, Prove. 21.11
That a word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, or as
the Hebrew has it, a word spoken ((...)) upon his wheels, that is, rightly
ordered, placed, and circumstantiated. Such a word is of all words the most
excellent, the most prevalent, and the most pleasant word that can be spoken:
such a word is indeed a word that is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver;
of all words such a word is most precious, most sweet, most desirable, and most
delectable. O Sirs, to time a word, to set a word upon the wheels, to speak a
word to purpose is the project of this Book. Though all truths are glorious,
yet there is a double glory upon seasonable truths; and therefore I have made
it my great business in this Treatise to hold forth as seasonable a truth, and
as weighty a truth, and as comfortable and encouraging a truth as any I know in
all the Book of God. The Mother of King Cyrus willed, that the words of those
that spoke unto her son, should be in silk, but certainly seasonable words are
always better than silken words.

Every prudent husbandman observes his fittest seasons to sow his seeds, and
therefore some he sowes in the Autumn and fall of the Leaf, and some in the
Spring and renewing of the year; some he sowes in a dry season, and some he
sowes in a wet; some he sowes in a moist clay, and some he sowes in a sandy dry
ground, as the Holy Ghost speaks, Isa. 28.25.
He sows the Fitches and the Cummin, and casts in Wheat by measure. And so
all spiritual husbandmen must wisely observe their fittest seasons for the
sowing of that immortal seed that God has put into their hands, and such a
thing as this is I have had in my eye; but whether I have hit the mark, or mist
it, let the Christian Reader judge.

One speaking of the glory of heaven, says, That the good things of eternal
life are so many, that they exceed number, so great that they exceed measure,
and so precious that they are above all estimation, etc. the same may I say
concerning the Saints portion, for certainly the good things that are in their
portion, in their God, are so many that they exceed number, so great that they
exceed measure, and so precious that they are above all estimation.

The same Author in one of his Epistles has this remarkable relation, viz.
That the same day wherein Jerome died, he was in his Study, and had got pen,
ink, and paper to write something of the glory of heaven to Jerome, and suddenly
he saw a light breaking into his Study, and smelt also a very sweet smell, and
this voice he thought he heard. O Augustine, what do thou? do think to put
the Sea into a little vessel? when the heavens shall cease from their continual
motion, then shall thou be able to understand what the glory of heaven is, and
not before, except you come to feel it, as I now do. Certainly, the glory of
heaven is beyond all conception, and all expression, and so is that portion
that is a little hinted at in the following Discourse. And indeed a full
description of that God that is the believers portion, is a work too high for
an Aaron when standing upon Mount Hor; Number. 20. and chapter 33. Deuteronomy. 32.49. and
chap. 34.1. Isa. 6.3.
or for a Moses, when standing on the top of Nebo after a Pisgah prospect; yea,
it is a work too high and too hard for all those blessed Seraphims that are
still a crying before the throne of God, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts.
No finite being, though never so glorious, can ever be able fully to comprehend
an infinite being. In the second Verse of the sixth of Isaiah we read that each
Seraphim had six wings, and that with twain he covered the face of God, with
twain his feet, and with twain he did sly, intimating (as one well observes
upon the place) that with twain they covered his face, Vide Origin on the Text.
the face of God, not their own face, and with twain they covered his feet, not
their own feet; They covered his face, his beginnig being unknown; they covered
his feet, his end being incomprehensible, only the middle are to be seen the
things which are, whereby there may be some glimmering knowledge made out what
God is. Eccl. 7.24. There are many depths in God which our shallow reason
cannot fathom; and indeed it is the credit of our Religion, and the glory of
our God, that he is unsearchable
The wise man hit it, when he said, That which is afar off, and exceeding deep,
who can find it out? who can find out what God is? The knowledge of him a
priori is so far off, that he whose arm is able to break even a bow of steel is
not able to reach it; so far off, that he who is able to make his nest with the
Eagle is not able to sly unto it. And so exceeding deep that he who could
follow the Leviathan could not fathom it; that he who could set out the center
of the earth, is not able to find it out; And who then is able to reach it* In
a word, so far off, and so deep too, that the Depth says, it is not in me, and
the Sea says, it is not in me; it is such a deep to men and Angels as far
exceeds the capacity of both. Augustine speaking to that question, August. de
fide contra Arrionum, cap. 6.
what God is? gives this answer; Surely such a one is he, who when he is spoken
of, cannot be spoken of; who when he is considered, cannot be considered of,
who when he is compared to any thing cannot be compared; and when he is defined
grows greater by defining of him. Such are not only good Scholars, but also
great Scholars, who have learned contentedly to be ignorant where God would not
have them knowing.
If that great Apostle that learned his Divinity among the Angles, yea, to whom
the Holy Ghost was an immediate Tutor, did know but in part, then certainly
those that are most acute and judicious in divine knowledge, may very well
conclude, that they know but part of that part that was known to him. As for my
own part, I dare pretend but to a spark of that knowledge that others have
attained to; and yet who can tell but that God may turn this spark into such a
flame as may warm the hearts of many of his dear and precious ones. Much is
done many times by a spark.

O Sirs, catch not at the present profits, pleasures, preferments, and honors
of this world, but lay up a good foundation for the time to come, provide for
eternity, make sure your interest and propriety in God. It was an excellent
saying of Lewis of Bavyer, Emperor of Germany, Such goods (said he) are worth
getting and owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a Shipwreck happen. How
many of you have lost your all by Shipwracks? and how has divine providence by
your multiplied crosses and losses taught you that the good things and the
great things of this world cannot be made sure. How many of you have had rich
inheritances left you by your fathers, besides the great portions that you have
had with your wives, and the vast estates that you have gained by Trading; but
what is become of all? is not all buried in the deep, or in the grave of
oblivion? O the unconstancy, and the grand impostury of this world! Oh the flux
and reflux of riches, greatness, honors, and preferments! how many men have
we seen shining in their worldly pomp and glory like stars in the Firmament,
who are now vanished into smoke or Comets? How has the Moon of many great men's
riches and honors been eclipsed at the full, and the Sun of their pomp gone
down at noon?

It was (says the Historian) a wonderful precedent of the vanity and variety
of humane condition to see mighty Exerxes to float and sly away in a small
Vessel, Justin.
who but a little before wanted Sea-room for his Navy. The Dutch to express the
worlds vanity and uncertainty have very wittily pictured a man with a full
blown bladder on his shoulders, and another standing by pricking the bladder
with a pin, with this Motto, Quamsubito, how soon is all blown down? I am not
willing to make the Porch too wide, else I might have given you famous
instances of the vanity and uncertainty of all worldly wealth, pomp, and glory,
from the Assyrian, Chaldean, Persian, Grecian and Roman Kingdoms, whose glory
now lies all in the dust. By all this it is most evident that earthly portions
cannot be made sure, they make themselves wings, and they fly away, Prove. 23.5.

O but now God is a portion that may be made sure. In the time of the Marian
Persecution, Mr. Fox, Acts and Monum.
there was a woman who being convened before bloody Bonner, (then Bishop of
London) upon the trial of Religion, he threatened her that he would take away
her husband from her: Says she, Christ is my husband; I will take away thy
child, Christ, says she, is better to me than ten sons; I will strip thee,
says he, of all thy outward comforts, but Christ is mine, says she, and you
cannot strip me of him. A Christian may be stripped of any thing but his God, he
may be stripped of his estate, his friends, his relations, his liberty, his life,
but he can never be stripped of his God. As God is a portion that none can give
to a Christian, but himself; so God is a portion that none can take from a
Christian but himself; and therefore as ever you would have a sure portion, an
abiding portion, a lasting portion, yea, an everlasting portion, make sure of
God for your portion.

O Sirs, that you would judge that only worth much now, which will be found of
much worth at last, when you shall lie upon a dying bed, and stand before a
Judgment Seat. O that men would prize and value all earthly portions now, as
they will value them when they come to die, and when their souls shall sit upon
their trembling lips, and when there shall be but a short step between them and
eternity, O at what a poor rate, at what a low rate do men value their earthly
portions then certainly it will be their very great wisdom to value their
earthly portions now as they would value them then. And O that men would value
this glorious, this matchless portion that is held forth in this Treatise now,
as they will value it and prize it when they come to die, and when they come to
lanch out into the ocean of eternity. I have read of a Stationer, who being at
a Fair, hung out several pictures of men famous in their kinds, among which he
had also the Picture of Christ, upon which diverse men bought according to their
several fancies; the soldier buys his Caesar, the Lawyer his Justinian, the
Physician his Galen, the Philosopher his Aristotle, the Poet his Virgil, the
Orator his Cicero, and the Divine his Augustine; but all this while the picture
of Christ hung by as a thing of no value, till a poor Chapman that had no more
money then would purchase that, bought it, saying, Now every man has taken
away his God, let me have mine too. O Sirs, it would make any gracious, any
serious, any ingenious, any conscientious beart to bleed to see at what a high
rate all sorts and ranks of men do value earthly portions, which at best are
but counterfeit pictures, when as this glorious portion that is here treated on
hangs by as a thing of no value, of no price; most men are mad upon the world,
and so they may have much of that for their portion, they care not whether ever
they have God for their portion, or no: Give them but a Palace in Paris, The
Duke of Burbone.
and then with that French Duke they care not for a place in Paradise: Give
them but a mess of pottage, and let who will take the birthright; give them
but Manna in a wilderness, and let who will take the land of Canaan; give them
but ground which is pleasant and rich, and then with the Reubenites they will
gladly take up their rest on this side the Holy Land; give them but their bags
full, Luke 12.16-22.
and their barns full, and then with the rich fool in the Gospel, they can
think of nothing but of taking their ease, and of eating, and drinking, and
making merry. So brutish and foolish are they in their understandings, as if
their precious and immortal souls were good for nothing, but as salt to keep
their bodies from rotting and stinking.

O that these men would seriously consider, that as a cup of pleasant wine
offered to a condemned man in the way to his execution; and as the Feast of him
who sat under a naked sword hanging perpendicularly over his head by a slender
thread, and as Adams forbidden fruit, seconded by a flaming sword, and as
Belshazzars dainties overlooked by an handwriting against the wall, such and
only such are all earthly portions to those that have not God for their
portion.

Well, Gentlemen, remember this, there is no true happiness to be found in any
earthly portions; Solomon having made a critical inquiry after the excellency
of all creature comforts, gives this in as the ultimate extraction from them
all, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. If you should go to all the creatures
round, they will tell you that happiness is not in them: If you should go to
the earth, the earth will tell you that happiness grows not in the furrows of
the field. If you go to the Sea, the Sea will tell you, that happiness is not
in the Treasures of the deep; If you go to the beasts of the field, or to the
birds of the air, they will tell you, that happiness is not to be found on
their backs, nor in their bowels; If you go to your bags or heaps of gold and
silver, they will tell you that happiness is not to be found in them; If you
go to Crowns and Scepters, they will tell you that happiness is too precious
and too glorious a Gemme to be found in them.

As it is not the great Cage that makes thn bird sing, so it is not the great
estate that makes the happy life, nor the great portion that makes the happy
soul. There is no true comfort, nor no true happiness to be drawn out of the
standing pools of outward sufficiencies; all true comfort and happiness is
only to be found in having of an all-sufficient God for your portion, Psalm.
144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case, yea, happy is that people
whose God is the Lord. And therefore as ever you would be happy in both worlds,
it very highly concerns you to get an interest in God, and to be restless in
your own souls till you come to enjoy God for your portion.

A man that has God for his portion, is a nonesuch, This you will find fully
cleared up in the following Treatise.
he is the rarest and the happiest man in the world, he is like the
morning star in the midst of the clouds, he is like the Moon when it is at
full, he is like the flower of the Roses in the Spring of the year, he is like
the Lillies by the Springs of waters, he is like the branches of Frankincense
in the time of Summer, he is like a vessel of massy gold that is set about
with all manner of precious stones.

Nothing can make that man miserable that has God for his portion, nor nothing
can make that man happy that wants God for his portion: the more rich, the more
wretched; the more great, the more graceless; the more honorable, the more
miserable that man will be that has not God for his portion. The Sodomites
were very wealthy; and who more wanton and wicked than they? the Egyptians, and
Babylonians were very rich, great, and potent in the world, and what greater
oppressors and persecutors of the people of God than these: O the slavery, the
captivity, and the woeful misery of the people of God under those cruel Tyrants!
Have not the Nimrods, the Nebuchadnezzars, the Belshazzars, the Alexanders, and
the Caesar's, etc. been commonly the Lords of the world? and who so abominably
wicked as these? no men for wickedness have been able tomatch them, or come
near them.

It has been long since observed to my hand, Dan. 7.
that Daniel sets forth the several Monarchies of the World by sundry sorts of
cruel beasts, to show that as they were gotten by beastly subtilty and cruelty,
so they were supported and maintained by brutish sensuality, craft, and tyranny.

I have read of a Lacedemonian that said, that they well deserved death that
did but quench Tyranny, they should quite have consumed it with fire: But
whether he hit the mark, or mist it, let the Reader judge. Well, Sirs, you may
be the Lords of this world, and yet you will certainly be miserable in another
world, except you get God for your portion. The top of man's happiness in this
world lies in his having of God for his portion. He that has God for his
portion, enjoyes all; and he that wants an interest and propriety in God,
enjoyes nothing at all.

Gentlemen, I have read of an Heathen, who seeing a sudden Shipwreck of all his
wealth, said, Well, Fortune, I see now that thou would have me to be a
Philosopher. O that you would say under all your heavy losses and crosses:
well, we now see that God would have us lay up treasure in heaven, Matthew. 6.19,
20.
we now see that God would have us look after a better portion than any this
world affords; we now see that it highly concerns us to secure our interest and
propriety in God; we now see, that to enjoy God for our poron is the one thing
necessary. Have not many of you said, nay sworn, That if you might but see and
enjoy the delight of your eyes, that then you should have a sweeping Trade, and
abound in all plenty and prosperity, and grow rich and great, and glorious in
the world, and be eased of every thing that did but look like a burden, etc.
If it be indeed thus with you, why do you so complain, murmur, and repine? and
why do many of you walk up and down the Exchange and streets with tears in your
eyes, and with heaviness in your hearts, and with cracked credits, and
threadbare coats, and empty purses? and why are so many of you broke, and so
many prisoners, and so many hid, and so many fled? But if it be otherwise,
and that you are sensible that you have put a cheat upon your selves (I say not
upon others) and that as you have been self-flatterers, so you have been
self-deceivers, the more highly it concerns you to do your selves, your souls
that right, as to make sure God for your portion: For what else can make up
those woeful disappointments under which you are fallen.

It is a sad sight to see all the arrows that men shoot to fall upon their own
heads, or to see men twist a cord to hang themselves, or to see men dig a pit
for others, and to fall into it themselves; and it it is but justice that men
should bake as they brew, and that they which brew mischief should have the
first and the largest draught of it themselves.

Now the best way to prevent so sad a sight, and so great a mischief, is to get
God for your portion: for when once God comes to be a man's portion, then all
things shall work together for his good, Romans 8.28. and then God will preserve
him from such hurtful and mischievous actings. The whole World is a great
Bedlam, and multitudes there are that think madly, and that design madly, and
that talk madly, and that act madly, and that walk madly. Now as you would not
be found in the number of those Bedlams, it highly concerns you to get God for
your portion, that so you may be filled with that wisdom that may preserve you
from the folly and madness of this mad world.

Gentlemen, The following Sermons I preached in the year 1660. at Olaves
Breadstreet, and God blessed them then to those Christians that attended on my
Ministry, and I hope he will bless them also to the internal and eternal
welfare of your souls to whom they are now dedicated. They are much enlarged;
the profit will be yours, the labor has been mine: I judge them very
seasonable and suitable to present dispensations, else they had not see the
light at this time. Curiosity is the spiritual adultery of the soul; curiosity
is that green-sicknesse of the soul, whereby it longs for novelties, and loathes
sound and wholesome truths; it is the Epidemical distemper of this age and hour.

And therefore if any of you are troubled with this itch of curiosity, and love
to be wise above what is written, and delight to scan the choice mysteries of
Religion by carnal reason, and affect elegant expressions and Seraphical
notions, and the flowers of Rhetoric, more than sound and wholesome Truths,
then you may ease your selves (if you please) of the trouble of reading this
following Treatise; only remember this, that the prudent Husbandman looks
more and delights more in the ripeness, and soundness, and goodness of the
Corn that is in his Field, than he does at the beauty of the Cockle; and
remember, that no man can live more miserably than he that lives altogether
upon Sawces; and he that looks more at the handsomnesse than he does at the
wholsomnesse of the Dishes of Meat that are set before him, may well pass for
a fool.

Well, Gentlemen, for a Close remember this, that as Noah was drunk with his
own wine, and as Goliath was beheaded by his own sword, and as the rose is
destroyed by the canker that it breeds in it self, and as Agrippina was killed
by Nero, to whom she gave breath; so if ever you are eternally destroyed, you
will be destroyed by your selves; if ever you are undone, you will be undone by
your selves; if ever you are scourged to death, it will be by rods of your own
making, and if ever the bitter cup of damnation be put into your hands, it will
be found to be of your own preparing, mingling, and imbittering.

Behold, I have set life and death, heaven and hell, glory and misery before
you in this Treatise: and therefore if you will needs choose death rather than
life, hell rather than heaven, misery rather than glory: What can be more just
than that you should perish to all eternity. If you will not have God for your
portion, you shall be sure to have wrath for your portion, and hell for your
portion, etc.

Well Sirs, remember this at last, every man shall only thank his own folly
for his own bane, his own sin, for his own everlasting shame, his own iniquity,
for his own endless misery.

I have now no more to do, but to improve all the interest that I have in
Heaven, That this Treatise may be blessed to all your souls and that you all
experience what it is to have God for your portion: for that will be my joy as
well as yours, and my Crown as well as yours, and my glorying as well as yours
in the great day of our Lord Jesus. And so I commend you to God, and to the
word of his grace, Acts 20.32.
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that
are sanctified. And rest,

Gentlemen, Your Souls Servant Thomas Brooks.

A MATCHLESS PORTION.
LAMENT. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him.


CErtainly, if Ennius could pick out Gold out of a Dunghill, I may, by Divine
Assistance, much better pick out golden matter out of such a golden Mine, as my
Text is, to enrich the souls of men withal. The best of Painters, Apelles.
to draw an exquisite Venus, had set before him an hundred choice and selected
beauties, to take from one an eye, another a lip, a third a smile, a fourth an
hand, and from each of them that special lineament in which she most excelled:
but I have no need of any other Scripture to be set before me, to draw forth
the excellency of the Saints portion, than that which I have now pitched upon;
for the beauty, excellency, and glory of an hundred choice Scriptures are
epitomized in this one.

The Jewish Doctors, and other Writers differ about the time of Jeremiahs
penning this Book of the Lamentations; but to be ignorant of the circumstance
of time when this Book was made, is such a crime, as I suppose will not be
charged upon any man's account in the great day of our Lord Jesus.

Doubtless this Book of the Lamentations was composed by Jeremiah in the time
of the Babylonian captivity. In this Book the Prophet sadly laments and bewails
the grievous calamities and miseries that had befallen the Jews, viz. the ruin
of their State, the devastation of their land, the destruction of their
glorious City and Temple (which was the great wonder of the world) the
profanation of all his holy things, the contemptible and deplorable condition
of all sorts, ranks, and degrees of men; and then he complains of their sins,
as the procuring causes of all those calamities, that God, in his
righteousness, had inflicted upon them: He exhorts them also to patience under
the mighty hand of God, and stirs them up to repent, and reform, as they would
have their sins pardoned, judgments removed, divine wrath pacified, their
insulting enemies suppressed, and former acts and grants of favor and grace
restored to them.

But to come to the words of my Text.

The Lord Jehovah, from Havah, He was: this name Jehovah is the most proper
Name of God, and it is never attributed to any, but to God. The three syllables
contain the notes of all times. Je, the time to come, Ho, the time present,
Vah, the time past.


First, Jehovah sets out Gods eternity, in that it contains all times,
future, present, and past.

Secondly, It sets out also Gods Self-existency, coming from Havah, to Be.

Thirdly, When either some special mercy is promised, or some extraordinary
judgment is threatened, then the Name of Jehovah is commonly annexed, to show,
that that God, whose being is from himself, and who gives a being to all his
creatures, both in heaven, and on earth, will certainly give a being to his
promises and threatenings, and not fail to accomplish the words that are gone
out of his mouth.

Fourthly, This name Jehovah consists only of quiescent letters, i.e. letters
of rest, (as the Hebrews call them) to show, that there is no rest till we come
to Jehovah, and that in him we may safely and securely rest, as the Dove did in
Noah's Ark.

Is my portion. Chelki, from (...) Chalak; the Hebrew word signifies to divide.
He alludes, as I take it, to the dividing of the Land of Canaan amongst the
Israelites, by lot; The Lord, says he, is my portion, my part, my lot, and
with this portion I rest fully satisfied, as the Israelites were to do with
their parts and portions in that pleasant Land. It Is true, says Jeremiah (in
the name of the Church) I am thus and thus afflicted, and sorely distressed on
all hands, but yet the Lord is my portion, and that supports, and bares up my
spirits from fainting and sinking in this evil day.

Says my soul, Naphshi, from (...) Nephesh; the Hebrew word has nine several
senses or significations in the Scripture. But let this suffice, that by soul
here in the Text, we are to understand the heart, the mind, the spirit, and
the understanding of a man. Well, says the Prophet, though I am in a sea of
sorrow, and in a gulf of misery, yet my heart tells me, that the Lord is my
portion, my mind tells me, that the Lord is my portion, my spirit tells me,
that the Lord is my portion, and my understanding tells me, that the Lord is my
portion: and therefore I will bare up bravely in the face of all calamities and
miseries.

Therefore will I hope in him: the Hebrew word (...) that is here rendered
hope, Gen 8.10. Isa. 42.4. Psalm. 31.25.
is from (...) Jachal that signifies both hoping, expecting, and trusting, also
it signifies a patient waiting upon the Lord. The Prophet Jeremiah had not only
a witness above him, but also a witness within him, that the Lord was his
portion; and therefore he resolves firmly to hope in the Lord, and sweetly to
trust on the Lord, and quietly and patiently to wait upon the Lord, till God
should turn his storm into a calm, and his sad Winter into a blessed Summer.

In my Text there are three things observable.

First, an Assertion, or Proposition, in those words, The Lord is my portion.

Secondly, A proof of it, in those words, Says my soul.

Thirdly, The use or inference from the premises, in those words, Therefore
will I hope in him.

The words being thus opened, the Proposition that I intend to insist upon, is
this, viz.

That the Lord is the Saints portion, I shall call in a few Scriptures to
witness to the truth of this Proposition, and then I shall further open it to
you. Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup:
thou maintainest my lot. Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Ps. 119.57. Thou art my
portion, O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy words. Jer. 10.16. The
portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all things, and
Israel is the Rod of his inheritance; the Lord of Hosts is his name.

Now for the further opening and clearing up of this great and glorious, this
sweet and blessed truth, I shall endeavor to show you.

First, what a portion the Lord is to his Saints, to his gracious ones. And.

Secondly, the reasons or grounds whereupon the Saints have laid claim to God,
as their portion.

For the first, What a portion God is. Now the excellency of this portion I
shall show you, by an induction of particulars thus:

First, God is a present portion, he is a portion in hand, he is a portion in
possession; Psalm. 48.14. Isa. 25.9.
all the Scriptures that are c^ted to prove the Doctrine, evidence this to be a
truth: And so does that, Psalm. 46.^. God is a very present help in trouble. The
Hebrew word Betsaroth is in the plural number, Maximilian the Emperor was so
delighted with that sentence of Paul, Si Deus nobiscum, If God be with us, who
shall be against us? that he caused it to be written upon the Walls in most
rooms of his Palace.
troubles, that is, God is a present help in many troubles, in great troubles,
and in continued troubles. Betsaroth is from (...) I for, that signifies to
straiten, and closely to besiege, it notes the extremity of affliction and
trouble. When the people of God are in their greatest extremity, then God will
be a present help, a present portion to them. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivens, they shall not
overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. God will be a present help, a present
relief, a present support, a present comfort, a present portion to his people,
in all those great and various trials that they may be exercised under. Psalm.
142.5. I cried unto thee, O Lord; I said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in
the land of the living. God is a portion in present possession, and not a
portion in reversion; the Psalmist does not say, Thou may be my portion in
another world, but Thou art my portion in the land of the living: nor he does
not say, Thou will be my portion in another world, but Thou are my portion in
the land of the living. Look, as Elkanah gave Hannah a worthy portion in hand,
1 Samuel 1.5.
so God gives himself to his Saints, as a worthy portion in hand: Many men
wait, and wait long for their earthly portions before they enjoy them, yea,
their patience is oftentimes wore so threadbare in waiting, that they wish
their parents in Abraham's bosom, I, and sometimes in a worser place, that so
they may inherit their Honors, Lordships, Lands, Treasures, etc. Look, as a
bird in the hand is worth two, I, ten in the bush; so a portion in possession
is worth two, I, ten in reversion. Now God is a portion in present possession,
and that speaks out the excellency of the Saints portion. As he in Piatarch
said of the Scythians, that although they had no music, nor vines among them,
yet (as a better thing) they had gods. So I may say, though the Saints have not
this, nor that, nor the other earthly portion among them, yet (as a better
thing) they have God for their present portion: and what can they desire more?
But

Secondly, As God is a present portion, so God is an immense portion, he is a
vast, large portion, he is the greatest portion of all portions: 1 Timothy 6.15.
Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. These words are a stately and lofty
description of the greatness of God: the Apostle heapeth up many words
together, to show, that in greatness God excels all, Isa. 40.15, 16, 17.
Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: Behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing.
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt offering. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to
him less than nothing, and vanity. Not only one Nation, but many Nations;
yea, not only many Nations, but all Nations, in comparison of God, are but as
the drop of a bucket; and what is lesser than a drop? and as the small dust of a
balance; and what is of lighter weight and lesser worth than the small dust or
powder of the balance that hangs on the scale, and yet never alters the
weight? yea, they are nothing, they are less than nothing. And though Lebanon
was a very great spacious Forest, and had abundance of beasts in it, yet God
was a God of that infinite greatness, that though all the beasts harboring in
that stately Forest should be slain, and all the wood growing on it cut down
to burn them with it, all would not make up a sacrifice any ways answerable or
proportionable to his greatness with whom they had to do: and so in that,
Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power; his understanding is
infinite, or as the Hebrew has it, of his understanding there is no number.
Such is his greatness, that he knows not only all kinds and sorts of things,
but even all particulars, though they exceed all number: Psalm. 145.3. Great is
the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable, or as
the Hebrew has it, of his greatness there is no search. God is infinitely
above all names, all notions, all conceptions, all expressions, and all
parallels: Psa. 150.2. Praise him for his mighty acts, praise him according to
his excellent greatness, or greatness of greatness, or abundance of
greatness, or according to the multitude of his greatness, as the Hebrew and
Greek carries it: and so in that, Deuteronomy. 10.17. For the Lord your God is God of
Gods, In Daniel God is called El Elim, the mighty of mighties.
and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regards not
persons, nor takes reward. God is the original cause of all greatness; all
that greatness that is in any created beings, whether they are Angels, or men,
is from God; all their greatness is but a beam of his Sun, a drop out of his
Sea, a mite out of his Treasury. Psalm. 139.
God is a God of that infinite greatness, that he fills heaven and earth with
his presence, he is every where, and yet circumscribed to no place, he is in
all things, and without all things, and above all things, and this speaks out
his immensity. Job had a very large portion, before God made a breach upon him,
Job 1.3.
He had seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke
of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great household; but at last God
gives him twice as much as he had first, Job 42.12.
for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand
yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses. Cattle are only instanced in, because
the wealth of that Country consisted especially in cattle; but yet doubtless
Job had a great many other good things, as goods, lands, possessions, and
stately habitations; but what is all this to a Saints portion? certainly, had
not Job had God for his portion, he had been but a rich fool, a golden beast,
notwithstanding all the great things that God had heaped upon him. And so
Ahasuerus had a very large portion, Esth. 1.1, 2.
he reigned from India unto Ethiopia over an hundred and seven and twenty
Provinces, but what were all his Provinces; but as so many handfuls of dust, in
comparison of the Saints portion? The whole Turkish Empire, says Luther, is
but a crust that God throws to a dog: had a man all the world for his portion,
it would be but a poor pittance. Nebuchadnezzar had a very great portion, Dan.
5.18, 19. O thou King, the most high God gave thy father Nebuchadnezzar a
Kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor. And for the majesty that he gave
him, all people, Nations, and languages trembled and feared before him: whom he
would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up,
and whom he would he put down. And so in that, Jer. 27.5, 6, 7, 8. I have made
the earth, the man, and the beast that are upon the ground, See Jer. 28.14.
by my great power, and by my outstretched arm, and I have given it unto whom
it seemed me^ unto me. And now have I given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, my servant, and the beasts of the field have I
given him also to serve him. And all Nations shall serve him, and his son, and
his sons son, until the very time of his land come; and then many Nations and
great Kings shall serve themselves of him. And it shall come to pass, that the
Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the King of
Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the sword, and with
the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.
The portion that here God gives to Nebuchadnezzar is a wonderful large portion;
and yet all these Nations that God gave to him, were but as so many molehils,
or as so many birds nests, compared with a Saints portion. All Nations are but
as a drop of a bucket (that may in a moment be wiped off with a finger) in
comparison of God, nay, they are all nothing; but that word is too high, for
they are less than nothing: had a man as many worlds at his command as there
be men on earth, or Angels in heaven, yet they would be but as so many drops,
or as so many attomes to a Saints portion.

When Alc biades was proudly boasting of his lands that lay together, Socrates
wittily rebukes his pride, by bringing him a Map of the world, and wishing him
to show him where his lands did lie; his lands would hardly amount to more than
the prick of a pin; England, Scotland, and Ireland are but three little spots,
to the vast Continents that be in other parts of the world; and what then is
thy palace, thy lordships, thy manors, thy farm, thy house, thy cottage, but
a little minum, but a prick of a pin to God, who is so great, so vast a
portion? O Sirs, had you the understanding of all the Angels in heaven, and the
tongues of all the men on earth, yet you would not be able to conceive,
express, or set forth the greatness and largeness of a Saints portion; Can
you tell the stars of heaven, or number the sands of the sea, or stop the Sun
in his course, or raise the dead, or make a new world? then, and not till then
will you be able to declare what a great, what an immense portion God is: If
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive the great things that God has laid up in the Gospel, (for so that
1 Cor. 2.9. is to be understood) Oh how much less then are they able to declare
the great things that God has laid up for his people in another world? But

Thirdly, Genesis 17.1. And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the almighty God; walk before me,
and be thou perfect. I am God almighty, or as some carry the words, I am God
all-sufficient, or self-sufficient: In quo nihil desiderari possit boni. Zanch.
de not. Dei l. 4. c. 1. Qu 1
God has self-sufficiency and all sufficiency in himself. Some derive the word
Shaddai that is here rendered almighty, or all-sufficient, from Shad aduge,
because God feeds his children with sufficiency of all good things, as the
tender mother does the sucking child. Genesis 15.1. After these things the word
of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not Abram, I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward: I will be thy buckler to defend thee
from all kind of mischief and miseries, and I will be thy exceeding great
reward to supply thee with all necessary and desirable mercies; and what can a
Saint desire more? Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield; the Lord
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that
walk uprightly. The Sun, which among all inanimate creatures is the most
excellent, notes all manner of excellency, provision, and prosperity; and the
shield, which among all artificial creatures is the chiefest, notes all manner
of protection whatsoever; under the name of grace all spiritual good is wrapped
up; and under the name of glory all eternal good is wrapped up; and under the
last clause, no good thing will he withold, is wrapped up all temporal good:
all put together speaks out God to be an all-sufficient portion. Before the
world was made, before Angels or men had a being, God was as blessed and as
glorious in himself as now he is; God is such an all-sufficient and such an
excellent being, that nothing can be added to him to make him more excellent:
Man in his best estate is so great a piece of vanity, Psalm. 39.5.
that he stands in need of a thousand thousand things; he needs the air to
breath in, the earth to bare him, and fire to warm him, and clothes to cover
him, and an house to shelter him, and food to nourish him, and a bed to ease
him, and friends to comfort him, etc. But this is the excellency of God, that
he has all excellencies in himself, and stands in need of nothing. Were there
as many worlds as there are men in the world, and were all those worlds full of
blessed Saints, yea, were there as many Heavens as there are stars in heaven,
and were all those heavens full of glorious Angels, yet all these Saints; and
Angels together could not add the least to God; for what can drops taken out
of the Sea add unto the Sea? what can finite creatures add to an infinite
being? though all the men in the world should praise the Sun, and say, the Sun
is a glorious creature, yet all this would add nothing to the light and glory
of the Sun; so, though all the Saints and Angels shall be blessing, and
praising, and admiring, and worshipping of God to all eternity, yet they shall
never be able to add any thing to God, who is blessed for ever. O Christians,
God is an all-sufficient portion, his power is all-sufficient to protect you,
his wisdom is all-sufficient to direct you, his mercy is all-sufficient to
pardon you, his goodness is all-sufficient to provide for you, his word is
all-sufficient to support you and strengthen you, and his grace is
all-sufficient to adorn you and enrich you, and his spirit is all-sufficient to
lead you and comfort you; and what can you desire more? O Sirs, God has within
himself all the good of Angels, of men and universal nature; he has all glory,
all dignity, all riches, all treasures, all pleasures, God is Omnia super
omnia, and many of the very heathens counted God Optimum maximum, the best and
greatest.
all delights, all comforts, all contents, all joys, all beatitudes in
himself. All the scattered excellencies and perfections that be in the
creatures are eminently, transcendently, and perfectly in him. Look as the
worth and value of many pieces of silver are contracted in one piece of gold;
so all the whole volume of perfections which is spread through heaven and earth
are epitomized in God, according to that old saying, Omne bonum in summo bono,
all good is in the chiefest good. God is one infinite perfection in himself,
which is eminently and virtually all perfections of the creatures: all the
good, the excellency, the beauty, and glory that is in all created beings, are
but parts of that whole that is in God; and all the good that is in them is
borrowed and derived from God, who is the first cause, and the universal cause
of all that good that is in Angels or men. God is a sufficient portion to
secure your souls, and to supply all your wants, and to satisfy all your
desires, and to answer all your expectations, and to suppress all your
enemies, and after all to bring you to glory; and what can you desire more?

But now all earthly portions are insufficient portions, they can neither
prevent afflictions, nor support the soul under afflictions, nor mitigate
afflictions, nor yet deliver a man from afflictions: They can neither arm the
soul against temptations, nor comfort the soul under temptations, A golden
crown cannot cure the headache, nor a purple robe cannot fray away a burning
seaver, nor a bed of gold cannot give ease to a distempered body, nor the
velvet slipper cannot take away the pain of the gout.
nor lead the soul out of temptations. All the creatures in the world are but
as so many ciphers without God; when God frowns, all the creatures in the world
are not sufficient to cheer the soul, when God withdraws, all the creatures in
the world are not sufficient to sustain the soul; when God clouds his face, all
the creatures in the world are not sufficient to make it day with the soul,
etc. There is not enough in the whole creation to content, quiet, or satisfy
one immortal soul; he that has most of the world would have more, and he that
has least of the world has enough, if his soul can but groundedly say, The
Lord is my portion.

Fourthly, As the Lord is an all-sufficient portion, so the Lord is a most
absolute, needful, and necessary portion; the want of an earthly portion may
trouble me, but the want of God for my portion will damn me; it is not
absolutely necessary that I should have a portion in gold, or silver, or
jewels, or goods, or lands; but it is absolutely necessary that I should have
God for my portion. I may have union and communion with God, Act. 3.6.
though with the Apostles I have neither gold nor silver in my purse; I may be
holy and happy, Luk 16.20, 21.
though with Lazarus I have never a rag to hang on my back, nor never a dry
crust to put into my belly; I may to heaven at last, and I may be glorious in
another world, Job 1, etc.
though with Job I should be stripped of all my worldly glory, and set upon a
dunghill in this world; but I can never be happy here, nor blessed hereafter,
except God be my portion. Though I could truly say, that all the world were
mine, yet if I could not truly say, that the Lord is my portion, I should be
but miserable under all my worldly enjoyments. To have God for my portion is
absolutely necessary, for without it I am for ever and ever undone: Ephe. 2.12.
In this verse you have several withouts; and it is very observable that they
that were without God in the world, they were without Christ, without the
Church, without the Covenant, without the Promise, and without hope in the
world; and therefore such persons must needs be in a most sad and deplorable
condition, etc.

First, in relation to the soul,

Secondly, Vna gutt^la malae conscientiae totum more mundam gaudil absorbet.
Luther.
of the unspeakable evil that is in sin, yea in the least sin, and of their
lost, undone, and miserable estate out of Christ; O then, what would they not
give to have God for their portion? O then they would give all the gold and
silver they have in the world to have God for their portion; O then they would
give thousands of Rams, Mic. 6.6, 7
and ten thousands of Rivers of oil; yea, they would give their firstborn,
they would give the very fruit of their bodies, that they might have God to be
the portion of their souls; O then they would say as Mephibosheth said unto the
King, 2 Samuel 19.29, 30.
Let Ziba take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto
his own house. Under distress of conscience poor sinners will cry out, O! let
who will take all our honors, and all our manors, and all our treasures, and
all our stores, and all our lands, and all our lordships, and all our bags, so
we may have God for our portion: O let us but have God for our portion, and we
care not a straw who takes all. Now what does this speak out but that of all
portions God is the most absolute necessary portion. But

Thirdly, though wicked men, Lament. 2.14, 15. Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10, etc.
when they are in the height of their worldly prosperity, felicity, and glory,
do slight the Saints, and revile, and scorn the Saints, and contemn and
undervalue the Saints; yet when death knocks at their doors, and when their
consciences are startled, and when hellfire flashes in their faces, and when
the worm within begins to gnaw: O now, if all the world were a lump of gold,
and in their hands to dispose of, they would give it all, so they might have
that honor and happiness to change conditions with those who have God for
their portion: Number. 23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my
last end be like his. Though men who have their portion in this life do not
love to live the life of the righteous, yet when they come to die, they are
often desirous that they might die the death of the righteous: And this many
hundred Ministers and Christians can witness from their own experience.
Lazarus having God for his portion, when he died he went to heaven without a
rag on his back, or a penny in his purse, whereas Dives who had not God for his
portion, when he died, went tumbling down to hell in all his riches, bravery,
and glory. O it is infinitely better to go to heaven a beggar, than to go to
hell an Emperor; and this the sinner understands, when his conscience comes to
be enlightened upon a dying bed, and therefore he cries out, O send for such a
Minister, and send for such and such a Christian, and let them pray with me,
and counsel me, and if it be possible, give out some drops of comfort to me;
See Wisdom 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. All these verses are worth their weight in
gold.
O that I had never derided nor reviled them, O that I had never opposed and
persecuted them, O that I had lived at such a rate of holiness and exactness
as they have done, O that I had walked with God as they have walked, O that I
had laid out my time, my strength, my treasure, my parts, my all, for God, as
they have done, O that my estate was as good, as safe, and as happy as theirs
is, O that I could as truly say, that the Lord is my portion, as they can say
that the Lord is their portion: And what does all this speak out but that high
esteem and value that they set upon those that have God for their portion: So
that upon this threefold account, we may safely conclude, that God is a most
absolute, needful, and necessary portion. But

Fifthly, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Hab. 1.13.
he is a perfect beauty, without the least spot or shadow of deformity. All
other portions are a bitter sweet; but God is a Rose without prickles, he is a
good, in which there is not the least evil. 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all. There are no mixtures in God, God is a most clear
bright shining light, yea, he is all light, and in him is no darkness at all.
God is all light, and all love, all sweetness, and all goodness, all
kindness and all graciousnesse, and there is no uncomliness, no unlovelinesse,
no bitterness nor no darkness at all in God. The Moon when it shines brightest
has her dark spots and specks; but God is a light that shines most gloriously
without the least spot or speck; God is a most pure, clear, splendid light.
It Is very observable, that the Apostle, to illustrate the perfect purity of
God, adds a Negative to his Affirmative, in him is no darkness at all; that
is, God is so pure, that not the least spot, the smallest speck of vanity or
folly can cleave to him: God is a pure, a most pure act, without the least
potentiality, defectability, or mutability, and therefore in the highest sense
he is light, and in him is no darkness at all. By this Metaphorical
description of God the Apostle would not have us think, that the nature of God
is changed into the nature of light; but by this similitude the Apostle would
represent something of the purity and excellency of God to us. The Sun is
light, the Moon is light, and the Stars are light; but it would be blasphemy
for us to imagine, that the essence of God is the same with this of the
creatures: but this Sirs you must remember, that there are many excellent
properties of light, for which God is often in the Scripture resembled to
light. As

First, light is pure, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil,
and can not look on iniquity. There are four things that God cannot do.

1. He cannot lie.

2. He cannot die.

3. He cannot deny himself, nor

4. He cannot look with a favorable eye upon iniquity: he is a God of that
infinite purity, that he cannot look upon iniquity, but with an hateful eye, an
angry eye, a revengeful eye, and with a vindictive eye.

Secondly, Psalm. 41.12. 1 Samuel 2.1, 3 Psalm. 16.8. Ps. 119.168. God is totus
oculus, all eye. Athenodorus an heathen could say, that God was every where,
and beheld all that was done.
Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do. The Greek word (...), is a Metaphor, say some, that is taken from the
Priests under the Law, who when they killed the beasts for sacrifice, all
things that were within the beasts were laid naked and bare before the Priest,
that so he might see what was sound, and what was corrupted. Others say, the
Apostle alludes to the anatomizing of such creatures, wherein men are very
cautious and curious to find out every little vein or muscle, though they lie
never so close: others say, that it is a Metaphor taken from those that lie with
their faces upwards, that all passengers may see who they are. All agree in
this, that all men's in sides and outsides are anatomized, dissected,
quartered, and laid naked to the eye of God, Job 34.21, 22. For his eyes are
upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings: There is no darkness, nor
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. If thou
can not bide thy self from the Sun, which is Gods Minister of light, how
impossible will it be to hide thy self from him whose eyes are ten thousand
times brighter than the Sun, says Ambrose. But

Thirdly, Jam. 1.17.
a man cannot see heaven, but in that light that comes from heaven, 1 Cor.
2.10, 12, 14, 15, 16. Were it not for the Sun it would be perpetual night in
the world, notwithstanding all the Torches that could be lighted, yea,
notwithstanding all the light of the Moon and Stars: so it would be perpetual
night with poor souls, notwithstanding all the torch-light of natural parts,
and creature comforts, and notwithstanding all the Starlight of civil honesty
and common gifts, and notwithstanding all the Moonlight of temporary faith and
formal profession, did not the Sun of righteousness arise and shine upon them.
But

Fourthly, Eccles. 11.7. Truly the light is sweet, and it is a very pleasant
thing to behold the Sun. A Philosopher being ask't whether it were not a
pleasant thing to behold the Sun? answered, that that was a blind man's
question, because life without light is but a life-lesse life. Now as there is
nothing more pleasant and delightful to the eye than light, so there is nothing
more pleasant and delightful to the soul than God. The poor Northern Nations in
Strabo that want the light of the Sun for some months together, when the term
of his return approaches, they climb up into the highest mountains to spy it,
and he that spies it first was accounted the best and most beloved of God, they
chose him King almost as the Tyrians did Strato. Now the return of the Sun is
not more pleasant and delightful to those poor Northern Nations, than God is
pleasant and delightful to all gracious souls. But

Fifthly, Psalm. 139. But.

Sixthly, of the beholders; and so God is a God of that transcendent beauty,
majesty, and glory, that the very eyes of the Angels are dazzled, as not being
able to behold the brightness of his glory, Isa. 6.2. God dwells in that light,
which no man can approach unto. But

Seventhly, Cor. 6.14. What communion has light with darkness? the nature of
God is void of all composition, light expells darkness, it never mixes nor
mingles with it. By what has been said, you see that God is a pure, and an
unmixed light, and that in him there is no darkness at all.

But now all worldly portions are mixed with many troubles, sorrows, cares,
fears, hazards, dangers, vexations, oppositions, crosses, losses, and often
times with many gripes of conscience too. All earthly portions are mixed
portions, All earthly riches are true gardens of Adonis, where we can gather
nothing but trivial flowers surrounded with many briars and thorns.
the goodness of all creatures is a mixed goodness, our wine is mixed with
water, our silver with tin, our gold with dross, our wheat with chafe, and our
honey with gall, etc. every Be has his sting, and every rose has his
prickles; and this mixture speaks out all earthly portions to be vanity and
vexation of spirit, 1 Eccles. 1.13. That great Prince Exerxes was wont to say,
You look upon my Crown, and my purple robes; but did you know how they were
lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them up. And who is there in
this our English Israel, that cannot with both hands subscribe to this? The
Emblem of King Henry the seventh in all his buildings (in the windows) was
still a Crown in a bush of thorns; B. Hall.
wherefore, or with what historical allusion he did so is uncertain; but surely
it was to imply thus much, that great places are not free from great cares,
that no man knows the weight of a Scepter, but he that swayes it: This made
Saul to hide himself amongst the stuff, when he should have been made King;
many a sleeplesse night, many a restless day, many a sad temptation, and many
a busy shift will their ambition cost them that affect such places of
eminency. Besides, high places are commonly very slippery, he that stands in
them may suddenly fall, and wound his conscience, or easily fall and break his
neck. But

Sixthly, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
he is so in himself, and he makes them so too who enjoy him for their portion,
Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom
he has chosen for his own inheritance. All the happiness and blessedness of
the people of God stands in this that God is their God, and that he is their
portion, and that they are his inheritance. The Hebrew word Ashre. (that is
here rendered blessed) is, O the blessednessel or, O the heaped up happiness of
those whose God is the Lord! the happiness of such is so great, and so
glorious, as cannot be conceived, as cannot be uttered: the words are a joyful
acclamation for their felicity that have God for their portion. Ps. 144.15.
Happy is that people that is in such a case, yea happy is that people whose God
is the Lord. David having prayed for many temporal blessings in the behalf of
the people, from ver. 12. to ver. 15. at last concludes, Blessed are the people
that are in such a case; but presently he checks and corrects himself, and eats
(as it were) his own words, but rather happy is that people whose God is the
Lord: The Syriack rendereth it question-wise, Is not the people that is in such
a case? P sal. 146.5
the answer is No, except they have God to boot. Nothing can make that man
truly miserable that has God for his portion, nor nothing can make that man
truly happy that wants God for his portion. God is the Author of all true
happiness, he is the donor of all true happiness, he is the maintainer of all
true happiness, and he is the center of all true happiness and blessedness; and
therefore he that has him for his God, for his portion, is the only happy man
in the world.

But now all earthly portions cannot make a man truly happy and blessed; a
Crown, a Kingdom cannot, If a man should make a critical enquiry after true
happiness, from the highest Angel in heaven to the lowest worm on earth, the
joint voice of all the creatures would be, that happiness is not in them.
for Saul and other Princes have found it so; Honors cannot, for Haman and
others have found it so; A high and noble birth cannot, for Absalom, Ammon, and
others have found it so; Riches cannot, for the rich fool in the Gospel and
many thousand others have found it so; Large Dominions, and great commands
cannot, for Ahasuerus, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and others have found it so;
Policy cannot, for Achitophel and other great Counselors have found it so;
Glorious apparel and delicate fare cannot, for Dives and others have found it
so; Applause and credit among the people cannot, for Herod and others have
found it so; Learning and great gifts cannot, for the Scribes, Pharisees, and
many others have found it so: no earthly thing nor earthly creature can give
happiness and blessedness to man; Non dat quod non habet, Nothing can give what
it has not. If the Conduit has no water, it can give no water; if the Sun
has no light, it can give no light; if the Physician has no remedy, he can
give no remedy, etc.

But now it is a very true observation, though it be a very sad Observation,
viz. That every wicked man's portion is cursed unto him.

Do but compare the Scriptures in the margin together, Deuteronomy. 28.17, 18, 19, 20.
and then let conscience judge. Job 20.22, 23, 26, 28, 29. and chap. 24.18
Prove. 3.33 Mal. 2.2, etc.
All a wicked man's relations are cursed to him, and all a wicked man's
contentments and enjoyments are cursed to him, all his mercies without doors are
cursed to him, and all his mercies within doors are cursed to him, etc. What
though a man should match with one that has many thousand bags of gold for her
portion, yet if the plague should be in every bag, would you count him happy in
his match? surely no. Verily this is the case of every man that has not God
for his portion. But

Sevently, Psalm. 16.5. Psalm. 142.5, 6. Jer. 10.16.
This is evident in the Text, and in all the Scriptures cited to prove the
Point, and so in that, Psalm. 67.6. Then shall the earth yield her increase, and
God, even our own God shall bless us: and so Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God
is the God of salvation, or God of salvations, as it is in the Hebrew. God is a
God of all manner of salvations, he has all sorts and ways of salvations, he
is not only powerful, but also skilful to save his people from ten thousand
deaths and dangers. Joh. 20.28. Job 19.25. Luke 1.47.
Faith is an appropriating grace, it is much in appropriating of God to its
self, my Lord, and my God, and my Redeemer, and my Savior, and my portion,
Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart
and my portion for ever. Judge. 7.
In Gideons Camp every Soldier had his own pitcher; 1 Chronicles. 26.30. Mat. 25.4.
amongst Solomon's men of valor every man wore his own sword; and the five wise
Virgins had every one oil in her own lamp. Luther was wont to say, that there
lay a great deal of Divinity couched up in pronouns, as in meum, tuum, suum,
mine, thine, his: and so faiths appropriating of God to the soul, as its own
portion, is all in all. God is a portion peculiar to the Saints, he is the
hidden Manna, the new Name, the white Stone, the bread to eat that others know
not of: There is never a hardened Pharaoh in the world that can truly say, The
Lord is my portion; nor there is never a murdering Saul in the world that can
truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never a painted bloody Jezabel
in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never a
cunning Achitophel in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor
there is never a proud Haman in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my
portion; nor there is never a tyrannical Nebuchadnezzar in the world that can
truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never a crafty Herod in the
world that can truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never a rich
Dives in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is
never a treacherous Judas in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my
portion; nor there is never an hypocritical Simon Magus in the world that can
truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never an Apostatizing Demas in
the world that can truly say, The Lord is my portion; nor there is never a
persecuting Scribe or Pharisee in the world that can truly say, The Lord is my
portion: it is only the Saint that can truly say, The Lord is his portion, for
God is peculiarly his, he is only his.

But now all earthly portions are common portions, Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3.
they are all common to good and bad, to the righteous and to the wicked, to
the clean and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not, to him that swears, and to him that fears an oath. Was
Abraham rich? so was Dives to; was David a King? so was Saul to; was Daniel a
great favorite at Court? so was Haman to, etc. And indeed usually the basest
and the worst of men have the largest share in earthly portions: which made
Luther say, that the whole Turkish Empire was but a crust that God cast to a
dog. Genesis 25.5, 6.
Abraham gave unto his sons of the Concubines gilts, and sent them away, but
unto Isaac he gave all that he had: So all earthly portions which are giftlesse
gifts God gives them to the worst and vildest of men; Dan. 4.17. This matter is
by the Decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones; to
the intent that the living may know, that the most High rules in the Kingdom
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest
of men: and so in that, Dan. 11.21. And in his estate shall stand up a vile
person, to whom they shall not give the honor of the Kingdom, but he shall
come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom by flatteries. Interpreters do
generally agree, that by this vile person in the Text is meant Antiochus
Epiphanes, that was so great and mighty a Prince, that when the Samaritans did
write to him, they write Antiocho magno Deo, to Antiochus the great God. And
indeed his very name speaks him out to be some great and glorious person, for
Antiochus Epiphanes is Antiochus the illustrious, the famous; and yet you see
that the Holy Ghost speaking of him, calls him a vile person. Ah, how vile in
the eyes of God are the greatest men in the world who have not God for their
portion! Augustus in his solemn Feasts gave trifles to some, but gold to
others; God gives the trifling portions of this world to the vilest and worst
of men, but his gold, his Christ, himself, he gives only to his Saints, Gal.
2.20. And the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Hawes that are for hogs grow
upon every hedge, but roses that are for men they only grow in pleasant
gardens; you know how to apply it: Though many have counterfeit jewels, yet
there are but a few that have the true Diamond; though many have their earthly
portions, yet there are but a few that have God for their portion. But

Eighthly, Romans 8.32. God is the honum in qua omnia bona.
God has in himself the good, the sweet, the profit, the pleasure, the
delight, the comfort, etc. of all portions; there is no good in wife, child,
father, friend, husband, health, wealth, wit, wisdom, learning, honor, etc.
but is all found in God, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son; or as the Greek has it,
(...), He that is overcoming; though he has not yet overcome, yet if he be
striving for the conquest, and will rather die than he will give up the
Bucklers, Qui habet hoc unum, habet unum universale.
he shall inherit all things, that is, he shall inherit God in all, and all in
God, Genesis 33.9. And Esau said, I have enough, my brother, keep that thou have
unto thy self; or as the Hebrew has it, Li Rab, I have much my brother: and
indeed 'twas very much that an Esau should say he had much; it is more than many
of the Esaus of these times will say: but Jacob speaks at a far higher rate in
ver. 11. Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee, because God
has dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough; or rather as the
Hebrew has it, Li chol, I have all; Esau had much, but Jacob had all, because
he had all in God, and God in all; Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia, He
has all that has the haver of all; 2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, and yet
possessing all things. There is in God an immense fullness, an Ocean of
goodness, and an overplus of all that graciousnesse, sweetness, and kindness
that is to be found in all other things or creatures. As Noah had a copy of
every kind of creature in that famous Library of the Ark, out of which all were
reprinted to the world; so he that has God for his portion has the original
copy of all blessings, out of which all may easily be renewed; all the
goodlinesses and all the glories of all the creatures are eminently and
perfectly to be enjoyed in God; God is an universal excellency; Ephesians. 1.3.
all the particular excellencies that are scattered up and down among Angels,
When Paulinus Nolanus a great man, had his City taken away, from him by the
Barbarians, he prayed thus; Lord, let me not be troubled at the loss of my
Gold, Silver, Honor, etc. for thou art all, and much more than all these to me.
men, and all other creatures are virtually and transcedently in him; he has
them all in his own being. All creatures in heaven and earth have but their
particular excellencies, but God has in himself the very quintescence of all
excellencies; the creatures have but drops of that Sea, that Ocean that is in
God, they have but their parts of that power, wisdom, goodness,
righteousness, holiness, faithfulness, loveliness, desireablenesse,
sweetness, graciousnesse, beauty, and glory that is in God; one has this
part, and another has that, one has this particular excellency, and another
has that; but the whole of all these parts and excellencies are to be found
only in God. There is none but that God that is an universal good, that can
truly say, all power, all wisdom, all strength, all knowledge, all goodness,
all sweetness, all beauty, all glory, all excellency, etc. dwells in me; he
that can truly say this, is a God, and he that cannot is no God. There is no
Angel in heaven nor Saint on earth that has the whole of any one of those
excellencies that are in God; nay, all the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints
on earth have not among them the whole of any one of all those glorious
excellencies and perfections that be in God. All the excellencies that are
scattered up and down in the creatures are united into one excellency in God;
but there is not one excellency in God that is ^ully scattered up and down
among all the creatures: There is a glorious union of all excellencies in God,
and only in God.

Now this God that is such an universal good, and that has all excellencies
dwelling in himself, he says to the believer, as the King of Israel said to
the King of Assyria, 1 Kings 20.4. Jer 32.38, 42.
I am thine, and all that I have: our propriety reaches to all that God is,
and to all that God has. God is not parted, nor divided, nor distributed among
his people, as earthly portions are divided among children in the family; so as
one believer has one part of God, and another believer another part of God,
and a third another part of God; O no, but every believer has whole God
wholly, he has all of God for his portion. God is not a believers portion in a
limited sense, nor in a comparative sense, but in an absolute sense; God
himself is theirs, he is wholly theirs, he is only theirs, he is always
theirs. As Christ looks upon the Father, and says, All thine is mine, Joh
17.10. 1 Cor. 3 ult.
and mine is thine, that may a Saint say, looking upon God as his portion, he
may truly say, O Lord thou art mine, and all that thou have, and I am thine,
and all that I have: A Saint may look upon God, and say, O Lord, not only thy
gifts and thy graces are mine to adorn me and enrich me, and not only thy
mercies and thy good things are mine to comfort me and encourage me, but also
thou thy self art mine; and this is my joy and crown of rejoicing: to be able
to say that God is mine, is more than if I were able to say, that ten thousand
worlds, yea, and as maheavens are mine: for it is God alone that is the
sparkling Diamond in the Ring of glory. Heaven would be but a low thing without
God, says Augustine; and Bernard had rather enjoy Christ in a Chimney-corner,
than to be in Heaven without him; and Luther had rather be in Hell with Christ,
than in Heaven without him: it is God alone that makes heaven to be heaven.

Now God is so every particular believers portion, as that he is every
believers portion; 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother, unto the Church of God
which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints, with all that in every place call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, both theirs and ours. As the Sun is every man's Sun to see by, to walk
by, to work by; and as the Sea is every man's Sea to trade by, etc. so God is
every believers portion; he is a poor Saints portion, as well as a rich Saints
portion; he is the despised believers portion, as well as the exalted believers
portion; he is the weak believers portion, as well as the strong believers
portion; he was as much his portion who miscalled his faith, and who in the
behalf of his son cried out with tears, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, Mar.
9.24.
as he was Abraham's portion, Genes. 2^.
who in the strength of his faith offered up his only son; he was as much Jobs
portion sitting on a dunghill, as he was David's portion sitting on a royal
Throne; he was as much Lazarus his portion that had never a penny in his purse
as he was Solomon's portion, 2 Chronicles. 1.15.
who made gold and silver as plenteous in Jerusalem as the stones of the
streets. God is not my portion alone, but he is every Saints portion in heaven,
and he is every Saints portion on earth: The Father is every child's portion,
and though they may wrangle, and quarrel, and fall out one with another, yet he
is all their portions; and so it is here: and O what a spring of joy and comfort
should this be to all the Saints. Riches are not every believers portion, but
God is every believers portion; honor and preferment in the world is not every
believers portion, but God is every believers portion; Liberty and freedom is
not every believers portion, but God is every believers portion; credit and
applause in the world is not every believers portion, but God is every
believers portion; prosperity and success is not every believers portion, but
God is every believers portion, etc.

God is a universal portion, all things receive their being, essence, and
existence from him, for the fullness of all things is in him really and
eminently. The Heathen Philosophers of old called God (...), i. e. all or every
thing, and in that Oracle great Pan is dead, of which Plutarch makes mention:
Christ is called the great Pan, because, say some, he is the Lord of all, and
contains all things in himself, Exodus 33.19. I will make all my goodness
pass before thee, to wit, because in God are all good things; God is all
things, God is every thing; the cream, the good, the sweet, the beauty, and the
glory of every creature, and of every thing centers in God. But

Ninthly, These things I have formerly handled more largely, and therefore a
touch here must suffice, etc.
he is a portion that none can cheat or spoil you of; God is such a portion,
that no friend, no foe, no man, no enemy, no Devil can ever rob a Christian of.
O Christians, God is so yours in Christ, and so yours by Covenant, and so yours
by promise, and so yours by purchase, and so yours by conquest, and so yours by
donation, and so yours by marriage-union and communion, and so yours by the
earnest of the Spirit, and so yours by the sealings and witnessings of the
Spirit, that no power or policy on earth can ever finger your portion, or
cheat, or rob you of your portion, Psalm. 48.14. For this God is our God for
ever and ever, and he will be our guide even unto death: he is not only our God
for the present, nor he will not be only our God for a short time longer: O no;
but he will be our God for ever and ever; If God be once thy portion, he will
be for ever thy portion. It must be a power that must over-match the power of
God, and a strength that must be above the strength of God that must rob or
spoil a Christian of his portion; but who is there that is stronger than God?
Is the clay stronger than the potter, or the stubble than the flame, Romans 9.
or weakness than strength? 1 Cor. 1.25. and chapter 10.22
yea, is not the very weakness of God stronger than man? and who then shall
ever be able to take away a Christians portion from him?

But now a man may be easily deprived of his earthly portion; how many have
been deprived of their earthly portions by storms at Sea, and others by force
and violence, and others by fraud and deceit, and others by hideous lying and
hellish swearing? many have lost their earthly portions by treachery, knavery,
perjury, subtilty, robbery, etc. Some play away their earthly portions, and
others with Esau fool away their earthly portions, and not a few, Luke 15.
with the prodigal, sin away their earthly portions. 1 Kings 21.1-5.
Ahabs fingers itch't to be a fingering of Naboths Vineyard; a man can no
sooner come to enjoy an earthly portion, but other men's fingers itch to be a
fingering of his portion, as daily experience does sufficiently evidence. But
God is a portion that the fire cannot burn, nor the floods cannot drown, nor
the thief cannot steal, nor the enemy cannot sequester, nor the soldier cannot
plunder a Christian of; a man may take away my gold from me, but he cannot take
away my God from me. Job 1.
The Chaldeans and the Sabeans could take away Jobs estate from him, but they
could not take away Jobs God from him. And the Amalekites burnt Ziklag, and
robbed David of his substance, 1 Samuel 30.
and of his wives, but they could not rob him of his God: And those persecuters
in the 10. and 11. Chapters of the Hebrews plundered the Saints of their goods,
but they could not plunder them of their God: Till weakness can make a breach
upon strength, impotency upon omnipotency, the pitcher upon the potter, and the
crawling worm upon the Lord of Hosts, a Saints portion is safe and secure. It Is
true, sicknesses and diseases may take away my health and my strength from me,
and death may take away my friends and my relations from me, and enemies may
take away my estate, my liberty, my life from me, but none of all these can
take away my God from me. I have read of the men of Tyrus, how that they
chained and nailed their God Apollo to a post, that so they might be sure of
him, supposing that all their safety lay in the enjoyment of him. Certainly God
is so chained, and so linked, and so nailed to his people by his everlasting
love, and by his everlasting Covenant, and by the blood of his Son, and by his
Oath, and by that law of relation that is between him and them, that no created
power shall ever be able to deprive them of him. But

Tenthly, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
no object is so suitable and adequate to the heart as he is; he is a portion
that punctually, exactly, and directly suits the condition of the soul, that
suits the desires of the soul, the necessities of the soul, the wants of the
soul, the longings of the soul, and the prayers of the soul: the soul can crave
nothing, nor wish for nothing, but what is to be found in this portion; here is
light to inlighten the soul, and wisdom to counsel the soul, and power to
support the soul, and goodness to supply the soul; and mercy to pardon the
soul, and beauty to delight the soul, and glory to ravish the soul, and
fullness to fill the soul, etc. Health is not more suitable to the sick man,
nor wealth to the poor man, nor bread to the hungry man, nor drink to the
thirsty man, nor clothes to the naked man, nor balm to the wounded man, nor
ease to the tormented man, nor health to the diseased man, nor a pardon to the
condemned man, nor a guide to the blind man, etc. then this portion is suitable
to all the necessities of man; and this speaks out the excellency of this
portion above all other portions. Now there is no earthly portion that can suit
an immortal soul; he is a fool upon record that said, Soul, thou have goods
laid up for many years, Luke 12.18, 19, 20.
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. If the man, says Ambrose upon the
words, had had the soul of a Swine, what could he have said more? for those
things were more suitable to Swine than they were to an immortal soul: man's
soul is a spiritual and immortal substance, it is capable of union and communion
with God, it is capable of a choice enjoyment of God here, and of an eternal
fruition of God hereafter. A great shoe will not fit a little foot, nor a
great Sail a little Ship, nor a great Ring a little finger, no more will any
earthly portion suit an immortal soul. The soul is the breath of God, the
beauty of man, the wonder of Angels, and the envy of Devils, it is of an
Angelical nature, it is an heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a divine
offspring; so that nothing can suit the soul below God, nor nothing can
satisfy the soul without God: the soul is so high and so noble a piece that
all the riches of the East and West Indies, nor Rocks of Diamonds, nor
mountains of gold can fill it, or satisfy it, or suit it.

When a man is in prison, and condemned to die, if one should come to him, and
tell him, that there is such a friend or such a relation that has left him a
very fair estate, a brave Seat, etc. yet all this would not please him, nor joy
him, because it does not suit his present condition; O but now let a man bring
him his pardon sealed under his Princes hand, O how will this delight him and
joy him? and all because it suits him. And so tell a man that is ready to
starve, that such and such loves him, and that such and such intends well
toward him, etc. yet all this does not take him, it does not satisfy him, and
all because it does not suit him; O but now do but bring him food to eat, and
this will joy him and delight him, and all because it suits him, that is the
highest good that is the most suitable good to the soul, and such a good is
God; that is the most excellent portion that is the most suitable portion to
the soul, and such a portion is God. But

Eleventhly, As God is a suitable portion, so he is an incomprehensible
portion; no created understanding can comprehend what a portion God is: it is
true God is not incomprehensible, Psalm. 147.5. Job 26.14.
in regard of his own understanding, for he perfectly understands himself, and
comprehends himself, else he could not be God; but God is incomprehensible, in
regard of us, and the Angels, Aristotle that great Secretary of Nature being
not able to comprehend the reason of the Seas ebbing and flowing, cast himself
into it; O how much less able was he to comprehend God blessed for ever.
who are no ways able to comprehend infiniteness, 1 Kings 8.27. But will God
indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot
contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded? God is an infinite
being, and therefore he cannot be contained in any place, nor comprehended by
any created being; such multiplied phrases and Hebraisms as are here, as
heaven, and the heaven of heavens, do very emphatically set out the immensity
and incomprehensiblenesse of God, Job 37.23. Touching the Almighty we cannot
find him out; we are as well able to comprehend the Sea in a Cockle-shell, as
we are able to comprehend God; God is above all name, all notion, and all
comprehension. God is so incomprehensible, that you shall as soon tell the
stars of heaven, and number the sand of the Sea, and stop the Sun in his
course, Psalm. 145.3. His greatness is unsearchable
and raise the dead, and make a world, as you shall be able to comprehend the
infiniteness of Gods essence. The most perfect knowledge that we can have of
God is, that we cannot perfectly know him, because we do know him to be
infinitely and incomprehensibly perfect, Romans 11.33. O the depth both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! when men and Angels do search farthest into Gods perfection,
they do then most of all discover their own imperfection; for it is utterly
impossible for Angels or men by their most accurate disquisition to find out
the Almighty to perfection, Job 11.6, 7.
1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man
can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; here is a denial both of
the fact, and the possibility. It Is a good observation of Chrysostom on the
words, Diligentiae Pauli attend, non dicit lucem incomprehensibilem, etc.
Observe the diligence of Paul, If one man had all the reason, gifts, graces,
and excellencies that are in Angels and men, yet would he never be able to
comprehend an incomprehensible God.
he does not say a light incomprehensible, but a light inaccessible, which is
much more; for that which being sought and searched for, cannot be
comprehended, we say is incomprehensible; but that which suffers not by any
means the labor of searching after, and which no one can come near, that is
inaccessible. There is infinitely more in God than the tongues of men or Angels
can express: there is much in God beyond the apprehension and comprehension of
all created beings; the sum of all that Philosophers and Schoolmen have
attained to concerning this great Principle, amounts to no more than this, viz.
That men and Angels can never comprehend that perfection which dwells in God:
for the perfection of God is infinite, and therefore incomprehensible. God
(says Dionysius) is a super-substantial substance, an understanding not to be
understood, a word never to be spoken.

When one was ask't, what God was? he answered, that he must be God himself,
before he could know God fully.

When the Tyrant (Hiero) asked the Poet (Simonides) what God was? Simonides
apud Ciceronem, Lib. 1. de Not. Deorum.
he craved a day to study an answer; but the more he sought into the nature of
God, the more difficult he found it to express; the next day after being
questioned, he asked two days, and the third time he craved four, and so went
on, doubling the number; and being ask't, why he did so? he answered, that the
more he studied the nature of God, the less he was able to define what. God
was, he being so incomprehensible in his nature; the more this poor Heathen
inquired, the more he admired, and the less he understood.

'Twas a notable Observation of Chrysostom, who being very busy and studious
in searching into the nature of God, says, I am like a man digging in a deep
spring; I stand here, and the water rises upon me, and I stand there, and
still the water rises upon me. Indeed this is a knowledge that passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.

The Turks build their Moschies or Churches without any roof, because they hold
(as we do) that God is incomprehensible: God is a circle whose center is every
where, and whose circumference is no where, all which speaks out his
infiniteness and incomprehensiblenesse.

But now all earthly portions are easily apprehended and comprehended. A
portion in money, or plate, or goods, or lands, or jewels, is easily cast up,
and so many hundreds or thousands a year are quickly told; there are few except
it be children and fools but can readily give an account of all earthly
portions: the child's portion, and the wives portion, and the fervants portion,
and the soldiers portion, and the poor man's portion, and the rich man's portion
are talked on all the City over, and all the Town over, and all the Country
over, but God is such an incomprehensible portion, that there is not a man in
Town, City, or Country that is able to comprehend him, Prove. 3.15. But

Twelfthly, has no bottom, a Spring that can never be drawn dry, but
continues always full without augmentation or diminution: Joh. 4.14. But
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but
the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up
unto everlasting life. If grace in the soul be such a perpetual flowing
fountain, that it shall never be exhausted till grace be swallowed up in glory;
then certainly the God of grace is much more an inexhaustible Fountain that
can never be drawn dry. Angels, Saints, Col. 1.16, 17
and sinners have lived upon this portion almost this six thousand years, and
it is not in the least diminished. God has his City-house, and his
Countreyhouse, where millions have been kept at his table, and lived upon his
purse, his charge, even days without number, and yet God is not one penny the
poorer for all this. This portion is like the meal in the Barrel, and the oil
in the Cruse, which never failed: 1 Kings 17.14, 16. For thus says the Lord
God of Israel, the barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the Cruse of
oil fail, until the day that the Lord sends rain upon the Earth: And the
Barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the Cruse of oil fail, according to the
word of the Lord which he spoke by Elijah. God is such a portion as cannot be
wasted nor diminished; he is such a portion as can never fail: Should all
Christians now live to the age of the Patriarchs, who lived many hundred years,
and should they all live freely, and keep open house every day in the year, yet
at the end, not a dram, not a penny, no not a farthing of this portion will be
expended or diminished.

Though men have never so great a stock, yet if they still spend upon it they
will certainly consume it; O but God is such a stock as can never be spent, as
can never be consumed. If a sparrow should but fetch a drop of water out of the
Sea once a day, yea, once in a thousand years, yet in time it would be
exhausted; O but God is such a Sea, such an Ocean, that if every Angel in
heaven, and every Saint and sinner on earth should drink whole Rivers at a
draught, yet not one drop could be diminished: If a child should but take a
cockle-shell of water out of the Sea every day, the Sea would be really the
less, though not visibly the less, and in time it would be exhausted, and
drawn dry; but let all created beings be every day a drawing from God, yet they
shall never lessen him, they shall never draw him dry. The mothers breasts are
often drawn dry, but the more you draw at the breasts of God, the more the milk
of grace and comfort will flow in upon you: Isa. 66.10, 11. Rejoice ye with
Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her; rejoice for joy with
her, all ye that mourn for her: That ye may suck and be satisfied with the
breasts of her consolation, that you may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory. God keeps open house for all comers and goers, Psalm.
104.24.
for all created creatures both in heaven and earth; and though they are
perpetually a sucking at his breasts, yet the more they draw the more the
heavenly milk of divine joy, content, and satisfaction flows in abundantly upon
them: All creatures, both high and low, rich and poor, honorable and base,
noble and ignoble, bond and free, Jews and Gentiles, are all maintained upon
Gods own cost and charge, they are all fed at his Table, and maintained by what
comes out of his Treasury, his purse; and yet God is not a pin the poorer for
all this: It would break and beggar all the Princes on earth to keep but one
day the least part of that innumerable company that God feeds, and clothes, and
cherishes, and maintains every day upon the account of his own Revenue, which
is never the poorer for all the vast expenses that he is daily at. There is
still in God a fullness of abundance, and a sulnesse of redundance,
notwithstanding the vast sums that he has and daily does expend. It were
blasphemy to think that God should be a penny the poorer by all that he has
laid out for the maintenance of those millions of Angels and men that have had
their dependence upon him, from their first creation to this very day. Look, as
the Sun has never the less light for filling the Stars with light, and as the
Fountain has never the less water for filling the lesser Vessels with water
that are about it; so though God fills all the Vessels both of grace and glory
with his own fullness, yet he is never the less full himself; there is still
in God (plenitudo fontis) the fullness of a Fountain. Look, as the overflowing
Fountain pours out water abundantly, and yet after all it remains full; so
though the Lord be such an overflowing Fountain as that he fills all, yet still
he retains all fullness in himself.

I have read of a Spanish Ambassador, that coming to see the Treasury of Saint
Mark in Venice that is so much cried up in the world, he fell a groping at the
bottom of the Chests and Trunks to see whether they had any bottom; and being
asked the reason, why he did so? answered in this among other things, My
Masters Treasure differs from yours, and excells yours, in that his has no
bottom as yours have, alluding to the Mines in Mexico, Peru, and other parts
of the Western India. All men's Mints, Bags, Purses, and Coffers may be quickly
exhausted and drawn dry, but God is such an inexhaustible portion that he can
never be drawn dry: all Gods Treasures are bottomless, and all his Mints are
bottomless, and all his Bags are bottomless; millions of thousands in heaven
and earth seed every day upon him, and yet he seels it not, he is still a
giving, and yet his purse is never empty; he is still a filling all the Court
of heaven, and all the creatures on earth, and yet he is a Fountain that still
overflowes. There be them that say, that it is most certainly true of the Oil at
Rhemes, that though it be continually spent in the inauguration of their Kings
of France, yet it never wastes; but whatever truth is in this story, of this I
am most sure, that though all the creatures in both worlds live and spend
continually on Christ's stock, yet it never wastes.

But now all earthly portions are frequently exhausted and drawn dry; Luke 15.
the prodigal quickly spent his patrimony upon his harlots; and how many
Drunkards, Prove. 23.20, 21.
and Gluttons, and Wantons, and Gamesters, and Roysters, etc. do daily bring a
Noble to nine pence. Have thou entered into the Treasures of the snow, Vide Job
38.22.
(says God to Job:) Now, says Gregory, the treasures of the snow are worldly
riches which men rake together, even as children do snow, which the next shower
washes away, and leaves nothing in the room of it but dirt. And ah how many
Merchants, and Shopkeepers, and others in these breaking times, have found all
their riches and earthly portions to melt away as snow before the Sun? how many
of late have been very rich one week, and stripped of all the next, and set with
Job upon the dunghill? All earthly portions are like water in a Cistern that may
easily and quickly be drawn dry; but God is an inexhaustible portion that can
never be drawn dry; and this discovers the excellency of this portion above all
other portions. But

Thirteenthly, Psalm. 17.15.
Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup:
thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea,
I have a goodly heritage. 'Twas as well with him as his heart could wish. And
so in that Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee; or as some render it, Vide Jerome, Calvin,
Cajetan, Marlorat, Mollerius, etc.
I would I were in heaven with thee; or as others read the words, I have sought
none in heaven or earth besides thee; or as others, I desire none in heaven or
earth but thee; or, I affect none in heaven, nor none on earth like thee; I
love none in heaven, nor none on earth in comparison of thee; I esteem thee
instead of all other treasure, and above all other treasures that are in
heaven, or that are on earth. The holy Prophet had spiritual and sweet
communion with Christ to comfort and strengthen him, he had a guard of glorious
Angels to protect him and secure him, and he had assurance of heaven in his
bosom to joy and rejoice him; and yet 'twas none of these, nay, 'twas not all
these together that could satisfy him; 'twas only an infinite good, an
infinite God that could satisfy him; he very well knew that the substantials
of all true happiness and blessedness did lie in God, and his enjoyment of
God: 'Twas not his high dignities nor honors that could satisfy him, 'twas
not the strength, riches, security, prosperity, and outward glory of his
Kingdom that could satisfy him, 'twas not his delightful music, nor his
noble attendance, nor his well-furnished tables, nor his great victories, nor
his stately palaces, nor his pleasant gardens, nor his beautiful wise, nor his
lovely children that could satisfy him; all these without God could never
satisfy him, but God without all these was enough to quiet him, and satisfy
him. Joh. 14.8. Philip said unto him, Lord, show us the Father, and it
suffices us: a sight of God will satisfy a gracious soul more than all
worldly contentments and enjoyments; yea, one sight of God will satisfy a
Saint more than all the glory of heaven will do: God is the glory of all the
glory of heaven; heaven alone is not sufficient to content a gracious soul, but
God alone is sufficient to content and satisfy a gracious soul: God only is
that satisfying good that is able to fill, quiet, content, and satisfy an
immortal soul. Certainly, if there be enough in God to satisfy the spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23, 24, 25.
whose capacities are far greater than ours; and if there be enough in God to
satisfy the Angels, whose capacities are far above theirs; if there be enough
in God to satisfy Jesus Christ, whose capacity is unconceivable and
unexpressible; yea, if there be enough in God to satisfy himself, then
certainly there must needs be in God enough to satisfy the souls of his
people. If all fullness, and all goodness and infiniteness will satisfy the
soul, then God will: there is nothing beyond God imaginable, nor nothing beyond
God desirable, Ephesians. 3.2.
nor nothing beyond God delectable; and therefore the soul that enjoys him
cannot but be satisfied with him. God is a portion beyond all imagination, all
expectation, all apprehension, and all comparison; and therefore he that has
him cannot but sit down and say, I have enough, Genesis 33.11.
Psalm. 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied, as with Cheleb vade shen, Fat and
sat: So the Hebrew has it; and hereby is meant satiety of pleasures, etc.
marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: When I
remember thee on my bid, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. Marrow and
fatness cannot so satisfy the appetite, as God can satisfy a gracious soul;
yea, one smile from God, one glance of his countenance, one good word from
heaven, one report of love and grace will infinitely more satisfy an immortal
soul, than all the fat, and all the marrow, and all the dainties and delicates
of this world can satisfy the appetite of any mortal man: My soul shall be
satisfied with fatness and fatness; so the Hebrew has it, that is, my soul
shall be top-full of comfort, it shall be filled up to the brim with pleasure
and delight in the remembrance and enjoyment of God upon my bed, or upon my
beds, in the plural, as the Hebrew has it: David had many a hard bed, and many
a hard lodging, whilst he was in his wildernesse-condition; it oftentimes so
fell out that he had nothing but the bare ground for his bed, and the stones
for his pillows, and the hedges for his curtains, and the heavens for his
canopy; yet in this condition God was sweeter than marrow and fatness to him;
though his bed was never so hard, yet in God he had full satisfaction and
content: Jer. 31.14. My people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the
Lord. And my God shall supply all your need, Phil. 4.10.
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus, says Paul that great
Apostle of the Gentiles: the Greek word (...) signifies to fill up, 2 Kings 4.4.
even as he did the Widows Vessels, till they did overflow. God will fill up
all, he will make up all, he will supply all the wants and necessities of his
people. That water that can fill the Sea, can much more fill a cup; and that
Sun which can fill the world with light, can much more fill my house with
light: So that God that fills heaven and earth with his glory, can much more
fill my soul with his glory. To show what a satisfying portion God is, he is
set forth by all those things that may satisfy the heart of man, as by Bread,
Water, Wine, Milk, Honors, Riches, Raiment, Houses, Lands, Friends, Father,
Mother, Sister, Brother, Health, Wealth, Light, Life, etc. And if these things
will not satisfy, what will? Genesis 45.28.
It Is enough, says old Jacob, that Joseph is alive; so says a gracious soul,
It Is enough that God is my portion. A pardon cannot more satisfy a condemned
man, nor bread an hungry man, nor drink a thirsty man, nor clothes a naked
man, nor health a sick man, etc. than God does satisfy a gracious man. But

Now worldly portions can never satisfy the souls of men. Eccles. 5.10. Some
read the words thus. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver,
and he that loves it in the multitude of it, shall not have fruit.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase; this is also vanity. All the world cannot fill the
soul, nor all the creatures in the world cannot stock the soul with complete
satisfaction. As nothing can be the perfection of the soul, but he that made
it; so nothing can be the satisfaction of the soul, but he that made it: If a
man be hungry, silver cannot feed him; if naked, it cannot cloth him; if cold,
it cannot warm him; if sick, it cannot recover him; if wounded, it cannot heal
him; if weak, it cannot strengthen him; if fallen, it cannot raise him; if
wandering, it cannot reduce him; O how much less able is it then to satisfy
him! He that out of love to silver seeks after silver, shall love still to
seek it, but shall never be satisfied with it. A man shall as soon satisfy the
grave, and satisfy hell, and satisfy the stomach with wind, as he shall be
able to satisfy his soul with any earthly portion. All earthly portions are
dis-satisfying portions, they do but vex and fret, gaul and grieve, tear and
torment the fouls of men. The world is a circle, and the heart of man is a
triangle, and no triangle can fill a circle: Some good or other will be always
wanting to that man that has only outward good to live upon. Absalons beauty
could not satisfy him, If the whole world were changed into a globe of gold,
it could not sill one heart, it could not satisfy one immortal soul.
not Hamans honor could not satisfy him, nor Ahabs Kingdom could not
satisfy him, nor Balaams gold could not satisfy him, nor Ahitophels policy
could not satisfy him, nor the Scribes and Pharisees learning could not
satisfy them, nor Dives riches could not satisfy him, nor Alexanders
conquests could not satisfy him; for when (as he thought) he had conquered one
world, he sits down and wishes for another world to conquer; and Cyrus the
Persian King was wont to say, Did men but know the cares which he sustained
under his Imperial Crown, he thought no man would stoop to take it up. Gilimex,
King of the Vandals, when he was led in triumph by Bellisarius, cried out,
Vanity of vanity, all is vanity. Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany (whom
of all men the world judged most happy) cried out with detestation to all his
Honors, Riches, Pleasures, Trophies, Abite hinc, abite long, Get you hence,
let me hear no more of you: And it has been long since said of our King Henry
the second, He whom, alive, the world could scarce suffice,
When dead in eight foot earth contented lies.


By all these Instances, it is most evident, that no earthly portions can
satisfy the souls of men: Can a man fill up his chest with air? or can he fill
up the huge Ocean with a drop of water? or can a few drops of beer quench the
thirst of a man in a burning fever? or can the smell of meat, or the reaking
fume of a Ladle, or dreaming of a banquet satisfy an hungry stomach? No: no
more can any earthly portions fill or satisfy the heart of man. If emptiness
can fill the soul, if vanity can satisfy the soul, or if vexation can give
content to the soul, then may earthly portions satisfy the soul, but not till
then; when a man can gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, and turn
day into night, and winter into summer, then shall he find satisfaction in the
creatures, but not before: All earthly portions are weighed in the balance of
the Sanctuary, and they are found to be lighter than the dust of the balance;
and this will rather inflame the thirst, than quench it.

A man that has only the world for his portion is like to Noah's Dove out of
the Ark that was in continual motion, but could find no resting place; but a
man that has God for his portion is like the Dove returning and resting in the
Ark; the soul can never be at rest, till it comes to rest and center in God:
God himself is the souls only home; no good but the chiefest good can suffice
an immortal soul. Look, as God never rested till he had made man, so man can
never rest till he comes to enjoy God; the soul of man is of a very vast
capacity, and nothing can fill it to the brim, but he that is fullness it self:
it is the breast, and not the Baby nor the Rattle that will satisfy the hungry
child; and it is God, and not this or that creature that can satisfy the soul
of man. But

Fourteenthly, portion, a never failing portion, a lasting, yea, an everlasting
portion, Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength
(or the rock) of my heart, and my portion for ever. God is a Fountain which the
hottest Summer dries not, a bottomless treasure that can never be expended:
God ever was, and ever will be; he cannot borrow his being from any thing who
gives being and well-being to all things. Rev. 1.8.
God is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, he is yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever. God is the Almighty, which is, and which was, and which
is to come. Omnia tempora conjuncti de Deo dicta aeternitatem connotant.
All the differences of time are united by some to con-note the eternity of
God, in that Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am: and he said,
thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you:
Some translate this Text, according to the full scope of the Future amongst the
Hebrews, I am that I am, that I was, and that I will be; for the Future amongst
the Hebrews, points at all differences of time, past, present, and to come; but
others observing the strict and proper signification of the Future, translate
it thus, I will be that I will be. This Name of God imports two of Gods
incommunicable Attributes;

First, His Eternity, when he says, I will be.

Secondly, His Immutability, when he says, That I will be. The Rabbis upon
this Text express themselves after this manner, Vide Ainsw. and D. Ri^. on the
place. The Hebrew words in this Exodus 3. and their several significations do
well agree with the name Jehovah, which implies, that God here sending Moses,
is eternal in his being, saithful in his promises, and Almighty in the
performance thereof.
The blessed God said unto Moses, say unto them, I that have been, and I the
same now, and I the same for time to come, etc. but others more agreeable to
the Chaldee Paraphrase express themselves thus, I, he that is, and was, and
hereafter will be, has sent me unto you. But it is observable, that the Angel
of the waters unites all differences of time in that great and glorious
acknowledgment, Rev. 16.5. Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be, because thou have judged thus. God is a God of that infinite
excellency and glory, that it is utterly impossible for him to be better, or
other than he is. If God should in the least be alterable or mutable, he would
presently cease to be God. God is a God of that transcendent excellency, that
there can be nothing added to him, nor nothing subtracted from him: If you
add any thing to him, you deny him to be God; and if you take any thing from
him, you destroy his being, Jam. 1.17. Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God: And Mary has chosen the better part, which shall
never be taken from her: God is eternal, as neither being capable of a
beginning nor ending; and therefore the Egyptians used to signify God by a
circle: and the Persians thought that they honored God most, when going up to
the top of the highest Tower, they called him the circle of heaven; now you
know a circle has no end: And it was a custom among the Turks to go up every
morning to a high Tower, and to cry out, God always was, and always will be,
and so salute their Mahomet. Some things have a beginning, but no ending, as
Angels, and the souls of men; and some things have no beginning, and yet have
an end; as the Decrees of God in their final accomplishment; and some things
have both a beginning and an ending, as all sublunary things; but God has
neither beginning nor ending: All creatures have a lasting, Angels have an
outlasting, but God has an everlasting being, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory, for ever
and ever, Amen. God is without beginning and end, first and last, past and to
come, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of thy hands. He that made heaven and earth must
needs be before them, and therefore eternal; but this God did, ergo.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like
a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: But
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. Were there no other
Scripture to prove the eternity and immutability of God, this were enough.
Whatever changes may pass upon the heavens and the earth, yet God will always
remain unchangeable and unalterable. By what has been said, it is most evident
that God is an everlasting portion, that he is a never failing portion.

But now all earthly portions are very uncertain; now they are, and anon they
are not, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for
riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
heaven. Though the foolish world call riches substance, yet they have no solid
subsistence: All earthly portions are as transitory as a shadow, a ship, a
bubble, a bird, a dream, an arrow, a post that passes swiftly away. Riches
were never true to any that have trusted in them. In this Text Riches are said
not to be, because they do not continue to be; Crossus was so rich that he
maintained an Army with his own Revenues; yet he, his great army, with his son
and heir fell together, and so his great Estate fell to others.
they will not abide by a man, they will not long continue with a man, and
therefore they are as if they were not. All earthly things are vain and
transitory, they are rather shows and shadows than real things themselves; 1
Cor. 7.31. For the fashion of this world passes away: The Greek word (...)
signifies a Mathematical Figure, which is a mere notion, and nothing in
substance. All the glory of this world is rather a matter of fashion than of
substance, it is a body without a soul, it is a golden shell without a kernel,
it is a show without a substance; there is no firmness, there is no solidnesse,
there is no consistency, there is no constancy in any of the creatures. All the
pomp, and state, and glory of the world is but a mere piece of Pageantry, a
Mask, a Comedy, a Fantasy; Act. 25.23. And on the morrow when Agrippa was come
and Bernice with great pomp. The original words (...) signify great fantasy,
or vain show. The greatest glory and pomp of this world in the eye of God, in
the account of God, is but as a fantasy or a shadow. It was a custom in Rome,
that when the Emperor went by upon some great day in all his Imperial pomp,
there was an Officer appointed to burn flax before him, and to cry out, Sic
transit gloria mundi, so the glory of this world passes away: And this was
purposely done to put him in mind, that all his honor, pomp, glory, and
grandeur should soon pass and vanish away, as the flax did that he saw burnt
before his eyes.

That great Conqueror of the world, Alexander, Plutarch in the life of
Alexander, etc.
caused a Sword in the compass of a Wheel to be painted upon a Table, to show,
that what he had gotten by the sword was subject to be turned about by the
wheel of Fortune: and many great Conquerours, besides him, have found it so,
and many now alive have seen it so.

Look, as the Rainbow shows it self in all its dainty colors, and then
vanishes away; so does all worldly honors, riches, and preferments show
themselves, and then vanish away: and how many in our days have found it so?
When one was a commending the riches and wealth of Merchants; I do not love
that wealth, said an Heathen which hangs upon ropes, for if they break, the
Ship and all their wealth miscarries. Certainly within these few months the
miscarrying of several Ships has caused several Merchants sadly to miscarry. A
storm at Sea, a spark of fire, an unfaithful servant, a false oath, or a
treacherous friend, may quickly bring a man to sit with Job upon a dunghill.
Look, as the bird flies from tree to tree, and as the beggar goes from door to
door, and as the pilgrim travails from place to place, and as the Physician
walks from Patient to Patient; so all the riches, honors, and glory of this
world do either fly from man to man, or else walk from man to man. Who knows
not, that many times one is made honorable by another disgrace? another is
made full by another man's emptiness? and a third is made rich by another
poverty? how soon is the Courtiers glory eclipsed, if his Prince does but frown
upon him? and how soon does the Prince become a peasant, if God does but frown
upon him? Now one is exalted, and anon he is debased; now one is full, and anon
he is hungry; now one is clothed gloriously, and anon he is clothed with
rags; now one is at liberty, and anon he is under restraint; now a man has
many friends, and anon he has never a friend. There is nothing but vanity and
uncertainty in all earthly portions. But

Fifteenthly, and lastly,

1. If God be a present portion, a portion in hand, a portion in possession; and

2. If God be an immense portion, if he be the vastest, the largest, and the
greatest portion; and

3. If God be an all-sufficient portion; and

4. If God be the most absolute needful and necessary portion; and

5. If God be a pure and unmixed portion; and

6. If God be a glorious a happy, and a blessed portion; and

7. If God be a peculiar portion; and

8. If God be an universal portion; and

9. If God be a safe portion, a secure portion, a portion that none can rob or
wrong us of; and

10. If God be a suitable portion; and

11. If God be an incomprehensible portion; and

12. If God be an inexhaustible portion, a portion that can never be spent,
that can never be exhausted or drawn dry; and

13. If God be a soul-satisfying portion; and

14. If God be a permanent and an everlasting portion; then it must very
necessarily follow, that God is an incomparable portion: but such a portion God
is, as I have proved at large; and therefore beyond all dispute, God must needs
be an incomparable portion. Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. Happy is the man that finds
wisdom (that is, the Lord Jesus Christ) and the man that gets
understanding, for the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies,
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her. All the
Gold of Ophir, and all the silver of the Indies (which are but the guts and
garbidge of the earth) are nothing, yea less than nothing, compared with God.
God is a portion more precious than all those things which are esteemed most
precious. A man may desire, what not? he may desire that all the mountains in
the world may be turned into mountains of gold for his use, he may desire that
all the rocks in the world may be turned into the richest pearls for his use,
he may desire that all the treasure that is buried in the Sea may be brought
into his Treasuries, he may desire that all the Crowns and Scepters of all the
Princes and Emperors of the world may be pil'd up at his gate (as they were
once said to be at Alexanders) yet all these things are not comparable to a
Saints portion, yea, they are not to be named in that day, wherein the
excellency of a Saints portion is set forth. Horatius.
Horace writes of a precious stone that was more worth than twenty thousand
shekels; Plinius.
and Pliny valued the two precious pearls of Cleopatra at twelve hundred
thousand shekels; but what were these? and what are all other precious stones
in the world? but dung and dross in comparison of a Saints portion. Phil. 3.7,
8, 9.
I have read a story of a man, whom Chrysostom did feign to be in prison Oh,
says he, if I had but liberty, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh then, if
I had but for necessity, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh then, had I for
a little variety, I would desire no more, he had it: O then, had I any office,
were it the meanest, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh then, had I but a
Magistracy, though over one Town only, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh
then, were I a Prince, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh then, were I but a
King, I would desire no more, he had it; Oh then, were I but an Emperor, I
would desire no more, he had it; O then, were I but Emperor of the whole world,
I would then desire no more, he had it; and yet then he sits down with
Alexander, and weeps, that there are no more worlds for him to possess. Now
did any man enjoy what he is said to desire, it would be but a very mean
portion compared with God: we may truly say of all the honors, riches,
greatness, grandeur and glory of this world, compared with God, as Gideon
sometimes said of the Vintage of Abiezer, The gleanings of Ephraim are better
than the Vintage of Abiezer; Judge. 8.2.
so the very gleanings, yea, the smallest gatherings of God are far better, and
more excellent, and transcendent, they are more satisfying, more delighting,
more ravishing, more quieting, and more contenting than all earthly portions
are, or can be: What comparison is there between a drop of a bucket, and the
vast Ocean? between a weak drop, which recollecting all its force, yet has not
strength enough to fall, and the mighty waters? or what comparison is there
between the dust of the balance and the whole Earth? why, you will say, there
is no comparison between these things; and I will say, there is less between
all finite portions, and such an infinite portion as God is: For this is most
certain, that there must needs be always an infinite distance between what is
finite, and what is infinite; and such a portion God is. By all that has been
said, it is most evident that God is an incomparable portion.

But now all earthly portions are comparable portions; you may easily and
safely compare one earthly portion with another, one Princes Revenues may be
comparable to another, and one great man's Lordships may be comparable to
another, and one Merchants estate may be comparable to another, and one
Gentleman's lands may be comparable to another, and one wives portion may be
comparable to another, and one child's portion may be comparable to another,
etc. but God is an incomparable portion; there is no comparison to be made
between God and other portions. And thus I have in these fifteen particulars
fully discovered the excellency of the Saints portion above all other portions.

And therefore I shall now come to the second thing, and that is to show you
upon what grounds their title unto God as their portion is founded and
bottomed, and they are these that follow:

First, of God is the true ground and bottom of Gods bestowing of himself as a
portion upon his people; Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Ezekiel. 16.1. to the 15.
there was no loveliness nor comeliness in them that should move him to bestow
himself upon them; they had neither portion, nor proportion, and therefore
there was no cause in them why God should bestow himself as a portion upon
them. God, for the glory of his own free grace and love, has bestowed himself
as a portion upon those who have deserved to have their portion amongst Devils
and damned spirits, in those torments that are endless, easless, and
remediless. The Ethnicks feign, that their Gods and Goddesses loved some
certain Trees, for some lovely good that was in them; for Jupiter loved the Oak
for durance, and Neptune the Cedar for stature, and Apollo the Laurel for
greenness, and Venus the Poplar for whiteness, and Pallas the Vine for
fruitfulness; but what should move the God of Gods to love us, who were so
unworthy, so filthy, so empty, so beggarly, that were Trees indeed, but such as
Jude mentions, corrupt, fruitless, twice dead, Verse. 12.
and pluck 't up by the roots? The question may be resolved in three words,
Amat quia amat, he loves us, because he loves us: the root of all divine love
to us lies only in the bosom of God. But

Secondly, Ezekiel. 11.19 Heb. 8.10. to the end, etc.
In the Covenant of grace God has freely bestowed himself upon his people,
Jer. 32.38, 40. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God. And I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from
them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. The Covenant of grace is the great Chapter, it is the Magna
Charta of all a Saints spiritual privileges and immunities: now in this great
Charter the Lord has proclaimed himself to be his peoples God: Jer. 10.16. The
portion of Jacob is the former of all things, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. He
that is the former of all things, even the Lord of Hosts, is the portion of
Jacob, and he is Jacobs portion, by virtue of that Covenant of grace, which is
a free, a full, a rich, and an everlasting Covenant, a Covenant that he will
never break, nor alter, nor falsify, a Covenant that he has sworn to may
good, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together. Psalm.
89.34 Isa. 54.9, 10. Psalm. 111.5. Psalm. 89.35. Psalm. 105.9 Mic. 7. ult. Heb.
6.13. to the 19. Luke 1.73.
That Covenant of grace, whereby God gives himself to be his peoples God and
portion, he is bound to make good by his oath; and therefore certainly whoever
is forsworn, God will never be forsworn. The Egyptians (though Heathens) so
hated perjury, that if any man did but swear By the life of the King, and did
not perform his oath, that man was to die, and no gold was to redeem his life,
as Paulus Fagius observes in his Comment on Genesis. To think that God will
not make good that Covenant that he has bound himself by Oath to make good, is
blasphemy, yea, it is to debase him below the very Heathens. All Laws, both
divine and humane, have left no such bond of assurance to tie and fasten one to
another, as that of an Oath or Covenant; which as they are to be taken in
sincerity, so they are to be kept inviolably. Certainly, the Covenant and Oath
of the great God is not like a Cypsies knot that is fast or loose at pleasure:
Whoever breaks with him, yet he will be sure faithfully and inviolably to keep
his Covenant and his Oath with his. But

Thirdly, Their title to God, as their God and portion, Jer. 3.13, 14
is founded and bottomed upon that Marriage-union that is between God and his
people; Hosea 2.19, 20, 23. And I will burith thee unto me for ever, yea, I
will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness; and in mercies. I will betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and
thou shall know the Lord: And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will
have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; And I will say to them that
are not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.
This threefold repetition, I will betroth thee, I will betroth thee, I will
betroth thee, notes three things.

First, The certainty of their Marriage-union and communion with God.

Secondly, The excellency and dignity of their Marriage-union and communion
with God. And

Thirdly, The difficulty of believing their Marriage-union and communion with
God. There is nothing that Satan does so much envy and oppose, as he does the
souls Marriage-union and communion with God; and therefore God fetches it over
again, and again, and again, I will betroth thee unto thee, etc. And so in
that, Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful
in my God; for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has
covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself
with ornaments, What was said by one of the Rabbis concerning Methuselahs
wife, that she had nine husbands in one, is very applicable to the believer
that has God for his husband.
and as a bride adorneth her self with her jewels. And so, Chap. 62.5. For as a
young man marries a Virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee; and as a bridegroom
rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. I have read of
five sisters, of the same birth, pedigree, and race, whereof one was married to
a Knight, another to an Earl, a third to a Gentleman, a fourth to a mean man,
and the fifth to a filthy beggar; though they were all alike by birth and
descent, yet their difference did lie in their marriage; we are all alike by
creation, by the fall, by nature, and by the first birth, it is only our
Marriage-union and communion with God that differences us from others, and that
exalts and lifts us up above others. Look, as the husband is the wives by
marriage-union and communion, so God is the believers God and portion, by
virtue of that marriage-union and communion that is between God and the
believer. And let thus much suffice for the second thing.

I shall come now to the third thing, and that is, to make some improvement of
this blessed and glorious truth to our selves; and therefore,

Is it so, that God is the Saints portion, and that he is such an excellent,
and such a transcendent portion above all other portions, as has been fully
evidenced? Then,

First, worst of men. There is a great aptness in the best of men to envy
those earthly portions that God often bestows upon the worst of men. The lights
of the Sanctuary have burnt dim, stars of no small magnitude have twinkled, men
of eminent parts, famous in their generations for religion and piety, Diogenes
the Cynick Philosopher seeing Harpalus a vicious person still thriving in the
world, he was bold to say, that wicked Harpalus his living long in prosperity,
was an argument, that God has cast off his care of the world, that he cared
not which end went forward; and no wonder if this Heathen stumbled at the
prosperity of the wicked, when so many of the precious sons of Zion have
stumbled at that stumbling stone.
have staggered in their judgments, to see the flourishing estate of the
wicked; it made Job to complain, Job 21.7-16. and Chap. 24.12. and Jeremy to
expostulate with God, Chap. 12.1, 2. and David even to faint and sink, Ps. 73.
To see the prosperity of the ungodly, to see the wicked in wealth, and the
Saints in want; the wicked in their robes, and the Saints in their rags; the
wicked honored, and the Saints despised; the wicked exalted, and the Saints
debased, the wicked upon thrones, and Saints upon dunghils, is a sight that
has sadly put the best of men sometimes to it: But this is a temper of spirit
that does no ways become those that have God for their portion: and therefore
the Psalmist in the 37 Psalm cautions the Saints against it no less than
three several times, as you may see in v. 1.7, 8. There is nothing that does so
ill become a Saint that has God for his portion, as to be sick of the Frets;
and to prevent this mischief, this sickness, the precept is doubled, and
redoubled, Fret not, Fret not, Fret not. Though they that have sore eyes are
offended at bright clear lights, yet they that have God for their portion
should never fret or fume, storm or rage, because some are greater than they,
or richer than they, or higher than they, or more honorable than they, because
all all their prosperity is nothing but an unhappy happiness, it is nothing but
a banquet (like Hamans) before execution; and what man is there (that is in his
wits) that would envy a Malefactor who meets with honorable entertainment, as
he is going along to execution? All a wicked man's delicate meats, his fine
bits, and his murdering morsels are sawced, and all his pleasant and
delightful drinks are spiced with the wrath and displeasure of an angry God;
and why then should you fret and vex at their prosperity? what madness and
folly would it be in a man that is heir to many thousands per annum, to envy a
Stageplayer that is clothed in the habit of a King, but yet not heir to one
foot of land, no, nor worth one penny in all the world, and who at night must
put off his royal apparel, and the next day put on his beggarly habit? Oh Sirs,
it will be but a little little while before the great God will disrobe the
wicked of all their prosperity, felicity, and worldly glory, and cloth them
with the rags of shame, scorn, and contempt for ever; and therefore, Oh what
folly and madness would it be for those that are heirs of God, Romans 8.17.
and joint heirs with Christ of all the glory of heaven to envy the prosperity
of the wicked.

The prosperity of the wicked lays them open to the worst and greatest sins.

First, Jer. 5.7, 8.

Secondly, Psalm. 73.3-13. Deuteronomy. 32.15.

Thirdly, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Jezabel, Haman, and the Scribes and Phatisees.

Fourthly, of God, Job 21.5-16. Mal. 3.13, 14, 15. Jer. 22.21. When the
Protestants in France were in their prosperity, they slighted powerful
Preaching, etc. and began to affect a vain frothy way of preaching and living,
which ushered in the massacre upon them. Moulin hit it, when speaking of the
French Protestants, he said, when the Papists hurt us and persecute us for
reading the Scriptures, we burn with zeal to be reading of them; but now
persecution is over, our Bibles are like old Almanacks.

Fifthly, Amos 6.1-8. Pharaohs chief Butler was no sooner set down in the seat
of prosperity, but quite contrary to his promise, he easily forgets Joseph in
misery.

Sixthly, Deuteronomy. 32.15, 16, 17, 18. No sooner was Israel possessed of the good
land that flowed with milk and honey, etc. but they forsook the true worship of
God, and fell to the worshipping of Idols, for which at last the good land
spewed them out as a generation cursed and abhorred by God.

Seventhly, Matt. 24.37, 38, 39.

Eighthly, Hosea 2.6, 7, 8. and chap 4.6, 7, etc. Ah Sirs! who can seriously
consider of the dreadful sins that the prosperity of the wicked lays them open
to, and yet fret and vex at their prosperity?

Again, As their prosperity lays them open to the greatest sins, so their
prosperity lays them open to the greatest temptations, witness their tempting
of themselves, and their own lusts, and witness their temptings of others to
the worst of wickednesses and villainies, and witness their frequent tempting
and provoking of the great God to his own face, and witness their daily, yea,
their hourly tempting of Satan to tempt their own souls. Oh Sirs, as there is
no condition that lays persons open to such great transgressions as prosperity
does, so there is no condition that lays persons open to such horrid
temptations as prosperity does; and why then should Gods holy ones envy wicked
men's prosperity and worldly glory? etc.

Again, their prosperity, and worldly felicity and glory, is all the portion,
and all the heaven and happiness that ever they are like to have, Psalm. 17.14.
From men of the world, which have their portion in this life. Certainly, men
whose hearts are worldly, whose minds are worldly, whose spirits are worldly,
whose desires are worldly, whose hopes are worldly, and whose main ends are
worldly, have only the world for their portion; and what a pitiful perishing
portion is that? men that choose the world as their portion, and that delight in
the world as their portion, and that trust to the world as their portion, and
that in straits run to the world as their portion, and that take content and
satisfaction in the world as their portion; doubtless these have never known
what it is to have God for their portion. That Is a very heart-cutting and
soul-killing word that you have in that Matthew. 6.2. Verily, I say unto you,
that they have their reward. The Scribes and Pharisees proposed to themselves
the eyes of men, the praise of men, and the applause of men for a reward of
their alms, etc. and Christ tells them, that they have their reward; not Gods
reward, but theirs; that is, that reward that they had propounded to
themselves, as the prime and ultimate end of their actions; and doubtless that
word was a thunderbolt to Dives, Son, Luke 16.25
remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus his evil, etc. Wicked men have their best here, their worst is to come;
they have their comforts here, their torments are to come; they have their joys
here, their sorrows are to come; they have their heaven here, their hell is to
come. Gregory being advanced to great preferment, professed, that there was no
Scripture that struck so much terror and trembling into his heart, as that
Scripture did, Here you have your reward: Had wicked men but their eyes in
their heads, and a little understanding in their hearts, and life in their
consciences, they would quickly conclude, that it is hell on this side hell for
a man to have his portion in this world; and why then should you envy the
prosperity of the wicked.

Again, Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26. Prove. 3.33. Mal. 2.2.
All their prosperity is cursed unto them, as you may see by comparing the
Scriptures in the Margin together; all their comforts are cursed without doors,
and all their comforts are cursed within doors; there are snares on all their
tables, and poison in all their cups, and the plague in all their brave
clothes, etc. Dionysius the tyrant, to show Dimocles (one of his flatterers)
the felicity (or rather the infelicity) of a King attired him as a King, and
set him at the Table, served as a King, and whilst he was in his imperial robes
he caused a naked sword with the point downward to be hung just over his head
by a horse. hair, which made Dimocles to tremble, and to forbear both meat and
mirth: Vide Cic. Tusc. quaest.
Though the Feast was a royal Feast, and the Attendance royal Attendance, and
the Music royal Music, yet Dimocles for his life could not taste of any of
those varieties that were before him, nor take any comfort or contentment in
any other part of his royal entertainment, because of the sword, the sword that
hung but by a single hair over his head. Oh Sirs, a sword, a sharp sword, a
two-edged sword, a sword of displeasure, a sword of wrath, a sword of vengeance
hangs over the heads of every wicked person, when he is in his most prosperous
and flourishing condition; and had sinners but eyes to see this sword, it would
be as the handwriting upon the wall, it would cause their thoughts to be
troubled, and their countenances to be changed, and their joints to be loosed,
and their knees to be dashed one against another; and why then should
Christians fret and vex at the prosperity of the wicked?

Again, When wicked men are at the highest, then are they nearest their fall,
as you may see in that 37 Psalm. and that 73 Psalm. and in those great instances
of Pharaoh, Adoni-bezeck, Exodus 14. Judge. 1.6, 7 1 Kings 20 and chapter 22. 2 Kings
19 Esth. 6.4. Dan. 5.
Ben-hadad, Ahab, Sennacherib, Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and Herod,
etc. Look, as the Ship is soonest cast away, when she is top and top-gallant,
so when wicked men are top and topgallant, when they are at the height of all
their pomp, bravery, and worldly glory, then God usually tumbles them down into
the very gulf of misery; the great ones of the world have suddenly fallen from
their highest honors and dignities, and have been sorely and sadly exercised
with the greatest scorns and calamities: let me give you this in a few
remarkable instances.

Valerian the Roman Emperor fell, from being an Emperor to be a footstool to
Sapor the King of Persia, as often as he took horse.

Valens the Emperor (a furious Arrian) being wounded in a Fight with the
Goths, in his flight he betook himself to a poor cottage, wherein he was burnt
by the Goths.

Aurelianus the Roman Emperor brought Tetricus his opposite, and the noble
Queen Zenobia of Palmerina in triumph to Rome in golden chains.

Bajazet a proud Emperor of the Turks, being taken prisoner by Tamberlain, a
Tartarian Emperor, he bound him in chains of gold, and used him for a
footstool when he took horse; and when he eat meat, he made him gather crumbs
under his table, and cat them for his food.

Caesar having bathed his sword in the blood of the Senate, and his own
Contrymen, is after a while miserably murdered in the Senate by his own
friends Cassius and Brutus, to show, that they are but the scourges and rods of
the Almighty, which he will cast into the fire, as soon as he has done with
them.

The victorious Emperor Henry the fourth, who in 62 pitched battles, for the
most part, became victorious, fell to that poverty and misery before he died,
that he was forced to petition to be a Prebend in the Church of Spire to
maintain him in his old age, which the Bishop of that place denied him,
whereupon he brake forth into that speech of Job, Have pity upon me, O my
friends, for the hand of the Lord has touched me: He died of grief and want.

And Procopius reports of King Guillimer, who was sometimes a potent King of
the Vandals, that he was brought so low as to entreat his friend to send him a
Sponge, a Loaf of Bread, and an Harp; a Sponge to dry up his tears, a Loaf of
Bread to maintain his life, and an Harp to solace himself in his misery.

Dionysius, King of Sicily, was such a cruel tyrant, that his people banished
him; after his banishment he went to Corinth, where he lived a base and
contemptible life; at last he became a Schoolmaster; that so when he could no
longer tyrannize over men, he might over boys.

Great Pompey that used to boast that he could raise all Italy in arms with a
stamp of his foot, had not so much as room to be buried in.

And William the Conquerours Corpse lay three days unburied, his interment
being hindered by one that claimed the ground to be his.

And Pythias pined to death for want of bread, Turk. Hist. fol. 220, etc.
who once was able to entertain and maintain Xerxes mighty army.

And Philip de Comines reports of a Duke of Exeter, who though he had married
Edward the fourth's sister, yet he saw him in the Low Countries begging
barefoot.

And so Bellisarius, a most famous General, and the only man living in his
time for glorious victories, riches and renown, yet in his old age he had his
eyes put out by the Empress Theodora; and being led at last in a string he was
forced to cry out, Da^e panem Bellisario, etc. Give a crust to old blind
Bellisarius, whom virtue advanced, but envy has brought into this great
misery. By all these royal instances you see the truth of that which once a
Royal Slave hinted to Sesostris; the Story runs thus:

Sesostris having taken many of his Neighbour-Kings prisoners, be made them to
draw his Chariot by turns; now it so happened, that one of these royal slaves,
as he was drawing in the Chariot, had his eye almost continually fixed on the
wheels, which Sesostris observing, ask't him, why he looked so seriously upon
the wheels? he answered, that the falling of that spoke lowest which was even
now highest put him in mind of the instability of fortune; Sesostris duly
weighing the parable, would never after be drawn by his Royal Slaves any more.

By what has been said, it is most evident that when wicked men are highest,
they are nearest their fall; and that none fall so certainly and so suddenly,
and under such dreadful calamities and miseries as those that have been most
highly advanced in all worldly dignities and glories; and why then should any
fret or vex at their outward prosperity, or worldly felicity?

Again, God will bring them to an account for all those talents of power, of
honor, of riches, Matthew. 25.14-31.
of trust, of time, of interest that God has given them in the world; and the
more they have employed the liberality and bounty of God against God, or his
glory, or interest, or people, the shorter shall be their felicity, and the
more endless shall be their misery. The greatest account and the greatest
damnation commonly attends the great ones of the world. I have read of Philip
the third of Spain, whose life was free from gross evils, professing that he
would rather lose all his Kingdoms, than offend God willingly; yet being in
the agony of death, and considering more thoroughly of that account he was to
give to God, fear struck into him, and these words break from him, Oh would to
God I had never reigned, Oh that those years I have spent in my Kingdom, I had
lived a private life in the wilderness; Oh that I had lived a solitary life
with God; how much more confidently should I have gone to the Throne of God?
what does all my glory profit me now, but that I have so much the more torment
in my death, and the greater account to give up to God. I have read of a
Soldier, who being to die for taking a bunch of grapes contrary to his
Generals command; as he was going along to execution he went eating of his
grapes, whereupon one of his fellow soldiers rebuked him, saying, what are you
eating your grapes now you are going to execution? the poor fellow replied,
Prithee friend do not envy me my grapes, for I shall pay a dear price for them,
I shall lose my life for them; and so accordingly he did: So I say, Oh you that
have God for your portion, do not envy, do not fret and vex at the prosperity
of the wicked; for what though they have more than heart can wish, what though
they live in pleasure, and wallow in all carnal and sensual delights, etc. yet
they have a sad account to give up to God, and they shall pay dear at last for
all their worldly enjoyments; for without sound repentance on their sides, and
pardoning grace on Gods, they shall not only lose their lives, but they shall
also for ever lose their immortal souls; and therefore never fret at their
prosperity.

Oh Sirs, do not you remember that Lazarus did not fret nor fume because Dives
had robes for his rags, and delicates for his scraps? etc. for he very well
knew, that though he was sine dome, yet not sine domino; he had a guard of
glorious Angels to transport his holy, precious heaven-born soul into Abraham's
bosom; he knew that it was better to beg on earth, than to beg in hell: Oh
Sirs, what is darkness to light, earth to heaven, chafe to wheat, tin to
silver, dross to gold, or pibbles to pearls? no more are all earthly portions
to that God who is the Saints portion: and therefore let not the Saints that
have such a matchless portion envy the prosperity and felicity of wicked men.
It Is the justice of envy to kill and torment the envious; and therefore shun it
as you would poison in your meat, or a serpent in the way. A man were better
have a serpent tumbling up and down in his bowels, than to have envy a gnawing
in his soul. Envy is as pernicious a wickedness, as it is a foolish and a
groundless wickedness; envy is a scourge to scourge the soul, it is a serpent
to sting the soul, it is a poison to swell the soul, it is a Saw to saw the
soul, it is a moth that corrupts the soul, and it is a canker that eats up the
soul; and therefore fly from it, as you would fly from the most cruel and
destroying adversary. Oh Sirs, to be angry, because God is bountiful to others;
to frown, because God smiles upon others; to be bitter, because God is sweet in
his dealings with others; and to sigh, because God multiplies favors and
blessings upon others; what is this but to turn others good into our own hurt,
others glory and mercy into our own punishment and torment? and if this be not
to create a hell in our own hearts I am much mistaken. I shall conclude this
first Inference with the counsel of the Prophet in that 49. Psalm. 16, 17. v. Be
not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is
increased: For when he dies he shall carry nothing away, his glory shall not
descend after him. When the bodies of the wicked are rotting in their graves,
and their souls are roaring in hell, none of their worldly greatness, pomp,
state, glory, gallantry, riches, rents or revenues shall descend after them to
administer one drop of comfort to them; and therefore never envy their outward
prosperity or worldly glory, etc. But

Secondly, 1 Kings 17.12.
and a little oil in a Cruse. Oh Sirs, in having of God you have much, in
having of God you have enough, in having of God you have all; and why then
should you not sit down quiet with your present allowance? Certainly, if much
will not satisfy you, if enough will not satisfy you, if all will not
satisfic you, nothing will satisfy you, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be
without covetousness (or love of silver, as the Greek word signifies) and be
content with such things as you have, (or as the Greek has it, (...), be
content with present things) for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. There are five negatives in the Greek, I will not, not, not, not,
not leave thee, nor forsake thee; fully to assure, and fully to satisfy the
people of God that he will never forsake them, and that he will everlastingly
stick close to them: What does this unparalled gemination, I will never,
never, never, never, never, import but this, I will ever, ever, ever, yea and
for ever and ever take care of thee, and look after thee, and be mindful of
thee. Though they had changed their glory for contempt, their fine raiment for
sheepskins and goat skins, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
their silver for brass, their plenty for scarcity, their fullness for
emptiness, their stately houses for holes and caves, and dens of the earth,
yet they are to be contented and satisfied with present things, upon this very
ground, that God will always cleave to them, and that he will never turn his
back upon them. Heb. 10.34
The Hebrews had been stripped and plundered of all their goods that were good
for any thing, and yet they must be contented, they must sit down satisfied
with their hands upon their mouths, though all were gone. Though men cannot
bring their means to their minds, yet they must bring their minds to their
means, and then they will sit down in silence, though they have but a rag on
their backs, a penny in their purse, and a crust in their Cupboords, Nature is
content with a little, as not to starve, not to thirst, says Galen.
etc. O Sirs, a little will serve nature, less will serve grace, though
nothing will serve men's lusts; and why then should not Christians be contented
with a little. Oh friends, you have but a short journey to go, you have but a
little way home, and a little will serve to bear your charges till you come to
heaven, and therefore be contented with a little; to have more than will serve
to bring a man to his journeys end is but a burden; one staff is helpful to a
man in his journey, but a bundle is hurtful; and this doubtless Jacob well
understood, when he made that proposal in Genesis 28.20, 21. If God will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall the Lord be my God. Jacob does
not say, if God will give me delicates and junkets to eat, he shall be my God,
O no; but if he will give me but bread to eat, though it be never so course,
and never so black, and never so dry, he shall be my God: he does not say, If
God will give me so many hundreds or so many thousands a year, he shall be my
God, O no; but if he will give me bread to eat, he shall be my God; nor he does
not say, If God will give me so many hundred pounds in my purse, a comfortable
habitation, and a thriving trade, he shall be my God, O no; but if he will give
me bread to eat, he shall be my God; nor he does not say, If God will give me
costly apparel, or rich and royal raiment to put on, he shall be my God, O no;
but if God will give me raiment to put on, though it be never so mean and poor,
he shall be my God. If Jacob may but have a little bread to feed him, and a few
clothes to cover him, it is as much as he looks for. Look, as a wicked man in
the fullness of his sufficiency is in straits, Job. 20.22
as Job speaks; so a holy man in the fullness of his straits enjoys an
all sufficiency in God, as you may see in Jacob. O Christians, though you have
but little, yet you have the highest and the noblest title that can be to that
little that you do enjoy, for you hold all in capite, as the Apostle shows in
that large Charter of a Christian, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. which the wicked do
not. Now an hundred a year upon a good title is a better estate than a thousand
a year upon a cracked, crazy title; Saints have the best title under heaven for
all they enjoy, be it little or be it much; but all the titles that sinners
have to their earthly enjoyments are but crazy titles, yea in comparison of the
Saints titles they are no titles.

Again, That little that a Saint has, he has it from the special love and
favor of God, he has it from a reconciled God. Now a little from special love
is better than a great deal from a general providence; Prove. 15.17
a penny from a reconciled God is better than a pound from a bountiful God; a
shilling from God as a father is a better estate than an hundred from God as a
Creator. The kiss that a King gave to one in the story, was a greater gift
than the golden cup that he gave to another; Can. 1.2.
a little with the kisses of Gods mouth is better than all the gold of Ophir; a
drop of mercy from special love is better than a Sea of mercy from common
bounty. Look, as one draught of clear sweet Spring Water is more pleasing,
satisfying, and delightful to the pallat, than a Sea of brakish Salt Water: So
one draught out of the fountain of special grace is more pleasing, satisfying,
and delightful to a gracious soul, than a whole Sea of mercy from a spring of
common grace: and therefore do not wonder when you see a Christian sit down
contented with a little.

Again, That little that a Christian has shall be certainly blessed and
sanctified to him: 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. 1 Tit. 15. Jer. 32.41, etc.
Though thy mercies, O Christian, are never so few, and never so mean, yet they
shall assuredly be blessed unto thee; the Lord has not only promised that he
will bless thy blessings to thee, but he has also sworn by himself, that in
blessing he will bless thee; Genesis 22.16 17.
and how dare thou then, O Christian, to think that the great and faithful
God will be guilty of a lie, or that which is worse, of perjury. Now a little
blessed is better than a great deal cursed; Prove. 3.33. Mal. 2.2, 3.
a little blessed is better than a world enjoyed; a pound blessed is better than a
thousand cursed; a black crust blessed is better than a feast cursed; the gleanings
blessed are better than the whole Harvest cursed; a drop of mercy blessed, is better
than a Sea of mercy cursed; Lazarus crumbs blessed, was better than Dives his
delicates cursed; Jacobs little blessed unto him, Luke 16.
was better than Esaus great estate that was cursed unto him; It Is always
better to have scraps with a blessing, than to have Manna and Quails with a
curse; Psalm. 78.18-32.
a thin Table with a blessng is always better than a full Table with a snare;
a thread bare coat with a blessing is better than a purple Robe cursed; a Hole,
a Cave, a Den, a Barn, a Chimney-corner with a blessing, is better than
stately Palaces with a curse; a woollen cap blessed is better than a golden Crown
cursed; and it may be that Emperor understood as much, that said of his Crown
when he looked on it with tears, If you knew the cares that are under this
Crown you would never stoop to take it up. And therefore why should not a
Christian be contented with a little, seeing his little shall be blessed unto
him? Genesis 26.12
Isaac tils the ground, and sowes his seed, and God blesses him with an hundred
fold; and Cain tils the ground, Chapter 4.12.
and sowes his seed, but the earth is cursed to him, and commanded not to yield
to him his strength. Oh therefore never let a Christian murmur because he has
but a little, but rather let him be still a blessing of that God that has
blessed his little, and that does bless his little, and that will bless his
little to him.

Again, that little estate that a righteous man has is most commonly a more
lasting, Prove. 15.16 and chapter 16.8.
a more abiding, a more permanent, and a more enduring estate than the great
and large estates of the wicked are, Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous man
has, is better than the riches of many wicked. One old piece of Gold is worth
more than a thousand new Counters, and one box of pearls is more worth than
many loads of pibbles, and one hundred pounds a year for ever is better than
many hundreds in hand. It Is very observable, the Psalmist does not simply say,
the estate, but the rich estate; the riches not of one, or a few, but of many
wicked, are not comparable to that little that a righteous man has: From this
word Hamon comes the word Mammon, Luke 16.9.
the Hebrew word (...) Hamon, that is here rendered riches, signifies also a
multitude or an abundance, or store of riches; a little that a righteous man
has is better than the multitude of riches, or the abundance of riches, or the
store of riches that many wicked men have; and he gives you the reason of this
in the 17 v. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but he upholdeth (or
under-props) the righteous. By the arms of the wicked you are to understand
their strength, their valor, their power, their wit, their wealth, their
abundance, which is all the arms they have to support and bare up themselves in
the world with; Now these arms shall be broken and when they are broken, then,
even then, will God uphold the righteous, that is, God will be a continual
overflowing fountain of good to his righteous ones, so that they shall never
want, though all the springs of the wicked are dried up round about them.

Oh Sirs, there are so many mothes, and so many dangers, and so many crosses,
and so many losses, and so many curses that daily attends the great estates of
wicked men, that they are very rarely long-lived ah! how many in this great
City are there that have built their nests on high, and that have thought that
they had laid up riches for many years, and that have said in their hearts,
that their lands, and stocks, and trades, and houses, and pompous estates
should abide for ever, who are now broken in pieces like a potters vessel? ah!
how often does the pride, the oppression, the lying, the cheating, the
overreaching, the swearing, the cursing, the whoring, the covetousness, the
drunkenness, and the wantonness of the wicked cut the throat of all their
mercies? these are the wickednesses that as a fire burns up all their outward
enjoyments, and that turns their earthly paradise into a real hell; it is the
wickedness of the wicked that causes their prosperity to wither, and that
provokes God to turn their plenty into scarcity, their glory into contempt, and
their honor into shame; it is very observable that in the holy Scriptures the
prosperous estates of the wicked are frequently compared to things of an abrupt
existence, to a shadow which soon passes away, Job 14.2. Chapter 21.17, 18 Isa
29.5.
to chaff, which a puff, a blast of wind easily disperseth and scatters; to
grass, 2 Kings 19 26. Job 24.24. Chapter 15.33. and chapter 20.8.
to grass, which quickly withers before the Sun; to tops of corn, which in
an instant are cut off; to the unripe grape, which on a sudden drops down; yea,
to a dream in the night, and what is a dream, but a quick fancy and a momentary
vanity? All the riches that the wicked gain, either by their trades, or by
their friends, or by their great places, or by their high Offices, or by their
subtle contrivances, or by their sinful compliances; and all the honor they
gain in the Court, or in the Camp, or in the School, is but light and
inconstant, it is but like the crackling of thorns under a pot; they are fading
vanities, that commonly die before those that enjoy them are laid in the dust.

Oh therefore let all Christians be contented with their little, seeing that
their little shall outlast the large estates of wicked and ungodly men: A man
that has God for his portion can truly say that which no wicked man in the
world can say, viz. Psalm. 23.6.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The Psalmist does not say, that
goodness and mercy should follow him a day, or a few days, or many days, but
that goodness and mercy should follow him all the days of his life: the
Hebrew word Radaph, that is here rendered to follow, signifies to persecute;
says the Psalmist, goodness and mercy shall follow me, as the persecutor
follows him he persecutes, that is, it shall follow me frequently, it shall
follow me constantly, it shall follow me swiftly, it shall follow me earnestly,
it shall follow me unweariedly; the word signifies a studious, anxious,
careful, diligent following: it is a Metaphor that is taken from beasts and
birds of prey, that follow and fly after their prey with the greatest
cagernesse, closeness, and unweariednesse imaginable; Why thus should mercy
and loving kindness follow David all the days of his life; and if in a
temptation he should prove so weak, and so foolish, as to run from goodness
and mercy, yet goodness and mercy should follow him, like as the Sun going
down follows the passenger that goes Eastward with his warm beams.

Oh but now the mercies of the wicked are short-lived; Psalm. 37.35, 36, 37.
though the wicked flourish and spread themselves like a green bay tree one
day, yet they are cut down the next, and there is neither root nor branch to be
found, tale nor tidings to be heard of them, for in a moment they with all
their greatness, state, pomp, and glory, are utterly vanished and banished out
of the world. And so, Psalm. 34.10. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger,
but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Young lions are
lusty, strong, fierce, and active to seek their prey, and have it they will if
it be to be had; and yet for all that they shall lack and suffer hunger. By
young lions the learned understand,

First, All wicked Rulers, Prove. 28.15 Ezekiel. 32.2.
men that are in the highest places and Authority, as the Lion is the King of
beasts.

Secondly, By Lions they understand all cruel oppressors that are still
oppressing and grinding of the faces of the poor, Prove. 30.30. rich cormorants
(as the Septuagint renders it) who live on the spoil of the poor, and are never
satisfied.

Thirdly, By Lions they understand the Tyrants and the mighty Nimrods of the
world, which are sometimes called Lions, Jer. 2.15. 1 Chronicles. 11.22. Nahum 2.13.

And lastly, By Lions they understand all the crafty and subtle Politicians of
the earth, Ezekiel. 38.13. The Lion lurks very craftily and secretly for his prey.
The sum of all is this, That wicked men that are in the highest authority,
and that great Oppressors, cruel Tyrants, and crafty Politicians shall be
impoverished, and brought to penury, beggary, and misery. And this we have
often seen verified before our eyes.

Oh Christian! what though thou have but a little of this world, yet the God of
all mercies, and all the mercies of God, the God of all comforts, and all the
comforts of God are thine; and what would thou have more? In God is
fullness, all fullness, infinite fullness; and if this, with a little of the
world, will not satisfy thee, I know not what will: If a God for thy portion
will not content thee, all the world will never content thee: Shall Diogenes (a
Heathen) be more content with his Tub to shelter him, and with his dish to
drink in, than Alexander was with all his conquests; and shall not a Christian
sit down contented and satisfied in the enjoyment of God for his portion,
though he has but a Tub to shelter him, Bread to feed him, and a dish of water
to refresh him. I shall conclude this Head with a weighty saying of Cato's,
Aulus Gellius.
Si quid est quo utar utor, si non scio quis sum, mihi vitio vertunt, quia
multis egeo, and ego illis, quia nequeunt egere. I have neither house, nor
plate, nor garments of price in my hands; what I have I can use, if not, I can
want it: some blame me, because I want many things, and I blame them, because
they cannot want. Oh let not nature do more than grace; Oh let not this Heathen
put Christians to a blush! But

Thirdly, Psalm. 8.4, 5.
Balaam himself being Judge, Number. 23.5-11. A man that has God for his portion
is honorable even in rags, he has some beams, Psalm. 16.3.
some rays of the majesty and glory of God, stamped upon his soul, and shining
upon his face, and glittering in his life; and he that is so blind as not to
behold this, is worse than Balaam the witch. Though the blind Jews could see no
form nor comeliness nor beauty in Christ, Isa. 53.2.
that they should desire him, yet the wise men that came from the East could
see his Divinity sparkling in the midst of the straw, they could see an
heavenly majesty and glory upon him when he lay among the beasts, Luke 2.7.
Matthew. 2.11
when he lay in a manger, witness their tedious journey to find him, and
witness their worshipping of him, and witness those rich and royal presents
that they brought unto him: So though the blind sots of the world can see no
loveliness, nor comeliness, no beauty nor glory in the Saints, or upon the
Saints, that should render them amiable and desirable in their eyes, yet God,
and Christ, and Angels, and those that are wise in heart, and wise to
salvation, can see a great deal of divine beauty, majesty, and glory upon all
those that have God for their portion. There is no happiness to that of having
God for a man's portion, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a
case, (but give me that word again) yea, happy is that people whose God is the
Lord. He that has not God for his portion can never be happy, and he that
enjoys God for his portion can never be miserable. Augustine speaking of one,
who passing by a stately house which had fair lands about it, and asking
another whom be met, to whom that house and land belonged? he answered, to such
an one; Oh, says he, that is a happy man indeed: No, says the other, not so
happy as you think, for it is no such happiness to have that house and land;
but he is happy indeed that has the Lord for his God, for that is a privilege
that exceeds all things whatsoever; for (says he) he that has honors and
riches may go to hell for all them, but he that has God to be his God, is sure
to be everlastingly happy. According as a man's portion is, so is he; now if God
be a man's portion, who is the spring, the fountain, the top of all excellency
and glory, then certainly that man must needs be an excellent man that has God
for his portion: Prove. 12.26. A man that has God for his portion does as much
excel and outshine such as have only Mammon for their portion, as the Sun
excells and out-shines the Stars.
and upon this score it is that the righteous man is more excellent than his
neighbor: let the righteous man's neighbor be never so great, and never so
rich, and never so mighty, and never so noble, yet if he has not God for his
portion, the righteous man is more excellent than he; and the reason is
evident, because he has that God for his portion that is most ominent and
excellent. Oh Sirs, if God be most excellent, if God be alone excellent, then
they must needs be most excellent that have God for their portion. It Is very
observable, that according to the excellency of God the excellency of the
Saints is in some proportion hinted at in Scripture; as in that, Deuteronomy. 33.26,
29. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun: and presently it follows, Happy
art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee? or, Oh the happinesses of thee, Oh
Israel, Oh the multiplied happiness, the heaped up happiness that attends
Israel: the Saints that have God for their portion are the worlds Paragons;
Heb. 11.
they are worthies of whom this world is not worthy; they are such great, such
noble, such worthy worthies, that this world is not worthy to think on them, to
look on them, to wait on them, or to enjoy their company; one Saint that has
God for his portion, is more worth than all the millions of sinners in the
world that have not God for their portion. God delights to reflect his glory
upon his Saints; for as there are none like to God, so there are none like to
the people of God: Look, as God is a nonesuch, so his people are a nonesuch;
and so in that, 2 Samuel 7.22, 23. Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God; for
there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to
all that we have heard with our ears: and what one nation in the earth is like
thy people? Look, as the excellency of God rises, so in a proportion the
excellency of the Saints rises; and look, as there are no gods in all the world
that are so excellent as God is, so there are no people in all the world that
are so excellent as the people of God are. Every one that has God for his
portion resembles the child of a King, Judge. 8.18.
as Zeba and Zalmunna said to Gideon of his brethren. If you look upon their
divine and heavenly original, you shall find that they are born of the
blood royal, and that they are his sons who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; yea, all the Saints that have God for their portion are Kings, Rev.
17.14. Rev. 5.10. Dan. 7.27. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
Rev. 1.6. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: They
have the power, sovereignty, and authority of Kings, Psalm. 34.14. Heb. 1, ult.
Psalm. 45.13. 1 Cor. 1.30.
they are privileged as Kings, they are guarded as Kings, they are adorned as
Kings, they are entertained as Kings, they feed as Kings, they feed high, they
live upon God and Christ, and all the glory of heaven, and they are clothed as
Kings, they are clothed with Christ's righteousness, and with the garments of
joy and gladness; Kings have great alliance, and so have the Saints that have
God for their portion; Kings have a very great influence, and so have they that
have God for their portion; A man in rags that has God for his portion, is a
more honorable person than the greatest Monarch on earth that has only the
world for his portion. I have read of Alexander the great, and of Pompey the
great, and of Charles the great, and of Abner the great, and of Herod the
great, but what were all these great men, but Grass-hoppers to the Saints that
have God for their portion? Men that have had God for their portion, As you may
see in the 10. and 11. Chap. of the Hebrews.
have been very famous, illustrious, and glorious, when they have been
friendlesse, and house-lesse, and penniless; yea, when they have been under the
Swords, and Sawes, and Harrowes of persecution. When Maximian the tyrant had
plucked out one of Paphnutius the Confessors eyes, that good Emperor
Constantine saw such a luster, beauty, and glory upon Paphnutius that he fell
upon him, and kissed him, and he kissed that very hole most, wherein one of the
Confessors eyes had been, as being most ravished and delighted with that hole.
Prove. 10.7. Psalm. 112.9.
His name that has God for his portion shall live, when the name of the wicked
shall rot; his name shall be written in golden characters upon Marble, when the
name of the wicked shall be written in the dust.

The blind besotted world are sadly out, who are ready to set the Crown of
Honor and Happiness upon any heads, rather than upon theirs that have God for
their portion. Look, 1 Samuel 16.6-12.
as Samuel beholding the beauty and stature of Eliab, would needs have him
anointed, and the Crown set upon his head, when the Crown was designed for
David at the Sheepfold; so vain men are very apt to set the Crown of
happiness upon their heads, who have the greatest share in this world, when as
the Crown of happiness and blessedness is only to be set on their heads that
have God for their portion. What the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's servants,
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand continually before
thee, 1 Kings 10.8.
and that hear thy wisdom, is here very applicable to the Saints; Happy,
happy, yea thrice happy are those precious sons and daughters of Zion that have
God for their portion. A man that has God for his portion shall live happily,
and die happily, and after death he shall remain happy to all eternity, and
therefore we may well cry out, Oh the happiness and blessedness of that man
that has God for his portion* But

Fourthly, Prove. 23.5.
thou may lay thy hand upon an earthly portion, but thou must never set thy
heart upon an earthly portion, Psalm. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not thy
heart upon them. The Hebrews put the heart for the thoughts, affections, love,
desire, joy, hope, confidence, etc. If riches increase, O set not thy thoughts
upon them; If riches increast, O set not thy affections upon them; If riches
increase, O set not thy love upon them, set not thy desires upon them, set not
thy joy and delight upon them, nor never place thy hope or confidence in them.
O what a shame and dishonor would it be to see men of great estates to rake in
dunghils, and to sweep Channels, and to carry Tankards of water, and to cry
Trifles up and down the streets! and is it not a greater shame, a greater
dishonor, to see those that have the great God for their portion, to set their
hearts and affections upon a little white and yellow clay? 'Twas a generous
speech of that Heathen, Themistocles, who seeing something glister like a pearl
in the dark, scorned to stoop for it himself, but bid another stoop, saying,
Stoop thou, for thou art not Themistocles. O it is below a generous Christian, a
gracious Christian, a noble Christian, that has God for his portion, to stoop
to the things of this world: a true bred Christian will set his feet upon those
very things that the men of the world set their hearts; Rev. 12.1. And there
appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve stars. The Church is
compared to a woman, for her weakness, for her lovingnesse, for her
comeliness, and for her fruitfulness; and being clothed with the Sun of
righteousness, she has the Moon, that is, the World, under her feet; the
Church treads under her feet all temporary and transltory things, which are as
changeable as the Moon; she treads upon all worldly and carnal enjoyments and
contentments as things below her, as things not worthy of her: What vanity is
it for a great man to set his heart on birds-nests and paper-kites that boys
make fly in the air? and as great, yea a greater vanity it is for the Saints
that have God for their portion, to set their hearts upon the poor little low
things of this world. It Is not for you to be a fishing for Gudgeons, but for
Towns, Forts, and Castles, said Cleopater to Mark Anthony; so say I, it is not
for you that have God for your portion to be a fishing for the Honors, Riches,
and Preferments of the world; but for more grace, more holiness, more communion
with God, more power against corruptions, more strength to withstand
temptations, more abilities to bear afflictions, more sense of divine love, and
more assurance of interest in Christ, and in all that glory and happiness that
comes by Christ. When Alexander heard of the riches of India, he regarded not
the Kingdom of Macedonia, but gave away his gold; and when he was ask't what
he kept for himself? he answered, Spem majorum and meliorum, the hope of better
and greater things. O Sirs, when you look upon those riches of grace, those
riches of glory, those riches of justification, those riches of sanctification,
and those riches of consolation that are in that God that is your portion; how
should you dis-regard, how should you despise, how should you scorn the great
things, and the gay things of the world? 'Twas a notable speech of Erasmus, if
his wit were not too quick for his conscience; I desire (said he) neither
wealth nor honor, no more than a feeble horse does an heavy cloak-bag. O
Christians, you have many thousand excellencies in God to set your affections
upon, and you have many thousand excellencies in Christ to set your affections
upon, and you have many thousand excellencies in the Spirit to set your
affections upon, and you have many thousand excellencies in the Covenant to set
your affections upon, and you have many thousand excellencies in the Gospel to
set your affections upon, and you have many thousand excellencies in the
Ordinances to set your affections upon, and you have many thousand excellencies
in promises to set your affections upon, and you have many thousand
excellencies in prophecies to set your affections upon, and you have many
thousand excellencies in rare providence to set your affections upon, and you
have many thousand excellencies in the Saints to set your affections upon; and
therefore, for shame, set not your affections upon things below, set not your
hearts upon things that perish, Coloss. 3.1. A man can never come to set his
heart upon any earthly portion, but that God will either imbitter it, or lessen
it, or cloud it, or wholly strip him of it; and therefore set loose, I say
again, set loose in your affections to all worldly enjoyments. But

Fisthly, Acts 5. Romans 5.2, 3, 4.
and troubles. With what a Roman spirit do many vain men of great Estates bear
up under great losses and crosses; and shall not grace do more than nature?
shall not the Spirit of God do more than a Roman spirit? O Sirs, how can you
look upon God as your portion, and not bear up bravely under any worldly loss?
Heb. 10.34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better,
and an enduring substance. They had God for their portion, and the joy of the
Lord was their strength, and therefore they could rejoice in whatever damage
came upon them by the hand of violence. 1 Samuel 30.6
And so David could comfort himself in his God, and encourage himself in his
God, when Ziklag was burned, his wives and children carried captive, and the
people in a readiness to stone him; Better is that hell on earth which makes
way for heaven, than that heaven on earth which makes way for hel^.
now all was gone, he looks up to God as his portion, and so he bears up
bravely and cheerfully in the midst of all extremity of misery. And so Habakkuk
was a man of the same noble temper, as you may see in that Hab. 3.17, 18.
Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines,
the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls;
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Although
the Fig Tree shall not blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I, but that is
nothing to rejoice in the Lord as long as there is fruit in the vines; I, but
(says he) though there be no fruit in the vines, yet I will rejoice in the
Lord: I, but that is nothing to rejoice in the Lord so long as the labor of the
olive does not fail; I, but (says he) though the labor of the olive shall
fail, yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I, but that is nothing to rejoice in the
Lord so long as the fields do yield their meat; I, but (says he) though the
fields shall yield no meat, yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I, but that is
nothing to rejoice in the Lord so long as the flock is not cut off from the
fold; I, but (says he) though the flock shall be cut off from the fold, yet I
will rejoice in the Lord: I, but that is nothing to rejoice in the Lord so long
as there be Herd in the stalls; I, but (says he) though there be no Herd in
the stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation.
Habakkuk could rejoice in the Lord, and joy in that God that was his portion,
not only when all delightful comforts and contentments should fail, but also
when all necessary comforts and contentments should fail; Habakkuk was a man of
a raised spirit, he knew that he had that God for his portion that did contain
in himself all comforts and contentments, and that could easily make up the
want of any comfort or contentment, and that would certainly lie himself in the
room of every comfort and contentment, that either his children should need or
desire; and in the power of this faith he rejoices and triumphs in a day of
thick darkness and gloominess. 1 Samuel 1.5, 18. But unto Hannah he gave a
worthy portion, for he loved Hannah, and her countenance was no more sad. O my
brethren, it does no ways become those that have God for their portion to walk
up and down the world with clouded countenances, with saded countenances, or
with dejected countenances, etc. and therefore under all your crosses and
losses wipe your eyes, and walk up and down with pleasant countenances, with
cheerful countenances, and with smiling countenances, and this will be an
honor to God, and an honor to religion, and an honor to profession, and an
honor to that Saintship that is too much slighted and scorned in the world.

Indeed when wicked men are exercised with crosses and losses, it is no wonder
to see them take on like mad men, to see them take on bitterly like Micah, when
he cried out, Judge. 18.23, 24.
They have taken away my gods, and what have I more? and what is this that ye
say unto me, what aileth thee? Wicked men's bags and goods are their gods, they
are their portion, they are their all, and when these are gone, all is gone
with them; when these are taken away, all is taken away with them; and
therefore it is no wonder to hear them cry out, Undone, undone, and to see them
sit down and weep, as if they were resolved to drown themselves in their own
tears: But you that have God for your portion you have such a portion that
shall never be taken from you. As Christ told Mary, Luke 10.42.
Thou have chosen the better part that shall never be taken from thee: and
therefore it highly concerns you to bear up bravely, as well when you have but
little, as when you have much; and as well when you have nothing, as when you
have every thing: You shall be sure to enjoy all in God, and God in all; and
what would you have more? Seneca once told a Courtier that had lost his son,
that he had no cause to mourn, either for that or ought else, because Caesar
was his friend: O then, what little cause have the Saints to mourn for this or
that loss, considering that God is their friend, yea, which is more, that God
is their portion. I have read of a company of poor Christians, who being
banished into some remote parts; and one standing by, seeing them pass along,
said, that it was a very sad condition that those poor people were in, to be
thus hurried from the society of men, and to be made companions with the beasts
of the field; true, said another, it were a sad condition indeed, if they were
carried to a place where they should not find their God; but let them be of
good cheer, for God goes along with them, and will follow them with the
comforts of his grace wheresoever they go. Would it not make a man either sigh
or laugh to see a man lament and take on bitterly for the loss of his
shooe-strings, when his purse is safe; or for the loss of a little lumber, when
all his goods are safe; or for the burning of a Pig-sty, when his dwelling
house is safe; or for the loss of his scabbard, when his life is safe? and why
then should a Christian lament and take on for the loss of this or that, so
long as his God is safe, and his portion is safe? But

Sixthly, Ahab, 1 Kings 21.
who had a whole Kingdom at his devotion, to possess himself of poor Naboths
vineyard by false swearing, hypocrisy, treachery, cruelty, and blood? but
certainly, it is a far greater baseness and wickedness in those that have God
for their portion (or at least pretend to have God for their portion) to be a
sharking, and a shifting, and a complying with the lusts of men, and with the
abominations of the times, and all to hold what they have, or else to raise
themselves, and greaten themselves, and enrich themselves by others ruin;
these men might do well to make that, Jer. 17.11. their daily companion; As the
Partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches,
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool. The crafty Fox in the Fable hugged himself to think how he had
cozened the Crow of his Breaksast; but when he had eaten it, and found himself
poisoned with it, he wished that he had never meddled with it. O Sirs, there is
a day a coming, wherein men shall wish that they had never labored to sin
themselves into honors, riches, preferments, high offices, and high places,
when God shall let some scarding drops of his wrath to fall upon their spirits
who have sold all Christ's and Christians concernments and their own
consciences, to gain riches and high offices; how will they curse the day
wherein they were born, and be ready by the knife or the halter to put an end
to their most wretched days? O what a sad and lamentable thing would it be to
see men worth many thousands a year, a purloining from others, or a defrauding,
cheating, or overreaching of others? but it is a far more sad and lamentable
thing to see men who pretend to have God for their portion, to act all this,
and more than this, and all to lay up an earthly portion for themselves and
others: How many be there in these days who pretend very high toward God, and
yet sell the righteous for silver, Amos 2.6.
and the poor for a pair of shoes, Ezekiel. 13.19 1 Samuel 2. ult.
yea, that pollute the Name of God, the worship of God, and that slay the souls
of men for handfuls of barley, and pieces of bread, and that will say any
thing, or swear any thing, or bow, or crouch to any thing for a piece of silver
and a morsel of bread, or to be put into one of the Priests Offices? O
Christian, thou have all honors and riches, and preferments in that God that
is thy portion; and why then should thou go about to sin thy self into the
enjoyment of those things which thou have already in thy God? Have thou forgot
that Solomon got more hurt by his wealth, then ever he got good by his wisdom?
and that David was best in a wilderness, and that our stomachs are usually
worst in Summer, and that the Moon is furthest from the Sun, when it is fullest
of light, and that all that a man gets by breaking with God and his conscience,
he may put in his eye, and that the coal that the Eagle carried from her
sacrifice to her nest set all on fire? have you forgotten what is said of
Abraham in that, Genesis 13.2. viz. That he was very rich in Cattle, in silver,
and in gold? The Hebrew word Cabbedh, that is here rendered rich, signifies
heavy, to show that riches are a very heavy burden, and oftentimes an
hinderance in the way to heaven. O! how vain, how uncertain, how vexing, and
how dividing are the great things of the world? how unfit do they make many men
to live, and how unwilling do they make many men to die? O what is gold in the
purse, when there is guilt upon the conscience? what are full bags, when sin
and wrath are at the bottom of them? O Sirs, you have an infinite fullness in
that God that is your portion, and that fills all in all; and why then should
you break the hedge to gain the world? But

Seventhly, 1 Cor. 1 31.
O then let them glory in their portion, let them rejoice and delight
themselves in their portion; man is a creature very apt and prone to glory in
earthly portions, when he should be a glorying in the Lord; Jer. 9.23, 24. Thus
says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me; that
I am the Lord which exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in
the earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord; Isa. 41.16. Thou
shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall glory in the holy one of Israel; and Chap.
45.25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.
Oh how should the Saints that have God for their portion, make their boast of
their God, and rejoice in their God, and glory in their God! Shall the men of
the world glory in an earthly portion, and shall not a Saint glory in his
heavenly portion? Shall they glory in a portion that they have only in hope,
and shall not a Christian glory in that portion that he has already in hand?
Shall they glory in a portion that they have only in reversion, and shall not a
Saint glory in that portion that he has in present possession? Shall they
glory in their hundreds and thousands a year, and shall not a Christian glory
in that God that fills heaven and earth with his glory? In all the Scriptures
there is no one duty more pressed, Compare these Scriptures together, Phil. 3.1.
Chapter 4 4. Ezekiel. 10.7. Joel 2.23. Psalm. 33.1. Psalm. 79.12. Ps. 149.1, 2.
than this of rejoicing in God; and indeed if you consider God as a Saints
portion, there is every thing in God that may encourage the soul to rejoice in
him; and there is nothing in God that may in the least discourage the soul from
rejoicing and glorying in him. O Christians, the joy of the Lord is your
strength, Neh. 8.10. it is your doing strength, and your bearing strength, and
your suffering strength, and your prevailing strength; it is your strength to
work for God, and it is your strength to wait on God, and it is your strength to
exalt and lift up God, and it is your strength to walk with God, it is your
strength to live, and your strength to die, and therefore be sure to keep up
your joy in God. It Is one of the saddest sights in all the world to see a man
that has God for his portion, with Cain, to walk up and down this world with a
dejected countenance. 'Twas holy joy and cheerfulness that made the faces of
several Martyrs to shine as if they had been the faces of Angels. One observes
of Chrispina, that she was cheerful when she was apprehended, August. in Psalm.
137.
and joyful when she was led to the Judge, and merry when she was sent to
prison, and so she was when bound, and when lift up in a Cage, and when
examined, and when condemned. O Christians, how can you number up the several
souls that you deject, the foul mouths that you open, and the bad reports that
you bring upon the Lord and his ways by your sad dejected and uncomfortable
walking. It is very observable that the Lord takes it so very unkindly at his
peoples hands, when they go sighing, lamenting, and mourning up and down, when
as they should be a rejoicing and a delighting of themselves in him and his
goodness, that he threatens to pursue them to the death with all manner of
calamities and miseries upon that very score, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou
servest not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart, for
the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou serve thine enemies which the
Lord shall sond against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and
in want of all things; and he shall put a yoke of Iron upon thy neok until he
have destroyed thee. But

Eighthly, Psalm. 23.5, 6.
David tells you that his cup run over; the words are an allusion to the Hebrew
Feasts; David's table was richly and nobly spread, both in sight and spite of
all his enemies. In one God is every good; and what can he want that enjoyes
that God? God is a bundle of all goodness and sweetness. And look as God is
the best God, so he is the greatest and the fullest good, he can as easily fill
the most capacious souls up to the very brim with all inward and outward
excellencies and mercies, as Christ did once fill those water-pots of Gallilee
up to the very brim with wine. John 2.
If God has enough in himself for himself, then certainly he has enough in
himself for us; that water that can fill the Sea, can much more easily fill my
cup or my pot. Jer. 31.14.
My people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the Lord: And I will make
an everlasting Covenant with them, Chapter 32, 40, 41.
that I will not turn away from them to do them good, yea I will rejoice over
them to do them good; and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my
whole heart, and with my whole soul: Phil. 4.19.
My God shall supply all your need; or, my God shall (...) fill-up all your
need, as he did the widows vessels in that 2 Kings 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Godliness
has the promise both of this life and that which is to come; 1 Timothy 4.8.
he that has God for his portion shall have all other things cast into his
store, Mal. 6.25.31, 32, 33.
as paper and packthread is cast into the bargain, or as an handful of corn is
cast into the corn you buy, or as Hucksters cast in an over-cast among the
fruit you buy, or as an inch of measure is given into an ell of cloth. O Sirs,
how can that man be poor, how can that man want that has the Lord of heaven
and earth for his portion? Surely he cannot want light that enjoyes the Sun,
nor he cannot want bread that has all sorts of grain in his barnes, nor he
cannot want water that has the fountain at his door; no more can he want any
thing that has God for his portion, who is every thing, and who will be every
thing to every gracious soul. O Sirs, the thought, the tongue, the desire, the
wish, the conception all fall short of God, and of that great goodness that he
has laid up for them that fear him; Psalm. 31.10.
and why then should they be afraid of wants? How does that pretty bird the
Robin-red-breast cheerfully sit and sing in the chamber-window, Psa 104.10 to
Verse. 31.
and yet knows not where he shall make the next meal, and at night must take up
his lodging in a bush; O what a shame is it that men that have God for their
portion should act below this little bird? I have read of famous Mr. Dod (who
is doubtless now high in heaven) who intending to marry, was much troubled
with fears and cares how he should live in that condition, his in-comes being
so small, that they would but maintain him in a single condition; and looking
out at a window, and seeing a Hen scraping for food for, her numerous brood
about her, thought thus with himself; this Hen did but live before it had these
chickens, and now she lives with all her little ones; upon which he added this
thought also, I see the sowls of the air neither sow nor reap nor gather into
barnes, Mar. 6.25.33.
and yet my heavenly Father feeds them; and thus he overcame his fears of
wanting. O Christians you have such a Father for your portion, as will as soon
cease to be, as he will cease to supply you with all things necessary for your
good. 'Twas a good saying of one, I would desire neither more nor less than
enough; for I may as well die of a surfeit, as of hunger, and he is rich enough
that lacks not bread, and high enough in dignity that is not forced to serve.
Plutarchs reasoning is good ( Taton philon panta koina) friends have all things
in common, but God is our friend, ergo we cannot want; a rare speech from an
Heathen. Rather than Israel should want, did not God feed them with Manna in
the wilderness? and rather than Eliah and the widow should not have their
wants supplied, 1 Kings 17.15, 16. 2 Kings 4.5, 6.
did not God work a miracle, by causing the handful of meal in the barrel, and
the little oil in the cruise to last and hold out, till he supplied them in
another way; rather than Eliah shall want, God will feed him with a Raven, and
by that miraculous operation save him from a perishing condition. O Sirs, all
the Attributes of God are so engaged for you, that you cannot want, and all the
promises of God are so engaged to you, that you cannot want, and all the
affections of God are so set upon you, that you cannot want; and why then
should you fear wants? O Sirs, Romans 8.32.
has God given you his Son, his Spirit, his grace, his glory, yea himself, and
will he deny you lesser things? has he given you those things that are more
worth than ten thousand worlds, Gregory the great was wont to say, that he was
the poor man, whose soul was void of grace, if not he whose Coffers were empty
of money.
and will he not give you bread to eat, and raiment to put on? has he given
you those spiritual riches that infinitely exceed and excel all the riches,
rubies, and pearls in the world, and will he deny you a little money in your
purses to bear your charges till you come to heaven? has he given you a crown,
and will he deny you a crust? has he given you his royal robes, and will he
deny you a few rags? has he given you a royal Palace, and will he deny you a
poor Cottage to shelter you from the stormy winter, and from the scorching
summer? yea, does he feed his enemies, and cloth his enemies, and protect his
enemies, and provide for his enemies, which are the generation of his wrath and
curse, and will he not do as much for you, O ye of little faith? will he do so
much for them that hate him, and will he not do as much for you that love him,
doubtless he will; will he seed the Ravens, and provide for the Ox and the
Ass, and cloth the grass of the field, and will he suffer you, who are his
love, his joy, his delight, to starve at his feet, for want of necessaries?
Surely no.

But suppose you were under many real wants, yet certainly this very
Consideration, that the Lord is your portion should quiet your hearts, and beat
up your spirits bravely under them all. Jerome tells us of one Dydimus, a godly
Preacher, who was blind, Alexander a godly man coming to see him, asked him,
whether he was not sorely troubled and afflicted for want of his sight: O yes,
said Dydimus, it is a very great affliction and grief to me; whereupon
Alexander chid him, saying, Has God given you the excellency of an Angel, of
an Apostle, and are you troubled for that which rats and mice, and bruit beasts
enjoy? O Sirs, if God has given you himself for a portion, then certainly it is
a sinful thing, a shameful thing, an unworthy thing, for you to be troubled,
afflicted, and grieved, because you want this and that worldly contentment and
enjoyment, which God bestows upon such whose wickedness has debased them
below the Ox and the Ass, Isn. 1.2, 3.
I mean, men of beastly spirits, and beastly principles, and beastly practices.
Look, as Benjamins mess was five times greater than his brethrens; Genesis 43.34
so those that have God for their portion have five thousand times a greater
portion than the wicked of the world whose portion only lies in perishing
trifles, and in tried vanities; and therefore there is no just reason, no
Scripture-reason why they should be afraid of wants. But

Ninthly, Hos. 14.8.
and disturbing cares, as Ephraim once said to his Idols, Get you hence, for
what have I any more to do with you? Christ's counsel should lie warm upon every
man's heart that has God for his portion, Matthew. 6.31.
Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? and so should the Apostles, 1 Pet. 5.7.
Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you: Psalm. 55.22.
and so should the Psalmists also, Cast thy burden (or as the Greek well turns
it thy care) upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, he shall never suffer
the righteous to be moved. Some write, that Lions sleep with their eyes open
and shining; but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
the keeper of Israel never slumbers nor sleeps, his eyes are always open upon
the upright, he still stands Sentinel for his peoples good, and therefore why
should inordinate cares eat up the hearts of Christians? O Christians, of all
burdens the burden of carking cares will sit the heaviest upon your spirits;
there is no burden that will bow you and break you like this; inordinate cares
vex the heart, they divide the heart, they scratch and tear the heart, 1 Timothy
6.10
they pierce and wound the heart through and through with many sorrows;
inordinate cares will either crowd out Duties, Luke 10.40
as in Martha, or else they will crowd into Duties, and spoil Duties, as in
that Luke 8.14. the cares of the world choke the Word. Look, as Pharaohs
ill-favored lean kine eat up the fat, Genesis 41.4.
so all inordinate ill-favored cares will eat up all those fat and noble cares
for God, for his glory, for heaven, for holiness, for grace, for glory, for
power against corruptions, for strength to resist temptations and for support
and comfort under afflictions, etc. with which the soul should be filled and
delighted. Oh that you would for ever remember these few things to prevent all
inordinate, distrustful, and distracting cares.

First, answer all your desires, and to succor you in all your distresses, and
to deliver you out of all your calamities and miseries, etc.

Secondly, Psalm. 139. Psalm. 40.5. Job (...) 2 Chronicles. 16.9, etc.
as if your wants were not as well known to him as his own works, and as if he
had not a fixed eye upon all the straights and trials that lies upon you, and
as if he did not know every burden that makes you to groan, and did not behold
every affliction that makes you to sigh, and did not observe every tear that
drops from your eyes, etc. whereas his eye is still upon you, Deuteronomy. 11.11, 12.
But the Land whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinks water of the rain of heaven; a land which the Lord thy God cares for:
the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the
year unto the end of the year. And do you think that he will not have as great
a care, and as tender a regard of you who are his jewels, his treasure, his
joy, yea, who are the delight of his soul, and the price of his Sons blood?

Thirdly, Psalm. 24.1. Psalm. 50.10.
as if the earth were not the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and as if all
creatures were not at his command and at his dispose, whenas he is the great
proprietary, and all is his by primitive right, and all the creatures are at
his service, and are ready at a word of command to serve where he pleases, and
when he pleases, and as he pleases, and whom he pleases.

Fourthly, of many thousands speaks him to be. I have read of a Duke of
Millain, that marrying his daughter to a son of England, he made a Dinner of
thirty Courses, and at every Course he gave so many gifts to every guest at the
Table, as there were Dishes in the Course: Here was rich and royal
entertainment, here was noble bounty indeed; but this bounty is not to be named
in the day wherein the bounty and liberality of God to his people is spoken of.
Princes treasures have been often exhausted and drawn dry, Mercy and bounty is
as essential to God, as light is to the Sun, or as heat is to the fire.
but the treasures of Gods bounty and liberality were never, nor never shall be
exhausted or drawn dry. O Sirs, you are as well able to tell the Stars of
heaven, and to number the sands of the Sea, as you are able to number up the
mercies and favors of God that attends his people in one day, yea, that
attends them in one hour of the day, or in one minute of an hour, such is his
liberality and bounty toward them. God is always best, when he is most in the
exercise of his bounty and liberality toward his people; his favors and
mercies seldom come single; there is a Series, a concatenation of them, and
every former draws on a future; yea, such is the bounty and liberality of God,
that he never takes away one mercy, but he has another ready to lay in the
room of it; as Joshuah began to shine before Moses his candle was put out; and
before Joshuah went to bed, C^hniel the son of Kenaz was risen up to judge; Eli
was not gathered to his Fathers, before Samuel appeared hopeful; nor Sarah was
not taken away till Rebeckah was ready to come in her stead. The Jews have a
saying, that never does there die any illustrious man, but there is another
born as bright on the same day. But

Fifthly, the faithful witness, Rev. 1.5. Chapter 3.14. Isa. 49.7. 1 Cor. 1.9. Chapter
10.13. 2 These. 3.3. Heb. 10.23. Rev. 19.11. Heb. 6.13-19.
the faithful God, that has bound himself by promise, by covenant, and by oath
to take care of his people, and to provide for his people, and to look after
the welfare of his people. God is that Ocean and Fountain from whence all that
faithfulness that is in Angels and men do issue and flow, and his
faithfulness is the rule and measure of all that faithfulness that is in all
created beings, and his faithfulness is unchangeable and perfect: though the
Angels fell from their faithfulness, and Adam fell from his yet it is
impossible that ever God should fall from his. Gods faithfulness is a
foundation-faithfulnesse, it is that foundation, upon which all our faith,
hope, prayers, praises, and obedience stands; and therefore whoever is
unfaithful, God will be sure to show himself a faithful God, in making good all
that he has spoken concerning them that fear him. I had rather, said Plutarch,
that men should say, there was never any such person in the world as Plutarch,
rather than say, that Plutarch is unfaithful; men were better say, that there
is no God, than to say that God is an unfaithful God; and yet this is the
constant language of inordinate cares. O Sirs, Gods goodness inclines him to
make good promises, 2 Pet. 1 4.
precious promises, and his faithfulness engages him to make those promises
good; if the word be once gone out of his mouth, Mat. 5.18.
heaven and earth shall sooner pass away than one jot of that Word shall fail.
Men say and unsay what they have said, they often eat their words as soon as
they have spoke them, but so will not God: This faithfulness of God Joshna
stoutly asserts to the height; he throws down the Gantler, Josh. 23.14, 15.
and does as it were challenge all Israel to show but that one thing that God
had failed them in of all the good things that he had promised. If God in very
faithfulness afflicts his people to make good his threatenings, Psa. 119.75.
O how much more in faithfulness will he preserve and provide for his people,
to make good his promises? God has never broke his word, nor cracked his
credit by deceiving, or by compounding for one penny less in the pound, than
what he has promised to make good; God stands upon nothing more than his
faithfulness, and glories in nothing more than his faithfulness; and yet all
inordinate cares leaves a blot upon his faithfulness. But

Sixthly and lastly, Matthew. 6.32.
they speak out God to be a God of no pity, of no bowels, of no tenderness,
whereas God is all pities, all bowels, all compassions, all tendernesses, Psalm.
103.13. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him: there is an Ocean of love and pity in a fathers heart to his
children, Genesis 33.13, 14.
and there is much more in Gods to his: Hence he is called the Father, by way
of eminency; and indeed originally and properly there is no Father to him,
there is no Father like him, there is no Father besides him; Ephesians. 3.15 God is
pater miserationum, tam pius nom^o, tam pater nemo, says Bernard.
and he is called the Father of all mercies, because all the mercies, all the
pities, all the bowels, all the compassions that are in all the Fathers on
earth are but a drop of his Ocean, a spark of his flame, a mite out of his
Treasury. That Father that sees his child in want, and pities him not, and
pitying, if able, relieves him not, forfeits the very name of father, and may
better write himself monster than man. I have read of a young man, who being at
Sea in a mighty Storm, was very merry, when all the passengers were at their
wits end for fear, etc. and when he was asked the reason of his mirth, he
answered, that the Pilot of the Ship was his father, and he knew that such was
his fathers pity and compassion that he would have a care of him: O Sirs,
whatever storms the people of God may be in, yet such is his pity and
compassion toward them, that he will be sure to have a care of them. The Lord
is all that to his people, and will be all that to his people, yea, and
infinitely more than that which Isis Mammosa was to the Egyptians, a God full
of dugs; and whilst he has a breast there is no reason why his children
should fear the want of milk. That golden promise, Heb. 13.5. were there no
more, has enough in it to steel and arm the soul against all inordinate cares.
The Greek has five Negatives, (...), Never, in no wise, in no case; whatever I
do, I will not do this, whatever shift I make.
and may thus be rendered, I will not, not leave thee, neither will I not, not
forsake thee. Five times, as one well observes, is this precious promise
renewed, that we may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of its
consolations, that we may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of its
glory. O Sirs, shall the word, the promise, the protest of a King arm us and
cheer us up against all inordinate cares, and shall not the word, the promise,
the protest of the King of Kings so often repeated much more arm us against all
base distrustful and distracting cares? O Christians, the remembrance of this
blessed truth, that God is your portion, should make you sing care away, as
that famous Martyr said, John Carless in a Letter to Mr. Philops. Acts and Mon.
fol. 1743, etc.
My soul is turned to her rest, I have taken a sweet nap in Christ's lap, and
therefore I will now sing away care, and will be careless, according to my
name. If the sense of Gods being a man's portion will not burn up all those
inordinate cares that commonly fills his head, and that disturbs, and
distracts, and racks his heart, I profess I cannot tell what will. 'Twas a
strange speech of Socrates, a Heathen; Since God is so careful for you (says
he) what need you be careful for any thing your selves? But

Tenthly, Christus men's and omnia, Christ is mine, and all is mine; so may a
Christian say, Deus meus, and omnia mea, God is mine, and all is mine. If God
be thy portion, then heaven and earth are thine, then all the good, and all the
glory of both worlds are thine, then all the upper and the nether springs are
thine, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours; verse. 22. whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours. The scope of the Apostle is not to show that such as are Saints,
and have God for their portion have a civil and common interest in all men's
earthly possessions; but it is to show that all things are prepared, ordered,
and ordained by God to serve the interest of his people, to work for the good
of his people, and to help on the happiness and blessedness of his people.
All the gifts, and all the graces, and all the experiences, and all the
excellencies, and all the mercies of the Ministers of the Gospel, whether they
are ordinary or extraordinary, are all for the information, edification,
confirmation, consolation, and salvation of the Church, and all the good and
all the sweet of the creatures are to be let out for the good of the people of
God, and for the comfort of the people of God, and for the encouragement of the
people of God; all changes, all conditions, all occurrences shall be sure to
work together for their good that have God for their portion. Romans 8.28.
Whatever the present posture of things are, or whatever the future state of
things shall be, yet they shall all issue in their good, in their profit, in
their advantage that have God for their portion. Look, as the wife communicates
in her husbands honor and wealth, and as the branches partake of the fatness
and sweetness of the root, and as the members derive sense and motion from the
head; so the Saints communicate in all that good which in God is communicable
to them. God is communicative, as the Fig Tree, the Vine, and the Olive is. O
Sirs, if God be your portion, then every promise in the Book of God is yours,
and every Attribute in the Book of God is yours, and every Privilege in the
Book of God is yours, and every Comfort in the Book of God is yours, and every
Blessing in the Book of God is yours, and every Treasury in the Book of God is
yours, and every Mercy in the Book of God is yours, and every Ordinance in the
Book of God is yours, and every Sweet in the Book of God is yours; if God be
yours, all is yours. When Alexander asked King Porus (who was then his
prisoner) how he would be used? Plutarch in Apophlegm.
he answered in one word (...), like a King: Alexander again replying, Do you
desire nothing else? No, says he, all things are in (...), in this one word,
like a King: so all things are in this one word, The Lord is my portion; he
that has God for his portion, has all things, because God is all things, he
is a good that contains all good in himself; all the good that is to be found
in honors, in riches, in pleasures, in preferments, in husband, in wife, in
children, in friends, etc. is to be found only and eminently in God; you have
all in that great God that is the Saints great all, Col. 3.11. But

Eleventhly, blast and blot men's names, and they lay men open to such sins, and
snares, and temptations, that for ever undoes their immortal souls. O what a
Trappan are worldly portions to most men? yea, what fuel are they to
corruption? and how often do they lay persons open to destruction? Eccles.
5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept
for the owners therefore to their hurt. Though riches in themselves are Gods
blessings, yet through the corruptions that are in men's hearts they prove
weapons of wickedness, and engines to evil: There is a sore evil, the
Septuagint reads it, infirmitas pessima, a sore disease; Pagnin and Arias
Montanus reads it mala infirmitas, an evil disease; others read it, languor
pessimus, a sore weakness; the Hebrew word Cholah signifies such a sore evil as
sticks close, and is not easily removed; they are kept a thousand thousand
ways for their hurt. Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward the sixth, tells a
story of a rich man, that when he lay upon his sick bed, some told him that
came to visit him, that by all they were able to discern he was a dead man, he
was no man for this world; as soon as ever he heard these words (says Latimer)
what must I die? said the sick man; send for a Physician; wounds, sides, heart,
must I die, and leave these riches behind me? wounds, sides, heart, must I die,
and leave these things behind me; and nothing else could be got from him but
wounds, heart, sides, must I die, and leave these riches behind me? Do you
think, Sirs, that riches were not kept for this man's hurt? without a
peradventure in this man's heart was write the God of this present world.

And the same Father Latimer elsewhere says, that if he had an enemy to whom
it was lawful to wish evil, he would chiefly wish him great store of riches,
for then he should never enjoy any quiet. As I have read of one Pheraulas, a
poor man, on whom King Cyrus bestowed so much that he knew not what to do with
his riches; being wearied out with care in keeping of them, he desired to live
quietly, though poor, as he had done before, than to possess all those riches
with discontent; therefore he gave away all his wealth, desiring only to enjoy
so much as might relieve his necessities, and give him a quiet possession of
himself.

Queen Mary said, when she was dying, that if they should open her when she was
dead, they should find Calice lying at the bottom of her heart, implying,
that the loss of it broke her heart.

The Historian observes, that the riches of Cyprus invited the Romans to hazard
many dangerous Fights for the conquering of it.

When the Indians had taken some of the Spaniards, who made gold their god,
they filled their mouths with it, and so choked them, they melted their gold,
and poured it down their throats, resolving that they should have their fill of
gold, who preferred gold before the lives and souls of men. How many millions
of bodies and souls have the Spaniards destroyed to possess themselves of the
riches of the West- Indies? But let me a little further show you, how hurtful,
how dangerous and pernicious earthly riches, earthly portions are oftentimes to
their owners; and this I shall do by a brief induction of these particulars.

First, Not only the History of the ten persecutions, but also all other
Histories do very strongly evince this.
Riches encourage and advantage persons to make the strongest and the stoutest
opposition against any thing that is good; rich persons usually are the
greatest opposers both of religion and religious persons, James 2.6, 7. But ye
have despised the poor; do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the
judgment-seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy Name by which ye are called?
and this you may see also in the rich Citizens of Jerusalem, and in King Herod;
and the very same spirit you may run and read in the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were the rich and the great men of the times, and the very same opposing spirit
lives and works strongly in the hearts of many great ones this day. But

Secondly, Luke 15. and in those wealthy Monsters that say unto God, Depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What is the Almighty that
we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Job
21.13, 14, 15. But

Thirdly, Salvian counts pride the rich man's inheritance; Ps. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, etc.
men's minds ebb and flow with their means, their blood commonly rises with
their outward good. Pride, says Bernard, is the rich man's Cousin, it blows him
up like a bladder with a quill, it makes him grow secure, and so prepares him
for sudden ruin; so that he may well sing his part with those sad souls, What
has pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? All
those things are passed away like as a shadow, and as a post that passes by,
Wisd. 5.8, 9. But

Fourthly, David in that Psalm. 30.6, 7. and thus they served the fool in the
Gospel, Luke 12.16-22. Amos 1.12. to the 18. ponder the words.
and thus they served the old world; and so they did Sodom and Gomorrah
afterward, and so they did the two Kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and
their Hosts, Judge. 8.11, 12. and so they did the people of La^sh, in that Judge.
18.6-28. and so the peace, plenty, and prosperity of the Bohemians cast them
into so great a security, that they began to grow very loose and base in their
lives, and very cold and careless in the things of God, and in all their
soul-concernments; insomuch that many of their most pious and prudent men did
presage, that certainly some horrible storm would suddenly arise, and that some
dreadful tempest without all peradventure would beat upon them; and accordingly
it came to pass. Alexander slew him whom he found asleep on the watch; and God
finding the Bohemians in a deep sleep of sin and security, he brought the
devouring sword upon them. Mercury could not kill Argus, till he had cast him
into a sleep, and with an enchanted rod closed his eyes: No more can the Devil
or the World hurt any man, till by dandling of him on the knee of prosperity,
they come to lull him asleep in the bed of security. But

Fifthly, Matthew. 13.22.
Riches are the thorns that choke the Word, and that make men barren and
unfruitful under the Word. Rich Felix had no leisure to hear poor Paul, Acts
24.24-ult.
though the hearing of a Sermon might have saved his soul, and made him happy
in both worlds; and the rich fool in the Gospel was so taken up in pulling down
his Barnes, Luke 12.15. to the 22.
and in building of them greater, and in bestowing of his fruits and his goods,
that he had no time to prevent the ruin of his soul; and Dives was so taken up
with his riches, pomp, state, Chapter 16.19. to the end
and with his royal apparel, royal attendance, and royal fare, that he never
minded heaven, nor never dreaded hell, til he did awake with everlasting flames
about his ears. Sicily is so full of sweet flowers, Diodorus Siculus.
that dogs cannot hunt there: and so what do all the sweet profits, pleasures,
and preferments of this world, but make men lose the scent of grace, the scent
of glory, the scent of holiness, Some say, where gold grows, no plant will.
prosper; certainly, where riches bear the bell, no good, no grace will thrive
or prosper.
and the scent of happiness. It Is true, rich men will have their eating times,
and their drinking times, and their trading times, and their sporting times,
and their sleeping times, and that which is worse, their sinning-times, etc.
But ah how rare is it to see rich men covet after hearing times, and praying
times, and reading times, and meditating times, and mourning times, and
repenting times, and reforming times: Rich men will have time for every thing,
but to honor God, exalt Christ, obey the Spirit, love the Saints, attend
Ordinances, and save their own immortal souls. O the time, the thoughts, the
strength, the spirits that rich men spend and consume upon their riches,
whilst their precious souls lie a bleeding to death, and an eternity of misery
is posting upon them. But

Sixthly,

Seventhly, oppression, revenge, cruelty, Compare these Scriptures together,
Psalm. 73.1-13. Deuteronomy. 32.15, 16, 17. Jer. 5.7, 8. Hos. 13.6. James 5.1. to Verse.
7.
tyranny, gluttony, drunkenness, wantonness, and all manner of uncleanness
and filthiness: Riches are a Bawd to those very sins that require the largest
stock to maintain them. Vices are more costly than virtues; virtue observes a
mean, but vice knows none; vice is all for extremes, witness the prodigious
wickedness of these times. But

Eighthly, James 5.1, 2, 3. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the
miseries that shall come upon you: Your riches are corrupted, and your garments
moth-eaten; your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped
treasure together for the last days: The rust of the rich man's cankered gold
and his moth-eaten apparel shall be brought in as dreadful witnesses against
him in the great day. The Poet feigned Pluto to be the God of riches, and of
hell too, as if they were inseparable. By all these particulars you see how
hurtful, how prejudicial earthly portions often prove to their owners.

O but now God is a portion that will never hurt a man, that will never harm a
man, that will never in the least prejudice a man. Among all the spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12.22, 23.
there is not one to be found that will give in his witness against this sweet
and blessed Truth that I have asserted; and among all the Saints on earth you
shall not find one, but will with both hands readily subscribe to this
glorious Maxim, viz. That God is such a portion, that has never hurt them,
that has never harmed them, yea, that he is such a portion that has done them
good all their days, and one upon whom they have lived, and by whom they have
been maintained ever since they hung upon the breasts. Psalm. 22.9.
Holy Polycarp hit it, when he said, This sixty eight years have I served the
Lord, and he never did me any hurt; and shall I now forsake him? Surely no. But
now earthly riches, for the most part, do a world of mischief and hurt to their
owners. O the souls that earthly riches have pierced through and through with
many sorrows! O the minds that earthly riches have blinded! O the hearts that
earthly riches have hardened! O the consciences that earthly riches have
benumbed! O the wills that earthly riches have perverted! O the affections that
earthly riches have disordered! O the lives that earthly riches have corrupted!
and O the souls that earthly riches have destroyed. But

Ninthly and lastly, Earthly riches, for the most part, make men unwilling to
die; O how terrible is the King of Terrors to the rich and the great ones of
the world, A great man wrote thus a little before his death, Spes and fortuna
velete.
1 Samuel 28.20. Dan. 5.1-7. And so Henry Beauford, that rich and wretched
Cardinal, in the reign of Henry the sixth, perceiving death at hand, spoke
thus, Wherefore should I die being so rich? if the whole Realm would save my
life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it; fie, quoth
he, will not Death be hired? will money do nothing? It is reported that Queen
Elizabeth could not endure so much as to hear Death named; Brasmus hit it, when
he said, Timor mortis pejor quam ipsa mors.
and Sigusmund the Emperor, and Lewis the eleventh, King of France, straightly
charged all their servants, that when they saw them sick, they should never
dare to name that bitter word Death in their ears. Vitellius, an Emperor of
Rome, (a notorious glutton, as you may easily judge, by his having at one
supper two thousand fishes, and seven thousand birds) when he could not fly
Death, he made himself drunk, that he might not be sensible of the pangs of
Death. 'Twas a very prudent and Christian speech of Charles the fifth to the
Duke of Venice, who when he had showed him the glory of his Princely Palace,
and earthly Paradise, instead of admiring it or him for it, he only returned
him this grave and serious Memento, Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori, These
are the things which make us unwilling to die, etc. And by daily experience we
find that of all men wealthy men are most unwilling to die. O but now God is
such a portion as fits and disposes the soul to die, yea, as makes the soul
look and long for death, and that makes death more desirable than life it
self. A man that has God for his portion, that has God in his arms, may well
sing it out with old Simeon, Lord, Luke 2.25, 29, 30.
let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, Phil. 1.23.
for mine eyes has seen thy salvation; and with Paul, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; and with the Church, Make have, my beloved,
and be thou like a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountain of spices, Cant.
8. ult. and, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.20. Did Christ die for me,
that I might live with him? I will not therefore desire to live long from him;
all men go willingly to see him whom they love, and shall I be unwilling to
die, that I may see him whom my soul loves? Surely no. Augustine longed to die,
that he might see that head that was once crowned with thorns. The dying words
of my young Lord Harrington were these, O my God, when shall I be with thee?
Cyprian could receive the cruellest sentence of death with a Deo gratias; and
holy Andrew saluted the Cross on which he was to be crucified, saying, Take me
from men, and restore me to my Master: And so Lawrence Saunders, when he was
come to the stake at which he was to be burnt, he kissed it, saying. Welcome
the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life. But

Twelfthly, think of God, and look upon God under this notion; A man that has
God for his portion should always have very high, noble, sweet and precious
thoughts of God: It becomes not those that have God for their portion to be
always looking upon God as an angry God, or as a displeased Father, or as an
incensed Judge, or as an enraged enemy, or as a bitter friend. When God would
make known his Name, his Nature, his Glory to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7.
he proclaims himself to be, The Lord God, merciful, and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercies for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. And certainly to keep up
such precious thoughts and notions as these are of God, is that work of works
that lies upon every man's hand that has God for his portion. O Sirs, there is
a very great aptness and pronenesse, even in those that have God for their
portion, to have black, dark, hard, dismal, and dreadful thoughts and
apprehensions of God, Psalm. 77. and Psa 88. Job 3. Psalm. 73.11, 13, 13, 14.
as you may see in Asaph, Heman, Job, David, etc. By nature we are as full of
hard thoughts of God, as hell is full of sin: and where the heart is not
mightily over-awed by the Spirit of God, and overpowered by the grace of God,
there all manner of dark and dismal apprehensions of God abounds: Besides,
Satan knows very well, that our corrupt natures are made up of sad and hard
thoughts of God; and therefore he will use all his power and crast to blow up
every spark (every hard thought of God) into a flame, especially when outward
troubles and inward distresles are upon us; what says Satan, Do thou think
that God loves thee, O Christian, when he deals thus sharply and severely with
thee? does he pretend kindness to thee, and yet hide his sace from thee, and
set thee up as a mark to shoot at? how can he be thy friend, who has cast thee
down at thine enemies feet, and given thee up into their paws and jaws? how
can thou think that he has any pity and compassion toward thee, who makes
no better provision for thee? what vanity is it to believe that he will give
thee a crown, that denies thee a crust? and that he will give thee an house not
made with hands, and yet suffer thee to be turned out of house and home? and
that he will do so much for thee in another world, who does so little for thee
in this world? etc. And thus Satan takes his opportunities to provoke corrupt
nature, and to fill the soul with hard thoughts of God. And certainly, that
Christian is a very great stranger to his own heart, that is not able to say
from experience, that it is one of the highest and hardest works in this world
to keep up good and gracious thoughts of God, to keep up honorable and noble
thoughts of God in a suffering condition, or under dark and dismal
dispensations. O but now those that have God for their portion, they should
abandon and abhor all hard thoughts of God, yea, how severe soever the dealings
of God are toward them, yet it is their duty and their glory to keep up very
sweet and precious thoughts of God. Psalm. 73.1.
O Sirs, the more choice and honorable thoughts you keep up of God in your own
souls, the more you will love the Lord, and the more you will delight in the
Lord, and the more content and satisfaction you will take in the Lord. Such
Christians that take a pleasure to be still a representing of God to themselves
in the most hideous, terrible, and amazing shapes, they kill their love and
their joy, and they create a hell of torments in their own souls. Well,
Christians, let me put a cluster of the Grapes of Canaan into your hands at
once, and that by telling of you, that the more glorious and blessed thoughts
you keep up in your souls of God, the more spiritual, the more frequent, the
more fervent, the more abundant, the more constant, and the more unwearied you
will be in the work of the Lord, and the more all your graces will be acted,
exercised, strengthened, and increased, yea, and the more your evidences for
heaven will be cleared, your gracious experiences multiplied, your communion
with God raised, your way to glory facilitated, and all your sufferings
sweetened; and therefore never let noble and precious thoughts of God die in
your souls: Though he frown upon thee, O Christian, yet say, he is thy portion;
and though he chides thee, yet say, he is thy portion; and though he corrects
thee, yet say, he is thy portion; and though he deserts thee, and carries it
strangely toward thee, yet say, he is thy portion; and though he snatches many
a mercy from thee, yet say, he is thy portion; and though he multiplies thy
burdens upon thee, yet say, he is thy portion; and though he writes bitter
things against thee, yet say, he is thy portion; yea, though he should pass a
sentence of death upon thee, yet still say, he is thy portion: O Christians,
this would still raise an heaven in your hearts, if under all dispensations'
you would still look upon God as your portion, and live upon God as your
portion. But

Thirteenthly, See twenty Arguments in my String of Pearls to move you to be
willing to die, from page 169. to page 212.
let them be afraid to die that have only the world for their portion here,
and hell for their portion hereafter; but let not a Saint be afraid of death
that has for his portion the Lord of life: A man that has God for his portion
should rather court death than tremble at it; he should rather sweetly welcome
it, than turn his back upon it; for death to such an one is but the way to
paradise, the way to all heavenly delights, the way to those everlasting
springs of pleasure that are at Gods right hand, Psalm. 16. ult
the way to life, immortality, and glory, and the way to a clear, full,
constant and eternal fruition of God. Bernard says, that he heard his brother
Gorard, when just in dying, rejoice, and triumphingly say. Jam mors mihi non
stimulus sed jubilus.
Angustine upon those words, Exodus 33.20, 21. Thou can not see my face and
live, makes this short, but sweet reply, Then Lord let me die that I may see
thy face. Death is a bridge that leads to the paradise of God; all the hurt
that it can do is to bring a believer to a full enjoyment of his portion. When
Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant threatened to kill Bazil, he answered, If that
be all, I fear not, yea, your Master cannot more pleasure me, than in sending
me unto my heavenly Father, to whom I now live, and to whom I desire to hasten.
Old Alderman Jordan used to say, That Death would be the best friend he had in
the world, and that he would willingly go forth to meet it; or rather say with
holy Paul, O Death, where is thy sting? triumphing over it. What is a drop of
vinegar put into an Ocean of wine? what is it for one to have a rainy day, who
is going to take possession of a Kingdom? Acts and Mon. 813.
A Dutch Martyr feeling the flame to come to his beard, Ah, said he, what a
small pain is this, to be compared to the glory to come? Lactantius boasts of
the bravenesse of that spirit that was upon the Martyrs in his time; our
children and women (not to speak of men, says he) do in silence overcome their
tormenters, and the fire cannot so much as fetch a sigh from them. John Noyes
took up a faggot at the fire, and kissed it, saying, Blessed be the time that
ever I was born to come to this preferment. Never did Neckarchief become me so
well as this chain, said Alice Driver, when they fastened her to the stake to
be burnt; Mr. Bradford put off his cap, and thanked God, when the Keepers Wfie
brought him word that he was to be burned on the morrow; Mr. Tailor fetched a
frisk, when he was come near the place where he was to suffer; Henry and John
(two Augustine Monks) being the first that were burnt in Germany, and Mr.
Rogers the first that was burnt in Queen Mary's days, did all sing in the
flames; and be of good cheer, said the woman-martyr to her husband that was to
suffer with her; for though we have but an ill dinner on earth, we shall sup
with Christ in heaven: and what said Justine Martyr to his murderers, in
behalf of himself and his fellow-martyrs, You may kill us, but you can never
hurt us. Ah Christians, how can you read over these choice instances, and not
blush, and not be ashamed to consider what a readiness, what a forwardness,
and what a noble willingness there was in these brave Worthies to die and go to
heaven, and to be fully possessed of their God, of their portion, whilst you
shrug at the very thoughts of death, and frequently put that day far from
you, and had rather with Peter fall upon building of Tabernacles, Mat. 17.4.
Phil. 1.23.
then with Paul, desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. O Christians,
how justly may that father be angry with his child that is unwilling to come
home? and how justly may that husband be displeased with his wife, who is
unwilling to ride to him in a rainy day, or to cross the Sea to enjoy his
company? and is not this your case? is not this just your case, who have God
for your portion, and yet are unwilling to die, that you may come to a full
enjoyment of your portion? But,

Fourteenthly and lastly, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
that God is their portion. Next to a man's having God for his portion, it is the
greattest mercy in this world for a man to know, that God is his portion, and
to be able groundedly to say with the Church, The Lord is my portion says my
soul. Now this is a work that may be done; I suppose there is never a believer
on earth but may attain unto this personal evidence and certainty of knowledge,
that God is his portion; Heb. 10.37. (...). Here are two Diminutives in the
Greek, a little, little while, to note, that God will not in the least delay
his coming to his people.
express promises speaks out such a thing as this is, Zech. 13.9. They shall
call upon my Name, and I will hear them; I will say, it is my people, and they
shall say, it is my God: so Ezekiel. 34.30. Thus shall they know that I the Lord
their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel are my people,
says the Lord; Psalm. 9.18. For the patient abiding of the meek shall not be
forgotten for ever. God will as soon put the faith of reliance, and the faith
of assurance to a blush, as he will put the faith of expectance to a blush;
Psalm. 22.26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, they shall praise the Lord
that seek, him; your heart shall live for ever. First or last, such as seek him
shall have such an answer of their prayers, as shall turn their prayers into
praises, and their petitions into thanksgivings; Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will
give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that walk
uprightly. God will be an universal, all-sufficient, and satisfactory good to
them that walk uprightly; the Lord is as full of goodness as the Sun is full of
light, and he will as freely, and as fully, and as impartially communicate his
goodness to them that walk uprightly, Matthew. 5.45.
as the Sun does her light both to the just and the unjust. As under the name
of no good thing will he withold, all temporal good things are to be
understood; so under the name of grace all spiritual good things are to be
understood; and under the name of glory all eternal good things are to be
understood. And now if God will give all spiritual and all eternal good things
to his people, how can he then but sooner or later give a clear and
satisfactory evidence into his peoples bosoms, that he is their portion? And
not only express promises, but also the graces of the Spirit and the testimony
of the Spirit confirms the same thing; the language of every saving grace is
this, The Lord is thy portion, O thou believing soul; and the language and
testimony of the Spirit is the same, Romans 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Verse. 16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Shall an instinct
in nature teach young ones to know their Damms, and shall not the Spirit of God
by a divine instinct teach the Saints to know God to be their God, and to be
their portion also? Surely yes; though this or that particular Christian may go
to his grave without a satisfactory evidence in his own bosom, that God is his
portion, yet in an ordinary course at first or last God does give his people
some assurance that he is their portion, yea, rather than they shall always
live or die without assurance of their salvation; and that he is their portion,
he will work a miracle to assure them of his love.

I have both heard and read of a rare story of Mrs. Honywood a famous professor
of the Gospel, and one that for many years together lay under the burden of a
wounded spirit, and was much troubled in mind for want of assurance that God
was her portion, and that she should be saved from wrath to come: at length
there came a godly Minister to her, who endeavored to settle her faith and
hope in Christ; and pressing many Gospel-promises upon her, she took it with a
kind of indignation and anger that he should offer to present any promises to
her, to whom (as she thought) they did not belong; and having a Venice-glasse
in her hand, she held it up, and said, Speak no more to me of salvation, for I
shall as surely be damned, as this poor brittle glass shall be broke against
the wall, throwing it with all her force to break it; but it so pleased God,
that by a miraculous providence the glass was preserved whole; the Minister
beholding the miracle, took up the glass, and said unto her, Behold, God must
work a miracle for you before you will believe: and for ever after that day she
had very strong assurance of her salvation, and that God was her portion, and
so lived and died in a sweet and comfortable sense of the love and favor of
God.

Now to provoke you to labor with all your might to attain to a clear,
personal, satisfactory evidence in your own bosoms, that God is your portion;
do but seriously consider and lay to heart the rare and singular advantages
that will redound to your souls by this means. I shall only touch upon some,
by which your selves may guess at others.

First, will come to be fixed, settled, and established: A man's soul never comes
to be fixed and settled, by knowing in the general that God is the Saints
portion, but by a personal evidence and certainty of knowledge that he is his
particular portions whilst a man's particular propriety is unsettled, all is
unsettled in his soul; but when a man's particular propriety is settled, when he
can say, Psa. 57.7. Ps. 108 1. Psalm. 112.7.
this God is my God, and the Lord is my portion, then all is settled, then all
is at peace in the soul. A man that has God for his portion, if he do not know
it, will still be like a Ship at sea in the midst of a storm, tossed here and
there, and now rolling on one side, and then on the other, and never quiet,
never lying still; but a man that has God for his portion, and knows it, he is
like a Ship in a good Harbor that lies quiet and still, yea, he is like Mount
Zion that cannot be removed. But

Secondly, A clear, Luke 24.14 15.
now your hearts are as full of doubts, as hell is full of darkness; one day
you doubt whether your graces are true, and another day you doubt whether your
comforts are true; now you doubt of your Saintship, and anon of your Sonship,
and then of your Heirship; sometimes you doubt of your communion with God,
sometimes you doubt of your acquaintance with God, and sometimes you doubt of
your acceptance with God; one hour you doubt of the favor of God, and the next
hour you doubt of your access to God: And as it is thus with you, so it will
be thus with you, till you come to have some clear satisfaction in your own
spirits, that God is your portion. O Christians, had you but once a personal
evidence in your own bosoms that God is your portion, all those doubts that
are bred and fed by ignorance and unbelief, and that rob the soul of all joy
comfort, and content, and that render men Babes in Christianity, and that cast
reproach upon God, Christ, and the Promises, etc. and that do most gratify and
advantage Satan to tempt and try your souls, would vanish and disperse as the
Clouds do before the Sun when it shines in its brightness: till a Christians
eyes be opened to see God to be his portion, his heart will be full of doubts
and perplexities. John 20.13, 14, 15, 16.
Though Mary Magdalen was very near to Christ, yet she stands sighing,
mourning, and complaining, That they had stolen away her Lord. A Christian may
have God for his portion, yet till he comes to see God to be his portion he
will spend his days in sighing, mourning, and complaining; O Christians, till
you come to see God to be your portion, your doubts will lie down with you, and
rise with you; they will talk with you, and walk with you, till they make your
lives a very hell. 'Twas an excellent expression of Luther, The whole Scripture
(says he) does principally aim at this thing, That we should not doubt, but
that we should hope, trust, and believe that God is a merciful, bountiful, and
gracious God to his people; And what will bring a man's heart over to answer to
this blessed aim of the Scripture? certainly nothing below an assurance, that
God is his portion It was a noble resolution of blessed Bradford, who in one of
his Epistles, says thus, O Lord sometimes methinks I feel it so with me, as if
there were no difference between my heart and the hearts of the wicked; my mind
is as blind as theirs, and my will as stout, stubborn, and rebellious as
theirs, and my affections as much disordered as theirs, and my conscience as
much benumbed and stupefied as theirs, and my heart as hard and flintie as
theirs, etc. shall I therefore conclude, that thou art not my father? nay, I
will rather reason otherwise (says he) I do believe thou art my Father, I will
come unto thee, that thou may enlighten this blind mind of mine, and bend
and bow this stout and stubborn will of mine, and that thou may put order
into these disordered affections of mine, and that thou may put life and
quickness into this stupefied and benumbed conscience of mine, and that thou
may put softness and tenderness into this hard and slitie heart of mine:
And thus he nobly reasoned himself, and believed himself out of all his fears
and doubts. There is no such way for a man to be rid of all his doubts, as to
live in the sight and faith of this truth, that God is his portion.

Plutarch reports of one; who would not be resolved of his doubts, because he
would not lose the pleasure in seeking for resolution, like to him that would
not have his Physician to quench the thirst he felt in his Ague, because he
would not lose the pleasure of drinking; and like those that would not be freed
from their sins, because they would not lose the pleasure of sinning: But I
hope better things of all those that have God for their portion, than to find
them in love with their doubts, or to be unwilling to be rid of their doubts.
Next to a man's going to hell, it is one of the greatest afflictions in the
world for a man always to live in doubts about his going to heaven; Next to
damnation it is one of the greatest troubles that can attend a Christian to be
always exercised and perplexed with doubts about his salvation; Next to being
damned, it is the hell of hells to live in continual fears of damnation: Now the
only way to prevent all this, is to know that God is your portion. But

Thirdly, A clear, Habakkuk knew that God was the God of his salvation, and
that he was his po^tion, and therefore he rejoices though the Fig Tree did not
blossom, Hab. 3.17, 18.
and though there were no fruit in the vines, and though the labor of the
olive did fail, and the fields did yield no meat, and the stocks were cut off
from the fold, and there were no herd in the stalls: And the same noble temper
was upon those Worthies, in Heb. 10.34. They took joyfully the spoiling of
their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a better and an
enduring substance; they took joyfully the spoiling of their earthly portions
being well assured in their own souls that they should enjoy an heavenly
portion, 1 Cor. 5.6. to her 2.
an everlasting portion. And so the Apostles knew that they had an house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens; and this carried them bravely through
honor and dishonor, through evil report and good report, and through all
weaknesses, sicknesses, distresses, wants, dangers, and death; and this made
their heavy afflictions light, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
and their long afflictions short, and their bitter afflictions sweet; this was
that tree which being cast in the waters of Marah made them sweet; Exodus 15.23,
24, 25.
and this was that that did unsting all their crosses, losses and reproaches,
and that made them rejoice and sing under those very burdens and trials that
would have broke the necks, backs, Acts 5. and Chapter 16.
and hearts of others. When a man has a clear personal evidence that God is
his portion, then no outward changes will make any considerable change in him.
Genesis 31.7.
Though Laban had changed Jacobs wages ten times, yet Jacob was Jacob still;
let times change, and me^ change, and Powers change, and Nations change, yet a
man that has God for his portion, and knows it, will never change his
countenance, nor change his Master, nor change his service, nor change his
work, nor change his way; under all changes he will still be (semper idem)
always the same. Many great and dreadful changes past upon Joseph, Genesis 49.23,
24.
but yet under all Joseph's bow abode in strength. When a man knows that God is
his portion, whatever changes may pass upon him, yet his bow will still abide
in strength. Marcellus the Pope would not change his name, according to the
custom of other Popes, to show his immutability, and that he was no
changeling; but how many are there in these days, who were looked upon as
better men, who have changed their names, their notes, their coats, their
principles, their practices, and all for worldly advantages: these changelings
that change from better to worse, and from naught to be very naught, yea stark
naught, are the worst and naughtiest of men, and deserve to be hanged in
chains; and certainly when the wrath of God breaks forth, Mal. 4.1. Heb. 10.38.
these changelings shall be as stubble before it: God abhors none as he does
those who run from him to serve other lords, and who gad about to change their
way, Jer. 2.36, 37. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also
shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria; yea, thou shall go
forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head; for the Lord has rejected thy
confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them. There is nothing that will
keep a man from apostasy, and from making a defection from God, his ways, his
worship, his glory, etc. like a blessed persuasion, that God is his portion, 2
Pet. 1.5-11. But

Fourthly, solation to him, 2 Pet. 1.4. Isa. 12.3. Chapter 66.11. Without delight
the soul cannot live; take away all delight, and the soul dies, says Augustine.
but till then they will be but as dry breasts, as barren Heaths, as a
fruitless Wilderness, and as empty Wells; whilst a man is doubtful whether
God be his God, it is certain that the spring of joy and comfort will run low in
his soul; whilst a man lives in fear that his title and interest is not good,
how can he rejoice? When a man's interest in God is clear, then his heaven of
joy begins: a man that has God for his portion, and knows it, cannot but live
in a paradise of joy, and walk in a paradise of joy, and work in a paradise of
joy, and eat in a paradise of joy, and recreate himself in a paradise of joy,
and rest in a paradise of joy; he cannot but have an heaven of joy within him,
and an heaven of joy about him, and an heaven of joy over him; all his looks
will speak out joy within, and all his words will speak out joy within, and all
his works will speak out joy within, and all his ways will speak out joy
within. I remember a notable saying of one, August. in his Confessions.
How sweet was it to me of a sudden to be without these sweet vanities! and
these things which I was afraid to lose, with joy I let go, for thou who art
the true and only sweetness, did cast out those from me, and instead of them
did enter in thy self, who art more delightful than all pleasure, and more
clear than all light. When a man's interest in God is clear, Joh. 16.24
his joy will be full; when a man is happy, and knows it, he cannot but
rejoice; when a man has God for his portion, and knows it, all the world
cannot hinder the strong consolations of God from rising high in his soul: Why
have the Saints in heaven more joy and delight than the Saints on earth, but
because they have a clearer and a fuller knowledge of their interest and
propriety in God than the others have? The knowledge of a man's propriety in God
is the comfort of comforts: propriety makes every comfort a pleasureable
comfort, a delightful comfort. When a man walks in a fair Meadow, and can write
Mine upon it, and into a pleasant Garden, and can write Mine upon it, and into
a fruitful Corn-field, and can write Mine upon it, and into a stately
Habitation, and can write Mine upon it, and into a rich Mine, and can write
Mine upon it, O how does it please him? how does it delight him? how does it
joy and rejoice him? Of all words this word Meum is the sweetest and the
comfortablest: Ah, when a man can look upon God, and write Meum; when he can
look upon God, and say, This God is my God for ever and ever; when he can look
upon God, and say, this God is my portion; when he can look upon God, and say
with Thomas, John 20.
My Lord and my God, how will all the springs of joy rise in his soul! O who
can but joy to be owner of that God that fills heaven and earth with his
fullness? who can but rejoice to have him for his portion, in having of whom he
has all things, in having of whom he can want nothing. The serious thoughts of
our propriety in God will add much sweet to all our sweets, yea, it will make
every bitter sweet; when a man seriously thinks it is my God that cheares me
with his presence, it is my God that supports me with his power, it is my God
that guides me by his counsel, it is my God that supplies me with his
goodness, and it is my God that blesses all my blessings to me; it is my God
that afflicts me in love, it is my God that has broken me in my estate, and in
my credit, it is my God that has sorely visited such a child, it is my God
that has past a sentence of death upon such a friend, it is my God that has
thus straightened me in my liberty, and it is my God that has thus cast me down
at my enemies feet, etc. how does these thoughts cheer up the spirit of a man,
and make every bitter sweet, and every burden light unto him.

A beautiful face is at all times pleasing to the eye, but then especially when
there is joy manifested in the countenance; joy in the face puts a new beauty
upon a person, and makes that which before was beautiful to be exceeding
beautiful, it puts a luster upon beauty; and so does holy joy put a divine
beauty and luster upon all the ways of God, and upon all the people of God;
and therefore it highly concerns all Christians, as they would have an heavenly
beauty, luster, and glory upon them, to rejoice, and that they may rejoice, it
does as highly concern them to know their interest and propriety in God. But

Fifthly, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 13.14 Man's summum bonum stands in his
communion with God, as Scripture and experience evidences. Psalm. 144.15 My God
and I am good company, said famous Dr. Sibs.
there are to Christians on earth that have such high, such choice, such free,
such full, such sweet, and such uninterrupted communion with God, as those that
have a clear sight of their interest and propriety in God. The Spouse in that
Book of Solomon's Song, again, and again, and again sings and sounds out her
propriety and interest in Christ, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his:
Cant. 6.3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: Cant. 7.10. I am my
beloveds, and his desire is toward me. Now mark, how does the sense of this
her propriety in Christ work? why it works very highly, very strongly, very
inflamingly, very affectionately; Cant. 1.2, 3, 4. Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better than wine: Because of the savor of
thy good ointments, thy Name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the
Virgins love thee. Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me
into his chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
love more than wine: the upright love thee. Verse. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my
beloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. Chap. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons,
I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto
my taste: He brought me to the Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was
love. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love: His
left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me. And Chap. 7.5.
The King is held in the galleries. The Spouse had a clear sight and a deep
sense of her interest and propriety in Christ, and O how high, how close, how
full, how sweet is she in her communion and fellowship with Christ! it is the
sight and sense of propriety and interest that heightens and sweetens that
communion that is between husband and wife, father and child, brother and
sister, and friend and friend, so it is the sight and sense of a man's propriety
and interest in God that heightens and sweetens his communion and fellowship
with God. A clear sight of a man's interest and propriety in God will
exceedingly sweeten every thought of God, Psalm. 139.17, 18.
and every appearance of God, and every taste of God, and every smile of God,
and every communication of God, and every ordinance of God, and every work of
God, and every way of God; yea, it will sweeten every rod that is in the hand
of God, and every wrinkle that is in the face of God; a man that sees his
interest in God will hang upon him, and trust in him, though he should write
never such bitter things against him, and though he should deal never so
severely with him, yea, though he should slay him, as you may see in Job 13.15.
He hit it, who said, A man whose soul is conversant with God shall find more
pleasure in the Desert and in death, than in the Palace of a Prince. Adam in
vit. Regii, p. 78.
Vrbanus Regius having one days converse with Luther, said, It was one of the
sweetest days that ever he had in all his life: But if one days communion
with Luther was so sweet; O how sweet must one days communion with God be! and
therefore as ever you would have high, and full, and sweet communion with God,
keep up a clear sight, a blessed sense of your interest and propriety in God.
But

Sixthly, and a pillar of fire by night; it is Jacobs ladder, it is a salve for
every sore, it is physic for every disease, it is a remedy against every
malady, it is an anchor at Sea, and a shield on shore, it is a star to guide
you, a staff to support you, a sword to defend you, a Pavilion to hide you, a
fire to warm you, a banquet to refresh you, a City of refuge to secure you, and
a Cordial to cheer you; and what would you have more? But

Seventhly and lastly, A clear personal evidence that God is a man's portion
will exceedingly sweeten the thoughts of death, Eccles. 7.1. Job 18.14.
it will make a man look upon the King of terrors as the King of desires, it
will make a man laugh at the shaking of the spear at the sounding of the
trumpet, at the confused noise of the battle, at garments rolled in blood, at
the sighs and groans of the wounded, and at the heaps of the slain. 'Twas the
Martyrs clear sight of their interest and propriety in God that made them
complement with lions, and dare their persecutors, and to kiss the stake, and
to sing and clap their hands in the midst of the flames, and to tread upon hot
burning coals as upon beds of roses, and divinely to triumph over their
tormenters; 'twas this that made the primitive Christians ambitious of
Martyrdom, and that made them willingly and cheerfully lay down their lives,
that they might Eliah-like mount to heaven in fiery Chariots. A man that sees
his propriety in God, knows that death shall be the Funeral of all his sins,
sorrows, afflictions, temptations, desertions, oppositions, vexations,
oppressions, and persecutions, and he knows that death shall be the
resurrection of his hopes, joys, delights, comforts, and contentments, and
that it shall bring him to a more clear, full, perfect, and constant enjoyment
of God; and this makes him sweetly and triumphingly to sing it out, O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37. and O
that these seven Considerations might prevail with all your souls to be
restless, till you have in your own bosoms clear and full satisfaction, that
God is your portion. Now this last Inference leads me by the hand to an use of
trial and examination. O Sirs, if God be the Saints portion, the believers
portion, how highly does it concern every one that looks upon himself, as a
Saint, or as a believer, to search, try, and examine whether God be his
portion, or no?

But you will say, life from the dead, it would create an heaven in our hearts
on this side heaven, it would presently put us into a paradise of pleasure and
delight; but still the question is, how shall we know it? it is an easy thing
to say, that God is our portion; but how shall we come in fallibly to know,
that God is our portion?

Now to give clear and full satisfaction to this great and weighty Question, I
shall give in these following Answers, by which you may certainly and
undoubtedly know, whether God be your portion, or no.

First, Lord, says Austine, the more I meditate on thee, the sweeter thou art
unto me. Hierome calls meditation his paradise. And Theophylact calls it the
very gate and portal by which we enter into glory. To think is to live, says
Cicero.
precious, high, and honorable thoughts of God, then thy thoughts will still
be running out after God, and thy meditations of him will be sweet; a man that
has God for his portion is always best, when his thoughts and meditations are
running out most after God, Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet,
I will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied, as with
marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: When I
remember thee upon my bed (or beds, as the Hebrew has it; David never bedded
at home nor abroad, here nor there, but still his thoughts were running out to
God) and meditate on thee in the night-watches. Psalm. 139.17, 18. How precious
also are thy thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum of them? If I should
count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake I am still with
thee. The Psalmist had very frequent, high, precious, and honorable thoughts
of God, he valued nothing at so high a rate as sweet and noble thoughts of God,
and of his power, wisdom, goodness, faithfulness, and g aciousnesse, etc.
David had such precious thoughts of God, and such great and glorious thoughts
of God, and such infinite and innumerable thoughts of God, that he was as well
able to number the sands of the Sea, as he was able to number them up: And when
I awake I was still with thee; He was still a contemplating upon God, he did
fall asleep with precious thoughts of God, and he did awake with precious
thoughts of God; he did rise up with precious thoughts of God, and he did lie
down with precious thoughts of God; he did go forth with precious thoughts of
God, and he did return home with precious thoughts of God. Take a Christian
when he is himself, when he is neither under sad desertions, nor black
temptations, nor great afflictions, and he can as soon forget his own and his
fathers house, the wife of his bosom, the fruit of his loins, yea, he can as
soon forget to eat his bread, as he can forget his God.

When Alexander the Great had overthrown Darius, King of Persia, he took among
the spoils a most rich Cabinet full of the choicest Jewels that were in all the
world; upon which there rise a dispute before him, to what use he should put
the Cabinet, and every one having spent his judgment according to his fancy,
the King himself concluded, that he would keep that Cabinet to be a Treasury to
lay up the books of Homer in, which were his greatest joy and delight. A
sanctified memory is a rich Cabinet full of the choicest thoughts of God; Psa.
25.1. Ps. 86.4. Psalm. 143.8. Basil calls meditation the Treasury, where all
graces are locked up
it is that rich Treasury wherein a Christian is still a laying up more and more
precious thoughts of God, and more and more high and holy thoughts of God, and
more and more honorable and noble thoughts of God, and more and more awful and
reverend thoughts of God and more and more sweet and comfortable thoughts of
God, and more and more tender and compassionate passionate thoughts of God,
etc. Take a Christian in his ordinary course, and you shall find that
wherever he is his thoughts are running out after God, and about what ever he
is his thoughts are still a running out after God; and into what company soever
he is cast whether they are good or bad, yet still his thoughts are running out
after God, etc.

Look, as an earthly minded man has his thoughts and meditations still
exercised and taken up with the world, as you may see in Haman, whose heart and
thoughts were taken up with his honors, preferments, riches, wife, children,
The thoughts and hearts of the people of Constantinople were so extremely set
upon the world and running out after the world, that they were buying and
selling in their shops even three days after that the Turks were within the
walls of their City, and that was the reason that the streets run down with
their blood, and the blood of their wives and children.
and friends, etc. Esth. 5.10, 11, 12. Nevertheless Haman refrained himself,
and when he came home he sent and called for his friends and Zeresh his wife:
And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his
children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had
advanced him above the Princes and servants of the King: Haman said moreover,
yea Esther the Queen did let no man come in with the King unto the banquet that
she had prepared but my self, and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the
King. And the same spirit you may see working in those that had made Gold their
God, in that Psalm, 49.10, 11. For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool
and the brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others: Their inward
thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling-places to all generations; they call their lands after their own
names. The Hebrew runs thus, Their inwards are their houses for ever; as if
their houses were get within them; not only the thoughts but the very inmost
thoughts, the most retired thoughts, and recesses of worldlings souls are taken
up about earthly things. And though they care not whether their names are
written in heaven, or no, yet they do all they can to propagate and immortalize
their names on earth: And the rich fool was one in spirit with these the
Psalmist speaks of, as you may see in that Luke 12. v. 16. to v. 22. And he
spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought
forth plentifully. And he thought within himself, (the Greek word (...) is a
mavelous proper word for the purpose, it signifies to talk with a man's self,
or to reason with a man's self; this foolish worldling was much in talking to
himself, and in reasoning with himself about his goods and barns, etc. as the
usual manner of men is that are of a worldly spirit) saying, what shall I do,
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits: and he said, this will I do,
I will pull down my Barns, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my
fruits and my goods: And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid
up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Among all his
worldly thoughts there is not one thought of God, of Christ, of grace, of
heaven, of holiness, of eternity to be found; his thoughts were so taken up
with his bags, and his barns, and his buildings, and his ease, and his belly,
that he had no time to think of providing for another world; and therefore God
quickly dispatches him out of this world, and throws him down from the highest
pinnacle of prosperity and worldly glory into the greatest gulf of wrath and
misery, v. 20. and this foolish worldling puts me in mind of another, who being
offered an Horse by his fellow, upon condition that he would but say the Lords
prayer, and think upon nothing but God; which proffer being accepted, he began;
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name; But I must have the
Bridle too, said he: No, nor the Horse neither, said the other, for thou have
lost both already.

When worldlings should most think of God, and be most struck with the dread
and majesty of God, and be most afflicted and taken up with the glory of God,
yet then their thoughts and hearts will be a gadding and a running after the
world, as you may see in Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. and in Paul's,
Phil. 3.18, 19. When Queen Mary was dying, she said, that if they did but open
her when she was dead, they should find Calice lying at her heart: ah how often
does stinking lusts and rotten Towns, and moth-eaten bags, and other trifling
vanities lie near those hearts where God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and
grace, and Ordinances and Saints, and heaven should lie: Look as the thoughts
of the men of the world do mainly run out after the world, after their earthly
portions; so the thoughts of those that have God for their portion do mainly
run out after God, and they are never so well as when they are most a thinking
and a musing on God. But

Secondly, Psalm. 28.1. Psalm. 31.2, 3 Psalm. 61.2. Psa. 62.2, 6, 7. Psa. 92.15.
Psalm. 94.22 Isa. 32.1, 2.
troubles, and wants, thou will run to thy God, thou will fly to the Lord, as
to thy only City of refuge, 1 Samuel 30.6. And David was greatly distressed, for
the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved
(or bitter) every man for his sons, and for his daughters, but David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God. When a shower of stones were coming about David's
ears, he runs and shelters himself under the wings of his God. Though David was
an exile in an heathenish Country, though Ziglag the place of his habitation
was burnt, though he had neither house nor home to flee to, though his wives
were in his enemies hands, and though his friends and followers were
desperately incensed, enraged, exasperated, and provoked against him, and took
counsel together about stoning of him, looking upon him as the Author of all
their crosses, losses, calamities, and miseries; yet now he comforts and
incourages himself in the Lord his God, Psalm. 142.4. I looked on my right hand,
and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, no man
cared for my soul. But what does the Psalmist do in this case? does he despair,
or despond? no; does he cast away his hope and confidence in God? no; why what
does he do then? why when all outward comforts fail him, he runs to God, as to
his last refuge, v. 5, 6. I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said thou art my refuge
and my portion in the land of the living: Attend unto my cry, for I am brought
very low, deliver me from my persecutors, for they are stronger than I. He does
not run in his straits from God to the Creatures, for that had been to run from
the sountain of living waters to broken cisterns, Jer. 2.12, 13 John 6.68 Isa.
33.16.
from the light of the San to the light of a farthing candle, and from the Rock
of Ages to a leaf driven about with the wind, and from paradise into an howling
wilderness, etc. but whether does he run then? why he runs to God, he knew
that God was his light, his life, his love, his peace, his joy, his strength,
his shelter, his safety, his security, his crown, his glory, and therefore he
runs to his God; and indeed in times of danger, whether should the child run to
shelter himself, but to his father? and whether should the wise run, but to her
husband? and the servant, but to his master? and the soldier, but to his
strong hold? and a Christian, but to his God? Prove. 18.10. The Name of the Lord
is a strong tower, the righteous runs into it, and is safe. Sometimes by the
Name of the Lord we are to understand God himself, but most commonly Gods
Attributes are called his Name, because by them he is known as a man is by his
name; and here by the Name of the Lord we are to understand the power of the
Lord, for by that God is known, as men are known by their names. Now God
himself is a strong tower, and the power of God is a strong tower, yea, it is a
tower as high as heaven, and as strong as strength it self, it is a tower so
deep no Pioneer can undermine it, so thick, no Cannon can pierce it, so high,
no Ladder can scale it, so strong, that no enemy can assault it, or ever, be
able to stand before it, and so well furnished and provided for all purposes
and intents, that all the powers of darkness can never distress it, or in the
least straiten it. Now to this impregnable and inexpugnable tower the righteous
in all their distresses and dangers run: All creatures run to their refuges
when they are hunted and pursued; and so do righteous souls to theirs; but what
does the righteous man gain, by running to his strong Tower? why he gains
safety; he is safe, says the Text; or rather according to the Hebrew The
Hebrew word is from Sagab that signifies to exalt, or to set alost
(...) exaltatur, he is exalted, he is set aloft, he is a soul out of gunshot,
he is a soul out of all hazard and danger, he is safe in everlasting arms, he
is safe in his strong tower of defense, he can easily overlook all hazards,
yea, he can look upon the greatest dangers with an holy neglect. And when the
burning fiery furnace was heat seven times hotter than at first, whither does
Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego run? why they run to God, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.
Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego answered, and said to the King, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; If it be so,
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and
he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King: But if not, be it known unto thee,
O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which
thou have set up: And so Moses in that Psalm. 90.1. Lord, thou have been our
dewlling place in all generations; or as the Hebrew has it, thou have been our
refuge place in generation and generation. By this Hebraisme, generation and
generation, the Prophet sets forth all generations, to show that there has
been no generation wherein God has not been the refuge of his people: God was
a refuge to his people before the Flood, and he has been a refuge since the
Flood, and he will be a refuge to his people, whilst he has a people in the
world. All the time that Moses and the people of Israel were a traveling up
and down in that terrible howling wilderness, wherein they were compassed
about with dreadful dangers on all hands; God was a refuge and a dwelling place
unto them. In all their troubles and travels for four hundred years together
God was a shelter, a refuge, and an house of defense unto them; every man's
house is his strong castle, and thither he retreats when dangers come; and thus
did the people of God in the Text, when dangers threatened them, they still run
to their God, they still made their retreat to the Holy One of Israel. A man
that has God for his portion, when he is at worst can never be houselesse nor
harbourless; as long as God lives he can never want an house, a mansion house
to hide his head in. All the powers on earth and all the powers of hell can
never unhouse, nor never unharbour, nor never unshelter that man that has God
for his portion. 'Twas a witty saying of that learned man Picus Mirandula, God
created the earth for beasts to inhabit, the sea for fishes, the air for
fowls, and heaven for Angels and Stars, so that man has no place to dwell and
abide in but God alone. And certainly he that by faith dwells in God, dwells in
the best, the noblest, the safest, and the strongest house that ever was dwelt
in: And so Psalm. 91.1, 2. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, he is my
refuge, and my fortress; my God, in him will I trust: In this whole Psalm the
safety of a Saint is set forth to the life; to abide under the shadow of the
Almighty, notes the defense and protection of God: Those words, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty, are a Metaphor taken from a bird or an hen
that hides her young ones under her wings, and so secures them from the Kite,
or any other birds of prey. God never wants a wing to hide his children under;
and look, as little chickens run under the wings of the hen when danger is
near, so the people of God do commonly run under the wings of God when danger
is near. And certainly, that Christian may well bid defiance to all dangers,
and easily and sweetly sing away all cares and fears, who can by faith shelter
himself and lodge himself under the shadow of Shaddai.

Look, As the worldling in all his straits, troubles, trials, dangers, and
wants still runs to his bags, I have read of a wretched worldling, who being
sick to death, called for one of his bags of gold, and laid it to his heart,
and then cried out, O it will not do, it will not do; and then called for
another, and still cried out, Oh, it will not do, it will not do.
to his earthly portion for succor, for comfort, for support, for relief, for
shelter, for protection, Prove. 18.11. Matt. 19.24. 1 Timothy 5.17. So a Christian
in all his troubles, trials, and distresses, still runs to his God for shelter,
comfort, and support, Ps. 31.1, 2, 3. In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let
me never be ashamed; deliver me in thy righteousness: Bow down thine ear to
me, deliver me speedily, be thou my strong rock for an house of defense to save
me: For thou art my rock, and my fortress, therefore for thy Names sake lead
me and guide me. Psalm. 61.2, 3. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee,
when my heart is overwhelmed lead me to the rock that is higher than I: For
thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. Psalm.
94.21, 22. They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent blood: But the Lord is my defense, and my God is the
rock of my refuge. Psa. 57.2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that
performs all things for me. Isa. 25.9. And it shall be said in that day, Lo,
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord,
we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation; Micah
7.7. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
salvation, my God will hear. Thus you see that the Saints in all their straits
and trials do still run to God; they know that that God that is their portion
is an all-sufficient God, and that he is a Sun and a Shield to them that walk
uprightly; and therefore they delight to be still a running under his shadow. A
man that has God for his portion may truly say in his greatest distresses and
troubles, Well, though I have no riches to fly to, nor no friends to shelter
me, nor no relations to stand by me, nor no visible power on earth to protect
me, yet I have a God for my portion that is always willing to supply me, and
able to secure me, Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee, O Lord, my strength (or as
the Hebrew has it, I will dearly love the Lord, or I will love him with inmost
bowels of affections, as a tender hearted mother loves her dearest babe with
the inmost bowels of affections) The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my
deliverer, my God, my strength, in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn
of my salvation, and my high Tower. In this Verse you have nine several
expressions to discover what an all-sufficient refuge God is to his people in
their greatest distresses. When a Christian is at worst, yet he has bread
celestial, bread to eat that the world knows not of; the grand policy of a
Christian to secure himself against all dangers, is to run to God. But

Thirdly, If God be thy portion, and rather part with any thing, than part with
thy portion. Naboth would not upon any terms part with his inheritance, he
would rather let all go, yea, his very life go, then let his inheritance go,
his portion go, 1 Kings 21.3. And Naboth said to Ahab, the Lord forbid it me,
that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee: or as the Hebrew
has it, This be abomination to me from the Lord; that is, the Lord keep me
from this as from an abominable thing. Levit. 25.23. Number. 36.7 Fzek. 46.18.
To alter or alienate the property of inheritances was expressly forbidden by
God in his Law; and therefore Naboth looks upon Ahabs offer and motion as a
detestable and an abominable thing, and resolves to hold fast his inheritance
whatever it cost him: so a Christian will hold fast his God whatever comes on
it; he will let any thing go rather than let his God go, or his Christ go;
Cant. 3.4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves; I held him, and would not let him go, The Motto of a Christian,
whilst he is in the wilderness of this world, is, self-diffidence, and
Christ-dependence, Cant. 8.5.
until I had brought him into my mothers house, and into the chamber of her
that conceived me. The Hebrew word that is here rendered held, is from Achaz,
which signifies to hold, as a man would hold his possession, his inheritance;
the word signifies to hold with both hands, to hold with all ones might, and
with all ones strength; and thus the Spouse held the Lord Jesus, she held him
with both hands, she held him with all her might, and with all her strength,
she held him with a holy violence, with an holy force; she held him as a man
would hold his prisoner that had a mind to escape, or as a man would hold his
sword or buckler when his life is in danger: so Jacob, Genesis 32.26. And he said,
let me go, for the day breaks: and he said, I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me. When Jacob was all alone, and in a dark night, and upon one
leg, and when his joints were out of joint, and he very much over-match't, yet
then he holds God fast, Hos. 12.4.
he wrestles and weeps, and weeps and wrestles, he tugs and sweats, and sweats
and tugs, and will not let go his hold till like a Prince he had prevailed with
God. Ruth. 1.14. to the 19.
Ruth, you know, was so glued to her mother Naomi, that no arguments could
prevail with her to leave her mother, she was fully resolved in this, that
whether her mother went she would go, and where her mother lodged she would
lodge, and that her mothers people should be her people, and her mothers God
her God; and that where her mother died, there she would die, and there would
she be buried: So a man that has God for his portion is so glued to his God,
that nothing can take him off from following of God, and from cleaving to God.
When David was in his wildernesse-condition, yet then his soul followed hard
after God, then his soul stuck close to God; Ps. 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water is: Verse. 8. my soul follows
hard after thee; or as the words may be read, My soul cleaves after thee.
David's enemies did not follow harder after him, than he followed hard after
God; the wife in a man's bosom could not cleave so close to him, as David's soul
did cleave close to God, when he was in a wilderness estate, when he was in an
afflicted condition; it is nothing to follow God in a paradise, but it is rare to
follow God in a wilderness; it is nothing to follow God when the way is strowed
with rose-buds, but it is the glory of a Christian to follow God when the way is
strowed with thorns and briars; it is nothing to follow God in a crowd (or with
the crowd) but it is the excellency of a Christian to follow God in a
wilderness, where few or none follows after him; it is nothing to follow God in
the midst of all encouragements, but it is wonderful to follow God in the midst
of all discouragements: O the integrity! O the ingenuity! O the strong
intention! O the deep affection! O the noble resolution of that Christian that
hangs upon God in a wilderness, and that cleaves to God in a wilderness, and
that follows hard after God in a wilderness! Look, as Shechems soul did cleave
to Dinah, Genesis 34.3. Chap. 18.29, 30. 1 Samuel 18.1, 3.
and as Jacobs soul did cleave to Rachel, and as Jonathans soul did cleave to
David in the very face of all hazards, dangers, difficulties, troubles, trials,
and distresses; so the very soul of a man that has God for his portion will
cleave to God in the very face of all hazards, dangers, difficulties, troubles,
trials, and distresses that he meets withal, Psa. 44.8. to verse. 23. It Is
neither the frowns of men, nor the reproaches of men, nor the scorns of men,
nor the contempts of men, nor the oppositions of men, nor the treacheries of
men, nor the combinations of men that will work him to let go his hold of God.
A man that has God for his portion, knows that whilst he holds his God he
holds his life, and that whilst he holds his God he holds his comfort, his
crown, his heaven, his all; and therefore he will rather let all go, than let
his God go; and so much the several leave nots that are scattered up and down
in the blessed Scripture does clearly evidence, as that in 1 Kings 8.57. The
Lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers, let him not leave us, nor
forsake us: and that, Psalm. 27.9. Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy
servant away in anger; thou have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake
me, O God of my salvation. And so Ps. 119.121. I have done judgment and
justice, leave me not to mine oppressors. And so Psalm. 141.8. But mine eyes
are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not my soul
destitute, or leave not my soul naked, as the Hebrew word signifies: And so in
that Jer. 14.9. Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that
cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy
Name, leave us not. Now in these five Scriptures you have five leave us nots,
and what do they import? certainly nothing less than a mavelous
unwillingnesse in the people of God to part with God, or to let go their hold
of God.

I have read of Cynaegirus; an Athenian Captain, who in the Persian Wars,
pursuing his enemies Ship, which was laden with the rich spoils of his
Country, and ready to set sail, how he first held it with his right hand, till
that was cut off; and then with his left hand, till that was cut off, and then
with his stumps till his arms were cut off, and then he held it with his
teeth, till his head was cut off (...) as long as he had any life or strength
left in him he would not let go his hold; so a man that has God for his
portion will rather die at the foot of God, than he will let go his hold of
God, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. But

Fourthly, 1 Samuel 30.6 Hab. 3.17, 18. Psalm. 73.26 Romans 14.7, 8. Gal. 2.20.
Phil. 1.21.
as you may plainly see by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together.
Look, how the poor man lives upon his labors, the covetous man upon his bags,
the ambitious man upon his honors, the voluptuous man upon his pleasures, etc.
so does a Christian live upon his God; in all his duties he lives upon God, and
in all his mercies he lives upon God, and in all his wants he lives upon God,
and in all his straits and trials he lives upon God, and in all his
contentments and enjoyments he still lives upon God; he lives upon God for his
justification, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies, and he lives upon God for
the perfecting of his sanctification; Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very
thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ; and he lives upon God for the maintaining and increasing
of his consolation, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. When he is under the frowns of the world,
then he lives upon the smiles of God; when he is under the hatred of the world,
then he lives upon the loves of God; and when he is under the reproaches of the
world, then he lives upon his credit with God; when he is under the threatenings
of the world, then he lives upon the protection of God; and when he is under
the designs and plottings of the world, then he lives upon the wisdom and
counsel of God; when he is under the slightings and neglects of the world, then
he lives upon the care of God; and when he is under the crosses and losses of
the world, then he lives upon the fullness and goodness of God, etc. Alexander
told his soldiers, I wake that ye may sleep; most sure I am, that he that is
the Saints portion never slumbers nor sleeps: Psa. 121.3, 4
God is always watchful and wakeful to do his people good, he never wants
skill or will to help them, he never wants a purse, a hand, or a heart to
supply them, etc.

O Sirs, Every man singles out something to live upon; some single out one
thing some another; says the wife, I must live upon my husband; says the
child, I must live upon my father; says the servant, I must live upon my
master; says the old, we must live upon the labors of the young; says the
poor; we must live upon the charity of the rich; and why then shall not a
Christian live upon his God? A Christian that has God for his portion may say
when he is at worst, Well, though I have not this, nor that, nor the other
outward comfort to live upon, yet I have the power of a God to live on, and I
have the providence of a God to live on, and I have the promise of a God to
live on, and I have the oath of a God to live on, and I have the love of a God
to live on, and I have the bounty of a God to live on, Psalm. 23.
and I have the fullness of a God to live on, and I have the care of a God to
live on; and what can I desire more? Surius de vitis. SS.
John of Alexandria, sirnam'd the Almoner, did use yearly to make even his
Revenues, and when he had distributed all to the poor, he thanked God that he
had now nothing left him to live upon but his Lord and Master Jesus Christ:
When all is gone, yet a Christian has his God to live upon as his portion, and
that is enough to answer to all other things, and to make up the want of all
other things. Look, as he has nothing that has not God for his portion, so he
wants nothing that has God for his portion. Cajetan.
'Twas a weighty saying of one, The spiritual good of a man consists in this,
that a man has friendship with God, and consequently that he lives for him, to
him, with him, in him; that he lives for him by consent, to him by
conversation, with him by cohabitation, and in him by contentation. Old godly
Similes said, that he had been in the world sixty years, but had lived but
seven, counting his life not from his first birth, but from his new birth. A
man lives no longer than he lives upon God as his portion: when a man begins to
live upon God as his portion, then he begins to live indeed, and not till then.
But

Fifthly, If God be thy portion, Psa. 42.1, 2
the portion always carries the heart with it, Matthew. 6.20, 21. But lay up for
your selves treasures in heaven, Bernard well observes that a wise man's heart
is with the Lord.
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal: For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.
Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, (or, I will
diligently seek thee, as Merchants do precious stones that are of greatest
value) my soul thirsts for thee: (he does not say, my soul thirsts for
water, but my soul thirsts for thee; nor he does not say, my soul thirsts
for the blood of my enemies, but my soul thirsts for thee; nor he does not
say, my soul thirsts for deliverance out of this dry and barren wilderness,
but my soul thirsts for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is;
nor he does not say, my soul thirsts for a Crown, a Kingdom, but my soul
thirsts for thee) my flesh longs for thee: These words are a notable
Metaphor taken from women with child, to note his earnest, ardent, and strong
affections toward God. And so Psalm. 84.2. My heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God. The word that is here rendered cries, is from Ranan that
signifies to shout shrill, or cry out, as soldiers do at the beginning of a
battle, when they cry out, Fall on, Fall on, Fall on, or when they cry out
after a victory, Victory, Victory, Victory; the Hebrew word notes a strong cry,
or to cry as a child cries when it is sadly hungry, for now every whit of the
child cries, hands cry, and face cries, and feet cries; and so Psalm. 119.21.
My soul breaks for the longings it has unto thy judgments at all times.
Look, as the stone will still be rolling toward its center, its place, though
it break it self into a thousand pieces; so a soul that has God for his
portion cannot rest till he comes to God, till he comes to his center. It Is
very observable, that when the God of glory appeared to Abraham, Act. 7.1, 2, 3
4, 5. Genesis 12.1.
he made nothing of leaving his fathers house, his kindred, and his Country; a
glimpse of that glory works him to give up all easily, readily, and quietly. A
man that can look upon the God of glory to be his portion, he cannot but look
upon the greatest, the nearest, and the dearest enjoyments of the world, as
nothing; he cannot but look upon honor as a bubble, and worldly pomp as a
fancy, and great men as a lie, and poor men as vanity; he cannot but look upon
his nearest and his dearest relations, his highest and his noblest friends, his
choicest and his sweetest comforts, but as a dream and a shadow that soon
vanishes away.

It Is observable in the Courts of Kings and Princes, that children and the
ruder sort of people are much taken with pictures and rich shows, and feed
their fancies with the sight of rich hangings and fine gay things; when as such
as are great favorites at Court pass by all those things as things that are
below them, and as things that are not worthy of their notice, who have
business with the King, and who have the eye, the ear, the hand, and the heart
of the King to take pleasure and delight in: so most men admire the poor low
things of the world, and are much taken with them as things that have a great
deal of worth and excellency in them; but a man that has God for his portion,
the King of Kings for his portion, and all that he has, he passes by all the
gay and gallant things of the world, as things below him, as things not worthy
of him; his business is with his God, and his thoughts, and heart, and
affections are taken up with his God.

Naturalists tell us, that the loadstone will not draw in the presence of the
diamond; O Sirs, whilst a man can eye God as his portion, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26,
27, 35.
all the pride, pomp, bravery, glory, and gallantry in the world will never be
able to draw him from God. It is reported, that when the tyrant Tragine
commanded Ignatius to be ripped up and unbowelled, they found Jesus Christ
written upon his heart in characters of gold; here was an heart worth gold
indeed, Christ carried away his heart from all other things: So if God be thy
portion, he will certainly carry thy heart away from all earthly things: Look,
as earthly portions carry away worldly hearts from God; Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. Luke
12.16. to the 21.
so when God once comes to be a man's portion, he carries his heart away from
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. All the world cannot keep a man's interest
and his heart asunder: If a man make sin his interest, all the world cannot
keep sin and his heart asunder; if a man make the world his interest, all the
power on earth cannot keep the world and his heart asunder: And so if a man
make God his interest, all the world cannot keep God and his heart asunder; no
sword, no prison, Heb. 11.
no racks, no flames can keep a man's interest and his heart asunder; a man's
heart will be working toward his interest, even through the very fire, as you
may see in the three Children, Dan. 3.17, 18. Look as the Needles point in the
Seamans Compass never stands still, but quivers and shakes till it come right
against the North Pole; and as the Wisemen of the East never stood still, till
they were right against the Star which appeared to them; and as the Star it
self never stood still till it came right against that other Star, which shined
more brightly in the Manger than the Sun did in the Firmament; and as Noah's
Dove could find no rest for the sole of her foot all the while she was
fluttering over the Flood, till she returned to the Ark with an Olive branch in
her mouth; so the heart of a Christian that has God for his portion, can never
rest, can never be at quiet, but in God. But

Sixthly, If God be thy portion, Histories abound with instances of this nature
Every man will own his portion, and stand up stoutly and resolutely for his
portion; and so will every Christian do for his God, Psalm. 119.46. I will speak
of thy testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed. David was resolved
upon a noble and resolute owning of God and his testimonies before the greatest
and the highest of men; and this he would do and not blush, A man of no
resolution, or of a weak resolution, will be won with a nut, and lost with an
apple; but a man of a noble resolution will own God in the face of the greatest
majesty on earth.
this he would do and not be ashamed, this he would do and not be daunted: It
was neither the majesty or authority of Princes, 'twas neither the power or
dread of Princes that could hinder David from giving in his testimony on Gods
side, or on Truths side: Josh. 24.18. We will serve the Lord, for he is our
God: ver. 21, 22. And the people said unto Joshua, nay, but we will serve the
Lord; and Joshua said unto the people, ye are witnesses against your selves,
that ye have chosen you the Lord to serve him: and they said, we are witnesses.
Ver. 24. And the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and
his voice will we obey. They had chosen God to be their God (as God had chosen
them to be his peculiar people above all the Nations of the earth) and
therefore notwithstanding all that Joshua had objected, they were fully
resolved to own the Lord, and to cleave to the Lord, and to obey the Lord, and
wholly to devote themselves to the service of the Lord: having taken the Lord
to be their God, they were firmly resolved to own the Lord really, and to own
him fully, and to own him primarily, and to own him only, and to own him
everlastingly. And so Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be
thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his
Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken unto his voice. They had
avouched God to be their God, and therefore they were resolved upon all those
holy ways and means whereby they might evidence to the world their owning of
God to be their God. And so in that 2 Chronicles. 30.8. They yield themselves unto
the Lord, or as the Hebrew has it, They give the hand unto the Lord: You know
when men make Covenants or Agreements to own one another, or to stand by one
another, they commonly strike hands, or take one another by the hand: Certainly
all those that have the Lord for their portion, have given their hands to the
Lord, that they will own him, and stand by him, and cleave to him, as Jonathan
did to David, or as Ruth did to Naomi. Dan. 3.17.18.
How stoutly and courageously did the three Children own the Lord, and stand by
the Lord in the face of the fiery Furnace? Chapter 6.
and Daniel will upon choice be rather cast into the Den of Lions, then that
the honor of God should in the least be clouded, or his glory darkened by any
neglects or omissions of his. Hab. 11.34. - ult.
And so did all those Worthies, of whom this world was not worthy: O how did
they own God, and stand up for God, notwithstanding the edge of the sword, the
violence of fire, the cruel mockings and scourgings, the bonds and
imprisonments, the stoning and sawing asunder, the temptings, and wanderings
about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, and all other trials and torments that did
attend them. Basil affirms that the primitive Christians did so courageously
and resolutely own God, and stand up for God in the face of the most dreadful
sufferings, that many of the Heathens seeing their heroic zeal, courage,
magnanimity, and constancy, turned Christians. Domitian raised the second
persecution against the Christians, because they would not give the title of
Lord to any but Christ, nor worship any but God alone. Among the many thousand
instances that might be given, let me only give you a few of a later date,
whereby you may see how courageously and resolutely the Saints have stood up
for God, and owned God in the face of the greatest dangers that has attended
them.

Luther owned God, and stood up resolutely for God against the world: Acts and
Mon. 776.
And when the Emperor sent for him to Worms, and his friends dissuaded him
from going, as sometimes Paul's did him; Co, (said he) I will surely go (since I
am sent for) in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; yea, though I knew that
there were as many Devils in Worms to resist me, as there be tiles to cover
the houses, yet I would go: and when he and his associates were threatened with
many dangers from opposers on all hands, he lets fall this heroic and
magnanimous speech, Come, let us sing the six and fortieth Psalm, and then let
them do their worst. And indeed 'twas a brave courageous speech of the same
Author, who when one demanded, where he would be, when the Emperor should with
all his forces fall upon the Elector of Saxony, (who was the chief Protector of
the Protestants) answered, Aut in coelo, aut sub coelo, either in heaven, or
under heaven.

William Flower (the Martyr) said, that the Heavens should as soon fall, as he
would forsake his profession, or budge in the least degree from it.

Apollonius (as Philostratus reports) being asked, if he did not tremble at the
sight of the tyrant, made this answer, God which has given him a terrible
countenance, has given also unto me an undaunted heart.

When the persecutors by their dreadful threatenings did labor to terrify one
of the Martyrs, he replied, that there was nothing of things visible, nor
nothing of things invisible that he was afraid of: I will (says he) stand to
my profession of the Name of Christ, and contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints.

When Bishop Gardener asked Rowland Tailor, if he did not know him, etc. he
answered, yea, I know you, and all your greatness, yet you are but a mortal
man: and if I should be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear you not God, the
Lord of us all?

The Executioner kindling the fire behind Jerome of Prague, he bad him kindle
it before his face, for (said he) if I had been afraid of it, I had not come to
this place, having had so many opportunities offered me to escape it; and at
the giving up of the ghost, he said, This soul of mine in flames of fire, O
Christ, I offer thee.

The German Knight in his Apologetical Letter for Luther against the Pontifical
Clergy, says, I will go through what I have undertaken against you, and will
stir up men to seek their freedom; I neither care nor fear what may befall me,
being prepared for either event, either to ruin you, to the great benefit of
my Country, or else to fall with a good conscience.

When Dionysius was given up to the Executioner to be beheaded, he remained
resolute, courageous, and constant, saying, Come life, come death, I will
worship none but the God of heaven and earth.

Thus you see (by these instances) that men that have God for their portion
will courageously own God, and bravely and resolutely stand up for God, what
ever comes on it.

The blood that has been shed in most Nations under heaven does clearly
evidence this, that men will own their earthly portions, and that they will
stand up stoutly, resolutely, and courageously in the defense of them; and so
certainly will all those own God, and stand up in the defense of God, his
glory, and truth, who have God for their portion. Take a true bred Christian,
when he is himself, take a Christian in his ordinary course, and he cannot but
own his God, and stand up stoutly and courageously for his God in the face of
all difficulties and dangers. But

Seventhly, Ps. 73.24, 25
low, mean, and contemptible things: a worldly man looks upon all things below
his earthly portion as contemptible; and so does a Christian look upon all
things below his God, as contemptible; Phil. 3.7, 8. But what things were gain
to me, those I counted loss for Christ: Yea, doubtless, and I count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung,
(the Greek word (...), Dogs dung some interpret the word.
properly signifies such sordid, course and contemptible things which are
either cast forth by dogs, or cast before dogs) that I may win Christ. And it is
very observable, that after this great Apostle had been in the third heaven, 2
Cor. 12.1, 2, 3.
and had been blessed with a glorious sight of God, he looked upon the world as a
poor, mean, low, contemptible thing; Gal. 6.14. God forb'd that I should glory,
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. Paul scorned, despised, and rejected the world,
and the world scorned, despised, and rejected him; Paul cast off the world, and
the world cast off him; he disregarded the world, and the world disregarded
him; he was dead to the world, and the world was dead to him; the world and
Paul were well agreed; the world cared not a pin for Paul, and Paul cared not a
straw for the world. Heb. 11.24. to 27.
And so when Moses had seen him that was invisible, when he had taken a full
prospect of that other world, and when he had beheld God as his portion, Oh how
does he slight, scorn, and trample upon all the honors, preferments, profits,
pleasures, delights, and contentments of Egypt, as things below him, and as
things that in no respects were worthy of him! It is a Rabbinical conceit, Joh,
(...) tavit, ^lorileg. Rabbin^cum.
that Moses being a child had Pharaohs Crown given him to play withal, and he
made no better than a Football of it, and cast it down to the ground, and
kick't it about, as if it were a sign of his future vilifying and contemning of
temporal things. I shall not much trouble my head about what Moses did when he
was a child; but of this I am sure, having the word of a God for it, Heb. 11.24.
That when he was come to years, (or as the Greek has it, (...), being grown
big, Some conclude he was forty years old now from that, Acts 7.23.
or being grown a great one, and so sufficiently understood himself, and knew
very well what he did) he did little less than make a Football of Pharaohs
Crown, witness his refusing with an holy scorn and disdain to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, and so to succeed Pharaoh in the Throne. And so in
that Rev. 12.1, 2. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed
with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
Stars. The Church here is compared to a woman for her weakness, fruitfulness,
and lovingnesse; and it is observable, that she is clothed with the Sun, that
is, with Christ's own comeliness and righteousness, which resembles the Sun in
its several properties and effects, not now to be insisted on. Now this woman,
the Church, is said to have the Moon under her feet: by the Moon we are to
understand all temporary and transitory things; now the Church treads upon all
these things as trash and trumpery that were much below her, and despised by
her. Look, as the great men of the world do commonly look upon all portions
that are below their own with an eye of scorn, disdain, and contempt, Esth. 5.9
-- ult. Psa. 73.4-13.
as Haman did, and as those bold daring sinners did, Psalm. 73. So do those that
have God for their portion look upon all things below their God with an eye of
scorn and disdain. I have read of Lazarus, that after his resurrection from he
dead he was never seen to laugh, his thoughts, his heart, his affections were
so fixed upon God, and so taken up with God, with his portion, that he was as a
dead man to all the gay and gallant things of the world, he saw nothing in them
worthy of a smile.

And so when once Galiacius that famous Italian Marquess came to understand
that God was his portion, in the face of the highest offers imaginable, of
honor, favor, profit, and preferment, he cried out, Cursed be he that prefers
all the glory of the world to one days communion with God.

The old Grecians who had altogether fed on Acorns before, Eustath. in Homer.
when bread came in among them they made no reckoning of their mast, but
reserved it only for their Swine. And the Lacedaemonians despised their iron and
leathern money, Seneca de Benefic.
when gold and silver came in use among them; so when a man comes once to
experience God to be his portion, ah, at what a low rate will he value the
swelling honors, John 4.14.
the deceitful riches, and the vanishing pleasures of this beggarly world.
Christians are compared to Eagles; Matthew. 24.28.
now the Eagle is a Kingly, a Princely bird, it is a bird of a sharp piercing
sight, and of a swift and lofty flight, it flies high, and sets light by things
below (except it be when necessity compells her) and so it is with those that
have God for their portion, they fly high, and they live high in God, and
therefore they cannot but set light by the toys and trifles of the world. But

Eighthly, If God be thy portion, yet I infinitely value my portion above them
all: And who but a fool in Folio will value a thousand a year above a few
accommodations that are only for pleasure and delight: So though a Christian
may set a considerable value upon all his outward comforts and contentments,
Psa. 23.24, 25. Psa. 4.6, 7.
yet it is no value to that he sets upon his God, upon his portion; this and
that is precious to me, says a Christian, but my God is infinitely more
precious than all. A Christian sets up God above his goods; Heb. 10.34. and
above his lusts; Gal. 5.24. and above his relations; 1 Samuel 30.1-7. yea, and
above his very life; Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death: Psa. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life: the Hebrew is
Chaiim, lives; put many lives together, yet there is more excellency and glory
in the least beam, in the least discovery of divine love, than there is in them
all: A man may be weary of life, but never of divine love; Histories tell us of
many that have been weary of their lives, but no Histories can furnish us with
an instance of any one that was ever weary of divine love. Look, as the people
prized David above themselves, saying, 2 Samuel 18.3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us; so they that have indeed God for their
portion, O how do they prize God above themselves, and above every thing below
themselves! and doubtless they that in a course do not lift up God above all,
they have no interest in God at all. Whatever a man eyes as his greatest
interest, that he sets up above all, and before all other things in the world.
Now if a man eyes God as his greatest interest, he cannot but set God atop of
all. I have not faith enough to believe, Luke 14.26
that ever such did truly love God, who love any thing more than God, or who
set up any thing above God. Look, as Darius set up Daniel over all, and as
Pharaoh set up Joseph above all, so a man that has God for his portion, he
sets up God over all, and he sets up God above all. One set so high a price
upon Christ, Austin
that he has long since told us, that he would willingly go through hell to
Christ; Bernard
and, says another, I had rather be in my chimny-corner with Christ, than in
heaven without him: When one of the Martyrs was offered riches and honors if
he would recant, he made this excellent answer, Do but offer me somewhat that
is better than my Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall see what I will say to you.
Johannes Mollius.
And I have read of another that set so high a price upon the Lord Jesus, that
whenever he did but mention the name of Jesus, his eyes dropped tears; were
every Star in the Firmament a Sun, yet a man that has God for his portion
would prize him above them all.

Do you ask me, Plutarch in Photion.
where be my Jewels? my Jewels are my husband, said Phocions wise; do you ask
me, where be my ornaments? my ornaments are my two sons brought up in virtue
and learning, said the mother of the Graccht: do you ask me, where be my
treasures? my treasures are my friends, said Constantius, the father of
Constantine; So if you ask a Christian that has God for his portion, where his
jewels, his ornaments, his treasures, his comforts, and the delights of his
soul are, he will answer you, that they are all in God, he will tell you that
God is his portion, and that God is his great all, and that he enjoys all in
God, and God in all; and therefore he cannot but prize God above all. But to
prevent mistakes in this weighty case, let me give you a few brief hints; As

First, If God be truly precious to thee, then all of God is precious to thee,
his Name is precious to thee, his Honor is precious to thee, his Ordinances
are precious to thee, his Sabbaths are precious to thee, his promises are
precious to thee, his precepts are precious to thee, his threatenings are
precious to thee, his rebukes are precious to thee, his people are precious to
thee, and all his concernments are precious to thee. Look, as every sparkling
stone that is set round about a rich Diamond is precious in the eyes of the
Jeweller, so is every sparkling excellency in God precious in his eyes that
sets an high value upon God. It was an harlot that would have the child
divided. 1 Kings 3.25, 26.
Look, as all of the newborn babe is precious in the eyes of the tender
mother, as head, face, hands, arms, body, feet, etc. so all of God is very
precious in his eyes that has any tender regard of God; and look, as all of an
husband is precious in the eyes of a loving wife, viz. his person, name,
credit, honor, estate, liberty, life, etc. so all of God is very precious in
his eyes that loves God with a real love, with a superlative love. But

Secondly, Psalm. 69.9. Ps. 119.158.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. I beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word; the word that
is here translated grieved is from Katat, that signifies to loath, abhor, and
contend; I beheld the transgressors, and I loathed them; I beheld the
transgressors, and I abhorred them; I beheld the transgressors, and I
contended with them; but not so much because they were mine enemies, as because
they were thine. It Is just between God and all those that have a precious esteem
of him, as it is between two Lutestrings that are tuned one to another; no
sooner one is struck, but the other trembles. Jer. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.
A Saint cannot see God struck, but his heart will tremble. A Father lying upon
his deathbed, called three children to him, which he kept, and told them that
one only of them was his natural son, Mr. Perkins Government of the Tongue.
and that the other two were only brought up by him, therefore unto him only
he gave all his goods; but which of those three was his own son, he would not
in any wise declare: when he was dead, every one pleaded his birthright, and
the matter being brought to trial, the Judge for the making (if possible) a
true discovery, took this course; He caused the dead Corpse of the Father to be
set up against a tree, and commanded the three sons to take bows and arrows,
to shoot at their. Father, to see who could come nearest to his heart; the
first and second did shoot and hit him, but the third was very much angry, and
displeased with them both, and through the natural affection of a child to a
father, threw away his bow and arrows, and would not shoot at all; this being
done, the Judge gave this sentence, viz. That the two first that shot (at their
supposed fathers heart) were no sons, but that the third son that would not
shoot at all, and that was very much displeased with those that did shoot was
the true son, and that he should have the goods. O Sirs, every bitter word is
an arrow shot at the heart of God, and every bloody oath is an arrow shot at
the heart of God, and every heavy curse is an arrow shot at the beart of God,
and every superstitious custom is an arrow shot at the heart of God, and every
snare that is laid for the righteous is an arrow shot at the heart of God, and
every yoke that is laid upon the people of God is an arrow shot at the heart of
God, and every affront that by debauched persons is given to God, is an arrow
shot at the heart of God, etc. And what true bred sons, what ingenious sons can
see such arrows every hour in the day shot at the heart of God (and hear of
such arrows that are shot a thousand, thousand times in a day at the heart of
God) and not grieve and mourn, and not be afflicted, troubled, displeased, and
astonished, to see men and to hear of men that were once made in the Image of
God to be turned into such incarnate Devils, as thus to deal with God, yea,
with such a God as can speak them into hell at his pleasure. But

Thirdly, If God be most precious to you, then you will part with any thing for
God, Phil. 3.7, 8, Mat. 13.46.
then you will let go any thing that you may hold your God, and enjoy your God,
Genesis 22. Chap. 43.
then your Isaac shall be made a sacrifice, if God will have it so; and your
Benjamin shall be sent into Egypt, if God will have it so; Jonah 1.
then your Jonah shall be cast overboard, if God will have it so, then out
goes the right eye, and off goes the right hand upon a divine command; then you
will never cry out, O this mercy is too near to me to part with for God, and
that comfort is too dear to me to part with for God, etc. O no, but then you
will say, as the King of Sodom said to Abraham, Genesis 14.21.
Give me the persons, and take the goods to thy self: So you will say, Give us
God, O give us God, and let who will take the goods, let who will take the
honors, and the profits, and the pleasures of the world; it is enough that
Joseph is alive, it is enough if we may but enjoy our God. A Prince will part
with any thing rather than he will part with his Crown-Jewels; and so will a
Christian rather part with any thing, than (upon choice to part) with his God,
whom he values above all the Crown-Jewels in the world. But

Fourthly, thou can never have enough of the Spirit of God, Psa. 27.4. Psalm.
84. Psa. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3. Cant. 8.14. Rev. 22.20
thou can never have enough of the discoveries of God, thou can never have
enough of the assistance of God, thou can never have enough of the secret
influences and incomes of God, thou can never have enough of the comforts and
strong consolations of God, etc. The grave, the barren womb, the Mammonist, the
Pope, the Turk, the Devil and hell will be as soon satisfied, as thou can be
satisfied without clearer, further, and fuller enjoyments of God. Exo. 33.20
No man (says God to Moses) can see my face, and live; upon which words
Austine makes this short, but sweet reply, Then Lord let me die, that I may see
thy face. It Is impossible that ever a man's heart should rest satisfied, till he
comes to a full and perfect enjoyment of that which he has set up as his grand
interest, as his great all. But

Fifthly and lastly, most precious to thee, then thou will give up thy self
wholly to God, without any reservation. Whatever a man sets up as his great
interest, to that he devotes himself, to the service of that he wholly gives up
himself: So when a man eyes God as his most precious interest, and sets up God,
as his most precious interest, he cannot but devote himself wholly to God,
Cant. 2.16. Acts 7.2, 3, 4. Acts 13.22. Luke 1.5, 6, 7.
he cannot but give up himself wholly to God; Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save
me, I am not my own, nor sins, nor Satan's, nor the worlds, nor friends nor
relations, but I am thine; I am really thine, I am wholly thine, I am only
thine, I am always thine, I am thine to be sanctified, and I am thine to be
saved, I am thine to be commanded, and I am thine to be ruled; Lord, I am thine
own, and therefore do with thine own as thou please, and dispose of thine own
as thou please, I am at thy foot, willing in some measure to be any thing or
nothing, as shall seem best in thine own eyes. When the keys of the whole
house, and of every room in the house are given up to the King to be at his
dispose, at his service, then he is entertained as a King, and honored as a
King, and valued and prized as a King: And so when all the keys of the soul,
and every room in the soul, and every faculty of the soul are given up to God
to be at his dispose, at his service, then God is entertained as a God, and
honored as a God, and valued and prized as a God, but not till then. And by
these five hints (if you will not put a cheat upon your own souls) you may know
whether God sits in the uppermost room of your hearts, or no; and whether God
be set up in your hearts above all, and whether he be indeed your great all, or
your all in all. But

Ninthly, heavy upon thee, as the loss of thy God; there is no loss under
heaven that does so affect and afflict a man that has God for his portion, as
the loss of his God. David met with many a loss, but no loss made so sad and
so great a breach upon his spirit, as the loss of the face of God, the loss
of the favor of God, Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity I said, I shall never be
moved; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong; thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled: The Hebrew word Bahal signifies, And
so this Hebrew word Bahal you have again in that Dan. 5.9. to express the
greatness of Belshazzars trouble and terror, when he saw the handwriting upon
the wall, and when none of his wise men could read the writing, etc.
to be greatly troubled, to be sorely terrified, as you may see in that 1 Samuel
28.21. And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled: Here is
the same Hebrew word Bahal. Saul was so terrified, affrighted, and dis-animated
with that dreadful news that the Devil in Samuels likeness told him, that his
very vital spirits so failed him, that he fell into a fainting deadly swoon:
And it was even so with David upon Gods hiding of his face; David was like a
withered flower that had lost all its sap, life, and vigor, when God had wrapped
up himself in a cloud. The life of some creatures lies in the light and warmth
of the Sun; and so does the life of the Saints lie in the light and warmth of
Gods countenance: And as in an Eclipse of the Sun there is a drooping in the
whole frame of Nature; so when God hides his face, gracious souls cannot but
droop and languish, and bow down themselves before him. Many insensible
creatures (some by opening and shutting, as Marigolds and Tulips, others by
bowing and inclining the head, as the Solsequy and Mallow-flowers) are so
sensible of the presence and absence of the Sun, that there seems to be such a
simpathy between the Sun and them, that if the Sun be gone or clouded, they
wrap up themselves, or hang down their heads, as being unwilling to be seen by
any eye but his that fills them; and just thus it was with David, when God had
hid his face in a cloud. And it is very observable, that Job did bear up very
sweetly, bravely, patiently, and nobly under all his great losses of children,
estate, etc. but when the arrows of the Almighty were got within him, then he
complains, Job. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
that his grief was heavier than the sands of the sea: and when the face of God
was hidden from him, how sadly does he lament and bewail the withdrawings of
God; Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, Chapter 23.8, 9.
but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot
behold him; he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him. You
know there is no pain more grievous and tormenting, than that of breaking the
bones: Now David again and again pitches upon this, to hint unto you that
dreadful smart and pain that his soul was under, Psalm. 38.8. Psa. 51.8.
when he had lost his communion with God, and when his God was withdrawn from
him, and had hid his face from him. And so the Church sadly laments the loss
of her beloved in that Solomon's song 5.6. I opened to my beloved, but my
beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone; my soul failed when he spoke; or
he was gone, he was gone. Now this passionate duplication speaks out her very
great grief and trouble: Like a sad widow she sits down and wrings her hands,
and cries out, he is gone, he is gone. My soul failed me, or as the Hebrew has
it, Naphshi Jatsa, My soul went out of me, I was even as an astonished
creature, I was even as a dead creature, to note how greatly and how deeply she
was troubled and perplexed upon the account of his withdrawing from her. O the
fear, the terror the horror, the dread, the grief, the sorrow that fell upon
the Spouses heart, when her beloved had turned his back upon her. And so it was
with Mary, John 20.11, 12, 13. But Mary stood without at the Sepulcher weeping,
and as she wept she stooped down and looked into the Sepulcher, and sees two
Angels in white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where
the body of Jesus had lain: and they said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou?
she says unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him. Of all losses Mary was least able to bear the loss of her
Lord, that loss was so great, and so heavy a loss, that she was not able to
stand under it with dry eyes: Mary's mourning for the loss of her Lord was
like that of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon. Zech. 12.11.
There is no loss that comes so near to a Christians heart, as the loss of his
Lord: A Christian can a thousand times better bear the loss of his name (which
next to his soul and his grace is the best Jewel that he has in all the world)
the loss of his estate, the loss of his liberty, the loss of his nearest and
dearest relations, yea, the very loss of his life, than he can bear the loss
of his God.

You see how sadly Micah takes on for the loss of his wooden gods, in that
Judge. 18.23, 24. And they cried unto the children of Dan, and they turned their
faces, and said unto Micah, what aileth thee, that thou come with such a
company? And he said, ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the Priest
and ye are gone away, and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto
me, what aileth thee? Now if Micah was so affected and afflicted upon the loss
of his Idol gods, his wooden gods, what cause then have Christians to be deeply
affected and afflicted, when they come to lose their God, which is the true
God, the living God, the only God, and the God of Gods. You know, that when
Sampsons locks were cut off, Judge. 16.19, 20, 21.
his strength was gone; and therefore though he thought to go out, and do as
great things as he had formerly done, yet he found by woeful experience that he
could not; for now he was become as another man: and it is just so with the
choicest Saints, when their God is gone, their locks are cut, and their
strength is gone, their doing strength, and their suffering strength, and their
bearing strength, and their wrestling strength, and their prevailing strength,
etc. is gone, when their God is gone; yea, when God goes, all goes: when the
King removes, all his train follows; when God goes, Qui te non habet Domine
Deus, totum perdidit. Bern.
comforts go; when God goes, joys go; when God goes, peace goes; when God
goes, prosperity goes; when God goes, friends go; when God goes, all content
and satisfaction goes; and therefore it is no vvonder to see a Christian better
bear any loss than the loss of his God, for in losing of him he loses all at
a clap. A Christian counts it his only happiness to enjoy his God, and his
only unhappiness to be deprived of him: the constant language of a Christian
is, None but God, none but God, as it was once the language of the Martyr,
None but Christ, None but Christ.

Outvvard losses to some men have been unsufferably afflictive: one being
turned out of his estate runs out of his wits, another hangs himself with the
same hands with which he had formerly told his portion. Menipus of Phenicia
having lost his goods, strangled himself. Dinarcus Phidon at a certain great
loss cut his own throat, to save the charge of a cord. When Henry the second
had heard that his City Menze was taken, he let fall this blasphemous speech, I
shall never (said he) love God any more, that has suffered a City so dear to
me to be taken away from me. Suotenius.
And Augustus Caesar (in whose time Christ was born) was so troubled and
astonished at the loss and overthrow that Varus gave him, that for certain
months together he let the hair of his head and beard grow without cutting,
and sometimes he would run his head against the very doors, and cry out,
Quintilius Varus, deliver up my Legions again, Quintilius Varus, deliver up my
Legions again, etc. I might give you many sad instances nearer home, but that I
love not to harp upon so sad a string. But certainly no outward losses can lie
so heavy upon the spirit of a worldling, Compare the 77. and the 88. Psalms
together.
as the loss of God lies upon the spirit of a Saint. I have read of a
religious woman, that having brought forth nine children, professed, that she
had rather endure all the pains of those nine Travails at once, than endure the
misery of the loss of Gods presence. A man can better bear any loss than the
loss of his box of Jewels, and than the loss of his Writings and Evidences
that he has to show for his estate; and therefore when his house is on fire,
he does not cry out, O save that bed, or that chest, or that dish, or that
stool, etc. but he cries out, O save my box of Jewels, O save my Writings, I
care not though all be consumed, so my box of Jewels, and my Evidences be but
saved. Now God is a Christians box of Jewels, he is a Christians grand evidence
that he has to show for another world; and therefore his greatest fear is of
losing his God, and his greatest care is of keeping his God; If his box of
Jewels be safe, then all is safe; but if they are lost, all is lost; and how
then is it possible for a Christian to bear up bravely under the loss of all?
A man may bear up bravely under the loss of his Lumber, and and under the
loss of his houshold-goods, so long as his Jewels are safe, and his Writings
are safe; but if his box of Jewels should be lost, and his Writings should be
burnit, why then he wrings his hands, and cries out, O I am undone, I am
undone, I am undone: So a Christian can bear up bravely under this worldly
loss, and that worldly loss, and the other worldly loss so long as he enjoyes
his God, but when he has lost his God, O then he cannot but wring his hands,
and cry out, I am undone, I am undone, I am undone, I have lost my God, and in
losing of him I have lost my life, I have lost my love, I have lost my joy, I
have lost my Crown, I have lost my heaven, I have lost my happiness, I have
lost my all. O Christians, if God be your portion, it will be thus with you
upon the loss of your God. But

Tenthly, Psalm. 16.3. Pro. 12.26. and chapter 28.6.
and esteem upon those that have God for their portion. A man that has God for
his portion never values men by their arts; parts, gifts, gay clothes, gold
chains, no nor by their birth, breeding, high offices, or great places, no nor
by their outward dignities, honors, or riches, etc. but by their interest and
propriety in God. A man that has God for his portion prizes a poor ragged
Lazarus that has God for his portion before a rich Dives that has only gold
for his portion. If thou have God for thy portion, then there is no man in
Court, City, or Country to that man that has God for his portion, then there
is no man in a Parish, a County, a Kingdom to him that has God for his
portion; a man that has God for his portion has an higher esteem and a
greater respect for a Job, though stripped of all, and sitting upon a dunghill,
than he has for a wicked Ahab, though sitting on his royal Throne. Paul set an
higher price upon Onesimus, Phil. 10.12, 17. 2 Timothy 4.17
though but a servant, a slave, because he had God for his portion, than he did
upon Nero, though he was a great and mighty Emperor. And King Ingo valued poor
ragged Christians that had God for their portion, above all his glittering
Pagan Nobles that had only the world for their portion, saying, that when all
his Pagan Nobles should in all their pomp and glory be turned into hell, those
poor Christians that had God for their portion should be his Consorts and
fellow-Princes in heaven. Look, as men that have their portion in this world do
value men according to their worldly portions; so that they that have most gold
and silver, and they that have most Lordships and Lands, they are the best men,
the happiest men, the only men in their eyes: So a Christian that has God for
his portion, he sets the highest value upon those that have God for their
portion, and there are no men in all the world that are so high in his books as
they are. A man that has an interest in God loves none, nor likes none, nor
honors none, nor delights in none, nor exalts none, nor values none to those
that have God for their portion; though the men, the great men of this world
may sit in the uppermost seats at his table, yet they that have God for their
portion sit in the uppermost rooms of his heart. The Jews say, that those
seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much worth as all the
seventy Nations in the world: And I may say, that one soul that has God for
his portion is more worth than all the souls in the world that have only the
world for their portion. A man that has God for his portion, cannot but set a
very high value upon all those that have God for their portion, though in
disputable things they may differ from him. A man that has God for his portion
had rather live with those that have God for their portion in a prison, in a
dungeon, than live with those that have only the world for their portion in a
royal Palace. As Algerius an Italian Martyr was wont to say, that he had rather
live in prison with Cato, than with Caesar in the Senate House. And Doctor
Tailor the Martyr rejoiced exceedingly that ever he came into prison, because
he came there to have acquaintance with that Angel of God John Bradford, as he
calls him. Psa. 105.22
When Joseph was in Egypt the Scripture says (according to the Hebrew phrase)
That he tied the Princes of Pharaohs Court about his heart; so a man that has
God for his portion, he does as it were tie those that have God for their
portion about his heart; O he is always best when they are most in his eye,
and nearest to his heart; it is his happiness on this side happiness to enjoy
communion with them, and it is the greatest unhappiness in this world to be
separated from them. Psa. 120.5, 6, 7.
A man that has God for his portion values the company of such that have God
for their portion above all other company in the world, and he values the
favor of such above all other men's favor in the world, and he values the
prayers of such above all other men's prayers in the world, and he values the
counsel of such above all other men's counsel in the world, and he values the
experiences of such above all other men's experiences in the world, and he
values the interest of such above all other men's interest in the world, and he
values the hopes and expectations of such above all other men's hopes and
expectations in the world, and he values the examples of such above the
examples of all other men in the world, and he values the displeasure and anger
of such above all other men's displeasure and anger in the world. But

Eleventhly, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; Psalm. 119.94. I am
thine, save me; There are none that have that large interest and propriety in
the Saints that God has, Zech. 2.12 And the Lord shall inherit Judah his
portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.
I am not mine own, I am not sins, I am not Satan's, I am not the worlds, I am
not friends, I am not relations, but I am thine, save me, I am really thine, I
am totally thine, I am solely thine, I am everlastingly thine, save me; Ezekiel.
16.8. I entered into covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine; Deuteronomy. 32.9.
For the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance:
though Gods people are despised of the world, yet they are dear to God, for
they are his portion. In those words, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, he
alludes to the division of the land of Canaan, as if the sons of Jacob had
fallen to him by lot. The Lords people are as dear to God, and as near to God,
and in as great account with God, as earthly portions and inheritances are or
can be among the sons of men; Jer. 12.10. Many Pastors have destroyed my
Vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my pleasant
portion (or as the Hebrew has it, my portion of desire, or of delight) a
desolate wilderness. Gods people are not only his portion, but they are his
pleasant portion, yea, they are his desirable portion, his delightful portion.
If the Lord be your portion, then you are his inheritance, Isa. 19.25. and his
peculiar treasure, Exo. 19.5. and his glory, Isa. 46.13. and his ornament,
Ezekiel. 7.20. and his throne, Jer. 4.21. and his Diadem, Isa. 62.^. and his
jewels, Mal. 3.17. These Scriptures speaks out plainly and clearly that great
propriety and interest that God has in all those that have a propriety and
interest in him. O Sirs, look that as in all God has you have an interest, so
in all that you have God has an interest; and look as what God is, he is for
you, so what you are, you are for God; and look, as God is sincerely for you,
so you are sincerely for God; and as God is wholly for you, so you are wholly
for God; and as God is only for you, so you are only for God; and as God is
in all things for you, so you are in all things for God; and as God is at all
times for you, so you are at all times for God. O Sirs, there are none under
heaven that have that interest in you as God has, if indeed he be your poron.
Look what interest the head has in the members, the husband in the wife, the
father in the child, the Lord in his servant, the General in his soldier, and
the Prince in his subject, that, all that, and more than that has God in all
those that have an interest in him. There is no man in the world that has such
an interest in himself, as God has in him, if indeed God be his portion. Sin
cannot say to a man that has God for his portion, Thou art mine; nor Satan
cannot say to a man that has God for his portion, Thou art mine; nor the World
cannot say to a man that has God for his portion, Thou art mine; nor the
Creature cannot say to a man that has God for his portion, Thou art mine; it
is only God that can say to such a man, Thou art mine. As in marriage, none
can say, This woman is mine, but the husband; so none can say to a man that
has God for his portion, Thou art mine, but God alone. Look, as no man can
truly say, That God is my Lord, and my God, and my father, and my friend, and
my wisdom, and my counsel, and my righteousness, and my consolation, and my
salvation, and my portion, and my light, and my life, and my love, and my rock,
Psa. 8.1, 2.
and my fortress, and my deliverer, and my strength, and my buckler, and my
high tower, and my help, and my happiness, and my blessedness, and my all in
all, but he that has God for his portion; so none but God can look upon a
gracious person, and say, This gracious person is mine, he is my bride, my
child, my friend, my favorite, my beloved, my darling, my joy, my crown; his
heart is set upon me, and his love is inflamed toward me, and his trust and
confidence is fixed on me, and his desires and longings are running out after
me, and all his joys and delights are terminated in me. But

Twelfthly, precious; so the very least of God is very precious to that man
that has God for his portion. Look, as every little piece and parcel of a
worldly man's portion is very dear and precious to him; so every little piece
and parcel of God (if I may so speak) is very dear and precious to him that
has God for his portion. The least glimpse and manifestations of the love and
favor of God, the least taste of the mercies of God, the least anointings of
the Spirit of God, the least co^munications of the grace of God, and the least
drops of the consolations of God, are exceeding sweet and precious to him that
has God for his portion: The least good look that a man has from God, and the
least good word that a man hears from God, and the least love-letter and
love-token that a man receives from God, is exceeding precious to that man that
has God for his portion: Psalm. 84.10.
One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere: he does not say,
one year in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere, but one day in thy
Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere; nor he does not say, one quarter of
a year in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere, but one day in thy
Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere; nor he does not say, one month in
thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere, but one day in thy Courts is
better than a thousand elsewhere; to show, that the very least of God is
exceeding precious to a gracious soul that has God for his portion.

Now by these twelve particulars you may all know whether God be your portion
or no, except you are resolved beforehand to put a cheat upon your own
immortal souls, and so to make your selves miserable in both worlds. And let
thus much suffice for this use of trial and examination.

Now if upon trial and examination any of you shall come to some comfortable
satisfaction in your own spirits, that God is your portion, and that you have
an undoubted interest and propriety in God, O then I would upon the knee of my
soul entreat, and beseech you, (I might say, charge and command you) to
evidence and declare to all the world your interest and propriety in God.

But you will say, how should we evidence and declare to the world our interest
and propriety in God? we are willing to do it, if we did but know how we should
do it. Why then thus:

First, Number. 11.29 John 1.39-49. Chapter 4.28, 29, 30. Acts 10.24, 25, 27.
by your laboring and endeavoring with all your might to draw on others to
get an interest and propriety in God. O Sirs, have you been convinced of the
necessity and excellency of interest and propriety in God? have you experienced
the profit, the sweet, the comfort, and the happiness of propriety and
interest in God? and how then can you but strive, as for life, to persuade
others to look after their interest and propriety in Christ, as the one thing
necessary? Judge. 14.8, 9.
When Sampson had tasted honey, he gave his father and mother some with him. O
my brethren, propriety and interest in God is so sweet a morsel, that I cannot
see how it is possible for a man to taste of it, and not to commend it to
others; they that have tasted, that the Lord is gracious, cannot but cry out
with the Psalmist, O taste and see that the Lord is good. Psalm. 34.8.
Propriety and interest in God will never make a man a churl, it will never
work a man to make a monopoly of so rare a jewel as that is. O the servent
prayers! O the burning desires! O the vehement wishes! O the strong endeavors
of such that have an interest and propriety in God, to draw on others to seek
after an interest and propriety in God! All true propriety and interest in God
is of a diffusive nature, it is like light that will spread it self over all,
it is like leaven that will run through all, it is like Mary's box of sweet
ointment that filled all the house with the sweet scent thereof. If thou art a
Minister, Act. 26.29
evidence thy propriety in God, in doing all thou can to provoke those that
are under thy charge to secure their propriety in God; other things cannot be
secured, but propriety in God may be secured. If thou art a Magistrate that
have a propriety in God, Josh. 24.15
evidence it by doing all thou can by thy commands, and by thy counsel, and
by thy example, and by thy prayers, to persuade, and win others over to be
restless, till they have secured their interest and propriety in God. If thou
art a father that have interest and propriety in God, O then let thy soul be
still in travail for thy children, till Christ be formed in them, till they are
newborn, and till they have experienced the power and sweet of propriety and
interest in God. But

Secondly, Heb. 11. Number. 4.5. to 13.
It is very observable that when the holy things belonging to the Sanctuary
were to be removed, God commanded Aaron and his sons, that there should be a
special care had to cover them all over, lest in journeying dust should any
ways soil them. O beloved, it highly concerns you that have an interest and
propriety in God, to look narrowly to your hearts, words, works, and ways, and
to see that there be such a covering of grace and holiness, such a covering of
care, fear, wisdom, watchfulness, and circumspection over your whole man,
that no scandalous sins, pollutions, or defilements be found upon you, Rev.
14.3, 4, 5. Chap. 3.4.
according to that exhortation of the Apostle, in that Phil. 2.15. That ye may
be blameless, and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of
a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine (or shine ye) as lights in
the world. I have read of the Dove, that there is such a native dread of the
Hawk implanted in her, that she is afraid of every feather that has grown upon
a Hawk, and that she so detests and abhors the very sight of any such feather,
that she will fly from it, and keep at the greatest distance imaginable from
it: And shall not that divine fear, O Christians, that is planted by the hand
of the Spirit in your hearts, be of as great a force and prevalency to keep
your souls from all those enormities and wicked compliances that may in the
least occasion you or others to question your propriety and interest? remember
Francis Spira, and tremble. You know a Scrivener may by one great blot at last
spoil all that he has done for many days before upon a large Pattent or
Lease; so a man may by one foul blot, by one enormous crime, by one wretched
act of compliance, dash and obliterate the fairest copy of a virtuous life, and
raze out all the visible golden characters of divine graces, that once seemed
to be printed upon the soul. Look, as one drop of ink colors a whole glass
of clear water; so one gross sin, one shameful action, one hours compliance
with any thing of Antichrist will color and stain all the great things that
ever you have suffered, and all the good things that ever you have performed;
it will stain and color all the good prayers that ever you have made, and all
the good Sermons that ever you have heard, and all the good books that ever you
have read, and all the good words that ever you have spoke, and all the good
works that ever you have done: And therefore whatever you do, keep off from
sin, and keep off from all sinful compliances, as you would keep off from
hell it selt. But

Thirdly, Psalm. 63.1. Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
and in opposition to the worlds interest, and in opposition to Antichrists
interest, and in opposition to all carnal and superstitious interests; as Moses
did, Number. 14.
and as Joshuah and Caleb did, and as Mordecai and Nehemiah did, and as Daniel
and the three Children did, and as the Apostles and the primitive Christians
did. Certainly the heart of a gracious man cannot but rise, Psalm. 69.9. Psa.
15.5.
and his anger and indignation cannot but swell against every thing and every
interest that threatens to make a breach upon his interest and propriety in
God. A man that has an interest and propriety in God, in the midst of all
oppositions is like a man made up all of fire, walking in stubble and straw, he
overcomes and consumes all oppositions, and all difficulties are but whetstones
to his fortitude; he incourages his soul in the face of all oppositions and
dangers, as Hezekiah once did his soldiers in that 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. Be strong
and courageous, be not dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the
multitude that is with him; for there be more with us, than with him: With him
is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight
our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah, King
of Judah. He is a fool, we say, that will be laughed out of his Coat; but
certainly he is a fool in Folio that will be laughed out of his skin, nay, out
of his soul, out of his profession, out of his eternal salvation; but
doubtless such fools as these have never experienced the sweet of propriety
and interest in God. Without all peradventure there were many broad jests and
many bitter scoffs broken upon Noah, whilst he was a building of his Ark; the
people laugh't at him, and derided him, and thought the poor old man doted and
dreamed, not as we say of a dry Summer, but of a wet Winter: but yet Noah's
propriety and interest in God being clear, Noah begins his work, and goes on
his work, and never ceases till he had finished that work that God had set him
about.

Alciat observes in one of his Emblems, that a dog then barketh most, when the
Moon is at fullest; (but whether it be by some special influence that it then
works in the dog; or whether it be occasioned by the spots in the Moon
represented unto him in the form and shape of another dog, I shall not
conclude:) but yet let the dog bark never so much, the Moon will run her
course, she will walk her station securely through the Heavens, though all the
dogs in the Town bark never so fiercely at her; so a man that has an interest
and propriety in God (and knows it) he is like the Moon, he will hold on his
course heaven-wards, and holinesse-wards, though all the lewd and debauched
wicked wretches in City and Country should bark at him, and deride him, and
oppose him, and speak all manner of evil against him. Propriety and interest in
God will make a man set light by all such paper-shot, yea, it will carry him
through the pikes, not only of evil tongues, but it will also carry him
through the most fierce and eager opposition that either Satan himself, or any
of his instruments can possibly raise against him. But

Fourthly, in God. Look, as a child carries it in a different way to his Father
to what he does to others, so you must carry it in a different way toward
those that have an interest and propriety in God, to what you do toward those
that have no interest nor propriety at all in God. Though a wife be very kind
and courteous to all comers and goers, yet she carries it in a very different
way to her husband from what she does to all others, she carries it with a
great deal more kindness, and sweetness, and tenderness, and familiarnesse,
and nobleness, etc. toward her husband, than she does toward others, whether
they be friends or strangers: And just thus should you carry it toward those
that have a propriety and interest in God. I have not faith enough to believe
that such men have any interest and propriety in God, who carry it very
strangely and proudly, and churlishly, and scornfully, and deridingly, and
tyrannically, and disdainfully, and enviously, and maliciously, and rigorously,
and sowrly, and bitterly, etc. toward those that have an interest and
propriety in God, and yet carry it at the same time very fairly, and sweetly,
and courteously, etc. toward such wretches that have no interest or propriety
in God at all, yea, to such that blaspheme his Name, and that profane his
Sabbaths, and that pollute his Ordinances, and that trample upon his mercies,
and that despise his warnings, and that are given up to their own hearts lusts,
and that live as if there were neither God, nor heaven, nor hell. But

Fifthly, Matthew. 5.44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
by doing singular things for God, by doing such things for God that are above
their reach that have no interest nor propriety in God at all; As by denying
your selves, your sinful selves, your natural selves, and your religious
selves; and by keeping a singular guard upon your own hearts, words, and
ways; and by stepping over the Worlds Crown to take up Christ's Cross, Heb. 11.
as Moses did; and by lessening your selves to greaten Christ, as John did;
Joh. 3.30, 31, 32.
and by lifting up of Christ above your lusts, above your selves, above the
world, above outward privileges, above your performances, above your arts,
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
parts, and gifts, as Paul did; and by blessing a taking God as well as a
giving God, Job 1.
as Job did; and by rejoicing and glorying in all the afflictions and
sufferings that befalls you for Christ's sake and the Gospels sake, as the
Apostles and primitive Christians did; and by choosing to suffer rather than to
sin, Heb. 11.
as those Worthies did of whom this world was not worthy; and by keeping of
your selves from the defilements, pollutions, and abominations of the times, as
some in Sardis did; Rev. 3.4.
and by following of the Lamb wheresoever he goes, as those hundred forty and
four thousand did, who had their fathers name written in their foreheads. O
Sirs, Chap. 14.1, 2, 3. 4, 5.
it is infinitely better not to challenge any interest or propriety in God at
all, then to pretend high as to interest and propriety in God, and yet to do no
more for God (nay it may be not so much) than they that have no interest nor
propriety in God at all. But

Sixthly and lastly, Pharaohs lean kine eat up the sat, Genesis 41.4. Exodus 7.11,
12.
and as Aarons rod swallowed up the Egyptians rods, so the interest of God will
in time eat up and swallow up all that superstitious carnal worldly
Antichristian and Satanical interest that men labor now to uphold with all
their might; Isa. 8 9, 10.
Dan. 2.35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold
broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the Summer
threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for
them; and the stone that smote the Image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth. Verse 44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of
heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall
not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all
these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. And so, Chap. 7.27. And the
Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is
an ever lasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Rev.
17.12, 13, 14. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings one hour with the
beast: these have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
beast: these shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them;
for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him, are
called, and chosen, and faithful. If these Scriptures do not clearly evidence,
that the interest of Christ shall swallow up all other interests, I understand
nothing. Now mark, the people of God are the interest of God, and the Gospel of
God is the interest of God, and the Ordinances of God are the interest of God,
and the institutions and pure worship of God are the interest of God, etc. And
therefore all you that have an interest and propriety in God, evidence it by
your ready and resolute falling in with the interest of God. Believe it, they
that fall in with the interest of God, fall in with the strongest side, and
will be sure to carry it against ten thousand worlds: What is the stubble to
the flames? what is weakness to strength? what is impotency to omnipotency?
what is folly to wisdom? what is emptiness to fullness? no more are all the
carnal interests in the world to the interest of God; and therefore thrice
happy is that man that falls timely and cordially in with the interest of God.

But now, if upon trial and examination any of you shall find that yet the
Lord is not your portion, (and this I believe will be the case of many of you)
I would exhort all such persons to labor with all their might, yea, to labor
as for life, to get the Lord to be their portion. O Sirs, this is the one thing
necessary, this is the Sun among the stars, this is the work of works that lies
upon your hands; when this is done all is done, till this be done there is
nothing done that will do you good in another world. O Sirs, your lives lies
upon it, your souls lie upon it, eternity lies upon it, your all lies upon it,
and therefore you had need be restless, till you have gained the Lord to be
your portion.

Now that I may the more effectually provoke you, and stir you up to this great
and glorious, this necessary and weighty work, give me leave to propose these
following Considerations.

First, Consider, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
All the earth was cursed upon man's fall, and till fallen man comes to be
interested in God, all his earthly enjoyments are cursed unto him, his honors
are cursed, and his riches are cursed, and his preferments are cursed, and his
pleasures are cursed; the whole portion of his cup is nothing but a little
cursed vanity, Job 20.23, 24, 25, 28, 29. When he is about to fill his belly,
God shall east the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while
he is eating. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him through. It is drawn, and comes out of the body; yea, the
glistering sword comes out of his gall; terrors are upon him. The increase of
his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto
him by God. And so Chap. 24.18. He is swift as the waters, their portion is
cursed in the earth; he beholds not the way of the Vineyards. Prove. 3.33. The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear,
and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord
of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings,
yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart. There is a
real curse, and a secret curse, an invisible curse, and an insensible curse
that lies upon all their souls that have not God for their portion; Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. And as there is a curse upon all their souls, so
there is a curse upon all their comforts, contentments, and enjoyments, that
enjoy not God for their portion; till a man comes to enjoy God for his portion,
all his earthly portions are cursed unto him, but when a man comes to enjoy God
for his portion, then all his earthly portions are blessed unto him. O Sirs,
there is no mitigating of the curse, there is no reversing of the curse, there
is no altering of the curse, nor there is no taking of the curse from off your
souls, nor from off your earthly portions, but by gaining God to be your
portion O Sirs you will live accursed, and you will die accursed, and you will
appear before God accursed, and you will be judged and sentenced by God
accursed, and you will be sent to hell accursed, and you will remain to all
eternity accursed, if God be not your portion: and therefore, O how should this
Consideration awaken every sinner to give God no rest till he has given
himself as a portion to him! But

Secondly, Mark 14.36. Luke 18.27.
all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth do not know to the
contrary, but that God may be thy portion, even thine. If thou art but heartily
willing to be divorced from that wicked Trinity, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, there is no doubt but God will be thy portion. O Sirs, why has God laid
open so clearly and so fully the nature and incomparable excellency of this
portion above all other portions before you, but to persuade your hearts, and
to draw out your souls to look after this portion, and to make sure this
portion, as that wherein all your happiness and blessedness lies? O that you
were wise to consider, that now a prize, an opportunity is put into your hands
that may make you for ever; you have all the ways, and all the means, and all
the helps, and all the advantages imaginable for the obtaining of God to be
your portion, so that if God be not your portion, I shall be so bold to tell
you, Hos. 13.9.
that your destruction is from your selves. O Sirs, though God be a golden
Mine, Pro. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
yet he is such a Mine that may be come at, if you will but dig, and sweat, and
take pains to purpose; though he be a pearl of infinite price, yet Christ can
purchase this Pearl for you; though he be a matchless and incomparable
portion, yet he is such a portion as may be yours, as will be yours, if you are
not wanting to your own souls. Why has God sent his Ambassadors early and
late? and why has he, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
even to a miracle, continued them amongst you to this very day? but that they
should acquaint you with his wonderful readiness and willingness to bestow
himself as a portion upon you. Psa. 105.8. Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 86.15. 1 Pet.
11.3. Psa. 103.11.
O Sirs, God is said to be a God of great mercy, and to be rich and plenteous
in mercy, and to be abundant in mercy, and to be transcendent and incomparable
in mercy; yea, all the mercies of God are sure mercies, they are royal mercies,
they are innumerable mercies, they are bottomless mercies, they are
unchangeable mercies, and they are everlasting mercies; and therefore there is
no reason for any man to despair of obtaining of God for his portion. But

Thirdly, sufferings are a fourth man's portion, and sickness and diseases are
a fifth man's portion, etc. But now God is a portion that will sweeten all these
portions: You know the Tree that Moses cast into the bitter waters of Marah
made them sweet; Exodus 15.23, 24, 25.
now this Tree was a type of Christ, who will certainly sweeten all our
bitterest potions. The Church complained in that Lament. 3.15. That God had
filled her with bitterness (or as the Hebrew has it, with bitternesses) and
that he had made her drunken with wormwood; and yet this very Consideration,
That the Lord was her portion, v. 24. sweetened all. If God be thy portion,
there is no condition that can make thee miserable; if God be not thy portion,
there is no condition that can make thee happy: If God be not thy portion, in
the midst of thy sufficiency thou will be in straits; Job. 20.22
if God be thy portion, in the midst of all thy straits thou shall enjoy an
all sufficiency in an all-sufficient God. Till God be thy portion, O sinner,
thou will never taste any thing but death and bitterness in all thy comforts,
and in all thy contentments, and in all thy enjoyments. But

Fourthly, John 6.27. Matt. 6.19. James 5.3. Eccles. 1.
they are but moth-eaten and canker-eaten treasures, they are full of
uncertainty, yea, they are all over vanity, they reach not beyond the line of
this mortal life; they can neither fuit the soul, nor fill the soul, nor
satisfy the soul, nor save the soul; they can neither change the heart, nor
reform the heart, nor in the least better the heart; they can neither arm a man
against temptations, nor lead a man out of temptations, nor make a man
victorious over temptations; they can neither direct the conscience when it is
in straits, nor relieve the conscience when it is under distress, nor support
the conscience when it is under guilt, nor heal the conscience when it is under
wounds; they can neither make our peace with God, nor keep our peace with God,
nor augment our peace with God; they can neither bring us to Christ, nor unite
us to Christ, nor keep us with Christ, nor transform us into the similitude or
likeness of Christ, they can neither bring us to heaven, nor fit us for
heaven, nor assure us of heaven: In a word, no earthly portion can free us from
death, nor in the least avail us in the day of wrath. By all which it is most
evident that all earthly portions are of very little consequence and
concernment to the sons of men, to the souls of men. O but now God is a portion
of infinite consequence and concernment to all the sons and souls of men. No
man can hear as he should, nor pray as he should, nor live as he should, nor
die as he should, till God be his portion; no man is secure from temporal,
spiritual, or eternal judgments, till God be his portion: no man can be happy
in this world, or blessed in another world, till God be his portion. O Sirs, it
is not absolutely necessary that you should have this or that earthly portion,
but it is absolutely necessary that you should have God for your portion; for if
God be not your portion, all the Angels in heaven, nor all the men on earth
cannot prevent your being miserable to all eternity.

Fifthly, Themistocles did, Give those bracelets to slaves; and as Basil did,
who (when he was offered temporary honor, glory, and wealth, etc.) answered,
Give me glory which abides for ever, and give me riches which will endure for
ever: And as he did, who being tempted with offers of money to desert his
Religion, When Phyrrhus tempted Fabricius the first day with an Elephant, so
huge and monstrous a Beast, as before he had not seen, and the next day with
money and promises of honor, he answered, I fear not thy force, and I am too
wise for thy fraud. If nature could do this, grace can do more.
gave this excellent answer, Let not any think, that he will embrace other men's
goods to forsake Christ, who has forsaken his own proper goods to follow
Christ: And as that Martyr did, who when he had riches and honors offered him,
if he would recant, answered, Do but offer me somewhat that is better than my
Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall see what I will say to you: And as Hormisda, a
noble man in the King of Persia's Court did, who because he would not deny
Christ, he was put into ragged clothes, deprived of his honors, and set to
keep the camels; after a long time, the King seeing him in that base condition,
and remembering his former Fortunes, he pitied him, and caused him to be brought
into the Palace, and to be clothed again like a noble man, and then persuades
and tempts him afresh to deny Christ, whereupon this noble Spirit presently
rended his Silken Clothes, saying, If for these you think to have me deny my
Faith, take them again, and so he was cast out with scorn the second time: And
what was that that made the Apostles temptation-proof, and that made those
Worthies temptation-proof, Heb. 11. and that made the primitive Christians
temptation-proof, and that made the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days
temptation-proof? Certainly, nothing more than this very Consideration, that
God was their portion. Ah sinners, sinners, you will certainly fall, you will
readily fall, you will easily fall, you will frequently fall, you will
dreadfully fall before temptations til you come to enjoy God for your portion.
Every blast and every wind of temptation will overset and overturn that man
that has not God for his portion: Such a man may pray a thousand times over
and over, Lord, lead me not into temptation, and yet every day fall before the
least temptation, as common experience does abundantly evidence; whereas a man
that has God for his portion will stand fast like a rock in all storms, yea,
in the face of all temptations he will be like Mount Zion that cannot be
removed. Luther in Genesis
Luther counsels every Christian to answer all temptations with this short
saying, Christianus sum, I am a Christian; and I would counsel every Christian
to answer all temptations with this short saying, The Lord is my portion. O
Christian, when Satan or the world shall tempt thee with honors, answer, The
Lord is my portion; when they shall tempt thee with riches, answer, The Lord is
my portion; when they shall tempt thee with preferments, answer, The Lord is my
portion; and when they shall tempt thee with the favors of great ones, answer,
The Lord is my portion; yea, and when this persecuting world shall threaten
thee with the loss of thy estate, answer, The Lord is my portion; and when
they shall threaten thee with the loss of thy liberty, answer, The Lord is my
portion; and when they shall threaten thee with the loss of friends, answer,
The Lord is my portion; and when they shall threaten thee with the loss of
life, answer, The Lord is my portion. O Sirs, if Satan should come to you with
an apple, as once he did to Eve, tell him that The Lord is your portion; or
with a grape, as once he did to Noah, tell him, that The Lord is your portion;
or with a change of raiment, as once he did to Gehezi, tell him, that The Lord
is your portion; or with a wedge of gold, as once he did to Achan, tell him
that The Lord is your portion; or with a bag of money, as once he did to Judas,
tell him that The Lord is your portion; or with a Crown, a Kingdom, as once he
did to Moses, tell him, that The Lord is your portion. But,

Sixthly and lastly, Psalm. 11.6. Psalm. 9.17. Isa. 33.14. Mat. 24. ult 2 These.
1.7, 8, 9, 10. Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
if God be not your portion, wrath must be your portion, hell must be your
portion, everlasting burnings must be your portion, a devouring fire must be
your portion, and a separation for ever from the glorious presence of God,
Christ, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect must be your portion;
as you may clearly see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together. If
God be not your portion in this life, you shall never have him for your portion
in another life; if God be not your portion here, he will never be your portion
hereafter. O Sirs, if death should surprise you before God is your portion, you
will as certainly go to hell, as God is in heaven; and therefore it infinitely
concerns you to get God for your portion. There is no way in the world to make
the King of terrors to be a King of desires to thy soul, O man, but by gaining
God for thy portion. Or all terribles death will be most terrible and
formidable to that man that has not God for his portion. If thou should
live and die, O man, without having God for thy portion, it had been good for
thee that thou had never been born; and if the day of thy birth had been the
day of thy death, thy hell would not have been so hot as now thou will
certainly find it.

But now, methinks, I hear some crying out, O Sir, what shall we do that we may
have God for our portion? O had we as many worlds at our dispose as there be
stars in heaven, we would give them all that we might have God for our portion;
O we now see that we can never be happy except God be our portion, yea, we now
see that we shall be miserable to all eternity, except God be our portion; and
therefore what shall we do, that we may have God for our portion?

Well then, if you would indeed have God for your portion, let me thus advise
you.

First, Ephe. 2.12 Romans 8.7. Ephe. 2.^^ and chapter 4.18.
and that by nature you are children of wrath and disobedience, and in actual
arms and rebellion against the great God. O Sirs, never talk of having of God
for your portion, till you come to see your selves without God, and till you
come to judge your selves unworthy of God. Acts 2.39.
Every man in his natural estate is afar off from God three manner of ways:

First, In point of opinion and apprehension.

Secondly, In point of fellowship and communion.

Thirdly, In point of grace and conversion.

And till a man comes to be sensible of this, he will never desire God to be
his portion. But

Secondly, Austin prays, Lord (says he) whatever thou have given, take it all
away, only give me thy self.
Luther protested, that God should not put him off with the poor things of this
world. O, go to God, and say, Lord, thou have given me a portion in money, but
this money is not thy self; thou have given me a portion in lands, but these
lands are not thy self; thou have given me a portion in goods, but these goods
are not thy self; thou have given me a portion in jewels, but these jewels are
not thy self; and therefore give me thy self, and I shall say, I have enough:
Lord, had I all the world for my portion, yet I should be miserable for ever in
that other world, except thou bestowest thy self as a portion upon my soul. O
Lord, give me but thy self, and take away what thou please; O give me but thy
self, and take away all, strip me of all, and I shall with Job sit down and
bless a taking God, as well as a giving God. O go to God, and tell him with an
humble boldness, that though he has given thee many good things, yet all
those good things will do thee no good, except he bestow himself upon thee, as
the only good. O tell him, that he is the first good; tell him, that he is the
original of all good; tell him, that he is the greatest good, the noblest good;
tell him that he is a superlative good, tell him that he is an universal good,
tell him that he is an unchangeable good, tell him that he is an eternal good,
and tell him that he is the most soul-suitable and soul-satisfying good; and
therefore tell him that thou can not tell how to live one day without him,
yea, that thou know not how to be happy one hour without him. But

Thirdly, Zech. 13.9. They shall call upon my Name, and I will hear them; I
will say, it is my people, and they shall say, The Lord is my God. O Sirs, as
ever you would have the great and glorious God for your portion, plead out this
noble promise cordially with God, plead it out affectionately, plead it out
fervently, plead it out frequently, plead it out beleevingly, plead it out
resolutely, plead it out incessantly. O Sirs, this choice promise is an hive
full of heavenly honey, it is a paradise full of sweet flowers, it is a breast
that is full of the milk of consolation; Isa. 66.11.
and therefore be still a sucking at this breast, be still a pleading of this
promise, follow God with this promise early and late, follow him with this
promise day and night, Luke 18.1. to the 9. v.
follow him with this promise as the importunate Widow followed the unjust
Judge, and give him no rest, till he has made it good to your souls, that he
is your God, and that he is your portion, and that he is your salvation, and
that he is your all in all: O tell him that above all things in this world your
hearts are set on this, to have God to be your God, to have God to be your
portion; O tell him that you cannot, tell him that you dare not, tell him that
you may not, and tell him that you shall not be satisfied with any thing
without God, with any thing below God, with any thing on this side God, with
any thing but God; and therefore humbly entreat him, and earnestly beseech him
to be your God, and to be your portion. But

Fourthly, Deuteronomy. 32.9 Jer. 12.10. Zech. 2.12.
then you must be willing to be his portion; God is resolved upon this, that he
will be no man's portion that is not willing to be his; you must make a
resignation of your selves to God, if ever you would enjoy an interest in God;
you must be as willing to be his people, as you are willing to have him to be
your God; you must be as much at Gods dispose, as earthly portions are at your
dispose, or else there will be no enjoying of God to be your God; God will
engage himself to none that are not willing to engage themselves to him; he
that will not give his hand and his heart to God, shall never have any part or
portion in God. O Sirs, as ever you would have God for your portion, it highly
concerns you to give up your selves to God with highest estimations, and with
most vigorous affections, and with utmost endeavors; according to that
precious promise, Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to
the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. God stands upon nothing so
much as the giving up of your selves to him, nor he is taken with nothing so
much as the giving up of your selves to him. Seneca do Benesic. l. 1.
I have read of Aeschines, who seeing his fellow-scholars give great gifts,
viz. gold, silver, and jewels to his Master Socrates, and he being poor, and
having nothing else to bestow, he gave him himself, which the Philosopher most
kindly accepted, esteeming this present above all those rich and costly
presents that his other Scholars had presented to him, and accordingly in love
and sweetness he carried it toward him: So there is nothing that God accepts,
loves, likes, and esteems like the giving up of a man's self unto him; this is a
present that God prefers above all the gold, silver, and sparkling jewels in
the world. Well Sirs, remember this, Such as are not as willing to say, Lord,
we are thine, as they are to say, Lord, thou art ours, such shall never have
God for their portion. But

Fifthly, for your portion, then you must take up Christ in your arms, and
treat with God upon the credit of Christ; there is no acquaintance with God,
Ephe. 2.16. Heb. 2.17. Col. 1.20, 21. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.
there is no reconciliation to God, there is no union nor communion with God,
there is no readmission into the presence and favor of God without a
Mediator. God out of Christ is incomprehensible, God out of Christ is exceeding
terrible, Heb. 12.9.
an absolute God is a consuming fire; and therefore, says Luther, Nolo Deum
absolutum, Let me have nothing to do with God himself. The blood of Christ, the
blood of the Covenant is that and only that that can cement, reunite, and
knit God and man together. Themistocles understanding that King Admittus was
highly displeased with him, took up his young son into his arms, Plutarch in
Vita.
and treated with the father, holding that his Darling in his bosom, and
thereby appeased the Kings wrath. O Sirs, the King of Kings is offended with
you, and upon the account of your sins he has a very great controversy with
you; Now there is no way under heaven to pacify his wrath, and turn away his
displeasure from you, but by taking up Christ in your arms, and by presenting
all your suits in his name. There is no Angel in heaven, nor no Saint on earth,
that can, or that dares to interpose between an angry God, and poor sinners;
it is only Christ, Isa. 9.6.
the Prince of peace that can make up a sinners peace with God, John 14.6.
Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man comes unto
the Father but by me. There is no way to the Father, but by the meritorious
blood of the Son; Isa. 33.14.
there are none that can stand between everlasting burnings and us, but Christ.
You shall not see my face, except you bring your brother Benjamin with you,
said Joseph to his brethren; so says God, Sinners, sinners, you shall not see
my face, Genesis 43.3, 6.
except you bring Jesus with you; except you bring Christ in your arms, you
shall never see my face with joy, you shall never see my face and live. There
is a Writ of Vengeance that is issued out of the Court of Heaven against poor
sinners; and except Christ stops in, they will certainly fall under an eternal
arrest, and be thrown into everlasting perdition and destruction. But

Sixthly, 2 C^^. 6.14 ult.
heaven and hell, noon and midnight, as ever you shall be able to make an
accommodation between God and sin. So long as sin remains ours, God will be
none of ours: No Prince will be one with that Subject that lives in the
practice of Treason and Rebellion against him. Pharnaces sent a Crown to Caesar
at the same time that he rebelled against him, but he returned the Crown, and
this message back, Faceret imperata prius, Let him return to his obedience
first.
No Prince will be one with him that has killed his only son and heir, and
that daringly continues to hold up those bloody weapons in his hands wherewith
he has committed that horrid fact. There is no Adulteress that can be so
shamelesly impudent, or so vainly confident, as to desire pardon of her jealous
husband, or to expect an oneness and a sweetness with him, whilst she
continues to hold her wanton lovers still in her arms, and is fully resolved to
hold on in her wanton dalliances, as in times past. O Sirs, God is that Prince
that will never admit of peace or union with you, till you cease practicing of
Treason against him, and till you come to lay down your weapons of Rebellion at
his feet; he is that jealous husband that will never take you into an oneness,
into a neernesse and dearnesse with himself, till you come to abandon all your
wanton lovers, and thoroughly to resolve against all wanton dalliances for time
to come. If ever you would have God for your portion, you must say to all your
wanton lovers, and to all those Idols of jealousy that you have set up in your
souls, as Ephraim once said to his, Get you hence, for what have I any more to
do with you, Hos. 14.8. But

Seventhly and lastly, In my former Treatises I have spoken very largely about
the use of holy means, especially in my last on Holiness, and therefore a
touch here must suffice.
in the use of holy means God makes the clearest, the fullest, and the
choicest discoveries of himself; in the use of holy means poor sinners come to
be acquainted with the excellency of God, and with the necessity of having God
for their portion; in the use of holy means poor sinners come to understand the
fullness of God, the goodness of God, the graciousnesse of God, the sweetness
of God, and the wonderful freeness, readiness, and willingness of God to
give himself as a portion to all such as see their need of him, and that are
heartily willing to receive him as their God and portion; and in the use of
holy means God works in poor sinners a readiness, a forwardness, and a
blessed willingness to choose God for their portion, to close with God for
their portion, to embrace God for their portion, to accept of God for their
portion, and to own God for their portion. If this question should be put to
all the Saints in heaven, viz. How God came to be their portion? they would all
answer, by waiting upon him in the use of all those holy ways and means that
he had appointed for that purpose; and if the same question were put to all the
Saints on earth that have God for their portion, they would all give the same
answer. O Sirs, as ever you would have God for your portion, it highly concerns
you to wait patiently upon him in the use of all holy means; he that is in the
use of holy means is in the way of obtaining God for his portion: But he that
casts off the use of the means, he says in effect, I will not have God for my
portion, I care not to have God for my portion; let me but have the world for
my portion, and let who will take God for their portion.

To prevent mistakes, before I close up this direction, remember that by the
use of holy means, I only mean such means that God himself has appointed,
commanded, instituted, and ordained. As for those means that are of men's
inventing, devising, prescribing, commanding, and ordaining, a man may wait
till doomsday in the use of them before ever he will gain God for his portion;
and therefore they are rather to be declined, yea, detested and abhorred, than
any way to be owned, minded, or used by any that would have God for their
portion. Look, as all the worshippers of Baal got nothing by all their wailing
and crying out from morning to night, 1 Kings 18.
O Baal, hear us, O Baal, hear us; So they that wait upon God in invented and
devised worship will never get any thing by all their waiting; no, though they
should wait from morning to evening, and from evening to morning, and cut and
lance themselves till the blood gush out, as those foolish worshippers of Baal
did. And therefore as ever you would have God for your portion, be sure that
you wait upon him only in his own ways, and in the use of his own means. And
thus I have done with the Use and Application of the Point.

So that I have now nothing to do, but these two things:

First, To answer a few Objections that poor sinners are apt to make against
their own souls, and against their enjoying of God for their portion. And

Secondly, To lay down a few Positions that may be of singular use to all such
that have God for their portion. I shall begin with the Objections.

Methinks I hear some poor sinners ready to object and say,

Now to this Objection I shall return these answers.

First, God is a free agent,

Secondly, I answer, Psalm. 68.18.
Genesis 3.15.
Adam you know fell from the highest pinnacle of glory into the greatest gulf
of misery, and yet God bestowed himself as a portion upon him: 2 Kings 21.
And Manasseh was a sinner of the greatest magnitude, his sins were of a
skarlet dye, they reached as high as heaven, 2 Chronicles. 33.
and they made his soul as black as hell; for Witchcraft, Sorcery, Cruelty,
Idolatry, and Blood, he was a nonesuch; he sold himself to work all manner of
wickedness with greediness; he did more wickedly than the very heathen, whom
the Lord abhorred; in all his actings he seemed to be the firstborn of Satan's
strength; and yet the Lord freely bestowed himself as a portion upon him: and
so, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live, yea, I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy blood live. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon
thee, behold thy time was a time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness, yea, I swore unto thee, and entered into a Covenant
with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. And so, Isa 46.12, 13.
Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness; I bring
near my righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not
tarry; and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory. Solomon, Mary
Magdalen, Matthew, Zacheus, the Jailer, and the murderers of Christ were all
very great and grievous sinners, and yet the Lord bestowed himself as a portion
upon them; and so God bestowed himself as a portion upon those monstrous and
prodigious sinners that are mentioned in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. whose souls were
red with guilt, and as black as hell with filth. God has been very good to
those that have been very bad, and therefore do not despair, O sinner, though
thy sins are very great.

I have read a Story concerning a great Rebel that had made a great party
against one of the Roman Emperors, Joh. Bodin. Com. weal.
and Proclamation being sent abroad, that whoever could bring in the Rebel dead
or alive, he should have a great sum of money for his reward; the Rebel
hearing of it, comes, and presenting himself before the Emperor, demands the
sum of money proposed; the Emperor bethinking himself, concludes, that if he
should put him to death, all the world would be ready to say, that he did it to
save his money; and so he freely pardoned the Rebel, and gave him the money.
Here now was light in a dark Lanthorn, here was rare mercy and pity in a very
Heathen: And shall an Heathen do thus, and shall not the great God, who is made
up of all loves, of all mercies, of all compassions, of all goodnesses, and of
all sweetnesses, do much more? certainly he will. If the greatest Rebels, if
the greatest sinners will but come in whilst the white Flag of grace and mercy
is held forth, they shall find a marvcilous readiness and forwardness in
God, not only to pardon them, but also to bestow (not only money, but)
himself as a portion upon them. The greatest sinners should do well to make
that great Scripture their greatest companion, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended
on high (speaking of Christ) thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also, (but to what purpose has
Christ received gifts, spiritual gifts, gracious gifts, glorious gifts, for
men, for the rebellious? why it is) that the Lord God may dwell amongst them.
But,

Thirdly, I answer, Hos. 2.23. I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained
mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people; and
they shall say, Thou art my God. In this precious promise God has engaged
himself to have a most sweet harmony, and a most intimate conjunction and
communion with such a people as were not his people. But

Fourthly, I answer, gains the greatest glory, by bestowing of himself as a
portion upon the greatest sinners. There is nothing that makes so much for the
glory of free grace, and for the exaltation of rich mercy, and for the praise
of divine goodness, and for the honor of infinite fulnsse, as Gods bestowing
of himself upon the greatest of sinners. O Sirs, grace appears never so rich,
nor never so excellent, nor never so glorious, as when it triumphs over the
greatest sins, and when it falls upon the greatest sinners: Grace never shines,
nor never sparkles, nor never becomes so exceeding glorious, as it does when it
lights upon the hearts of the greatest sinners. The greatest sins do most and
best set off the freeness and the riches of Gods grace; there is nothing that
makes heaven and earth to ring and to sound out his praises so much as the
fixing of his love upon those that are most unlovely and uncomely, and as the
bestowing of himself upon them that have given away themselves from him.

And it is further observable, that the greatest sinners, when once they are
converted, do commonly prove the choicest Saints, and the rarest Instruments of
promoting the honor and glory of God in the world. The Canaanites were a
wicked and a cursed generation, They were of the race of cursed Cain.
they were given over to all whoredom, witchcraft, and cruelty, they offered
their sons and daughters to Devils, they were the very worst of sinners, they
were without God, and without the Covenant, and counted dogs among the
Israelites; and such an one was the Canaanite woman that you read of in that
Matthew. 15.21-29. till the Lord made it the day of his power upon her soul; but
when the Lord had brought her in to himself, ah what a rare Christian did she
prove, for wisdom, zeal, humility, self-denial, love, courage, patience,
faith, etc. And so Mary Magdalen was a notorious Strumpet, a common whore,
among all the harlots none to Mary Magdalen, Mark 16 9
and she was one out of whom Christ cast seven Devils; and yet when she was
changed and converted, Luke 7.
O with what an inflamed love did she love the Lord Jesus Christ! and with what
a burning zeal did she follow after the Lord Jesus! and how abundant was she in
her lamenting and mourning after the Lord Jesus Christ! Joh. 20.
Some report, that after our Saviors resurrection she spent thirty years in
weeping for her sins in Galba. And Paul, you know, was a very grievous sinner,
but after his conversion, O what a rare, what an eminent, what a glorious
instrument was he in bringing of souls to Christ, and in building up of souls
in Christ! 2 Cor. 11.
O what a noble drudge was he for Christ! O how frequent! O how fervent! O how
abundant was he in the work of the Lord, etc. And indeed in all ages, the
greatest sinners when once they have been converted, they have commonly proved
the choicest Saints, and the rarest Instruments in the hand of God for the
advancement of his glory, and the carrying on of his work in the world. I might
instance in Luther, and diverse others, but that I hasten to a Close: And
therefore,

Fifthly, I answer, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 7, 8, 9, 10.
nor no heart can conceive the greatness of that wrath, of that indignation,
of that desolation, of that destruction, and of that damnation that attends and
waits upon those great sinners that have not God for their portion; and
therefore the greater sinner thou art, the greater obligation lies upon thee to
get God to be thy God and portion; for till that be done, all thy sins in their
full number, weight, guilt, and aggravating circumstances will abide upon thy
soul. But

Sixthly and lastly, work for God to dissolve the world, and to raise the dead;
and yet doubtless it is a greater work for the great God freely to bestow
himself upon the greatest sinners. The love of God is a great love, and the
mercies of God are great mercies, and the compassions of God are great
compassions, and accordingly God loves to act; and therefore there is ground
for the greatest sinners to hope that the Lord may bestow himself as a portion
upon them. But

Secondly, been so long a discoursing on, etc. Now to this Objection, I shall
thus answer:

First, Mat. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you: The Greek word
(...) signifies a casting in as an overplus, as some over-weight, measure, or
number.
And so ver. 19, 20. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where
moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through, and steal; But lay
up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. And so in that Joh.
6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat which endures
to everlasting life. O Sirs, to act or run cross to Gods express command
(though under pretense of Revelation from God) is as much as a man's life is
worth, as you may see in that sad story, 1 Kings 13.24. O Sirs, it is a
dangerous thing to neglect one of his commands, who by another is able to
command your bodies into the grave, and your souls into hell at his pleasure:
Shall the wife make conscience of obeying the commands of her husband? and
shall the child make conscience of obeying the commands of his father? and
shall the servant make conscience of obeying the commands of his Lord? and
shall the soldier make conscience of obeying the commands of his General? and
shall the subject make conscience of obeying the commands of his Prince (though
he be none of his Council?) and will not you make conscience of obeying his
commands that is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, 1 Rev. 5. But

Secondly, Who but children, in Folio, will pitch upon a less good, when a
greater good is offered to them? what madness and folly is it for men to pitch
upon bags of counters, Children, mad men, and fools will part with a pearl for
a pippin.
when bags of gold are laid before them? or for men to choose an hundred pounds
per annum for life, when rich inheritances and great Lordships are freely
offered to be made over to them for ever? What were this but Esau-like to
prefer a mess of pottage before the birthright? and yet this is the present
case of these Objectors. God is that rich, that great, that glorious, and that
matchless portion that is held out, and freely offered and tendered in the
Gospel to poor sinners, and they neglect, slight, and reject this blessed
offer, and fix their choice, their love, their hearts, their affections upon
the perishing vanities of this world. O the folly of such, that at a Feast feed
upon kickshawes, and never taste of those substantial dishes that are for
nourishment! O the madness of such that prefer the fleshpots of Egypt before
the dainties of Canaan! Would not such a Merchant, such a Tradesman be pointed
at as he goes along the streets for a fool, or a mad man, that should neglect
such a season, such an opportunity, such an advantage, wherein he may be made
for ever (as to the world) and all because he is resolved first to secure such
a bargain of rags, or such a bargain of old shoes, which will turn but little
to his advantage when he has bought them? Surely yes: now this is the very
case of the Objectors, for they neglect the present seasons, the present
opportunities of grace and mercy, and of being made happy for ever, by enjoying
of God for their portion, and all because they are resolved first to secure the
Treasures, the Rags of this World. Certainly, in the great day of account these
will be found the greatest fools that have fooled away such golden
opportunities that were more worth than all the world, and all to secure the
rags of the world. But

Thirdly and lastly, Matthew. 7.22, 26, 27.
how many thousands have now their part and their portion in that burning lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone for ever and ever? Rev. 21.8.
who thought when they were on earth that after they had laid up goods for many
years with the fool in the Gospel, that then they would look after heavenly
treasures, and secure God for their portion; but before they could find time or
hearts to set about so noble work, divine vengeance has overtaken them, and
justice has cut the thread of their lives, and given them their portion among
hypocrites. Ah, how many be there that have died in the time of their earthly
projects and designs, Luke 12.15. to 22.
before ever they have set about that great work of securing God for their
portion; and how many thousands be there, that God in his just judgment has
given up to insatiable desires of earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19.
and to a cursed endless covetousness all their days? Some write of the
Crocodil, that it always grows, that it has never done growing; and just so
it is with the desires of worldly men, they always grow, they have never done
growing; now they are for one thousand, then for ten, then for twenty, then for
forty, then for an hundred thousand; now they are for this Lordship, and then
they are for that; now they are for this good bargain, and then they are for
that; their hearts grow every day fuller and fuller with new desires of further
and greater measures of earthly things; they please themselves with golden
dreams, till they awake with everlasting flames about their ears, and then they
fall a cursing themselves that they have made gold their confidence, and that
they have neglected those golden seasons and opportunities wherein they might
have secured God for their portion. But

Thirdly,

Now to this Objection I shall return these answers:

First, 2 Cor. 4.15. 1 Timothy 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.3.
yet God is rich, and abundant in mercy; your sins, your unworthiness can but
reach as high as heaven, but the mercies of God reach above the heavens, Psalm.
103.11. For as the Heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him: Psalm. 108.4. For thy mercy is great above the heavens, and
thy truth reaches unto the clouds: The highest comparisons which the world
will afford are not sufficient to express the greatness of Gods mercy to poor
sinners: Though the heavens are exceeding high above the earth, yet the mercies
of God to his poor people are above the heavens. But

Secondly, I answer, David was as unworthy as Saul, and Job as Joab, and Peter
as Judas, and Paul as Simon Magus, Mat. 21.31, 32.
and the Publicans and Harlots that entered into the Kingdom of heaven were as
unworthy as the Publicans and Harlots that were shut out of the Kingdom of
heaven; and the thief that went to paradise was as unworthy as the thief that
went to hell: All the Saints in heaven, and all the Saints on earth are ready
with one joint consent to declare, that they were as unworthy as the most
unworthiest, when God first bestowed himself as a portion upon them. This
Objection, I am unworthy, is a very unworthy Objection, and therefore away with
it. But

Thirdly, his goodness; and that they should be first worthy of himself,
before he would bestow himself as a portion upon them. If we should never enjoy
God for our portion till we are worthy to enjoy him for our portion, we should
never enjoy him. If a man had as many eyes as Argus to search into the
Scripture, and as many hands as Briareus to turn over the leaves of Scripture,
yet he would never be able to find out one Text, one line, yea, one word,
wherein God requires a personal worthiness in the creature, before he gives
away himself to the creature: Should God stand upon a personal worthiness to
be in the creature, before he would look upon the creature, or before he would
let out his love to the creature, or before he would extend mercy or pity to
the creature, or before he would in a Covenant of free grace give himself to
the creature, no sinner could be saved, man would be for ever undone, and it
had been good for him that he had never been born. But,

Fourthly, Isa. 53.1.
Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
Chapter 65.2, 3.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walks
in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts. A people that provoke me
to anger continually to my face. How long, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in scorning,
and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my
Spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I have called,
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof. I also will laugh
at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, etc. For thus says the
Lord God, the holy One of Israel, Isa. 30.15.
in returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and in confidence shall
be your strength, and ye would not. O Sirs, Matthew. 23 37. Luke 13.34.
men shall be damned at last, not for cannots, but for will nots; no man shall
be damned because he could not do better, but because he would not do better;
if there were no will, John 40.
there would be no hell: At last sinners will find this to be their greatest
hell, that they have wilfully destroyed themselves; this is that which will
damn with a witness, and this will be that never dying worm; I might have had
Christ and grace, but I would not; I might have been sanctified and saved, but
I would not; I might have been holy and happy, but I would not; Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19.
life and death has been often set before me, and I have chosen death rather
than life; heaven and hell has been often set before me, and I have chosen
hell rather than heaven; glory and misery has been often set before me, and I
have chosen misery rather than glory; and therefore it is but just that I should
be miserable to all eternity. No man, no Devil, can undo thee, O sinner,
without thy self; no man can be undone in both worlds, but by himself: No man
shall be damned for his unworthiness, but for his unwillingnesse; and
therefore never plead this Objection more. But,

Fifthly and lastly, I answer, that if you will not seek after the Lord to be
your portion, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.10-15.
went home justified, when the thank-God Pharisee returned as proud as he came.
The Centurion when he came to Christ, sped well, Matthew. 8.
notwithstanding his personal unworthiness. And the prodigal son sped well when
he returned to his Father, Luke 15.11 -- ult.
notwithstanding his personal unworthiness; for he was readily accepted,
greatly pitied, sweetly embraced, courteously received, and very joyfully and
nobly entertained, witness the best robe that was put upon his back, and the
gold ring that was put on his finger, and the shoes that were put on his feet,
and the fatted calfe that was killed to make the company merry. O Sirs, if in
the face of all your unworthiness you will go to God, and tell him that you
are sinners, that you are vile sinners, that you are wretched sinners, that you
are very great sinners, yea, that you are the greatest of sinners, and that you
have deserved a thousand deaths, a thousand hells, a thousand destructions, and
a thousand damnations, and earnestly beseech him to look upon you, and to
bestow himself on you (though not for your worthiness sake, yet) for his Names
sake, for his mercies sake, for his promise sake, for his Covenants sake, for
his Oath sake, and for his Sons sake; Certainly, if you shall thus plead with
God, all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth cannot tell to the
contrary, but that you may speed as well as ever the Centurion, or the Prodigal
did. I have taken the more pains to answer this Objection, that so it may never
have a resurrection more in any of your hearts, into whose hands this Treatise
may fall.

I know other Objections might be raised, but because I have spoken largely to
such in my former writings. I shall pass on to the last thing proposed, and
that is to lay down some Positions that may (by the blessing of God) be of
singular use to the Christian Reader.

As first, That it is one thing for a man to have God for his portion, First
Position. Moses his face did shine, and yet he did not see it.
and it is another thing for a man to have an assurance in his own soul that God
is his portion; there are many that have God for their portion, who yetare full
of fears and doubts, that God is not their portion: Thus it was with Asaph in
that 77 Psalm; and thus it was with Heman in that 88 Psalm; and thus it is with
very many Christians in these days. Sometimes God exercises his children with
such changeable and such terrible dispensations as raises many fears and doubts
in them about their interest and propriety in; God and sometimes their secret
indulging of some bosom Idol, their entertainment of some predominant lust,
raises strange fears and jealousies in their souls about their interest in God;
and sometimes their not closing with the Lord so closely, so fully, so
faithfully, so universally, and so sincerely as they should, without any secret
reservation, raises many doubts and questions in them, whether God be their
portion, or no. The graces of many Christians are so weak, and their
corruptions are so strong, and Satan is so busy with them, and their duties
and performances are so weak, so flat, so dull, so saplesse, so livelesse, so
fruitless, and so inconstant, that they are ready at every turn to say, if God
be our God, why is it thus with us? if God be our portion, why are our hearts
in no better a frame? why have our duties no more spirit, life, and fire in
them. Look, as the Sun may shine, and yet I not see it; and as the husband may
be in the house, and yet the wife not know it; and as the child may have a very
great portion, a very fair estate settled upon him, and yet he not understand
it; so a Christian may have God for his portion, and yet for the present he may
not see it, nor know it, nor understand it, 1 John 5.13. These things have I
written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know
that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of
God. These precious souls had God and Christ for their portion, and they did
believe, and they had eternal life in the seeds and beginnings of it, and in
the promise, and in Christ their Head, Ephe. 2.6.
who as a public person had taken possession of it in their steads, and yet
they had not the assurance of these things in their own souls. Look, as the
babe that has past the pangs of the first birth, does not presently cry out,
my father, my father; so the babe of grace, the newborn Christian does not
presently cry out, my God, my God; it is one mercy for God to be my God, and
it is another mercy for God to tell me, that he is my God; it is one act of grace
for God to be my portion, and it is another act of grace for God to tell me,
that he is my portion. Look, as fire may be hid under ashes for a time, and as
bits of gold may be hid in an heap of dust for a time, and as stars may be hid
in a dark night for a time, and as a pearl may be hid in a puddle for a time;
so God may be a man's portion, and yet this may be hid from him for a time.

The second Position is this, Second Position.
That it is one thing for a man to have God for his portion, and another thing
for a man clearly and convincingly to make it out to himself or others, that
God is his portion: Doubtless there are many thousands that have God for their
portion, who yet, God sometimes lays such a Law of restraint upon the noble
faculties of men and women, that they cannot use them at sometimes as they do
at others, as you may clearly see by comparing of these Scriptures together,
Luke 24.14, 15, 16, etc. Acts 22.9. Genesis 21.16, 19. John 20.14, 15, etc.
if you would give them a thousand worlds, are not able to make it out to their
own or others satisfaction, that God is their portion. Most Christians attain
to but small measures of grace, but little measures of grace: Now small things,
little things are hardly discerned, they are hardly made out. A little faith is
next to no faith, and a little love is next to no love, and a little repentance
is next to no repentance, and a little zeal is next to no zeal, and a little
hope is next to no hope, and a little holiness is next to no holiness, and a
little communion with God is next to no communion with God, and a little
conformity to God is next to no conformity to God. Now where there is but a
little grace, there it is very difficult for a man to make out the truth of his
grace, and so by consequence to make out the truth of his interest and
propriety in the God of grace: It Is not grace in truth, but grace in strength
that will enable a man to make it out to himself, and to make it out to others,
that God is his portion: It is not grace in its sincerity, but grace in its
sublimity, in its high and eminent actings, that will enable a man to make it
out to himself and others, that God is indeed his God. Besides, many precious
hearts have such weak heads, and such bad Logic, and such shallow natural
parts, that they are not able rationally nor divinely to argue the case with
their own souls, nor to make an improvement of those rules, helps, ways, and
means, whereby they might be enabled to make it out to themselves and others,
that God is their portion. Look, as many persons have often a good title to
such and such lands, and to such and such estates and inheritances, though they
are not able for the present to clear up their title either to themselves or
others; so many of the dear children of God have a good title to God, and a
real interest and propriety in God, and yet for the present they are not able
to clear up their title to God, nor to clear up their interest and propriety in
God, either to themselves or others. And this is so great a truth, that all the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ that deal with poor souls, and that are
conversant about souls, are ready from their daily experience to avouch it
before all the world. He that shall say, that such have not God for their
portion, that cannot make out God to be their portion, will certainly condemn
the generation of the just.

The third Position is this, Third Position.
That where there is an hearty willingness in any man to accept of God to be
his God, Isa. 55.1, 2. Joh. 7.37, 38.
to own God for his God, and to close with God as his God, there God is
certainly that man's God. If there be a cordial willingness in you to take God
to be your God, then without all peradventure God is your God. A sincere
willingness to accept of God to be your God is accepted of God, and is
sufficient to enter into a gracious Covenant with God. O Sirs, a sincere
willingness to accept of God to be your God flows from nothing below the good
will and pleasure of God; no power below that glorious power that made the
world, and that raised Christ from the grave, is able to raise a sincere, an
hearty willingness in man to accept of God to be his God, and to take God for
his God, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing (or willingnesses in the
abstract, and in the plural number,) in the day of thy power, in the beauties
of holiness. There is no power below the power of the Lord of Hosts that can
raise up a willingness in the hearts of sinners: it is not in the power of all
the Angels in heaven, nor of all the men on earth to beget a sincere
willingness in the heart of man to accept of God to be his God; this is work
that can only be effected by an omnipotent hand. Though an Emperor may force a
woman to marry him that is his slave, because she is his purchase, yet he
cannot by all his power force her will; he may force her body to the action,
but he cannot force her will to the action. The will is always free, and
cannot be forced, but God is that great Emperor that has not only a power to
marry the soul (which he has redeemed from being Satan's bond-slave) but also a
power to make the soul that is unready ready, and that is unwilling willing to
marry him, and to bestow it self freely upon him. If there be in thee, O man, O
woman, a sincere willingness to take God upon his own terms to be thy God
(that is, to take him as an holy God, and as a ruling God, and as a commanding
God in one thing as well as another) then he is certainly thy God, Rev. 22.17.
And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, come; and
let him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will let him take the water of
life freely.

The fourth Position is this, Fourth Position.
That it may so fall out, that such a Christian that has God for his portion,
that has an interest and a propriety in God, may lose the sight, the sense,
the feeling and the evidence of his interest and propriety in God; and this is
evident by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together. Psalm. 30.6, 7.
Psalm. 51.13. Joh. 24. Chapter 16.9. and Chapter 19.10, 11.
Doubtless it is very rare to find a Christian that has had the knowledge,
and experience, and evidence of his interest and propriety in God, but that
that Christian also has experienced what it is to have his interest and
propriety in God clouded and darkened. And Chapter 30.20. Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88. Isa.
8.17. Lam. 3.18.
Such Christians that have experienced what the warm beams of the Sun of
Righteousness means, have likewise experienced what it is to have their Sun
set in a Cloud; and this truth I might make good, by producing of a cloud of
witnesses both from among the Martyrs, and from among the Saints in all Ages.
But what do I talk of a cloud of witnesses, when the tears that daily drop from
many of your eyes, and the sad complaints, and sighs, and groans of many of
your souls do sufficiently evidence this sad truth. And therefore let no man
conclude, that God is not his God, because he has lost the sight and sense of
his interest and propriety in God; let no man say, that God is not his portion,
because he has lost those evidences (at the present) by which he has formerly
proved God to be his portion. Though a man should lose his Writings and
Evidences that he has to show for such or such an Estate, yet his Writings and
Evidences being enrolled in a Court of Record, his Estate remains good, and his
Title is still good in law; and therefore there is no reason why such a man
should sit down, and wring his hands, and cry out, I am undone, I am undone: so
though a Christian should lose his Writings, his Evidences that once he had to
show, that once he had to prove God to be his God and portion, and that he had
a real interest and propriety in God, yet his Writings, his Evidences being
enrolled in the Court of Heaven, his title to God, his interest in God remains
good; and therefore there is no reason why such a person should sit down
dejected, and wring his hands, and cry out, O I am undone, I am for ever undone.

The fifth Position is this, Fifth Position.
That such that have not (for the present) God for their portion, ought not
peremptorily to conclude, that they shall never have God for their portion;
such a person that cannot yet truly say, that the Lord is his portion ought not
to despair of ever having of God for his portion. The time of a man's life is
but a day, and God may bestow himself as a portion upon man in what hour of
that day he pleases. In the Parable he bestowed himself as a portion upon some
at the first hour, Matthew. 20.1-17.
upon others at the third hour, upon others at the sixth hour, upon others at
the ninth hour, and upon others at the eleventh hour: God is a free Agent, and
may bestow himself upon whom he pleases, and as he pleases, and when he
pleases. There is no sinner, We except such that has committed the sin against
the Holy Ghost
no not the greatest sinner living under the Gospel, that can infallibly
determine, that God will never be his God; no sinner can conclude that God has
peremptorily and absolutely excluded him from mercy, and shut him out among
those that he is resolved never to bestow himself upon. For,

1. God never made any sinner one of his Privy Council.

2. In the Gospel of grace God has revealed no such thing.

3. Secret things belong only to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

4. God has bestowed himself as a portion upon as great sinners as any they
are that yet have not God for their portion.

5. All the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth cannot tell to the
contrary, but that God may have thoughts of mercy toward thee, and that thy
lot may fall within the purpose of his grace, and that he may bestow himself as
a portion upon thee before thou art cut off from the land of the living.
Although a sinner may certainly know at the present that God is not his God,
that God is not his portion, yet he does not certainly know that God will never
be his God, that God will never be his portion; and therefore no sinner may
peremptorily conclude, that God will never be his God, because for the present
he cannot, he dares not say, he is his God.

God gave himself as a portion to Abraham when he was old, Genesis 12.4.
when he was a white-headed sinner. 2 Chronicles. 33.1, 12, 13, 14.
And Manasseh was old when he was converted and changed, and when God bestowed
himself upon him. And Zacheus and Nicodemus were called and converted in their
old age, when there were but a few steps between them and the grave, between
them and eternity, between them and everlasting burnings, then the Lord
graciously revealed himself, and bestowed himself as a portion upon them. And
if we believe Tertullian, Paul wanted not a prediction of the Holy Ghost in
that Prophetic blessing of dying Jacob to his youngest son, Genesis 49.27. Adu.
Marcion. l. 5.
Benjamin shall ravine as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the prey, and
at night he shall divide the spoil. See my Apples of Gold, page 352.353, 354.
two more famous Stories of such that were converted in their old age.
Paul was of the Tribe of Benjamin, in the morning, the forepart of his age,
worrying and devouring the flock of Christ, persecuting of the Church; and in
the evening, the declension of his life, dividing the Word, a Doctor of the
Nations. And Dionysius tells us, that Mary Magdalen that was so loose and
dissolute in her youth, being converted in her old age, she sequestered her self
from all worldly pleasures, and lived a most solitary life in the mountains of
Balma, where she spent full thirty years in meditation, fasting, and prayer.
And old godly Similes said, that he had been in the world sixty years, but had
lived but seven, counting his life, not from his first birth, but from his new
birth. Soliloq. c. 33.
And Augustine repented that he had began to seek, serve, and love God no
sooner. By all these instances it is most evident, that God may bestow himself
as a portion upon sinners, upon very great sinners, yea, upon the greatest of
sinners, and that at last cast, when they are stricken in years, and when they
are even ready to go out of this world; and therefore let no man despair of
having of God for his portion, though for the present his soul cannot say, the
Lord is my portion.

O Sirs, Despair is a sin, a very heinous sin, yea, it is that sin that damns
with a witness; despairing Judas perished, and was damned, Acts 2.
when as the very murderers of Christ believing on Christ were saved. Roger
Bishop of Salubury in King Stephens days was so troubled, that he could not
live, and durst not die, etc.
Despair thrusts God from his mercy-seat, it throws disgrace upon the throne of
grace, it gives the lie to all the precious promises, it casts reproach upon
the nature of God, it tramples under feet the blood of the Covenant, it cuts
the throat of faith, hope, and repentance, it renders all the means of grace
useless and fruitless, it imbitters all a man's comforts, it gives a sting to
all a man's troubles, it proclaims Satan a Conqueror, it raises a hell in the
conscience, it makes a man a Magor-missabib, a terror to himself, and an
astonishment to others. In that 7 of Daniel there is mention made of four
Beasts; the first a Lion, the second a Bear, the third a Leopard, but the
fourth without distinction either of kind, or sex, or name, is said to be very
fearful, and terrible, and strong; and such a thing as this fourth beast was is
Desperation, as all have found that ever have been under it; desperation is a
complicated sin, it is a mother-sin, it is a breeding sin, it is the complement of
all sins; and therefore above all take heed of this sin. O Sirs, as you love
your souls, and as you would be happy to all eternity, do not despair, nor do
not be peremptory in your conclusions, that God will never be your portion,
because for the present he is not your portion: remember the gracious
invitations of God, and remember the glorious riches of mercy, and remember the
overflowings of infinite grace, and then despond and despair if thou can.

The sixth and last Position is this, Sixth Position.
that such is the love, care, goodness and kindness of God to his people, that
few or none of them die without some assurance that God is their portion, and
that they have an interest and propriety in him. That here and there a
particular Christian (in cases not ordinary) may die doubting, and ascend to
heaven in a cloud, as Christ did, will, Acts 1.9.
I suppose, be readily granted; and that the generality of Christians shall
first or last, more or less, mediately or immediately, have some comfortable
assurance, that God is their God, and that he is their portion, and that they
have a real interest and propriety in him, may I suppose be thus evinced.

First, such a thing as this is; take these for a taste, Psalm. 9.18. For the
needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever. Psalm. 22.26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, they shall
praise the Lord that seek him, your heart shall live for ever. Psalm. 84.11. For
the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Hos. 2.23. And I
will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, Ponder upon that of Ezekiel
34 30, 31.
and I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people; and they
shall say, Thou art my God. Psalm. 5.12. For thou, Lord, wilt bless the
righteous, with favor will thou compass him, as a shield, John 14.21, 23. He
that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

Secondly, Solomon's Song 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Chap. 6.3. I
am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: And Chap. 7.10. I am my beloveds, and
his desire is toward me. Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, art our
Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. Isa. 64.8, 9. But now, O
Lord, thou art our Father, behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.
Jer. 3.22, 23. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Truly
in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Isa. 25.9. And it shall be said
in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us.
I might produce a cloud of witnesses from among the Patriarchs and Prophets,
further to evince this truth; but enough is as good as a Feast.

And as the Church of God in the Old Testament, so the Church of God in the New
Testament attained to the same assurance. The believers in Corinth were sealed,
and had the earnest of the Spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. And Chap. 5.1, 5.
For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who also has given
us the earnest of the Spirit. And so the believing Ephesians had the like,
Ephesians. 1.13. In whom, after ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
Promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. And so, Chap. 4.30. And
grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. And the believing Thessalonians had the same, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5.
Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. For our Gospel came not unto
you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
assurance. I might give you many particular instances out of the New Testament
to confirm this truth, but these general Instances are more convincing and
satisfying.

Thirdly, Isa. 57. 16, 18, 19. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I
be always wrath; for the Spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I
have made. I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners: I create the fruit of the lips,
peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord,
and I will heal him. Now seeing that God has so graciously undertaken for his
people, that their spirits shall not faint nor fail, there is no doubt but that
sooner or later, more or less, God will assure his people that he is their
portion, and that they have a real interest and propriety in him.

Fourthly, Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. Romans 4.11.
instituted, and appointed for that very purpose and to that very end, viz. to
seal up the believers propriety in God, and to assure him of his interest in
God, in Christ, in the everlasting Covenant, and in all the benefits of Christ's
death, to wit, the favor of God, reconciliation, redemption, and the remission
of sins. Now how can it possibly be imagined, that so glorious an Ordinance
should be instituted to so great and so glorious an end as to assure believers
of their interest and propriety in God, and yet this end should never be
effected in them all their days, for whose sake the Ordinance was instituted
and appointed. Certainly God never appointed any Ordinance to accomplish any
end, Isa. 55.10, 11. Chapter 45.23.
but first or last that Ordinance did accomplish that end, for which it was
appointed and instituted. Cy. l. 4. Ep. 6. The same Augustine reports, Aug. in
Joh Tract. 27.
Cyprian shows how the Martyrs in the primitive Church when they were to appear
before the cruel persecuting Tyrants, were wont to receive the Lords Supper,
and thereby they were so assured of their interest and propriety in God, and so
fired with zeal and fervor, and filled with faith and fortitude, etc. that
they made nothing of the greatest torments that those bloody Tyrants could
inflict upon them. And says Chrysostom, by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
we are so armed against Satan's temptations, that he flees from us, as if we
were so many Lions that spet fire.

The Jews in the celebration of the Passover did sing the 113. Psalm, with the
five following Psalms, which they called the great Hallelujah, and it was
always after that cup of wine which they called, The cup of praise; and thus it
should be with the Saints; at all times, upon all occasions, in all places they
should sing Hallelujahs to God: O but when they are at the Lords Supper, then
they should sing the great Hallelujah; but how they will be ever able to sing
this great Hallelujah, except first or last, more or less, God gives them some
assurance of their interest and propriety in himself, I cannot for my life
discern. But

Fifthly,

1. Union and communion with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3. That which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with
us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
Now that union that is between the foundation and the building, the head and
the members, the husband and the wife, the father and the child, the subject
and the Prince, the body and the soul, is nothing so near an union as that
which is between a believer and God. Besides, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17.
that union that a Christian has with God is an honorable union, and it is an
inseparable union, it is an invincible union, and it is an everlasting union.
Now how it is possible for a man to have such a near and such a glorious union
and fellowship with God from the day of his conversion to the day of his
desolution, and yet never come to any assurance of his interest and propriety
in God, is a thing not easily imaginable.

2. Precious faith is another spring of assurance, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not
seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Now this spring is in all the Saints, 2
Pet. 1.1. The faith of expectance will in time rise up into a faith of
reliance, and the faith of reliance will in time advance it self into a faith
of assurance.

3. Hope is another spring of assurance, Coloss. 1.27. Christ in you, the hope
of glory. Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail.

4. A good conscience is another spring of assurance, 2 Cor. 1.12.

5. Real love to the Saints is another spring of assurance, 1 John 3.14.

6. And lastly, the Spirit of God is another spring of assurance, Romans 8. Now
that a Christian should have all these choice springs of assurance in his soul,
from his new birth, to the day of his death, and yet in all that time never
come to assurance of his interest and propriety in God, is a thing, I had
almost said, beyond all belief. But

Sixthly, Psa. 4.6, 7.
That God would tell them that he is their portion, and that he would clear up
their interest and propriety in himself; the constant language of their souls
is this, Lord, do but tell us that thou art our portion, and then bestow
earthly portions upon whom thou please; do but clear up our interest and
propriety in thy self, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
and then we shall say, Our lot is fallen in a pleasant place, and verily we
have a goodly heritage. Believers know, that assurance that God is their
portion, and that they have an interest and propriety in him, will ease them of
all their sinful cares, fears, terrors, horrors, jealousies, suspicions, and
sad apprehensions, which makes their lives a very hell; They know that
assurance of their interest and propriety in God, will make every bitter sweet,
and every sweet more sweet, it will turn a Wilderness into a Paradise, an
Egypt into a Canaan; They know that assurance that God is theirs will raise the
truest comforts, the purest comforts, the greatest comforts, the surest
comforts, Isa. 40.1, 2.
the strongest comforts, the rarest comforts, the sweetest comforts, and the
most lasting comforts in their souls. They know that assurance of their
interest in God will fit them for the highest duties in Christianity, and for
the hardest duties in Christianity, and for the costliest duties in
Christianity, and for the most neglected, scorned, and despised duties in
Christianity; They know that assurance of their propriety in God will most
quicken their graces, and act their graces, and raise their graces, and
strengthen their graces, and brighten their graces, and put a luster and a
beauty upon their graces; They know that assurance of their interest in God
will wonderfully weaken sin, and effectually crucify their hearts to the
world, and sweetly moderate their affections to their nearest and dearest
relations, and powerfully arm them both against the worlds oppositions, and
Satan's temptations.

To conclude, They know that assurance of their propriety in God will make
death more desirable than terrible, yea, it will make the thoughts of death
sweet, and the approaches of death easy, and all the warnings of death
pleasant to their souls, and therefore they follow God hard day and night, with
strong cries, prayers, tears, sighs, and groans, that he would make it evident
to them, that he is their portion, and that he would clear up their interest
and propriety in him. Now how can any man that is in his wits imagine, that God
should always turn a deaf ear to the prayers of his people in this thing
especially, considering that their prayers, Rom: 8.26, 27.
cries, tears, sighs, and groans are but the products of his own Spirit in
them; and considering likewise the several promises, whereby he has engaged
himself to answer to the prayers of his people. I might tire both you and my
self in turning to those particular promises, but that I am resolved against,
and therefore take that for all, Joh. 16.23, 24. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Ask
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. This double asseveration
Verily, verily, is never used, but in matters of greatest weight and
importance; and this gemination Verily, verily, is a vehement confirmation of
the truth of what Christ speaks. Now from this gracious promise I may safely
and clearly infer, That if God the Father will give to believers whatsoever
they ask in the name of Christ, then certainly, at first or last, sooner or
later, he will give them assurance that he is their portion, and that they have
an undoubted interest and propriety in him; for this is one of the grand
requests, that they are still a putting up in the name of Christ, and upon the
grant of this request depends the fullness of a Christians joy. But

Seventhly and lastly, If God should not sooner or later, more or less, assure
his people that he is their portion, and that they have an interest and a
propriety in him then, he would be a very great loser (if I may so speak) he
would lose many praises, and many thanksgivings, he would lose much of that
love, of that honor, and of that delight, and of that admiration, which
otherwise he might have from among his children. And it is very observable,
that of all the duties of Religion there are none that are pressed so closely, so
frequently, and so strongly upon Christians, as those of praising of God, I
might produce above a hundred Scriptures to evidence this.
and rejoicing in God, etc. as all know that know any thing of the Scripture.
Now how it will stand with the holiness of God, and with the wisdom of God,
and with the care of God to be so great a loser in the very things which he
has so roundly and earnestly pressed upon his people, when as by one sweet word
of his mouth he might so easily and so happily prevent it, I cannot easily
discern. All believers know, that there is no such ready, no such effectual way
under heaven to draw out their love, their joy, their delight, their praises,
and their thanksgivings to God, as Gods assuring of them that he is their
portion, and that they have an unquestionable interest and propriety in him.
Certainly, that God that loves the praises of his people, and that dislights in
the rejoycings of his people, and that is so infinitely pleased with the
thanksgivings of his people, that God will not always hide himself from his
people, that God will sooner or later so manifest himself to his people, that
they shall be able to see their interest and propriety in God, and rejoycingly
to say, The Lord is our portion.

Now, O you that are the people of the Lord, and that to this very day do lie
under many fears and doubts about your interest and propriety in God, be not
discouraged, do not hang down the head, do not despond, do not despair, for
certainly sooner or later God will assure you, that he is your portion, and
that you have an interest and a propriety in him.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
OF All. If God be the Saints portion, then all is theirs. Page 203. to Page
206. Of Assurance. Such as have God for their portion, should use all diligence
to get an assurance in their own souls that God is their portion, and that upon
seven grounds. p. 232. to p. 259. It Is one thing for a man to have God for his
portion, and it is another thing for a man to have an assurance in his own soul
that God is his portion. p. 423, 424, 425, 426. That few Saints dye without
some Assurance that God is their portion, is made good by diverse Arguments.
from p. 441. to the end of the Book.
C
Of inordinate Cares. Such as have God for their portion, must away with all
inordinate Cares for the things of this life, and that upon six grounds. p.
190. to p. 203. Of Christ. A man that would have God for his portion must take
up Christ in his arms, and treat with God upon the credit of Christ. p. 387,
338, 389, 390. In Comparison of God all things are nothing. A man that would
have God for his portion, must trample upon all other portions in comparison of
God. p. 382, 383, 384. Of Contentation. Saints that have God for their portion,
ought to be content with their present outward condition; and that upon
several grounds. p. 136. to p. 153.
D
Of Death and Dying. Such as have God for their portion should never be afraid
to dye. p. 228. to p. 232. The Doctrine. That the Lord is the Saints portion,
the Lord is the Believers portion. p. 7.
E
Of Esteeming of God above all. A man that has God for his portion sets the
highest esteem, the highest price, the highest value upon God imaginable. p.
311. to p. 315. Five ways whereby a man may know whether God be highest in his
estimation or no. p. 315. to 324.
F
Against Fretings. Saints that have God for their portion should not fret nor
vex themselves because of those earthly portions that God commonly bestows
upon the worst of men; and that upon several Grounds. p. 114. to p. 136.
G
What Saints should Glory in. Such as have God for their portion, must glory in
their portion. p. 178. to p. 182. The Grounds upon which Believers Title unto
God as their portion is founded and bottomed are these; First, The free favor
and love of God. p. 107. to p. 109. Secondly, Gods free and voluntary donation
of himself to them in the Covenant of Grace. p. 109. to p. 111. Thirdly, That
marriage-union that is between God and his people. p. 111. to p. 114.
H
Of the Happy and unhappy man. Saints that have God for their portion, are the
happiest men in all the world, though this blind besotted world thinks
otherwise. p. 153. to p. 162. Of the Heart. Such as have God for their portions
should never set their hearts upon earthly portions. p. 162. to p. 167. If God
be thy portion, then he carries thy heart from all other things; the portion
always carries the heart with it. p. 291. to p. 297. Of Holding fast. A man
that has God for his portion, will hold fast his portion, and rather part with
any thing, than with his God. p. 279. to p. 287.
I
Of Interest. If you have an Interest in God, then God has an interest in you.
p. 340. to p. 345. Such as have an Interest and a propriety in God, should
evidence and declare their interest and propriety in God six special ways. p.
348. to p. 365.
L
If God be your portion, then the least of God will be precious to you. p. 345,
346, 347. Of Light. The properties of Light, for which God is often in
Scripture resembled to Light, are seven. p. 33. to p. 40. Of a Little. A
Saints Little is better than the vast estate of a wicked worldling; proved at
large. p. 136. to p. 153. Of Livings. A man that has God for his portion,
lives upon God as his portion. p. 287. to p. 391. Of Losses. Saints that have
God for their portion, should be very cheerful and comfortable under all their
worldly losses and crosses. p. 167. to p. 174. If God be thy portion, then
there are no Losses in all the world that will lie so hard and heavy upon these
as the Loss of thy God. p. 324. to p. 335.
M
Motives to persuade such Persons to get the Lord to be their portion, who yet
have not God for their portion. First, Consider that your present portion, your
present condition is but miserable and cursed. p. 365. to p. 368. Secondly,
Consider this, That there is yet a possibility of attaining of God to be your
portion. p. 368. to p. 370. Thirdly, Consider that God is a portion sweetning
portion. He is such a portion as will sweeten all other portions. p. 370. to p.
372. Fourthly, Consider that all earthly portions are not of that infinite
consequence and concernment to you as this portion is. p. 372, 373, 374.
Fifthly, Consider that till a man comes to have God for his portion, he never
comes to be temptation-proof. p. 374. to p. 379. Sixthly and Lastly consider,
That if God be not your portion, you will be miserable to all eternity. p. 379.
to p. 381.
N
Of men in their Natural Estate. A man in his Natural Estate, is without God in
the world. p. 381, 382.
O
Of Objections. Several Objections answered, from p. 396. to p. 423. Of Owning
of God. A man that has God for his portion will own his God, and stand up
stoutly and resolutely for his God. Every man will own his earthly portion, and
stand up stoutly and resolutely for his earthly portion, and so will every
Christian do for his God. p. 297. to p. 305.
P
The excellency of the Saints portion is discovered by an induction of
particulars thus; First, God is a present portion, he is a portion in hand, he
is a portion in possession. p. 8. to p. 11. Secondly, God is an immense
portion, he is a vast, large portion, he is the greatest portion of all
portions. p. 11. to p. 19. Thirdly, God is an All-sufficient portion. p. 19. to
p. 25. Fourthly, God is a most absolute, needful, and necessary portion, and
that in three respects. p. 25. to p. 31. Fifthly, God is a pure and unmixed
portion, God is an unmixed good, he has nothing in him but goodness. p. 31. to
p. 40. Sixthly, God is a glorious, a happy, and a blessed portion; he is so in
himself, and he makes them so too, who enjoy him for their portion. p. 40. to
p. 44. Seventhly, God is a peculiar portion, he is a portion peculiar to his
people. p. 44. to p. 50. Eighthly, God is a universal portion, he is a portion
that includes all other portions. p. 50. to p. 59. Ninthly, God is a safe
portion, a secure portion, a portion that none can rob or wrong a Believer of.
p. 59. to p. 63. Tenthly, God is a suitable portion. No object is so suitable
and adequate to the heart as he is. p. 63. to p. 67. Eleventhly, God is an
incomprehensible portion. p. 67. to p. 72. Twelfthly, God is an inexhaustible
portion, a portion that can never be spent, a spring that can never be drawn
dry. p. 72. to p. 80. Thirteenthly, God is a soul-satisfying portion, he is a
portion that gives the soul full satisfaction and content. p. 80. to p. 91.
Fourteenthly, God is a permanent portion, an indeficient portion, a
neverfailing portion, a lasting, yea, an everlasting portion. p. 91. to p. 101.
Fifteenthly and lastly, God is an incomparable portion, and this follows
clearly and roundly upon what has been said. p. 101. to p. 107. Six special
Positions. First, It Is one thing for a man to have God for his portion, and
it is another thing for a man to have an Assurance in his own soul that God is
his portion. p. 423. to p. 427. Secondly, It Is one thing for a man to have God
for his portion, and it is another thing for a man clearly and convincingly to
make it out to himself or others that God is his portion. p. 427. to p. 430.
Thirdly, Where there is in any man a hearty willingness to accept of God to be
his God, to own God for his God, and to close with God as his God, there God is
certainly that man's God. p. 430, 431, 432. Fourthly, That it may so fall out
that such a Christian that has God for his portion, that has an interest and
propriety in God, may lose the sight, the sense, the feeling and the evidence
of his propriety and interest in God. p. 432, 433, 434. Fifthly, That such as
have not (for the present) God for their portion, ought not peremptorily to
conclude that they shall never have God for their portion. Such a person that
cannot yet truly say, That the Lord is his portion, ought not to despair of
ever having of God to be his portion. p. 434. to p. 441. Sixthly and lastly,
Such is the love, care, goodness, and kindness of God to his people, that few
or none of them dye without some assurance that God is their portion, and that
they have an interest and a propriety in him etc. This is proved by diverse
Arguments from p. 441. to the end of the Book.
If God be such a portion, then God is no injurious portion, no mischievous
portion, etc. p. 206. to p. 222. Of the Promises. He that would have God for
his portion, of all precious promises, he must plead one most. p. 384, 385. Of
Prosperity. A prosperous estate of all estates is the most dangerous, proved at
large from p. 114. to p. 136.
R
Of earthly Riches. The dangerous and pernicious nature of earthly Riches of
earthly portions, set forth in nine particulars. p. 210. to p. 222. Object: We
are first for laying up earthly Riches, and when we have done that work to
purpose, then we will do what we can to get God for our portion. This Objection
is answered three ways. p. 407. to p. 414.
S
Of Signs. Twelve Signs whereby men may know whether God be their portion or
no. p. 260. to p. 347. Of Sin and Sinful shifts. Eight great Sins prosperity
lays Persons open to. p. 118, 119, 120. Such as have God for their portion,
must away with all sinful shifts, ways, courses, and compliances to gain
earthly portions. p. 174. to p. 178. A man that would have God for his portion
must break his League with Sin, he must fall out with Sin, if ever he fall in
with God. p. 390, 391, 392. Of great Sinners. Object: But will God ever bestow
himself as a portion upon such great, such grievous and such notorious Sinners
as we are? Six Answers to this Objection. p. 596. to p. 407.
T
The Text opened. p. 1. to p. 7. Of Thinking. Such as have God for their
Portion should be still a thinking of God under that sweet and comfortable
notion. p. 222. to p. 228. Of Thoughts. If God be thy portion, then thou have
very sweet, precious, high and honorable thoughts of God. p. 260. to p. 269.
Of Trouble. Such as have God for their portion in all their troubles, they run
to God as to a City of Refuge. p. 269. to p. 279.
V
Of Valuing of others. A. man that has God for his portion sets the highest
Value upon those that have God for their portion. p. 335. to p. 340. About
Unworthiness. Object. We would fain have God for our portion, but we are such
poor unworthy wretches that we very much question whether ever God will bestow
himself upon such miserable unworthy ones as we are? etc. This Objection is
answered five ways. p. 414, to p. 423.
W
Of Waiting. A man that would have God for his portion must wait upon him in
the use of all holy means. p. 392, 393, 394, 395, 396. Of Want. Such as have
God for their portion shall never want. p. 182. to p. 190. Of Wants. Such as
have God for their portion, in all their wants, troubles, and trials will run
to their God, they will fly to the Lord as their only City of Refuge. p. 269.
to p. 279. Of Willingness. Such as would have God for their portion, must then
be willing to be his portion. p. 385, 386, 387. God without all peradventure is
that man's God, that is cordially willing to have him for his God. p. 430, 431,
432. Of the World. A man that has God for his portion, looks upon the world as
a poor low contemptible thing. p. 305. to p. 311.
FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhill.
A Book of Short-writing, the most casie, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
fitted to the meanest capacity, composed by Master Theophilus Metcalf,
Professor, of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said book, with many new
Additions very useful.

Another Book of new Shorthand, by Tho. Cross.

A Copy-book of the newest and most useful hands, with Rules, whereby those
that can read, may quickly learn to write: To which is added, Brief directions
for true spelling and Cyphering, and making diverse sorts of Ink.

Seven Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New- Fish-street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices. Or,

Salve for Believers and Unbelievers sores, being a companion for those that
are in Christ, or out of Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a
pretense of living above them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying;
that are tempted, or deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or
want it; on 2 Cor. 2.11.

2 Heaven on Earth: Or,

A serious Discourse touching a welgrounded Assurance of man's everlasting
happiness and blessedness; discovering the nature of Assurance, the possibility
of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and Degrees of it, with the resolution of
several weighty Questions, on the 8. of the Romans 32, 33, 34. verses.

3 The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or,

Meat for strong Men and Milk for Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons,
from Ephesians. 3.8. Preached on his Lecturenights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold for young Men and Women: And

A Crown of Glory for Old Men and Women: Or, the Happiness of being Good
betimes, and the Honor of being an Old eiple, clearly and fully discovered,
and closely and faithfully applied.

5. A String of Pearls: Or,

The best things reserved till last; delivered in a Sermon preached in London,
June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that Triumphant Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, ^at:
Wife to his worthy friend Mr. Nicholas Blake, Merchant.

6 The Silent Soul, with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or,

A Christian with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the greatest
afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest and
darkest providence and changes, with Answers to diverse Questions and
Objections that are of greatest importance, all tending to win and work souls
to be still, quiet, calm, and silent under all changes, that have, or that may
pass upon them in this world, etc. Lately printed, and dedicated to all
afflicted, distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted, and discomposed Christians
throughout the world.

7 An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day.

Wherein is showed the transcendent excellency of a Believers portion; on
Lament: 3.24.

The Godly Man's Ark: Or,

City of Resuge, in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons. The
first of which was Preached at the Funeral of Mris. Elizabeth Moor.

Whereunto are annexed Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected
by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness. By
Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

Helps to improve the holy Scriptures

For our Spiritual Profit, Comfort, and Stability.

Viz. Scripture Prophesies. Promises. Precepts. Threatenings.


By Robert Perrot, Minister of Gods Word.

The Expert Physician,

Learnedly treating of all Agues and Fevers essential, whether simple or
compound, consused, Erratick, and Malignant, showing their different Nature,
Cause, Sign, and Cure; written Originally by that famous Doctor in Physic,
Bricius Bauderon, and translated into English by Dr. Wells, Licentiate in
Physic, by the University of Oxford.

Seven Treatises lately published by Mr. Ralph Venning. 1. A Warning to
backsliders, with means for the recovery of fallen ones; on Rev: 2.5. 2. The
way to Happiness, or way to Heaven opened; on Matthew. 7.21. 3. Mercies memorial,
or a thankful Remembrance for Gods merciful Deliverance on the 5. of November,
1605. on Ps. 136.23. 4. Canaans Flowings, or Milk and Honey, being a Collation
of many Christian Experiences, Sayings and Sentences, printed in an
Alphabetical order, to which is added 125 Heathen Speeches, Spiritually
improved. 5. His 543 Orthodox and Miscellanious Paradoxes concerning God,
Christ, the Spirit, Election, the Scriptures, the Creation, Angels, Man, Sin,
the Law, Grace, the Sacraments, the Resurrection, Heaven and Hell. 6. The New
Command renewed, or love one another. 7. Mysteries and Revelations, or the
Explication of several Allusions and Metaphors, in the Scriptures.


Several useful Treatises published by Mr, Nicholas Lockyer and others. 1.
Christ's Communion with his Church Militant; on John 14. verse. 18. 2. His Divine
Discovery of Sincerity, on 2 Cor. 1.12. 3. His seasonable Instructions for
Suffering-Christians; on Col. 2.11. 4. His Olive-leaf, or bud of the Spring, on
Acts 3.26.


Dr. Thomas Tailor, his Treatise of Circumspect Walking; on Ephesians. 5.15.

Mr. William Fenners Treatises on the Affections and wilful Impenitency; on
Ez: 18.31. Mr. Tho. Shepherds Treatise of Subjection to Christ in Ordinances,
and on the Sabbath. Mr. Turners breast plate. Culverwels white-stone.

Spiritual Experiences of sundry Believers, recommended to the Christian
Reader, by Vavasor Powel.

The wise Virgin, a Narration of Mris. Martha Hatfield, a child of 11 years
old, how God enabled her to utter many glorious truths concerning Christ,
Faith, and other Subjects.

The story of Gods merciful deliverance of this Nation in 88. from the Spanish
Invasion, and from that hellish Powder treason Nov: 5. 1605. very useful for
all families, published by Mr. Sam: Clark.

The Diligent Schoolboys Directory: Being certain plain, and profitable Rules
and Directions for the better understanding of the English Orthography; by
Thomas Hunt, Master of Art, School master in Tower-street.

Books printed, and are to be sold by Henry Cripps at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next Lombard Street.
Books in Folio. BVrtons Anatomy of Melancholy, with its Causes and Cures. Dr.
Sibbs Saints Cordials, being several Sermons on diverse subjects. Pareus
Exposition on the Revelations. Mr. John Goodwins Redemption redeemed. Pintoes
Travels.
Quarto. Goodwins Roman Antiquities, wherein is showed the affinity of the
English with the Roman Offices and Customs, very useful for Schools. Mr.
Buroughs Exposition on the three first Chapters of Hosea. Mr. Cradocks
Gospel-holinesse. His Gospel-liberty. Mr. John Goodwin his Exposition on the 9.
of the Romans. His Treatise of Baptism. His Treatise of the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures. Bishop Reynolds his Exposition on the 14. Chapter of Hosea.
Tichburns Cluster of Canaans Grapes. Mr. Huit his Exposition upon Daniels
prophecy. Mr. Cotton on the seven Vials, being an Exposition of some part of
the Revelations. Mr. Norton his Orthodox Evangelist. Mr. Dells works. Mr.
Allens Retraction of Separation. His Baptismall abuses. Mr. Brooks his Crown of
Chrisstianity, or Holiness the way to Happiness. A Conviction for the Jews.
Mr. Lie his Sermon at the Funeral of Mris. Nichols. Mr. Douglasses Mystery of
Godiness, in several Sermons. Mr. Woodwards Treatise of prayer. His Treatise of
the Lords Table.
Large Octavo. Mr. Reyners Government of the Tongue. Mr. Armitages Son of God,
walking in the fire with the servants of God, in several Sermons on the 3. of
Daniel. His Trial of Faith, or the Woman of Canaan, in several Sermons. Mr.
Vaughans Silex Scintillans.
Small Octavo. Mr. Baxters three Treatises, Viz: 1. A Sermon of Judgment. 2.
Danger of slighting Christ. 3. True Christianity; or Christ absolute Dominion,
and man's necessary self-resignation to him.
Mr. Eaton on the Godhead of Christ. Mris. Sarah Wight, or Grace advanced in a
nothing creature. Mr. Dingleys Vox Coeli, or a Discourse of Thunder. His Divine
Optics, or a Treatise of the Eye. Mr. Arndt on the Scriptures. Mr. Young his
Whole Duty of a Christian. Mr. Trenchfields Christian Chemistry, or History
improved. Mr. Riches Poems, Sacred and Satirical. Mr. Hubberts Pill to purge
formallity. Lumen de lumine, or a new Magical light discovered and communicated
to the world. Sheltons Short-hands, first and second. Palatinate Catechism in
English. Mr. Brooks An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day. Mr. Lies method
of using the Assemblies Catechism. Mr. Cottons Milk for Babes in Christ. A
Catechism. An Epitomie of History, containing the lives of the Roman
Emperors, wherein is also contained an Epitomie of English Chronicle.
Twelves. Dr. Thomas Goodwins Child of Light walking in darkness. Mr. Wards
Nature and Grace. Dr. Cornelius Purgess Treatise of zeal. Mr. Byfields Signs
of a Godly man. His Touchstone of Assurance. The Mirror of Martyrs. Mr.
Baxters Doctrine of Selfposing. Mr. Wells Anchor of hope. Mr. Warner Gain of
Loss, or temporal losses spiritually improved. Mr. Batchelers Golden Sands.
Every ones Duty. Mr. John Goodwins Saints interest in God. His Return of
mercies. God a good Master. Mr. Huits Anatomy of Conscience. Dr. Sibbs Bruised
Reed. Mr. Sarrocolds Supplications of Saints, a Book of Prayers and Praises.
Mr. Hookers Souls preparation for Christ. Mr. Dikes right receiving Christ. Mr.
Sam: Clarks Saints Nosegay, or 741 Scripture Flowers or Meditations. Mr. Powels
Experiences.

FINIS.

