Apples of Gold FOR Young Men and Women, AND A Crown of Glory for Old Men and
women.

OR, The happiness of being good betimes, And the honor of being an Old
Disciple. Clearly and fully discovered, and closely, and faithfully applied.

ALSO The Young Man's Objections answered, And the Old Man's doubts resolved.

By THOMAS BROOKS Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets new Fishstreet-hill.

But I thy Servant fear the Lord from my Youth. 1 King. 18.12. The hoary head
is a crown of Glory, if it be found in a way of righteousness, Prove. 16.31.
LONDON, Printed by R. I. for John Hancock, to be sold at the first Shop in
Popeshead-Alley next to Cornhill near the Exchange. 1657.

To all Young Persons throughout the Nations, especially those (of both Sexes)
who begin to turn their faces toward Zion. Prove. 15.23.25 c. 11 A word spoken
(gnalophnau) upon his Wheels, that is with a due concurrence and observation of
all circumstances of time, place, person, all which are as the wheels upon
which our words and speeches should run, such a word is like apples of gold in
pictures of silver.

Dear Hearts,
A Word spoken in due season how good is it? it is often like apples of Gold in
pictures of silver, many times such a word is sweet, precious, pleasing,
delectable, and strong in its operation. A company of near friends dining
together one Sabbath day, one that was at Table (to prevent impertinent
discourse) said, That it was a question whether they should all go to Heaven or
no; which struck them all into a dump, and caused every one to enter into a
serious consideration with themselves, one thought if any of this company go to
bell it must be I, and so thought another, and another, and indeed so thought
almost every one then present, as well servants that waited, as those that sat
at Table, as it was afterward acknowledged; and (through the mercy and blessing
of God) this speech so wrought upon the spirits of most of them, that it proved
the first isntrumental means of their conversion.

I have my hopes, through grace, that this Treatise, though it be sown in
weakness, yet by the blessing of the most high upon it, it may rise in power,
and be an instrumental means of the winning of souls to Christ, which is my
highest ambition in this world, and therefore I have broke through all
difficulties, and carnal reasonings, that might otherwise have stifled this
babe in the womb, and kept it from ever seeing of the light.

I have read of an Emperor, that delighted in no undertaking, so much as those
which in the esteem of his Counselors, and Captains were deemed most difficult
and impossible, if they said such or such an enterprise would never be
accomplished, it was argument enough to him, to make the adventure, and he
usually prospered, he seldom miscarried

I have never found greater and choycer blessings, to attend any of my poor
weak Labors, than those that have been brought forth into the world through the
greatest straits and difficulties.

Valerius Maximus reports that one telling a soldier, Valerius Maximus. lib.
3. c. de fiducia.
going to war against the Persians, that they would hide the Sun with their
arrows; he answered, we shall fight best in the shade; nothing should
discourage nor dis-hearten a soldier of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Christ says to
all his soldiers (as the black Prince his father said to him, Hist. of France.
p. 196.
fighting as it were in blood to the knees, and in great distress) either
vanquish or dye. Men of no resolution, or of weak resolution, will be but
little serviceable to the good of souls; Such watchmen as will be free from
the blood of souls, and be serviceable to the interest of Christ, in turning
sinners from darkness to light, must be men of spirit and resolution.

I remember Austin begins one of his Sermons thus (Ad vos mihi Sermo,
August. de tempore sermon. 246
O juvenes, flos aetatis, periculum mentis) To you is my speech, O young men,
the flower of age, the danger of the mind.

So say I, to you O Young men, do I dedicate the ensuing Treaetise, and that
first because, the matter contained therein, does primarily and eminently
concern you.

And Secondly, Because of an earnest desire, that I have of your internal and
eternal welfare.

And Thirdly, Because of some late impulses that have been upon my spirit, to
leave this Treatise in your hands as a Legacy of my Love, and as a testimony
and witness of my (great) ambition to help forward your everlasting salvation.

And Fourthly, Because there is most hope of doing good amongst you (as I
evidence more at large in the following Treatise.)

And fifthly; To countermine the great underminer of your souls, whose great
design is to poison you, and possess you in the morning of your days.

Sixthly, To provoke others that are more able and worthy; to be more
serviceable to you in declaring themselves, fully on this very subject, which
none yet have done that I know of, though it be a point of as great concernment
to young persons (especially) as any I know in all the scriptures.

Seventhly, and Lastly, because there are very many that do lie in wait, to
deceive, corrupt, Ephesians. 4 14 A blind eye is werse then a lame foor, he that had
the leprosy in his head was to be pronounced utterly unclean
and Poison young persons with God-dishonoring, Christ denying, conscience
wasting, and soul damning opinions, Principles, and Blasphemies.

I have read of one who boasted, and gloried in this, that he had spent thirty
years in corrupting and Poisoning of youth; doubtless many wretches, many
monsters there be among us, who make it their business, their glory, their
all, to delude and draw young Persons to those dangerous errors and
Blasphemies, that leads to destruction. Error and folly (says one very well)
be the knots of Satan, wherewith he ties children to the stake to be burnt in
hell.

There is a truth in what the Tragaedian said long since (Venenum in auro
bibitur) Poison is commonly drunk out of a cup of gold; So is an error, or
by-notion soonest taken into the judgment and conscience from persons of the
fairest carriage, and smoothest conversations. Error is so foul an Hagge, that
if it should come in its own shape; a man would loath it, and fly from it, as
from hell.

If Jezabel had not painted her face, she had not gotten so many young doteing
Adulterers to have followed her to their own ruin.

Ah! Young men, young men, the blessing of the Lord upon your serious and
diligent perusal of this Treatise, may be a happy means to preserve you from
being ensnared and deluded by those monsters, Mar. 23.15
who compass Sea and Land to make proselytes for bell.

And thus I have given you the reasons of my dedicating this Treatise to the
service of your souls. I would willingly presume that it will be as kindly
taken; as it is cordially tendered; I hope none of you into whose hands it may
fall, will say as once Antipater King of Macedonia did, when one presented him
with a book treating of happiness, his answer was (Ou Scholazo) I have no
leisure.

Ah! Young men and women, young men and virgins, as you tender the everlasting
welfare of your souls, as you would escape hell, and come to heaven, as you
would have an interest in Christ, a pardon in your bosoms, as you would be
blessed here, and glorious hereafter, find time, find leisure to read over and
over the following treatise, which is purposely calculated for your eternal
good. But before I go further, I think it needful in some respects to give the
world some further account of other reasons or motives that has prevailed with
me once more to appear in print; and they are these.

First, Having preached a Sermon occasionally upon those words (on which this
following discourse is built.) I was earnestly importuned to print the Sermon,
by some worthy friends; I did as long as in modesty I could withst and their
desires (judging it not worthy of them) but being at last overcome, and setting
about the work, the breathings and comings in of God were such, as has
occasioned that one Sermon to multiply into many. Luther tells us, that when
he first began to turn his back upon Popery, he intended no more, but to
withstand Popish pardons, and selling indulgencies; yet neither would God, or
his enemies let him alone, till he resolved with Moses not to leave a hoof of
Popery unopposed, etc. God many times in the things of the Gospel, carries
forth his servants beyond their intentions, beyond their resolutions. But

Secondly, The kind acceptance, and good quarter that my other pieces have
found in the world, and those signal and multiplied blessings that have
followed them, to the winning of many over to Christ, and to the building up of
others in Christ, has encouraged me to present this Treatise to the World,
hoping that the Lord has a blessing in store for this also. Gracious
experiences are beyond notions, and impressions; they are very quickening, and
encouraging.

Thirdly, That I might in some measure make up others neglects, whose age,
whose parts, whose experiences, whose graces, has long called upon them to do
something considerable this way, and that they may be provoked by my weak
assay to do better, and to make up what is wanting, through my invincible
infirmities, and spiritual wants and weaknesses, which are so many, as may well
make a sufficient Apology for all the defects, and weaknesses that in this
Treatise shall appear to a serious judicious eye. But

Fourthly, The love of Christ and souls has constrained me to it; 2 Cor.
5.14. 2 Cor. 12.15. Solus amor nesci^ difficultates. Love knows no difficulties.
as there is an attractive, so there is a compulsive virtue in divine love.
Love to Christ and souls will make a man willing to spend, and be spent; he
that prays himself to death, that preaches himself to death, that studies
himself to death, that sweats himself to death, for the honor of Christ, and
good of souls, shall be no looser in the end: divine love is like a rod of
Myrtle, which as Pliny reports, makes the traveller that carries it in his
hand, that he shall never be faint or weary. Divine love is very operative
(si non operatur, non est) if it do not work, it is an argument, it is not at
all; divine love like fire is not idle, but active; he that loves cannot be
barren; love will make the soul constant and abundant in well doing. God admits
none to heaven (says Justin Martyr) but such as can persuade him by their
works, that they love him. The very heathen has observed, Seneca.
that God does not love his children with a weak womanish affection, but with a
strong masculine love; and certainly they that love the Lord strongly, that
love him with a Masculine love; they cannot but lay out their little all for
him, and his glory. But

Fifthly, I observe that Satan, and his instruments are exceeding busy and
unwearied in their designs, attempts, and endeavors, in these days, to
corrupt and poison, It is said of Marcellus the Roman General that he could not
be quiet (Nec victor, nec victus) neither Conquered, nor Conqueror; such a one
is Satan.
to defile and destroy the young, the tender, the most hopeful, and most
flourishing plants among us.

Latimer told the Clergy in his time, that if they would not learn diligence,
and vigilance of the Prophets and Apostles, they should learn it of the Devil,
who goes up and down his Dioceses, and acts by an untired Power, seeking whom
he may destroy, when the wolves are abroad, the Shepherd should not sleep but
watch; yea double his watch, remembering that he were better have all the blood
of all the men in the world upon him, than the blood of one soul upon him; by
his negligence or otherwise.

Satan is a Lion, not a Lamb, a roaring Lion, not a sleepy Lion, not a Lion
standing still, but a Lion going up and down as not being contented with the
Prey, the many millions of souls he has got, he seeks whom he may sip up at a
draught, as that word ((...)) in the 1 Pet. 5.8. imports; his greatest design,
is to fill hell with souls, which should awaken every one to be active, and to
do all that may be done to prevent his design, and to help forward the
salvation of souls.

Chrysostom compares good pastors, Chrysostom. in Mat. Ho. 15.
to fountains that ever send forth waters, or Conduits that are always
running, though no pail be put under. But

Sixthly, and Lastly, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
I know the whole life of man is but an hour to work in, and the more work any
man does for Christ on earth, the better pay he shall have when he comes to
Heaven. 2 Cor. 9.6
Every man shall at last reap as he sows; Opportunities of doing service for
Christ, and souls, are more worth than a world, therefore I was willing to
takehold on this, not knowing how soon I may put off this earthly Tabernacle; 2
Pet. 1.13, 14
and remembering that as there is no believing, nor repenting in the grave,
Eccl. 9.10
So there is no praying, preaching, writing, nor Printing in the grave; we had
need to be up and doing, to put both hands to it, and to do all we do with all
our might, John 9.4
knowing that the night draws on upon us, wherein no man can work.

A Christians dying day is the Lords pay day; that is a time to receive wages,
not to do work. And thus I have given the World a true account of the Reasons
that moved me to print the following discourse; before I close up, I desire to
speak a word to young persons, and another to aged persons, and then I shall
take leave of both.

My request to you, who are in the primerose of your days, is this, if ever
the Lord shall be pleased so to own and Crown, so to bless, and follow this
following discourse; as to make it an effectual means of turning you to the
Lord, of winning you to Christ, of changing your natures, and converting your
souls (for such a thing as that, I pray, hope, and believe) that then you would
do two things for me,

First; That you would never cease, bearing of me upon your hearts when you are
in the mount, that I may be very much under the pourings out of the Spirit,
that I may be clear, high, and full in my communion with God, and that I may
be always close, holy, humble, harmless and blameless in my walkings with
God. And that his work may more and more prosper in my hand.

Secondly, Psalm. 66.16 1 Pet. 3.15
That you would by word of mouth, letter, or some other way, acquaint me with
what the Lord has done for your souls; if he shall make me a spiritual father
to you, do not hide his grace from me, but acquaint me how he has made the
seed that was sown in weakness to rise in power upon you, and that

First, That I may do what I can to help on that work begun upon you, that your
penny may become a pound, your mite a million, your drop an ocean.

Secondly, That I may the better English some impressions that have been upon
my own spirit, since I begun this work.

Thirdly, 1 These. 2 19, 20 2 Cor. 9.2
That my joy and thankfulness may be increased, and my soul more abundantly
engaged to that God, who has blessed the day of small things to you; ponder
these scriptures, ( 2 Cor. 7.3, 4, 13. Phil. 2.2. chapter 4.1. Philemon ver. 7. 2
John 3.4.) And then be ashamed to declare what the Lord has done for you, if
you can.

Fourthly, Mat. 25.23 Dan. 12.3 Prove. 11.30
it is better to convert one, than to civilize a thousand, and will turn more
at last to a Ministers account in that day, wherein he shall say, Lo here am
I, and the children that thou have given me, Isa. 8.18. such a man (with his
spiritual children about him) shall look on God with more comfort and boldness,
than those that are only able to say, Lo here am I, and the many Benefices;
here am I, and the many Ecclesiastical dignities, and glories; here am I, and
the many hundreds a year, that man had given, and I have gotten. But

Fifthly, Act. 9.3 Isa. 6.5 Mal. 2.5, 6, 7. etc.
and Lastly, The conversion of others is a secondary and more remote evidence
of a man's own renovation and conversion. Paul was converted himself, before God
made him instrumental for others Conversion. Gods usual method is, to convert
by them, who are converted.

I do not remember any one instance in all the scripture, of Gods converting
any by such who have not been converted first themselves; yet I know his grace
is free, and the wind blows where it lists, when it lists, and as it lists.

To aged persons I have a word, and then I have done.

First, To Gray Headed Saints, Ah Friends, ah Fathers, would you see your
honor, your happiness, your blessedness! then look into this Treatise, and
there you will find what an unspeakable honor it is to be an Old disciple,
what a glory it is to be good betimes, and to continue so to Old age.

Secondly, To white-headed Sinners, whose spring is past, whose summer is
overpast, and who are arrived at the fall of the leaf, and yet have a hell to
escape, a Christ to believe in, sins to pardon, hearts to change, souls to
save, and heaven to make sure, would such be encouraged from scripture grounds
to repent, believe, and hope; that yet there is mercy for such, let them
seriously peruse this Treatise, especially the latter part of it, and there
they may find enough to keep them from despairing, and to encourage them to
adventure their souls upon him that is mighty to save.

There are many things in this Treatise that are of use to all, and several
things of moment that are not every day Preached nor read. I have made it as
pleasureable as time would permit, that so it might be the more profitable to
the reader, and that I might the better take the young man by (a holy) craft; 2
Cor. 12. chapter 15.2 Prove. 11.30
which is a high point of heavenly wisdom; there being no wisdom to that of
winning of souls. I shall now follow this poor piece with my weak prayers, that
it may be soblest from heaven, as that it may bring in some, and build up
others, and do good to all, and so rest

Your friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ, THOMAS BROOKS.

The Contents.
THe explication of the words, from page 1. to page 10. Doct. That it is a very
desirable and commendable thing for young men to be (really) good betimes, this
truth proved. p. 10, 11, 12
Twelve Reasons of this point.
1 Because he commands it, whose Commands are not to be disputed but obeyed.
from p. 12. to 16 2 Because they have means and opportunities of being good
betimes. from p. 16. to 20 3 Because then they will have fewer sins to answer
for, and repent of. p. 20 21. 4 Because time is a precious talent that Young
men must be accountable for, from p. 21. to 26 5 Because then they will have
the greater comfort and joy when they come to be old. from. p. 26. to 28 6
Because an eternity of felicity and glory hangs upon those few moments that are
allotted to them. from p. 28. to 33. 7 Because they do not begin to live, till
they begin to be really good. from p. 33. to 36 8 Because the promise of
finding God, of enjoying God, is made over to an early seeking of God, etc.
from p. 36. to 44 9 Because the time of Youth is the choicest and fittest time
for service. from p. 44. to 47 10 Because death may suddenly and unexpectedly
seize on youth, youth being as fickle as old age. from p. 47. to 52 11 Because
it is ten to one, nay a hundred to ten, if ever they are converted, if they are
not converted when they are young. from p. 52. to 55 12 Because else they will
never attain to the honor of being an Old Disciple. p. 55.56
The honor of an Old Disciple showed in seven particulars.
1 All men will honor an Old Disciple. from p. 56. to 58 2 God usually reveals
himself most to old Disciples, to old Saints. p. 58. to 62 3 An old Christian,
an old Disciple has got the art of serving God, p. 62. to 63 4 An old
Disciple, an old Christian is rich, in spiritual experiences. from 63 to 67 5
An old Disciple is firm and fixed in his resolutions. from 67 to 70 6 An old
Disciple, is prepared for death. from 70. to 73 7 An old Disciple shall have a
great reward in heaven. from 73. to 79 Use of Reproof. from 79. to 84
The several evils that most properly attends youth, as
1 Pride. from 84. to 87 2 Sensual pleasures and delights. from 87. to 93 3
Rashness. from 93. to 96 4 Mocking and Scoffing at Religious men, and
religious things. from p. 96. to 98 5 Wantonness. from p. 98. to 101
Use of Exhortation to exhort young persons to be good betimes, and motives
moving thereunto, as
1 It is a high honor, to be good betimes, from p. 102. to 106 2 Christ gave
himself for sinners when he was in the primerose of his age. from p. 106. to
111 3 It is the best way in the world to be rich in spiritual experiences.
from p. 111. to 116. 4 The present time is the only time that you are sure of.
from p. 116. to 122 5 It is just with God to reserve the dregs of his wrath for
them, who reserve the dregs of their days for him, from p. 122. to 125 6 The
sooner you are good on earth, the greater will be your reward in heaven. from
p. 125. to 134 7 The Lord is very much affected and taken with your seeking of
him, and following after him in the spring and morning of your youth. from p.
134. to 136 8 It will prevent many sad and black temptations. from p. 136. to
140 9 Consider the worth and excellency of souls. from p. 140. to 144 10 God
will at last bring young men to a reckoning. from p. 144. to 155 Quest. Whether
in the great day of account, the sins of the Saints shall be brought into the
judgment of Discussion and discovery or no? the negative proved by diverse
arguments. from p. 155 to 171
Directions to such as would be good betimes, as would know and love, seek and
serve, the Lord in the primrose of their days, as
1 Take heed of putting the day of death a far off. from p. 171. to 177 2 If
you would be good betimes, take heed of leaning to your own understanding.
from p. 177. to 182 3 If you would be good betimes, take heed of flatterers and
flattery. from p. 182. to 191 4 If you would seek the Lord in the spring and
morning of your days, then take heed of engaged affections to the things of
the World. from p. 191. to 197 5 If you would be good betimes, then you must
take heed betimes of carnal reason, etc. from p. 197. to 201. 6 Take heed of
comparing your selves with those that are worse than your selves. from p. 201.
to 207
Secondly, As those six things must be declined, so several other things must
be practiced; if you would be good betimes, as
1 If you would be good betimes, then you must labor to be acquainted with
four things betimes, as 1 You must labor to acquaint your selves with the
scripture betimes. p. 207. to 219 2 You must acquaint your selves with your
selves betimes. from p. 219. to 226 3 If you would be good betimes, then you
must acquaint your selves with Jesus Christ betimes. from p. 226. to 228 Now
there are six things which you should be thoroughly acquainted with concerning
Jesus Christ. As 1 If you would be good betimes, then you must know that there
is every thing in Christ, that may encourage you to seek him, and serve him. p.
228. to 230 2 If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes that
Jesus Christ is mighty to save. p. 230 to 234 3 Then you must know betimes that
there is a mavelous readiness and willingness in Christ to embrace and
entertain returning sinners, etc. p. 234. to 236 4 If you would be good
betimes, then you must know betimes that Jesus Christ is designed, sealed, and
appointed by the father to the office of a Mediator. from p. 236. to 240 5 If
you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes that there is no way to
salvation but by Jesus Christ. p. 240. to 246 6 If you would be good betimes,
then you must know betimes, that the heart of Jesus Christ is as much set upon
sinners now he is in heaven, as ever it was when he was on earth. p. 246. to
249 4 If you would be good betimes, then you must acquaint your selves with
those that are good betimes. 249. to. 254 2 If you would be good betimes, then
you must shun the occasions of sin betimes. from p. 254. to 262 3 If you would
be good betimes, then you must remember the eye of God betimes. from p. 262. to
265 4 If you would be good betimes, then you must hearken to the voice of
conscience betimes. from p. 265. to 269 5 If you would be good betimes, then
you must know wherein true happiness lies betimes. from p. 269. to 272 6
Lastly, If you would be good betimes, then you must break your covenant with
sin betimes; Now to work you to that, you must always look upon sin under
these six notions. 1 You must look upon sin under the notion of an enemy. from
p. 272. to 277 2 Under the notion of bonds, etc. from p. 277. to 279 3 Under
the notion of fire, six resemblarces between sin and fire. from p. 279. to 289
4 Under the notion of a Theif, etc. from p. 289. to 292 5 Under the notion of a
burden, etc. from p. 292. to 296 6 Under the notion of a Tyrant, etc. from p.
296. to 299 1 Object. It may be time enough hereafter to seek and serve the
Lord, etc. This Objection answered four ways. from p. 299. to 304 2 Object. If
I should seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of my days, I
should loose the love and favor of such and such friends and Relations. Four
Answers to this Objection, etc. from p. 304. to 311 3 Obj. I shall meet with
many reproaches. Eight answers to this Objection. from p. 311. to 326 4 Object,
Most men give liberty to themselves; and walk in ways more pleasing to the
flesh. This Objection answered five ways. from p. 326. to 339 5 Ob. The last
(I shall mention) is, that God is a God of mercy, in him are bowels of mercy;
yea, a sea, an Ocean of mercy, he delights in mercy, etc. Five answers to this
Objection. from p. 339. to 349 Lastly, The Old man's doubts resolved, in eight
several answers, from p. 349 to the end.
FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 12. line 22. Alarm for Atome. p. 54. l. 5 it for that, p. 55. l. 20. were
for was, p. 70. l. 21. add to, p. 86. l. 7. Sybian for Lybian.

Reader,

What other defects thou meetest with, thou art desired in love to pass over,
by reason of the Authors absence from the Press.

THE Young-Mans Duty AND EXCELLENCY.
1 KING. 14. chapter 13. v. And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for
he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found
some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.

The Young man's Duty and Excellency.
ISHAL only stand upon the latter part of this Verse, because that affords me
matter most suitable to my design.

-- Because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of
Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.

These words are a commendation of Abijahs life, in him was found some good
thing toward the Lord, etc. when Abijah was a Child verse. 3.12. when he was in
his young and tender years, he had the seeds of grace in him, he had the Image
of God upon him, he could discern between good and evil, (...)
and he did that which pleased the Lord. Is used for a young man or stripling,
Genesis 22.5. and often for a servant though he be a man of tipe years, Est^er
2.2. Such as one Evangelist ^alleth young (...), Luke 12. (...) other (...)
fellow (...).


The Hebrew word (Nagnar) translated Child, verse. 3. is very often applied to
such as we call youth, or young men, Exodus 24.5. Numb. 6.11. 1 Samuel 2.17. etc.
Of such age and prudence, was Abijah, as that he could choose good and refuse
evil, he was a Lot in Sodom, he was good among the bad, the bent and frame
of his heart was toward that which was good, when the heart both of his Father
and Mother was set upon evil. Abijah began to be good betimes; he crossed
that pestilent proverb, a young Saint, and an old Devil. It Is the glory and
goodness of God that he will take notice of the least good that is in any of
his, 1 Pet. 3.6. There was but one good word in Sarahs speech to Abraham, and
that was this, she called him Lord, and this God mentions for her honor and
commendations, she called him Lord: God looks more upon one grain of Wheat,
than upon a heap of Chaff; upon one shining Pearl than upon a heap of rubbish.
God finds a Pearl in Abijah, and he puts it into his Crown, to his eternal
commendation. There was found in him some good thing toward the Lord, etc. for
the words

There was found in him, the Hebrew word Matsa, sometimes signifies finding
without seeking, Isa. 65.1. I am found of them that sought me not, so Psalm.
116. v. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold
upon me, I found trouble and sorrow. I found trouble which I looked not for, I
was not searching after sorrow, but I found it. There Is an elegancy in the
Original. The pains of hell gat hold upon me; So we read, but the Hebrew is;
The pains of hell found me (one word signifies both,) they found me, I did not
find them. There was found in Abijah some good thing toward the Lord, i.e.
there was found in him without searching, or seeking, some good thing toward
the Lord, it was plain and visible enough, men might see and observe it without
inquiring, or seeking, they might run and read some good thing in him toward
the Lord.

Secondly, The word sometimes signifies, Finding by seeking or enquiry, Isa.
55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, etc. So upon search and
enquiry there was found in Abijah (though young) some good thing toward the
Lord.

Thirdly, Sometimes the word notes the obtaining of that which is sufficient,
Josh. 17.16. Numb. 11.22. Judge. 21.14. in Abijah there was that good in him
toward the Lord, that was sufficient to evidence the work of grace upon him,
sufficient to satisfy himself and others of the goodness, and happiness of his
condition; though he died in the prime, and flower of his days, etc.

And in him was found some good thing; the Hebrew word (Tob) that is here
rendered good. Signifies,

First, That which is right and just, 2 Samuel 15.3. See thy matters are good and
right, i.e. just and right.

Secondly, that which is profitable, Deuteronomy. 6.11. Houses full of all good
things, i. e. houses full of all profitable things.

Thirdly, That which is pleasing, 2 Samuel 19.27. Do what is good in thine eyes,
i.e. do what is pleasing in thine eyes.

Fourthly, That which is full and complete, Genesis 15.15. Thou shall be buried
in a good old age, i.e. thou shall be buried when thine age is full and
complete.

Fifthly, That which is joyful and delightful, 1 Samuel 25.8. we come in a good
day, i. e. we come in a joyful and delightful day; now put all together and
you may see that there was found in Abijah when he was young, that which was
right and just, that which was pleasing and profitable, and that which was
matter of joy and delight.

In the words you have two things that are most considerable.

First, That this young man's goodness was toward the Lord God of Israel; many
there are that are good, nay, very good toward men, who yet are bad, ya very
bad toward God. This age affords many such hypocrites such Monsters etc.
Some there are who are very kind to the creature, and yet very unkind to their
Creator, many men's goodness toward the creature is like the rising Sun, but
their goodness toward the Lord is like a morning cloud, Hos. 6.4.
or as the early dew which is soon dried up by the Sunbeams, but Abijahs
goodness was toward the Lord, his goodness faced the Lord, it looked toward
the glory of God. Two things makes a good Christian, good actions, and good
aims; And though a good aim does not make a bad action good, There may be
Malum opus in bona materia, as in Jehues zeal.
(as in Vzzah) yet a bad aim makes a good action bad (as in Jehu) whose
justice was approved, but his policy punished, the first Chapter of Hosea, and
the fourth verse, doubtless Abijahs actions were good, and his aims good; and
this was indeed his glory, that his goodness was toward the Lord.

Its recorded of the Catanenses that they made a stately monument of Kingly
magnificence, in remembrance of two Sons who took their aged parents upon their
backs, and carried them through the fire, when their fathers house was al in a
flame, these young men were good toward their Parents; but what is this to
Abijahs goodness toward the Lord, etc. A man cannot be good toward the
Lord, but he will be good toward others; but a man may be good toward others
that is not good toward the Lord: Oh, that men's practices did not give too
loud a Testimony every day to this assertion! etc.

Secondly, He was good among the bad, Happy are those souls that with the
Sturgion or Crab-fish can swim against the stream of custom and example, and
that with Atticus can cleave to the right, though loosing side.
he was good in the house of Jeroboam, it is in fashion to seem (at least) to be
good among the good; but to be really good among those that are bad, that are
eminently bad, argues not only a truth of goodness, but a great degree of
goodness; this young man was good in the house of Jeroboam, who made all Israel
to sin, who was naught, who was very naught, who was stark naught; and yet
Abijah, as the fishes which live in the salt Sea are fresh, so though he lived
in a (sink) a sea of wickedness; yet he retained his goodness toward the
Lord.

They say Roses grows the sweeter, when they are planted by Garlic, they are
sweet and rare Christians indeed, who hold their goodness, and grow in
goodness where wickedness sits on the throne, and such a one the Young man in
the text was.

To be Wheat among Tares, Corn among Chafe, Pearls among Cockles, and Roses
among Thorns, is excellent.

To be a Jonathan in Saul's Court, to be an Obadiah in Ahabs Court, to be an
Abedmelech in Zedechias Court, and to be an Abijah in Jeroboams Court, is a
wonder, a miracle.

To be a Lot in Sodom, to be an Abraham in Chaldaea, to be a Daniel in
Babylon, to be a Nehemiah in Damasco, and to be a Job in the land of Husse,
is to be a Saint among Devils, and such a one the young man in the Text was.

The Poets affirm that Venus never appeared so beauteous, as when she sat by
black Vnlcans side. Gracious souls shine most clear when they be set by black
conditioned persons. Stephens face never shined so Angelically, so gloriously
(in the Church) where all were virtuous, as before the Council, where all were
vicious and malicious. So Abijah was a bright Star, a shining Sun in Jeroboams
Court, which for prophanness and wickedness, was a very hell.

The words that I have chosen to insist upon will afford us several
observations, but I shall only name one, which I intend to prosecute at this
time, and that is this, viz.

Doct. That it is a very desirable and commendable thing for young men to be
really good betimes.

Other Scriptures speak out this to be a truth, Job 32.4, 5, 6, 7.
besides what you have in the Text to confirm it, as that of the second of
Chronicles Chap. 34.1, 2, 3. verses. Josiah was eight years old, when he
began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years. And he
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of
David his father, and declined neither to the right hand nor to the left; for
in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek
after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year, he began to purge
Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the Groves, and the carved
Images, and the molten Images. It Was Obadiahs honor that he feared the Lord
from his youth. 1 King. 18.12 2 Timothy 3.15
And Tymothys crown that he knew the Scripture from a child, and John's joy, 2
Epist. 4. v.
that he found Children walking in the truth; this revived his good old heart,
and made it dance for joy in his bosom; to spend further time in the proving
of this truth, would be but to light candles to see the Sun at noon.

The grounds and Reasons of this point, viz. That it is a very desirable and
commendable thing for young men to be really good betimes; are these that
follow,

First, Because the Lord commands it; and divine commands are not to be
disputed but obeyed, Deuteronomy. 6.5. chapter 11.13. v. Augustine begins one of his
Sermons thus (Ad vos mibi Sermo, O juvenes, flos etatis periculum mentis.
August. de tempore Ser. 246) to you is my speech O young men, the flower of
age, the danger of the mind.
In the 12 Chapter of Ecclesiastes and the 1 verse, Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh,
when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: Remember now; I say now; now
is an Alarm, it will puzzle the wisdom of a Philosopher, the skill of an Angel
to divide: Now, is a Monosyllable in all learned Languages. Remember now thy
Creator, Remember him presently, instantly: for thou do not know what a day,
what an hour may bring forth; thou can not tell what deadly sin, what deadly
temptation, what deadly Judgment may over-take thee; if thou do not now,
even now remember thy Creator.

Remember now thy Creator, Remember to know him, remember to love him, remember
to desire him, remember to delight in him, remember to depend upon him,
remember to get an interest in him, remember to live to him, and remember to
walk with him. Remember now thy Creator, the Hebrew is Creatours, Father, Son,
and Spirit. To the making of man, a Council was called in Heaven, in the 1. of
Genesis and 29 verse. Remember thy Creatours, remember the Father, so as to know
him, so as to be inwardly acquainted with him. Remember the Son, so as to
believe in him, so as to rest upon him, so as to embrace him, and so as to make
a complete resignation of thy self to him. Remember the Spirit, so as to hear
his voice, so as to obey his voice, so as to feel his presence, and so as to
experience his influence, etc.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth; he does not say in the
time of thy youth, but in the days of thy youth, to note that our life is but
as a few days; it is but a vapor, a span, a flower, a shadow, a dream; and
therefore Seneca says well, that though death be before the old man's face,
yet he may be as near the young man's back, etc. Man's life is the shadow of
smoke, Aug. l. 1. Confess.
the dream of a shadow, one doubts whether to call it a dying life, or a
living death; ah young men! God commands you to be good betimes. Remember
young men that it is a dangerous thing to neglect one of his commands, who by
another is able to command you into nothing, or into Hell. To act or run cross
to Gods express command (though under pretense of Revelation from God) is as
much as a man's life is worth; as you may see in that sad story, 1 King. 13. chapter
24. verse, etc. Let young men put all their carnal reasons, though never so
many, and weighty, into one scale, and Gods absolute command in the other, and
then write Tekel upon all their reasons; They are weighed in the balance, and
found too light. Ah sirs! what God commands must be put in speedy execution,
Obedientia non discutis Dei mandata, sed facit, Prosper.
without denying, or delaying, or disputing the difficulties that attend it.
Most young men in these days do as the Heathens, when their gods called for a
man, they offered a candle; or as Hercules offered up a painted man in stead of
a living. When God calls upon young men to serve him with the Primrose of their
youth; they usually put him off till they are overtaken with trembling joints,
dazzled eyes, fainting hearts, failing hands, and feeble knees; but this will
be bitterness in the end, etc.

Secondly, Young men must be really good betimes, because they have means and
opportunities of being good betimes. Never had men better means, and greater
opportunities of being good, of doing good, and of receiving good than now. Ah
Lord! how knowing, how believing, how holy, how heavenly, how humble might
young men be, were they not wanting to their own souls: Young men might be
good, very good, yea eminently good; would they but improve the means of grace,
the tenders of mercy, and the knockings of Christ by his Word, Works, and
Spirit.

The Ancients painted Opportunity with a hairy forehead, Erasmus.
but bald behind, to signify that while a man has opportunity before him,
he may lay hold on it, but if he suffer it to slip away, he cannot pull it
back again.

How many young men are now in everlasting chains, who would give ten thousand
worlds (had they so many in their hands to give) to enjoy but an opportunity to
hear one sermon more, to make one prayer more, to keep one Sabbath more, but
cannot? this is their hell, their torment, this is the Scorpion that is still
biting, this is the Worm that is always gnawing. Woe, woe to us, that we have
neglected and trifled away those golden opportunities that once we had, to get
our sins pardoned, our natures changed, our hearts bettered, our consciences
purged, and our souls saved, etc. Bellarm. In concione de cruciatibus Gehennae.
I have read of a King, who having no issue to succeed him, espying one day a
well-favoured youth, took him to Court, and committed him to Tutors, to
instruct him, providing by his will, that if he proved fit for government, he
should be crowned King, if not, he should be bound in chains, and made a
Gally-slave. Now when he grew to years, the Kings executors perceiving that
he had sadly neglected those means and opportunities, whereby he might have
been fit for State government, called him before them, and declared the Kings
will and pleasure concerning him, which was accordingly performed, for they
caused him to be fettered, and committed to the Galleys. Now what tongue can
express how much he was affected, and afflicted with his sad and miserable
state, especially when he considered with himself, that now he is chained,
who might have walked at liberty. Now he is a slave, who might have been a
King, now he is overruled by Turks, who might once have ruled over
Christians; the application is easy.

Ah young men! young men, It Is storied of Charles King of Sicily and Jerusalem,
that he was called Carolus Cunctator. Charles the lingerer; this age affords
many such lingerers, etc.
shall Satan take all opportunities to tempt you? shall the world take all
opportunities to allure you? shall wicked men take all opportunities to ensnare
you? and to undo you? and shall Christian friends take all opportunities to
better you? and shall Gods faithful Messengers take all opportunities to save
you? and will you? will you neglect so great salvation? Plutarch writes of
Hannibal, that when he could have taken Rome he would not, and when he would
have taken Rome, he could not. Many in their youthful days, when they might
have mercy, Christ, pardon, Heaven; they will not, and in old age, when they
would have Christ, pardon, peace, Heaven, they cannot, they may not. God seems
to say as Thesius said once, go says he, and tell Creon, Thesius offers thee
a gracious offer, yet I am pleased to be friends, if thou will submit (this is
my first message) but if this offer prevail not, look for me to be up in arms.

The third Reason, why Young men should be really good betimes, Lord, says
Austin, I have loved thee late; the greater was his sins, and the more were his
sorrows.
is, because then they will have fewer and lesser sins to answer for, and
repent of, multitudes of sins and sorrows are prevented by being good betimes.
The more we number our days, the fewer sins we shall have to number. As a
copy is then safest from blotting, when dust is put upon it, so are we from
sinning, when (in the time of our youth) we remember that we are but dust.
The tears of young penitents do more scorch the Devils than all the flames of
Hell, for hereby all their hopes are blasted, and the great underminer
countermined, and blown up. Mane is the Devils Verb, he bids tarry, time
enough to repent; but Mane is Gods Adverb, he bids repent early in the morning
of thy youth; for then thy sins will be fewer, and lesser. Well young men,
remember this, he that will not at the first hand buy good council cheap,
shall at the second hand buy repentance over dear.

Ah young men! young men, if you do not begin to be good betimes, those sins
that are now as Jewels sparkling in your eyes, Psalm. 25.7. Job 13.26.
will at last be milstones about your necks, to sink you for ever. -- Among
many things that Beza in his last will and Testament, gave God thanks for, this
was the first and chief, that he at the age of sixteen years, had called him
to the knowledge of the truth, and so prevented many sins and sorrows that
otherwise would have overtaken him, and have made his life less happy, and
more miserable. Young Saints often prove old Angels, There is nothing puts a
more serious frame into a man's spirit than to know the worth of his time.
but old sinners seldom prove good Saints, etc.

The fourth ground, why young men should be really good betimes, is this, viz.
because time is a precious Talent that young men must be countable for; the
sooner they begin to be good, the more easy will be their accounts,
especially as to that great Talent of time. Cato and other heathens, held that
account must be given, not only of our labor, but also of our leisure, at the
great day it will appear, that they that have spent their time in mourning,
have done better than they that have spent their time in dancing; and they that
have spent many days in humiliation, than they that have spent many days in
idle recreations.

I have read of a devout man, who when he heard a clock strike, he would say,
here is one hour more past that I have to answer for. Ah young men! as time is
very precious, so it is very short, time is very swift, it is suddenly gone, in
the 9. of Job and the 25. verse. My days are swifter than a Post, they flee
away, they see no good. The Hebrew word (Kalal) translated swifter than a Post,
signifies any thing that is light, because light things are quick in motion.

The Ancients emblem'd time with wings, as it were, Sophocles. Phocilides.
not running, but flying. Time is like the Sun, that never stands still, but is
still a running her race; the Sun did once stand still, yea went back, but so
did never Time. Time is still running, and flying; it is a bubble a shadow, a
dream; can you seriously consider of this young men, and not begin to be good
betimes? surely you cannot. Sirs, if the whole earth whereupon we tread were
turned into a lump of gold, it were not able to purchase one minute of time. Oh
the regreetings of the damned, for mis-spending precious time! Who is there
among us that knows how to value time, and prize a day at a due rate. Sen.
Epist.
Oh what would they not give to be free, and to enjoy the means of grace one
hour. Ah with what attention! with what intention! with what trembling and
melting of heart! with what hungring and thirsting would they hear the Word!
Time (says Bernard) were a good commodity in hell, and the traffic of it most
gainful, where, for one day a man would give ten thousand worlds if he had
them; young men, can you in good earnest believe this, and not begin to be good
betimes?

Ah! young men and women, as you love your precious immortal souls, A heathen
said he lived no day without a line, that is, he did something remarkable
every day.
as you would escape hell and come to heaven, as you would be happy in life,
and blessed in death, and glorious after death, don't spend any more of your
precious time, in drinking and drabing, in carding, dicing and dancing, don't
trifle away your time, don't swear away your time, don't whore away your time,
don't lie away your time, but begin to be good betimes, because Time is a
Talent, that God will reckon with you for: Ah! young men and women, you may
reckon upon years, many years yet to come, when possibly you have not so many
hours to make ready your accounts, it may be this night you may have a
summons, and then if your time be done, and your work to be begun, in what a
sad case will you be, will you not wish that you had never been born?

Seneca was wont to jeer the Jews for their ill husbandry, in that they lost
one day in seven; meaning their Sabbath; O that it were not too true of the
most of professors both young and old, that they loose not only one day in
seven, but several days in seven.

Sirs, Time let slip cannot be recal'd, the foolish Virgins found it so, and
Saul found it so, and Herod found it so, Mat. 25.5 Judge. 3.23. Heb. 3.17, 18,
19.
and Nero found it so, the Israelites found it so, yea, and Jacob, and Josiah,
and David (though good men) yet they found it so to their cost.

The Egyptians draw the picture of Time with three heads, the first of a greedy
Wolf, gaping for time past, because it has ravenously devoured the memory of
so many things past recalling. The

Second of a crowned Lion, roaring for time present, because it has the
principallity of all actions, for which it calls loud. The

Third of a deceitful Dog, fawning for time to come, because it feeds some
men with many flattering hopes to their eternal undoing: Ah! young men and
women, as you would give up your accounts at last with joy, concerning this
Talent of time, with which God has trusted you, begin to be good betimes, etc.

The fifth Reason, Why young men should be really good betimes, and that is,
because they will have the greater comfort and joy when they come to be old,
Seneca (though a Heathen could say, believe me, true joy is no light thing.
the 71 Psalm. 5. 17, 18. compapared. Thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my
trust from my youth. O God, thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto I
have declared thy wondrous works. Now also when I am old and gray headed, O
God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength, unto this Generation,
and thy power unto every one that is to come. Polycarpus could say, when old,
thus many years have I served my Master Christ, and hitherto has he dealt
well with me; if early converts live to be old, no joy to their joy, their
joy will be the greatest joy, a joy like to the joy of harvest, Isa. 9.3.
a joy like to their joy that divide the spoil, their joy will be the soundest
joy, the weightiest joy, the holiest joy, the purest joy, the strongest joy,
and the most lasting joy, the carnal joy of the wicked, the glistering (golden)
joy of the world-ling, and the flashing joy of the hypocrite, is but as the
crackling of thorns under a pot, to the joy and comfort of such, who when old,
can say, with good Obadiah, that they feared the Lord from their youth. If when
you are young, your eyes shall be full of tears (for Sin) when you are old
your hearts shall be full of joys. Such shall have the best wine at last

Oh! that young men would begin to be good betimes, that so they may have
the greater harvest of joy when they come to be old, etc. it is sad to be sowing
your seed, when you should be reaping your harvest; it is best to gather in the
summer of youth, against the winter of old age.

The Sixth Reason, Why young men should be really good betimes, and that is,
because an eternity of felicity, and glory hangs upon those few moments that
are allotted to them, it was a good question the young man propoposed, Luke
10.25
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? I know I shall be eternally happy,
or eternally miserable, eternally blessed, or eternally cur'st, eternally saved,
or eternally damned, etc.

O what shall I do to inherit eternal life! my cares, my fears, Aeteruitas est
semper et immutabile esse. The old Romans were our that thought Eternity dwelt
in Statues and in Marble monuments.
my troubles, are all about eternity, no time can reach eternity, no age can
extend to eternity, no tongue can express eternity. Eternity is that (unum
perpetuum hodie) one perpetual day, which shall never have end; what shall I
do, what shall I not do, that I may be happy to all eternity? I am now young
and in the flower of my days; but who knows what a day may bring forth? the
greatest weight hangs upon the smallest wyers, an eternity depends upon those
few hours, I am to breath in this world; O what cause have I therefore to be
good betimes, to know God betimes, to believe betimes, to repent betimes, to
get my peace made, and my pardon sealed betimes, to get my nature changed, my
conscience purged, and my interest in Christ cleared betimes, before eternity
overtakes me, before my glass be out, my Sun set, my race run, least the dark
night of eternity should overtake me, and I made miserable for ever. I have
read of one (Myrogenes) who when great gifts were sent unto him, he sent them
all back again, saying, I only desire this one thing at your Masters hand, to
pray for me, that I may be saved for eternity. O that all young men and women
who make earth their heaven, Luke 15.19, 20
pleasures their Paradise, that eat the fat, and drink the sweet, that cloth
themselves richly and crown their heads with rosebuds, that they would
seriously consider of eternity, so as to hear as for eternity, and pray as for
eternity, and live as for eternity, and provide as for eternity. That they may
say with that famous Painter Zeuxes (Aeternitati pingo) I paint for eternity,
we do all for eternity, we believe for eternity, we repent for eternity, we
obey for eternity, etc.

O that you would not make those things eternal for punishment, Cur ea quae ad
usum diuturna esse non possunt, ad supplicium diuturna deposces Ambrose in Lu.
4. T. 5.
that cannot be eternal for use: Ah! young men and women, God calls, and the
blood of Jesus Christ calls, and the spirit of Christ in the Gospel calls, and
the rage of Satan calls; and your sad state and condition calls; and the
happiness and blessedness of glorified Saints calls; these all call aloud upon
you to make sure a glorious eternity; before you sail out into that dreadful
Ocean. All your eternal good depends upon the short and uncertain moments of
your lives; and if the thread of your lives should be cut, before a happy
eternity is made sure: woe to you that ever you were born; Do not say O young
man, that thou art young, and hereafter will be time enough to provide for
eternity, for eternity may be at the door, ready to carry thee away for ever.
Every days experience speaks out eternity to be as near the young man's back,
as it is before the old man's fa^^.

O graspe to day the diadem of a blessed eternity: least thou art cut off
before the morning comes, though there is but one way to come into this world,
yet there is a thousand thousand ways to be sent out of this world; well young
men and women remember this, as the motions of the soul are quick, so are the
motions of divine justice quick also, and if you will not hear the voice of God
to day; if you will not provide for eternity to day. God may swear to morrow
that you shall never enter into his rest; it is a very sad and dangerous thing
to trifle and dally with God, his word, his offers, our own souls, and
eternity: therefore let all young People labor to be good betimes, and not to
let him that is goodness it self alone, till he has made them good, till he
has given them those hopes of eternity that will both make them good, and keep
them good; that will make them happy, and keep them happy, and that for ever;
if all this will not do, then know, that ere long those fears of eternity, of
misery, that begets that monster, Despair, which like Medusa's head,
astonisheth with its very aspect, and strangles hope, which is the breath of
the soul, will certainly overtake you; as it is said, Dum Spiro Spero, so it
may be inverted Dum Spero Spiro, other miseries may wound the spirit, but
despair kills it dead; my prayer shall be that none of you, may ever
experience this sad truth, but that you may all be good in good earnest
betimes, which will yield you two heavens, a heaven on earth, and a heaven
after death.

The seventh Reason, Why young persons should be really good betimes, and that
is, because they do not begin to live till they begin to be really good,
till they begin to be good, they are dead God-wards, and Christ-wards, and
heaven-wards, and holiness-wards, till a man begins to be really good, he
is really dead, Phil. 2.1. and that first in respect of working, Respectu
operis.
his works are called dead works, Heb. 9.14. the most glistering services of
unregenerate persons are but dead works, because they proceed not from a
principle of life, and they lead to death, Romans 6.21. and leave a sentence of
death upon the soul, till it be washed off by the blood of the Lamb.

Secondly, Respectu honoris.
He is dead in respect of honor, he is dead to all privileges, he is not
fit to inherit mercy, who will set the crown of life upon a dead man. The crown
of life is only for living Christians, Rev. 2.10. The young Prodigal was dead,
till he begun to be good, till he begun to remember his fathers house,
and to resolve to return home. My Son was dead, but is alive, Luke 15.24.
and the Widow that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. 1 Timothy 5, 6
As it is a reproach to an old man to be in Coats, so it is a disgrace to be an old
babe. i e. to be but a babe in grace, when old in years. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.
When Josaphat asked Barlaam, how old he was, he answered five and forty
years old, to whom Josaphat replied, thou seem to be seventy, true says
he, if you reckon ever since I was born; but I count not those years which
were spent in vanity: Ah! Sirs you never begin to live, till you begin to be
good in good earnest. There is the life of vegetation, and that is the life of
plants; secondly, there is the life of sense, and that is the life of beasts;
Thirdly, there is the life of reason, and that is the life of man; Fourthly,
there is the life of grace, and that is the life of Saints; and this life you
do not begin to live, till you begin to be good; if a living Dog is
better than a dead Lion, as the wise man speaks, Eccl. 9.4.
and if a Fly is more excellent than the heavens, because the Fly has life
which the heavens has not, as the Philosopher says, what a sad dead poor
nothing is that person that is a stranger to the life of grace and goodness,
that is dead, even whilst he is alive.

Most men will bleed, sweat, vomit, Meconas in Seneca had rather live in many
diseases than dye. And Homer reports of his A^hilles, that he had rather be a
servant to a poor Country Clown here, than to be a King to all the Souls
departed
purge, part with an estate, yea with a limb, I limbs, yea and many a better
thing ( viz. the honor of God and a good conscience) to preserve their natural
lives: as he cries out, Give me any deformity, any torment, any misery, so you
spare my life; and yet how few, how very few, are to be found, who make it
their work, their business, to attain to a life of goodness, or to begin to
be good betimes, or to be dead to the world, and alive to God, rather than to
be dead to God, and alive to the world, this is for a lamentation and shall be
for a lamentation, that natural life is so highly prized, and spiritual life so
little regarded, etc

The eighth Reason, Why young persons should be really good betimes, and that
is, because the promise of finding God, of enjoying God, is made over to an
early seeking of God, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek
me early shall find me. Or as the Hebrew has it, they that seek me in the
morning shall find me, by the benefit of the morning light we come to find the
things we seek. (...)
Shahhar signifies to seek inquisitively to seek diligently, Exodus 16.21 Scipio
went first to the Capitol, and then to the Senate. Tully an heathen frequently
called G d Optimum maximum, the best, and greatest, God is Omnia super omnia.
to seek timely in the morning. As the Israelites went early in the morning, to
seek for Manna. And as Students rise early in the morning and sit close to it,
to get knowledge; so says wisdom, they that seek me in the spring and
morning of their youth, shall find me.

Now to seek the Lord early, is to seek the Lord firstly. God has in himself
all the good of Angels, of men, and universal nature, he has all gloryes,
all dignities, all riches, all treasures, all pleasures, all comforts, all
delights, all joys, all beatitudes. God is that one infinite perfection in
himself, which is eminently and virtually all perfections of the creatures, and
therefore he is firstly to be sought. Abstracts do better express him, than
Concretes and adjectives; he is, being, bonity, power, wisdom, justice,
mercy, goodness, and love it self, and therefore worthy to be sought before
all other things. Seek ye first the good things of the mind, says Philosophy,
Cicero.
and don't Divinity say as much?

Again, To seek early is to seek opportunely, to seek while the opportunity
does present, Days of grace have their dates, therefore take heed of saying
Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow.
Judge. 9.33. Thou shall rise early, and set upon the City; that is, thou shall
opportunely set upon the City. Such there have been, who by giving a glass of
water opportunely, have obtained a kingdom, as you may see in the story of
Thamastus, and King Agrippa.

Ah! Young men and women, you do not know, but that by an early, Heb. 12.28
by an opportune seeking of God, you may obtain a kingdom that shakes not, and
glory that passes not away. There is a season wherein God may be found, Isa.
55.6
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near,
and if you slip this season, you may seek him, and miss him. Ier. 11.11 Isa.
1.15 Mic. 3, 4 Prove. 1.28
Though they cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them; when ye make many
prayers I will not hear. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not
hear. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me
early but shall not find me. This was Saul's misery, The Philistines are upon
me, and God will not answer me, it is justice that they should seek and not
find at last, who might have found, had they but sought seasonably and
opportunely, etc.

Again, to seek early, is to seek earnestly, affectionately. With my soul have
I desired thee in the night, Isa. 26.9.
yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: The Hebrew word
signifies both an earnest, and an early seeking in the morning, the spirits are
up, and men are earnest, lively, and affectionate. Ah such a seeking, shall
certainly be crowned with finding! My voice shall thou hear in the morning,
Psalm. 5.3.11, 12.
O Lord; in the morning will I direct (Heb. martial) my prayer unto thee, (...)
and will look up; (Hebrew, look out like a watchman.) Let all those that put
their trust in thee, rejoice; let them ever shout for joy; because thou
defendest them, (Hebrew, thou coverest over, or protectest them) Let them also
that love thy Name, be joyful in thee, for thou, Lord, wilt bless the
Righteous, with favor will thou compass him (Hebrew crown him) as with a
shield. None have ever thus sought the Lord, but they have, or certainly shall
find him. Seek, and ye shall find, Matthew. 7.7. your heart shall live that
seek God, Psalm. 69.32. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails
much, (...). It signifies such a working as notes the liveliest activity that
can be.
James 5.16. or as the Greek has it, the working-prayer of a righteous man
avails much; that prayer that sets the whole man awork, will work wonders in
Heaven, in the heart, and in the earth. Earnest prayer like Saul's sword, and
Jonathans bow, never return empty. One speaking of Luther, who was a man very
earnest in prayer, said, (hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit, this man could
have what he would of God, etc.

Again, to seek early, is to seek chiefly, primarily, after this or that thing;
what we first seek, we seek as chief. Now to seek the Lord early, is to seek
him primarily, chiefly, In the 63. Psalm. and the 1. verse. Thou art my God,
early will I seek thee; that is, Omne bonum in summo b^no.
I will seek thee as my choicest and my chiefest good. God is Alpha, the
fountain from whence all grace springs; and Omega, the Sea to which all glory
runs; and therefore early and primarily to be sought. God is a perfect good, a
solid good (id bonum perfectum dicitur, cui nil accedere, solidum cui ^^l
decedere potest. Lactantius) that is a perfect good to which nothing can be
added, that a solid, from which nothing can be spared such a good God is, and
therefore early and chiefly to be sought. 1 John 1.5.
God is a pure and simple good, he is a light in whom there is no darkness, a
good, in whom there is no evil. The goodness of the Creature is mixed, yea that
little goodness that is in the Creature is mixed with much evil, but God is an
immixt good, Quicquid est in Deo, est ipse Deus.
he is good, he is a pure good, he is all over good, he is nothing but good.
God is an All-sufficient good, walk before me, and be upright, I am God
All-sufficient, in the 17. of Genesis and the 1. verse. Habet omnia, qui habet
habentem omnia, Aug. He has all, that has the haver of all. God has in
himself all power to defend you, all wisdom to direct you, all mercy to pardon
you, all grace to enrich you, all Righteousness to cloth you, all goodness to
supply you, and all happiness to crown you. Cant. 2.3.
God is a satisfying good, a good that fills the heart, and quiets the soul, in
the 33. of Genesis and the 11. verse. I have enough, says good Jacob, I have
all, says Jacob, for so the Hebrew has it (Cholli) I have all, I have all
comforts, all delights, all contents, etc. In having nothing, I have all
things, because I have Christ, having therefore all things in him. I seek no
other reward, for he is the universal reward, says one. As the worth and
value of many pieces of silver is to be found in one piece of gold. So all the
petty excellencies that are scattered abroad in the Creatures are to be found
in God, yea all the whole volum of perfections which is spread through Heaven
and Earth is epitomized in him. No good below him that is the greatest good,
can satisfy the soul; a good wife, a good child, a good name, a good estate, a
good friend, cannot satisfy the soul; these may please, but they cannot
satisfy. Omnis copia quae non est Deus meus, mihi egestas est. Aug. Soliloq.
c. 13.
All abundance, if it be not my God, is to me nothing but poverty and want,
said one. Ah that young men and women would but in the morning of their youth,
seek, yea seek early, seek earnestly; seek affectionately, seek diligently,
seek primarily, and seek unweariedly this God, who is the greatest good; the
best good, the most desirable good: who is a suitable good, a pure good: a
satisfying good, a total good, and an eternal good.

The ninth Reason, why young persons should be really good betimes, and that
is, because the time of youth is the choicest and fittest time for service. Now
your parts are lively, senses fresh, The days of youth are called, aetas bona,
in Cicero, and aetas optima, in Seneca.
memory strong, and nature vigorous; the days of your youth are the spring and
morning of your time; they are the firstborn of your strength, therefore God
requires your nonage as well as your dotage; the wine of your times, as well as
the lees, Exodus 13.2. Exodus 22.9.
as you may see typified to you in the first fruits, which were dedicated to
the Lord; And the firstborn. The time of youth is the time of salvation, it is
the acceptable time, it is thy summer, thy harvest time. O young man, therefore
do not sleep, but up, and be doing, awaken thy heart, rouse up thy soul, and
improve all thou have, put out thy reason, thy strength, thy all, to the
treasuring up of heavenly graces, precious promises, divine experiences, and
spiritual comforts, against the winter of old age, and then old age will not
be to thee an evil age, Genesis 25.28.
but as it was to Abraham a good old age; do not put off God with fair
promises, and large pretenses till your last sands are running, and the days
of dotage has overtaken you. Mal. 1.14.
That Is a sad word of the Prophet, cursed be the deceiver which has in his
flock a male, and yet offers to the Lord a corrupt thing. Jer. 1.11 The
Almond tree blossoms in January, (while it is yet Winter) and the fruit is
ripe in March.
Ah young men and women, who are like the Almond tree, you have many males in
the flock, your strength is a male in your flock, your time is a male in the
flock, your reason is a male in the flock, your parts are a male in the flock,
and your gifts are a male in the flock; now if he be cursed that has but one
male in his flock, and shall offer to God a corrupt thing, a thing of no worth,
of no value, how will you be cursed, and cursed, cursed at home, and cursed
abroad, cursed temporally, cursed spiritually, and cursed eternally, who have many
males in your flock, and yet deal so unworthily, so fraudulently, and false
heartedly with God, as to put him off with the dreggs of your time, and
strength, while you spend the Prime-rose of your youth in the service of the
world, Mat. 21.20
the Flesh, and the Devil.

The Fig Tree in the Gospel, that did not bring forth fruit timely and
seasonably, was cursed to admiration, the time of youth is the time and season
for bringing forth the fruits of righteousness and holiness, and if these
fruits be not brought forth in their season, you may justly fear, that the
curses of heaven will secretly and insensibly soak and sink into your souls,
and then woe woe to you that ever you were born, the best way to prevent this
hell of hels is to give God the cream and Flower of your youth, your strength,
your time, your Talents; vessels that are betimes seasoned with the savor of
life, never loose it, Pro. 22.6.

The Tenth Reason, Why young persons should be really good (in good earnest)
betimes, and that is, because Death may suddenly and unexpectedly seize upon
you, Pares nascuntur, pares moriuntur, in the womb and in the Tomb they are all
alike.
you have no lease of your lives. Youth is as fickle as old age, the young man
may find Graves enough of his length in burial places; as green wood, and old
logs meet in one fire, so young Sinners, and old Sinners meet (in one hell) and
burn together; when the young man is in his spring, Job. 21.23, 24
and prime, then he is cut off and dies, one dies in his full strength (or in
the strength of his perfection, It Is an Allegorical description of the highest
prosperity.
as the Hebrew has it) being wholly at ease and quiet. His breasts are full of
milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow. David's children dies when young,
so did Jobs, and Jeroboams, etc. Every days experience tell us, that the young
man's life is as much a vapor, as the old man's is.

I have read of an Italian Poet, who brings in a propper young man rich and
potent, discoursing with Death, in the habit of a mower with his Sithe in his
hand, cutting down the life of man (For all flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6.) and
will thou not spare any man's person says the young man; I spare none says
death, Deaths motto is Nulli Cedo, I yield to none.
man's life is but a day, a short day, a winters day, oft-times the Sun goes
down upon a man before it be well up; your day is short, your work is great,
your journey long, and therefore you should rise early and set forward toward
heaven betimes, as that man does that has a long journey to go in a winters
day.

The life of man is absolutely short. Psalm. 39.5
Behold thou have made my days as a hands breadth. The life of man is
comparatively short, and that if you compare man's life now to what he might
have reached; had he continued in innocence. Sin brought in death, death is a
fall that came in by a fall; or if you compare man's life now, to what they did
reach to before the Flood, then several lived, Genesis 9
six, seven, eight, nine hundred years; or if you compare man's days with the
days of God. Mine age is as nothing before thee; Psalm. 39.5
or if you compare the days of man to the days of eternity.

Ah! The Heathen could say, that the whole life of man should be nothing else
but (meditatio mortis) a meditation of death
Young men, young men, can you seriously consider of the brevity of man's life,
and trifle away your time, the offers of Grace, your precious souls, and
eternity? etc. surely you cannot, surely you dare not; if you do but in good
earnest ponder upon the shortness of man's life. It is recorded of Philip King
of Macedon, that he gave a pension to one to come to him every day at dinner,
and to cry to him (memento te esse mortalem) Remember thou art but mortal.

Ah! Young men and old, had need be often put in mind of their mortality, they
are too apt to forget that day, yea to put far from them the thoughts of that
day. I have read of three that could not endure to hear that bitter word,
death, mentioned in their ears, and surely this age is full of such monsters.

And as the life of man is very short, so it is very uncertain, now well, now
sick, alive this hour, and dead the next. Death does not always give warning
before hand, sometimes he gives the mortal blow suddenly, he comes behind
with his dart, and strikes a man at the heart, before he says, have I found
thee O my enemy? Eutichus fell down dead suddenly, Act. 20.19. Death suddenly
arested David's Sons, and Jobs Sons, Petrach tells of one who being invited to
dinner, the next day, enswered, Ego a multis annis crastinum non habui. I have
not had a morrow for this many years.
Augustus dyed in a complement, Galba with a sentence, Vespasian with a jest,
Zeuxes dyed laughing at the picture of an old woman, which he drew with his
own hand, Sophocles was choked with the stone in a Grape, D^odorus the
Logician dyed for shame, that he could not answer a joculary question
propounded at the Table by Stilpo, Joannes Measius, preaching upon the raising
of the woman of Naims son from the dead, within three hours after dyed
himself.

Ah! Young men and women, have you not cause, great cause to be good betimes?
for death is sudden in his approaches, nothing more sure than death, and
nothing more uncertain than life; therefore know the Lord betimes, turn from
your sins betimes, lay hold on the Lord, and make peace with him betimes,
that you may never say as Caesar Borgias said, when he was sick to death, when
I lived (said he) I provided for every thing but death, now I must dye and am
unprovided to dye, etc.

The Eleventh Reason, Why young persons should be really good betimes, and
that is, because it is ten to one, nay, a hundred to ten if ever they are
converted, if they are not converted when they are young.

God usually begins with such betimes, Hos. 11.1. When Israel was a child, then
I loved him, etc.
that he has had thoughts of love and mercy toward from everlasting; the
instances cited to prove the Doctrine, confirms this argument; and if you look
abroad, in the world, you shall hardly find one Saint among a thousand, but
dates his conversion from the time of his youth. 'Twas the young ones that got
through the wilderness into Canaan. If the Tree do not bud, and blossom, and
bring forth fruit in the Spring, Numb. 26.64.
it is commonly dead all the year after; An Hebrew Doctor observes that of
those six hundred thousand that went out of Egypt, there were but two persons
that entered Canaan.
if in the spring, and morning of your days you do not bring forth fruit to
God, it is a hundred to one, that ever you bring forth fruit to him, when the
evil days of old age shall overtake you, wherein you shall say, you have no
pleasure. For as the Son of Syrach observes, if thou have gathered nothing in
thy youth, Eccles. 25.5.
what can thou find in thy age? it is rare, very rare, that God sows and reaps
in old age, usually God sows the seed of grace in youth, it yields the harvest
of joy in age. Though true repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is
seldom true. Millions are now in Hell, who have pleased themselves with the
thoughts of after repentance. The Lord has made a promise to late repentance,
but where has he made a promise of late repentance: yea what can be more just
and equal, Pro. 1.24, 32.
that such should seek, and not find, who might have found, but would not
seek; and that he should shut his ears against their late prayers, who have
stopped their ears against his early calls? The Ancient warriors would not
accept an old man into their army, as being unfit for service, and do thou
think that God will accept of thy dry bones, when Satan has sucked out all the
marrow? What Lord, what Master will take such into their service, who have all
their days served their enemies, and will God? will God? The Circassians (a
kind of Mongrel Christians) are said to divide their life betwixt sin and
devotion, Breerw. Enqui.
dedicating their youth to rapine, and their old age to repentance; if this be
thy case, I would not be in thy case for ten thousand worlds.

I have read of a certain great man; Beda has this story.
that was admonished in his sickness to repent, who answered, that he would
not repent yet, for if he should recover, his companions would laugh at him;
but growing sicker, and sicker, his friends pressed him again to repent, but
then he told them that it were too late; (Quia jam judicatus sum, and
condemnatus) for now said he, I am judged and condemned.

The twelfth and last Reason, why young men should be really good betimes, and
that is, because else they will never attain to the honor of being old
disciples. It is a very great honor to be an old Disciple. Now this honor
none reach to, but such as are converted betimes, but such as turn to the Lord
in the spring, and morning of their youth. It is no honor for an old man to
be in coats, What more ridiculous than (puer. contum annorum) a child of an
hundred years old?
nor for an old man to be a babe in grace. An A. B. C. old man is a sad and
shameful sight; O but it is a mighty honor to a man when he is old, that he
can date his conversion from the morning of his youth. Now that it is an honor
to be an old Disciple, I shall prove by an induction of particulars. As

It is an honor to be an old Disciple
First, All men will honor an old Disciple, A Crown is a very glorious thing,
but there are but few of them.
Prove. 16.31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness. God requires that the aged should be honored, Levit. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man
(the old man here, is by some expounded the wise man) and fear thy God; I am
the Lord. Hoariness is only honorable, when found in a way of Righteousness; a
white head accompanied with a holy heart, makes a man truly honorable. There
are two glorious sights in the world, the one is, a young man walking in his
uprightness; and the other is, an old man walking in ways of Righteousness;
'twas Abraham's honor, Genesis 25.8.
that he went to his grave in a good old age, or rather as the Hebrew has it,
with a good gray head; many there be that goes to their graves with a gray
head, but this was Abraham's crown, that he went to his grave with a good gray
head; had Abraham's head been never so gray, if it had not been good, it would
have been no honor to him; a hoary head, when coupled with an unsanctified
heart, is rather a curse, than a blessing, when the head is as white as Snow,
Isa. 65.20.
and the soul as black as Hell, God usually gives up such to the greatest scorn
and contempt. Princes are hanged up by their hands, Lam. 5.12.
the faces of Elders were not honored, and this God had threatened long before.
Deuteronomy. 28.49.50
The Lord shall bring against thee a Nation from far, a Nation of fierce
countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to
the young. I have read of Cleanthes, who was wont sometimes to chide himself:
Ariston wondering thereat, asked him whom chidest thou, Cleanthes laughed, and
answered, I chide an old fellow (qui canos quidem habet, sed mentem non habet)
who has gray hairs indeed, but wants understanding and prudence worthy of
them. The Application I will leave to the gray heads, and gray beards of our
time, who have little else to commend them to the world but their hoary heads,
and snowy-beards.

Secondly, God usually reveals himself most to old Disciples, (...) In the
Ancient is wisdom.
to old Saints, Job 12.12, With the Ancient is wisdom, and in length of days
understanding. God usually manifests most of himself to aged Saints,
Valentianius the Emperors morto was (amicus veterimus optimus) an old friend is
best.
they usual pray most, and pay most, they labor most, and long most after the
choicest manifestations of himself, and of his grace, and therefore he opens
his bosom most to them, and makes them of his Cabinet-Councel. Genesis 18, 17,
19. And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do, for I
know him, that he will command his Children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice, and judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Abraham was an
old friend, and therefore God makes him both of his Court, and Council; we
usually open our hearts most freely, fully, and familiarly to old friends. So
does God to his ancient friends. Luke 2.25, 26, 27, 28.
Ah what a blessed sight and enjoyment of Christ had old Simeon, that made his
very heart to dance in him! Now Lord, let thou thy servant to depart in
peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, etc. I
have seen him, who is my light, my life, my love, my joy, my crown, my heaven,
my all; therefore now let thy servant depart in peace. Verse. 36, 37, 38.
So Anna, when she was fourscore and four years old, was so filled with the
discoveries and enjoyments of Christ, that she could not but declare what she
had tasted, felt, seen, heard, and received from the Lord: She was ripe, and
ready to discover, the fullness, sweetness, goodness, excellency, and glory of
that Christ whom she had long loved, feared, and served. So. Paul lived in the
light, Phil. 4.5, 7, 9.
sight, and sweet enjoyments of Christ, when aged, in years, Rev. 1.7. -- ult.
in grace. So when had John that glorious vision of Christ among the golden
Candlesticks, and those discoveries and manifestations, of the ruin of Rome,
the fall of Antichrist, the casting the beast and false Prophet into a lake of
fire; the conquest of the Kingdoms of the world, by Christ's bow and sword, the
binding up of Satan, and the new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, but when he was old, when he was aged in years, and in Grace?

The Lord speaks many a secret in the ears of aged Saints, of old Christians,
which young Christians are not acquainted with, as that phrase imports, 2 Samuel
7.27. Thou O Lord God of host, has revealed to thy servant, (...) Galitha
ethozen.
so you read it in your books, but in the Hebrew it is, Lord thou have revealed
this to the ear of thy servant. Some wonder how that word to the ear comes to
be left out in your books, in which indeed the Emphasis lies, we will tell
many things in an old friends ear, which we will not acquaint young ones with.
So does God many times whisper an old Disciple in the ear, and acquaints him
with such things that he hides from those that are of younger years. And by
this you may see what an honor it is to be an old Disciple.

Thirdly, Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Yet as Solon was not ashamed to say, that in
his old age he was a learner, so those that are the greatest Artists in
Christianity will confess, that they are still but learners.
An old Disciple, an old Christian, he has got the art of serving God, the
art of Religion, Got the art of hearing, the art of praying, the art of
meditating, the art of repenting, the art of believing, the art of denying his
natural self, his sinful self, his Religious self. All Trades have their
mystery and difficulty; so has the trade of Christianity; young Christians
usually bungle in religious work, but old Christians acquit themselves like
workmen that need not be ashamed. A Young Carpenter gives more blows, and
makes more chips, but an old Artist does the most, and best work; a young
Christian may make most noise in religious duties, but an old Christian makes
the best work. A young Musician may play more quick and nimble, upon an
instrument than an old, but an old Musician has more skill and judgment than
a young, the application is easy; And by this you may also see, what an honor
it is, to be an old Christian, etc.

Fourthly, An old Disciple, an old Christian, is rich in spiritual experiences,
1 John 2.13
O the experiences that he has of the ways of God, of the workings of God, of
the word of God, of the love of God. Ps. 119.49, 50. Old men love to speak of
ancieet things.
O the divine stories that old Christians can tell of the power of the Word, of
the sweetness of the Word, of the use-fulness of the Word, as a light to lead
the soul, as a staff to support the soul, as a spur to quicken the soul, as an
anchor to stay the soul, and as a cordial to comfort and strengthen the soul! O
the stories that he can tell you concerning the love of Christ, the blood of
Christ, the offices of Christ, the merits of Christ, the righteousness of
Christ, the graces of Christ, and the influence of Christ. O the stories that
an old Disciple can tell you of the indwellings of the spirit, of the
operations of the spirit, of the teachings of the spirit, of the leadings of
the spirit, of the sealings of the spirit, of the witnessings of the spirit,
and of the comforts and joys of the spirit. O the stories that an old
Christian can tell you, of the evil of Sin, the bitterness of Sin, the
deceitfulness of Sin, the prevalency of Sin, and the happiness of conquest
over Sin. O the stories that he can tell you of the snares of Satan, the
devices of Satan, the temptations of Satan, the rage of Satan, the malice of
Satan, the watchfulness of Satan, and the ways of triumphing over Satan. As an
old Soldier can tell you of many battles, many scarres, many wounds, many
losses, and many victories, even to admiration; So an old Saint is able to tell
you many divine stories even to admiration.

Pliny writes of the Crocodile, that she grows to her last day. So aged
Saints, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7
they grow rich in spiritual experiences to the last. An old Christian being
once asked, if he grew in goodness, Answered yea, doubtless I do, for God has
said, Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14.
The Righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree (now the Palm Tree never
loses his leaf, or fruit, says Pliny) he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the
Courts of our God; They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall
be fat and flourishing. Isa. 46.3, 4
A fellow to this promise Isaiah mentions, Hearken unto me O house of Jacob,
and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are born by me, from the
belly, which are carried from the womb, and even to your old age; I am he, and
even to hoary hairs, will I carry you, I have made, and I will bear, even I
will carry, and will deliver you. There is nothing more commendable in fullness
of age, Dan. 7.9, 13, 22
than fullness of knowledge and experience; nor nothing more honorable than to
see ancient Christians, very much acquainted with the Ancient of days. It is a
brave sight to see ancient Christians like the Almond-Tree. Now the Almond-tree
does flourish, and is full of blossoms in the winter of old age, for as Pliny
tells us, the Almond-Tree does blossom in the month of January; experiments in
religion are beyond notions, and impressions; a sanctified heart, is better
than a silver tongue, no man so rich, so honorable, so happy, as the old
Disciple, that is rich in spiritual experiences, and yet there is no Christian
so rich in his experiences but he would be richer. The Lawyer.
As Julianius said, that when he had one foot in the grave, he would have the
other in the School. So though an old Disciple has one foot in the grave, yet
he will have the other in Christ's School, that he may still be treasuring up
more and more divine experiments; and by this also you see, what an honor it
is to be an old Disciple, etc.

Fifthly, An old Disciple is very stout, courageous, firm, and fixed in his
resolutions; Psa. 44.9. -- ult.
an old Christian is like a pillar, a rock, nothing can move him, nothing can
shake him, what is sucked in in youth, will abide in old age; old soldiers are
stout and courageous, nothing can daunt nor discourage them. When Joshua was an
hundred and ten years old, Josh. 24.15.29
O how courageous and resolute was he! And if it seem evil unto you, to serve
the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the Gods that your
Fathers served, that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the
Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord. And it came to pass, after these things, that Joshua the Son of Nun,
the servant of the Lord dyed, being an hundred and ten years old. Confidius a
Senator of Rome told Caesar boldly that the Senators durst not come to council
for fear of his soldiers; he replied, why then do thou go to the Senate?
he answered, because my age takes away my fear. Ah! none so courageous, none
so divinely fearlesse, none so careless in evil days as ancient Christians.
An old Christian knows, that that good will do him no good, which is not made
good by perseverance; his resolution is like that of Gonsalvo, who protested to
his soldiers, showing them Naples, that he had rather die one foot forwards,
than to have his life secured for long by one foot of retreat. Shall such a man
as I am flee, said undaunted Nehemia? Neh. 6.11.
he will courageously venture life and limb, rather than by one foot of
retreat, credit profession with the reproach of fearfulness. Aristotle, (though
a heathen) could say that in some cases a man had better lose his life, than
be cowardly. Arist. Ethie. 3. cap. 1.
It was a brave magnanimous speech of Luther, when dangers from opposers did
threaten him, and his associates; come (says he) let us sing the forty sixth
Psalm, and then let them do their worst. When Polycarpus was fourscore and six
years old, he suffered Martyrdom courageously, resolutely, and undauntedly.

When one of the ancient Martyrs was very much threatened by his persecutors,
he replied, there is nothing of things visible, nothing of things invisible
that I fear; I will stand to my profession of the name of Christ, and contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, come on it what will. Old
Disciples, old Soldiers of Christ, 2 Samuel 23.11, 12.
they have the heart and courage of Shammah, one of David's worthies, who stood
and defended the field, when all the rest fled. The Hebrews call a young man
Nagnar, which springs from a root that signifies to shake off, Mat. 19.20.21,
22.
or to be tossed to and fro, to note how fickle, and how constant in
inconstancy young men are, they usually are persons either of no resolution for
good, or of weak resolution; they are too often wonn with a Nut, and lost with
an Apple: but now aged Christians in all Earthquakes, they stand fast, like
Mount-Zion, that cannot be removed. And by this also you may see, what an
honor it is, to be an old Disciple, an old Christian.

Sixthly, An old Disciple, an old Christian, is prepared for death, he has
been long a dying to sin, Romans 6 6. Gal. 5.24. chapter 6.14.
to the world, to friends, to self, to relations, all, and no man so prepared
to dye, as he that thus daily dies. An old Disciple has lived sincerely to
Christ, he has lived eminently to Christ, he has lived in all conditions,
Romans 14.7, 8. Phil. 1.21, 22, 23.
and under all changes to Christ, he has lived exemplarily to Christ, he has
lived long to Christ, and therefore the more prepared to dye, and be with
Christ. An old Disciple has a crown in his eye, a pardon in his bosom, and a
Christ in his arms, and therefore may sweetly sing it out with old Simeon,
Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace. As Hillary said to his soul, soul,
thou have served Christ this seventy years, Zeno a wise heathen said, I have no
fear but of old age.
and art thou afraid of death? go out soul, go out. Many a day said old Cowper
have I sought death with tears, not out of impatience, distrust, or
perturbation, but because I am weary of sin, and fearful to fall into it.
Nazianzen calls upon the King of terrors, devour me, devour me. And Austin,
when old, could say, shall I dye ever? Cyprian could receive the cruellest
sentence of death, with a Deo gratias. God I thank thee.
yes, or shall I die at all? yes, why then Lord if ever, why not now? why not
now? so when Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant threatened to kill Bazil, he
answered, if that be all. I fear not; yea, your Master cannot more pleasure
me, than in sending me unto my heavenly Father, to whom I now live, and to
whom I desire to hasten. I cannot say as he (said old Mr. Stephen Martial a
little before his death) I have not so lived, that I should now be afraid to
dye, but this I can say, I have so learned Christ, that I am not afraid to die.
Old Christians have made no more to dye, than to dine. Isa. 57.1, 2
It is nothing to dye when the Comforter stands by; Old Disciples know that to
dye is but to lie down in their beds, they know that their dying day is better
than their birth day, Eccl. 7.1
and this made Solomon to prefer his Coffin before his Crown, the day of his
dissolution, before the day of his coronation. The Ancients were wont to call
the days of their death, Natalia, not dying days, but birth days.

The Jews to this day stick-not to call their Golgotha's Batte Caiim, the
houses or places of the Living; old Christians know that death is but an
entrance into life, it is but a passover, a jubilee, it is but the Lords
Gentleman Usher to conduct them to heaven, and this prepares them to dye and
makes death more desirable than life, and by this you may see, that it is an
honor to be an old Disciple.

Seventhly, An Old Disciple, an old Christian, 1 Cor. 15 ult. 2 Cor. 9.6 Mat.
5.10, 11, 12 God will reward his Servants, Secundum laborem, according to their
labor, though not Secundum proventum, according to the success of their
labor.
shall have a great reward in heaven, Old Christians have done much, and
suffered much for Christ, and the more any man does, or suffers for Christ
here, the more glory he shall have hereafter. It Was the saying of an old
Disciple upon his dying bed, he is come, he is come (meaning the Lord) with a
great reward for a little work. Agrippa having suffered imprisonment for
wishing Cajus Emperor, the first thing Cajus did when he came to the Empire,
was to prefer Agrippa to a Kingdom; he gave him also a chain of Gold as heavy
as the chain of Iron that was upon him in prison; And will not Christ richly
reward all his suffering Saints? Surely he will, Christ will at last pay a
Christian for every prayer he has made, for every Sermon he has heard, for
every tear he has shed, for every morsel he has given, for every burden
he has born, for every battle he has fought, for every enemy he has
flain, and for every temptation that he has overcome. Cyrus in a great
expedition against his enemies, the better to encourage his soldiers to fight,
in an oration that he made at the head of his Army, promised upon the victory,
to make every foot soldier an horsman and every horseman a Commander, and that
no Officer that did valiantly, should be unrewarded, Mat. 19.28 Luke 22.30.
Mat. 5.12
but what are Cyrus his rewards, to the rewards that Christ our General
promises to his, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my father in his
throne. As the King in Plutarch said of a groat, it is no kingly gift, and of a
Talent, it is no base bribe.
As there is no Lord to Christ, so there is no rewards to Christ's, his rewards
are the greatest rewards, he gives Kingdoms, Crowns, Thrones, he gives grace
and glory, Psalm. 84.11. It is said of Araunah that noble Jebusite, renowned for
his bounty, that he had but a subjects purse, but a Kings heart, but Jesus
Christ has a Kings purse, as well as a Kings heart, and accordingly he gives.

And as Christ's rewards are the greatest rewards, so his rewards are the surest
rewards; he is faithful that has promised, 1 These. 5.24. Antiochus promised
often, but seldom gave (upon which he was called in way of derision a great
promiser) but Jesus Christ never made any promise, but he has or will perform
it, 2 Cor. 1.20. nay he is often better than his word, 1 Cor. 2.9. he gives
many times more than we ask. The sick man of the Palsy asked but health, Mat.
9.2
and Christ gave him health and a pardon to boot. Solomon desired but wisdom,
2 Chronicles. 1.10.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and the Lord gave him wisdom, and honor, and riches, and the favor of
creatures, as paper and pack-thred into the bargain. Jacob asked him but
clothes to wear, Genesis 28.20. Compared with Genesis 32.10.
and bread to eat, and the Lord gave him these things, and riches, and other
mercies into the bargain. Christ does not measure his gifts by our Petitions,
but by his own riches, and mercies. Gracious souls many times receive many
gifts, and favors from God, that they never dreamt off, nor durst presume to
beg, which others exstreamly strive after, and go without. Archelaus being
much importuned by a covetous courtier for a cup of gold, wherein he drank,
gave it unto Euripides that stood by, saying, thou art worthy to ask, and be
denied, but Euripides is worthy of gifts, although he ask not. Luke
15.19.^^,25.
The Prodigal craves no more but the place of an hired Servant, but he is
entertained as a Son, he is clad with the best robe, and fed with the fatted
calf, he has a ring for his hand, and shoes for his feet, rich supplies more
than he desired. Genesis 42.
Jacobs sons in a time of famine desired only corn, and they return with corn
and money in their sacks, and with good news too, Joseph is alive, and
governor of all Egypt.

And as his Rewards are greater and surer than others rewards, Heb. 12.28 Mat.
6.19, 20 1 Pet. 1.4
so they are more durable and lasting than others rewards, the Kingdom that
he gives is a Kingdom that shakes not, the treasures that he gives are
treasures that corrupt not, and the glory that he gives is glory that fades
not away, but the rewards that men give, are like themselves, fickle and
unconstant, they are withering and fading, Xerxes crowned his steers-man in the
morning, and beheaded him in the evening of the same day. And Andronicus the
Greek Emperor, crowned his admiral in the morning, and then took off his head
in the afternoon; Rofensis had a Cardinals hat sent him, but his head was cut
off before it came to him; most may say of their Crowns, as that King said of
his, O Crown, more noble than happy. It was a just complaint which long ago was
made against the Heathen gods ( O faciles dare summa deos eademque tueri
difficiles!) they could give their favorites great gifts, but they could not
maintain them in the possession of them, the World may give you great things,
but the World cannot maintain you in the possession of them, but the great
things, the great rewards that Christ gives his, he will for ever maintain
them in the possession of them, otherwise heaven would not be heaven, Glory
would not be glory: Now by all these things you see, that it is a very great
honor to be an Old Disciple, an old Christian; and this honor you will never
attain to, except you begin to be really good betimes, except in the morning
of your youth, you return to the Lord, and get an interest in him.

I shall now come to make some Use and Application of this weighty truth to our
selves.

You see beloved, that it is the great Duty and concernment of Young men, To be
really good betimes: if this be so. Then

The Vanity of Youth
Use 1.
First, This truth looks sowerly and sadly upon such Young men, that are only
seemingly good, that makes some shows of goodness, but are not right toward
God at the root. As Joash when he was young, 2 Chronicles. 24.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13,
14, 15, 16.
he seemed to have good things in him toward the Lord, whilst good Jehoiada
lived, but when Jehoiada was dead, Neroes first five years are famous, but
afterward who more cruel.
Joash his goodness was buried with him. Ah how many in these days that have
been seemingly good, have turned to be naught, very naught, yea stark naught!
It is said of Tiberius, that whilst Augustus ruled, he was no ways tainted in
his reputation; and that whilst Drusus and Germanicus were alive, he feigned
those virtues which he had not, to maintain a good opinion of himself, in the
hearts of the people; but after he had got himself out of the reach of
contradiction and controulment, There are some that write that after Demas had
forsaken Paul, he became a Priest in an Idol Temple.
there was no fact in which he was not faulty, no crime to which he was not
accessory. Oh that this were not applicable to many young persons in these
days, who have made great shows, and taken upon them a great name, who have
begun to outshine the stars, but are now gone out like so many snuffs, to the
dishonor of God, the reproach of the Gospel, the grief of others, and the
hazard of their own souls.

It was a custom of old, when any was baptized, the Minister delivered a white
garment to be put on, saying, take thou this white vestment, and see thou
bring it forth without spot at the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ; whereupon
one Maritta baptizing one Elpidophorus, who when he was grown up, proved a
profane wretch, he brings forth the white garment, and holding it up, Crabs
that go backward are reakoned among the unclean creatures. Levit. 11.10.
shakes it against him, saying, this linen garment Elpidophorus shall accuse
thee at the coming of Christ, which I have kept by me as a witness of thy
Apostasy.

Ah young men and women, your former professions will be a sad witness
against you in the great day of our Lord Jesus, except you repent and return in
good earnest to the Lord. Pro. 14.14.
Oh it had been better that you had never made profession, that you had never
set your faces toward Heaven, that you had never pretended to God and Christ,
that you had never known the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21.
than after you have known it, to turn from the holy commandment. Cyprian in
his Sermon de lapsis reports of diverse, who forsaking the Faith, were given
over to evil spirits, and dyed fearfully. Oh the delusions, and the
Christ-dethroning, conscience-wasting and soul-undoing opinions, and principles
that many young ones (who once were hopeful ones) are given up to! That
dreadful Scripture seems to be made good in power upon them, Jer. 17.13.
All you that forsake the Lord shall come to be ashamed; and they that depart
from him shall be written upon the dust; to begin well, and not to proceed, is
but to aspire to a higher pitch, that the fall may be the more desperate. Hos.
14.4.
Backsliding is a wounding sin. Ephesians. 6.11. -- 18
You read of no arms for the back, though you do for the breast: He that is
but seemingly good, will prove at last exceeding bad, 2 Timothy 3.13. they wax
worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

The Wolf, though he often dissembles, and closely, hides his nature, yet he
will one time or other show himself to be a Wolf. Comers make a greater blaze
than fixed stars.


In the days of Hadrian the Emperor, there was one Bencosby, who gathering a
multitude of Jews together, called himself Ben-cocuba, the son of a star,
applying that prophecy to himself, Number. 23.17. but his mask was taken off, his
Hypocrisy discovered, and he found to be Burchosaba, the son of a lie; this
age has afforded many such monsters, but their folly is discovered, and their
practices ahborred. This was the young man's commendation in the text, That
there was found in him some real good toward the Lord.

Use 2.
2 This truth looks sowerly and sadly upon such young men, who are so far from
having good things in them toward the Lord, that they give themselves up to
those youthful lusts and vanities that are ^^monouring, provoking, and
displeasing to the Lord, who roar and revel, and gad and game, and dice, and
drink, and drab, and what (...) these make work with a witness for repentance,
or Hell, or the Physician of souls. I shall but touch upon the evils of youth,
and then come to that which is mostly intended.

1 The first evil that most properly attends youth, (...) 3.6.
is pride, pride of heart, pride of apparel, pride of parts; young men are apt
to ^e proud of health, strength, friends, relations, wit, wealth, wisdom: two
things are very rare, the one is to see a young man humble, and watchful, and
the other is to see an old man contented, and cheerful. Bernard says, that
pride is the rich man's cousen, and experience every day speaks out pride to be
the young man's cousen. God (says one) had three sons, Lucifer, Adam, and
Christ; the first aspired to be like God in power, and was therefore thrown
down from Heaven; Pride cannot c^^^be so high, but Justice will sit above.
the second to be like him in knowledge, and was therefore deservedly driven
out of Eden, when young the third did altogether i(...)te and follow him in his
goodness, mercy, and humility, and by so doing, obtained an everlasting
inheritance.

Remember this young men, and as you would get a paradise, and keep a paradise,
get humble, and keep humble. Pride is an evil that puts men upon all manner of
evil. Accius the Poet, though he were a dwarf, yet would be pictured tall of
stature. Psaphon a proud Sybian, would needs be a God, and having caught some
birds, he taught them to speak and prattle, The great god Psaphon. Menecrates
a proud Physician, wrote thus to King Philip, Menecrates a god, to Philip a
King. Proud Simon in Lucian, having got a little wealth, changed his name (from
Simon to Simonides) for that there were so many beggars of his kin, and set
the house on fire wherein he was born, because no body should point at it.
What sad evils Pharachs pride, and Hamans pride, and Herod's pride and
Belshazzars pride put them upon, I shall not now mention. Ah young men, young
men! had others a window to look into your breasts, (...) an old woman ^^^ing
(...) ^ormity (...) a glass went mad, etc.
or did your hearts stand where your faces do, you would even be afraid of
your selves, you would loathe and abhor your selves. Ah! young men, young men,
as you would have God to keep house with you, as you would have his mind and
secrets made known to you, as you would have Christ to delight in you, and the
spirit to dwell in you, as you would be honored among Saints, and attended,
and guarded by Angels, get humble, and keep humble. Tertullians Council to the
young Gallants of those times, was excellent, Tert. de Gult. Jam. Cap. 13.
cloth your selves (said he) with the silk of piety, with the satin of
sanctity, and with the purple of modesty. So shall you have God himself to be
your Suitor.

The second evil that Youth is subject to, is, Eccl. 11.9 2 Samuel 13.23. ^^^ 29
(...). Pleasure is the bait of sin, says Plato.
sensual pleasures and delights, Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes. The wise man by an Ironical concession bids him
rejoice. etc. Sin, etc. thou art wilful, and resolved upon taking thy pleasure,
go on, take thy course, this he speaks by way of mockage, and bitter scoff,
etc. but know thou that for all these things, God will bring thee into
judgment. So Sampson made a feast; Judge. 14.10
for so used the Young men to do, the hearts of young men usually are much
given up to pleasure. I have read of a young man who was very much given up to
pleasures, he standing by St. Ambrose, and seeing his excellent death, turned
to other young men by him, and said, Oh! that I might live with you, and dye
with him. Sensual pleasures are like to those Locusts, Rev. 9.7 the crowns upon
whose heads, are said to be only as it were such, or such in appearance, and
like Gold, but verse. 10 it is said, there were (not as it were, They were much
out that held pleasure to be man's sum^um bonum.
but) stings in their tails. Sensual pleasures are but seeming, and appearing
pleasures, but the pains that attend them are true and real; he that delights
in sensual pleasures, shall find his greatest pleasures, become his bitterest
pains. The Heathens looked upon the back parts of pleasure, and saw it going
away from them, and leaving a sling behind. Pleasures pass away as soon as
they have wearied out the body, and leave it as a bunch of grapes, whose juice
has been pressed out; which made one to say, ( Nulla major voluptas, quam
voluptatis fastidium) I see no greater pleasure in this world, than the
contempt of pleasure. Julian though an Apostate, yet professed, that the
pleasures of the body were far below a great spirit. And Tully says, he is not
worthy of the name of man ( qui unum diem velit esse in voluptate,) that would
entirely spend one whole day in pleasures, it is better not to desire pleasures
than to enjoy them. Eccl. 2.2
I said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth what do thou? The interrogation
bids a challenge to all the masters of mirth, to produce any one satisfactory
fruit which it affords, if they could. Xerxes being weary of all pleasures,
promised rewards to the inventers of new pleasures, which being invented, he
nevertheless remained unsatisfied. As a Be flies from flower to flower, and
is not satisfied, and as a sick man removes from one bed to another, from one
seat to another, from one chamber to another, for ease, and finds none. So men
given up to sensual pleasures, go from one pleasure to another, but can find no
content, no satisfaction in their pleasures. The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, Eccl. 1.^
nor the ear filled with hearing. There is a curse of unsatisfiableness lies
upon the creature, honors cannot satisfy the ambitious man, nor riches the
covetous man; nor pleasures the voluptuous man; man cannot take off the
weariness of one pleasure by another, for after a few evaporated minutes are
spent in pleasures, the body presently fails the mind, and the mind the
desire, and the desire the satisfaction, and all the man. Pleasures are Junos
in the pursuit, and but clouds in the enjoyment; Pleasure is a beautiful
Harlot, sitting in her chariot, whose four wheels are Pride, Gluttony, lust,
and idleness; the two horses are prosperity and abundance, the two drivers are
Idleness and Security, her attendants and followers are guilt, grief, late
repentance, (if any) and often death and ruin; many great men, and many strong
men, and many rich men, and many hopeful men, Becanus says, that the fruit of
the tree of knowledge is sweet, but in the end it breeds choler, so do worldly
pleasures.
and many young men, have come to their ends by her; but never any enjoyed full
satisfaction and content in her.

Ah! Young men, Young men, avoid this harlot, and come not near the door of her
house. And as for lawful pleasures let me only say this, it is your Wisdom
only to touch them, to taste them, and to use them as Mithridates used poison,
to fortify your selves against casual extremities and maladies: when Mr. Roger
Ascham asked the Lady Jane Gray, how she could loose such pastime, her father
with the Duchess being a hunting in the Park; Smilingly answered, all the
sport in the Park is but a shadow of that pleasure I find in this book,
having a good book in her hand. Augustine before his conversion could not tell
how to live without those pleasures which he delighted much in, but when his
nature was changed, and his heart graciously turned to the Lord, O how sweet
(says he) is it to be without those former sweet delights.

Ah! Young men, when once you come to experience the goodness and sweetness
that is in the Lord, and in his word, and ways, you will then sit down, and
grieve that you have spent more Wine in the Cup, than Oil in the Lamp. There
are no pleasures so delighting, so satisfying, so ravishing, so engaging, and
s^ abiding, as those that springs from union, and communion with God, as those
that flows from a sense of interest in God, and from an humble and a holy
walking with God.

The third sin of youth is rashness, they many times know little, and fear
less, and so are apt rashly to run on, and run out often to their hurt,
Aristot. Polit.
but more often to their hazard. Tit. 2.6.
Exhort young men to be sober-minded, or discreet. They are apt to be rash, to
be hot spurs. As you may see in Rehoboams young Counselors, who counseled
him to tell the people (that groaned under their burdens) that his little
finger should be thicker than his Fathers loins, 1 King. 12.8, 9, 10, 11.
and that he would add to their yoke; and that whereas his Father had
chastized them with whips, he would chastize them with Scorpions; (this rash
counsel proved Rehoboams ruin; yea David himself, though a good man, yet being
in his warm blood, and young, how sadly was he overtaken with rashness. As the
Lord God of Israel lives, 1 Samuel 25.34, 35. Diis proximus ille est, quem
ratio, non ira movet. Sen. He is next to God, whom reason not anger moves.
(says he) except thou had hastened, and come to meet me, surely there had
not been left unto Nabal, by to morrow light, any that pisseth against the
wall. And this he binds with an oath; because the Master was foolishly
wilful, the innocent servants must all be woeful. And because Nabal had been
niggardly of his bread, David would be prodigal of his blood. Ah how unlike a
Christian! yea how below a man does David carry it, when his blood is up, and
he a captive to rashness, and passion. Rashness will admit of naught for
reason, but what unreasonable self shall dictate for reason; as sloth seldom
brings actions to good birth, so rashness makes them always abortive, ere
well formed. A rash spirit is an ungodlike spirit; a rash spirit is a weak
spirit, it is an effeminate spirit. A man of understanding is of an excellent
spirit, Prove. 17.27.
or as the Hebrew will bear, is of a cool spirit, not rash and hot, ready at
every turn to put out his soul in wrath. Rashness unmans a man, it will put a
man upon things below manhood. Herostratus (a hot spur) an obscure base fellow
did in one night by fire destroy the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, which was two
hundred and twenty years in building of all Asia, at the cost of so many
Princes, and beautified with the labors and cunning of so many excellent
workmen; the truth is, there would be no end should I discover the many sad
and great evils that are ushered into the world by that one evil, Rashness,
which usually attends youth, etc. and therefore young men decline it, and arm
your selves against it, etc.

The fourth sin that ordinarily attends on youth, is mocking, and scoffing at
Religious men, and Religious things, they were young ones that scoffingly and
scornfully said to the Prophet, Go up thou bald-head, 2 King. 2.23, 24. Job
30.1.12, 13, 14, 15.
go up thou baldhead. And the young men derided and mocked Job. But now they
that are younger than I, have me in derision; whose Fathers I would have
disdained, to have set with the dogs of my flock. Upon my right hand rise the
youth, they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their
destruction, etc. And Oh that this age! did not afford many such Monsters, who
are notable, who are infamous in this black Art of scoffing and deriding the
people of God, and the ways of God. The Athenians once scoffed at Sylla's
wife, and it had well nigh cost the razing of their City, he was so provoked
with the indigninitie, and will you think it safe to scoff at the people of
God, who are the Spouse of Christ, Rev. 21. -- Zach. 2.5. Deuteronomy. 32.9. Isa.
19.25. Joel. 2.17. Psalm. 33.12. Isa. 62.3.
who are as the apple of his eye, who are the signet on his right hand, his
portion, his pleasant portion, his inheritance, his Jewels, his royal Diadem?
Ah young men, young men, will you seriously consider how sadly, and sorely he
has punished other scoffers and mockers? and by his Judgments on them, be
warned never to scoff at the people of God, or his ways more. Julian the
Emperor was a great scoffer of Christians, but at last he was struck with an
arrow from Heaven, that made him cry out ( vicisti Galilee) thou Galilean
(meaning our Savior Christ) have overcome me. Felix for one malicious scoff,
did nothing day and night but vomit blood, till his unhappy soul was separated
from his wretched body Pherecydes was consumed by Worms alive, for giving
Religion but a nickname. Lucian for barking against Religion like a dog, was by
the just Judgments of God devoured of dogs. Remember these dreadful judgments
of God on scoffers, and if you like them, then mock on, scoff on, but know,
that justice will at last be even with you, nay above you.

The fifth and last evil (that I shall mention) that attends and waits on
youth, is lustfulnesse, wantonness, which occasioned aged Paul to caution his
young Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.22.
to flee youthful lusts. Timothy was a chaste, and chastened piece; he was
much sanctified and mortified, his graces were high, and corruptions low, he
walked up and down this world, with dying thoughts, and with a weak
distempered, declining, dying body; his heart was in Heaven; and his foot in
the grave, and yet youth, is such a slippery age, that Paul commands him to
fly, to post from youthful lusts; though Timothy was a good man, a weak sickly
man, a mavelous temperate man, drinking Water rather than Wine, yet he was
but a man, yea a young man; and therefore Paul's counsel and command is, that he
flees youthful lusts. And Solomon, who had sadly experienced the slipperinesse
of youth, gives this counsel. Put away the evils of thy flesh, Eccles. 11.10
for childhood and youth are vanity. He was a young man that followed the
Harlot to her house; Prove. 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
he was young in years, and young in knowledge ( Salazer upon the words says,
that was a happy age that afforded but one simple young man among many, whereas
late times afford greater store. Ah! too many of the youths of this age, in
stead of flying from youthful lusts, they post and pursue after youthful lusts.
Chrysostom speaking of youth, says, it is ( difficilem, jactabilem, Chrysostom.
Homil. 1. Ad populum.
fallibilem, vehementissimisque egentem fraenis) hard to be ruled, easy to be
drawn away, apt to be deceived, and standing in need of very violent reins.

The Ancients did picture youth like a young man naked, Lapide.
with a vail over his face, his right hand bound behind him, his left hand
loose, and Time behind him pulling one thread out of his vail every day,
intimating that young men are void of knowledge, and blind, unfit to do good,
ready to do evil, till Time by little and little make them wiser. Well young
man, remember this, that the least sparklings and kindlings of lusts, will
first or last cost thee groans and griefs, tears and terrors enough. These five
are the sins that usually are waiting and attending on youth, but from these
the young man in the text, was by grace preserved, and secured, which is more
than I dare affirm of all, into whose hands this treatise shall fall. But
though these five are the sins of youth, yet they are not all the sins of
youth, for youth is capable of, Other sins attends youth as 1 Ignorance. 1 Cor.
14 20. 2 Falsehood, Psalm. 58.3. 3 Excessive love of liberty. 4 Impatience of
councils and reproofs. Jer. 31.18, 19. 5 Impudency. Isa. 3.5. 6 A trifling
spirit. Eccles. 11.10. 7 Prodigality. Use.
and subject to all other sins whatsoever, but these are the special sins that
most usually waits and attends on young men, when they are in the spring, and
morning of their youth.

I shall now hasten to the main use that I intend to stand upon, and that is an
use of Exhortation to all young persons.

Ah sirs! as you tender the glory of God, the good of your bodies, the joy of
your Christian friends, and the salvation of your own souls; be exhorted and
persuaded to be really good betimes. It was the praise and honor of Abijah,
that there was found in him some good thing toward the Lord in the Primrose of
his childhood. Oh that it might be your honor and happiness! to be really
good betimes; that it might be to you a praise, and a name, that in the
morning of your youth you have begun to seek the Lord, and to know and love the
Lord, and to get an interest and propriety in the Lord; now that this
Exhortation may stick and take;

Encouragements to Young men
I beseech you seriously to weigh and ponder these following motives, or
considerations.

First, 1. Motive.
consider, It is an honor to be good betimes. A young Saint is like the
morning star; he is like a pearl in a gold Ring. It is mentioned as a singular
honor to the believing Jews, that they first trusted in Christ, that we
should be to the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1.12.
who first trusted in Christ; this was their praise, their crown, that they
were first converted and turned to Christ, and Christianity. So Paul mentioning
Andronicus and Junia, does not omit this circumstance of praise and honor,
Romans 16.7.
that they were in Christ before him. Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen,
and my fellow prisoners, who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in
Christ before me.

And so it was the honor of the house of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 16.15.
that they were the first fruits of Achaia, it was their glory that they were
the first that received and wellcomed the Gospel in Achaia. It Is a greater
honor for a young man to out-wrastle sin, Satan, temptation, the world, and
lusts, than ever Alexander the Great could attain unto. 2 Samuel 19.15.
It was Judah his praise and honor, that they were first in fetching home David
their King.

Ah! Young men and women, it will be your eternal praise and honor, if you
shall before others, if you shall be the first among many, who shall know the
Lord, and seek the Lord, who shall receive the Lord, and embrace him, who shall
cleave to the Lord, and serve him, who shall honor the Lord, and obey him, who
shall delight in the Lord, and walk with him. The Romans built Virtues and
Honors Temple close together, to show, that the way to honor was by virtue,
and indeed there is no crown to that which goodness sets upon a man's head, all
other honor is fading and withering. Adonibezeck a mighty Prince, Judge. 1.7
is suddenly made fellow commoner with the Dogs. Dan. 4.28
And Nebuchadnezzar a mighty conqueror turned a grazing among the oxen And
Herod reduced from a conceited God, Act. 12.23
to be the most loathsome of men, living carrion, arrested by the vilest of
creatures, upon the suit of his affronted Creator. Est 7.10.
And Haman feasted with the King one day, and made a feast for Crows the next.
I might tell you of Bajazet, and Belisarius, two of the greatest Commanders in
the world, and many others, who have suddenly fallen from the top of worldly
honor and felicity, into the greatest contempt and misery, but I shall not at
this time: But that honor that arises from men's being gracious betimes, is
such honor that the world can neither give nor take, it is honor, it is a
Crown that will still be green, and flourishing, it is honor that will bed
and board with a man, that will abide with a man under all trials and changes,
that will to the grave, that will to heaven with a man.

Ah Sirs! It is no small honor to you, who are in the spring and morning of
your days, that the Lord has left upon record several instances of his Love
and delight in young men; 1 Samuel 16.11, 12, 13
he chose David a younger brother, and passes by his elder brothers; he
frowns upon Esau, Romans 9.12, 13
and passes by his door, and sets his love and delight upon Jacob the younger
brother; he kindly and lovingly accepts of Abels person and sacrifice, Genesis
4.3, 4, 5, 6
and rejects both Cains person and sacrifice, though he was the elder brother.
Among all the Disciples, John 13.23
John was the youngest and the most and best beloved. There was but one young
man that came to Christ, Mar. 10.19, 20, 21.
and he came not aright, and all the good that was in him, was but some moral
good, and yet Christ loved him, with a love of pity and compassion, (...)
the Greek word signifies to speak friendly, and deal gently with one; and so
did Christ with him, all which should exceedingly encourage young men to be
good betimes, to be gracious in the morning of their youth, no way to true
honor like this, but

Secondly, The sacrifices in the Law were young Lambs, and young Kids, to show
that Christ our sacrifice should dye and suffer for our sins in the flower of
his age.
Consider Christ loved poor Sinners, and gave himself for them when he was in
the prime of his age (being supposed to be about thirty and three) and will
you put him off with the worst of your time?

Ah! Young men, young men, Christ gave himself up to death, he made himself an
offering for your sins, for your sakes, when he was in the prime and flower of
his age, and why then should you put off Christ to old age? Did he dye for Sin
in the prime of his age? and will not you dye to sin in the prime of your
age? Did he offer himself for you in the spring and morning of his years? and
will not you offer up your selves to him in the spring and morning of your
years? Romans 12.1, 2
O give not Christ cause to say, I dyed for you betimes! but you have not lived
to me betimes, I was early in my suffering for you, but you have not been
early in your returning to me, I made haste to complete your redemption, but
you have made no haste to make sure your vocation, and election: I stayed not,
2 Pet. 1.10
I lingered not, but soon suffered what I was to suffer, and quickly did what
was to be done for your eternal welfare, but you have stayed and lingered (like
Lot in Sodom) and have not done what you might have done in order to your
everlasting good, Genesis 19.16
in the Prime-rose of my days I sweat for you, I wept for you, I bled for you,
I hung on the cross for you, I bore the wrath of my father for you; but you
have not in the Primrose of your days sweat under the sense of divine
displeasure; nor wept over your sins, nor mourned over me whom you have so
often grieved and pierced; Zach. 12.10
I could not be quiet nor satisfied till I had put you into a capacity, into a
possibility of Salvation, and yet you are well enough quieted and satisfied,
though you do not know whether ever you shall be saved.

Ah Sirs! how sad would it be with you, if Jesus Christ should secretly thus
expostulate with your consciences in this your day.

Oh! how terrible would it be with you, if Christ should thus visibly plead
against you in his great day. Ah! Young men, young men and women, who, but
souls much left of God, blinded by Satan, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4
and hardened in sin, can hear Jesus Christ speaking thus to them? I suffered
for Sinners betimes, I laid down a ransom for souls betimes, I pacified my
fathers wrath betimes, I satisfied my fathers justice betimes, I merited grace
and mercy for Sinners betimes, I brought in an everlasting righteousness upon
the world betimes, etc. I say who can hear Jesus Christ speaking thus, and his
heart not fall in love and league with Christ, and his soul not unite to
Christ, and resign to Christ, and cleave to Christ, and for ever be one with
Christ, except it be such that are for ever left by Christ? Well, remember this
( Quanto pro nobis vilior, tanto nobis charior) the more vild Christ made
himself for us, the more dear he ought to be unto us.

Ah! Young men, remember this, when Christ was young he was tempted and tried,
when he was in the morning of his days, his wounds were deep, his burden
weighty, Nolo vivere sine vulnere, cum te video vulneratum. Bonaventur Oh my
G^^, as long as I see thy wounds, I will never live without wound
his cup bitter, his sweat painful, his agony and torment, above conception,
beyond expression; when he was young, that blessed head of his was crowned with
thorns, and those eyes of his that were purer than the Sun, were put out by
the darkness of death, and those ears of his which now hears nothing but
Hallelujahs of Saints and Angels, were filled with the blasphemies of the
multitude, and that blessed beautiful face of his which was fairer than the
sons of men, was spit on by beastly filthy wretches, Aut Deus naturae pa titur,
aut mundi machina dissolvitur, said Dionysius Alexandrinus. Either the God of
nature, suffered, or the frame of the world will be dissolved.
and that gracious mouth and tongue that spoke as never man spoke, was
slandered and accused of blasphemy, and those hands of his which healed the
sick, which gave out pardons, which swayed a Scepter in heaven, and another on
earth, were nailed to the Cross, and those feet that were beautiful upon the
mountains, that brought the glad tidings of peace and salvation into the World,
and that were like unto fine brass, were also nailed to the cross; All these
great and sad things did Jesus Christ suffer for you in the prime and flower of
his days, and Oh! what an unspeakable provocation should this be to all young
ones, to give up themselves betimes to Christ, to serve, love, honor, and obey
him betimes, even in the spring and morning of their youth?

Let the thoughts of a crucified Christ (says one) be never out of your mind,
let them be meat and drink unto you, let them be your sweetness and
consolation, your honey, and your desire, your reading and your meditation,
your life, death, and resurrection.

The third motive or consideration to provoke you to begin to be good betimes,
is this, viz. The Philosopher once said ( solus sapiens dives) only the wise
man, is the rich man
that it is the best and choicest way in the world, to be rich in gracious
experiences betimes, (which are the best riches in all the world) as he that
sets up for himself betimes, is in the most hopeful way to be rich betimes: so
he that is good in good earnest betimes, he is in the ready way, the highway
of being rich in grace, and rich in goodness, they usually prove men of great
observation, and great experience. God loves to show these his beauty, Psalm.
63.1, 2. Exodus 3.3.19.22. etc. Psalm. 65.11, 12
and his glory in his sanctuary. He delights to cause his glory and his
goodness to pass before such; these shall find all his paths drop marrow and
fatness, for these the Lord of hosts will make a feast of fat things, Ifa. 25.6
a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the
lees well refined; these shall have all manner of pleasant fruits laid up at
their gates for their well beloved; Can. 7.13
none have so many choice pledges of Christ's love, nor so many sweet kisses of
Christ's mouth, nor so many embraces in Christ's arms, as those souls that are
good betimes; O the grace, the goodness, the sweetness, the fatness that
Christ is still a droping into their hearts; Christ will make their hearts his
largest treasury, he will lay up most of his heavenly treasure in their souls;
Earthly Riches are full of Poverty. Divitiae corporales paupertatis plenae sunt.
there he will store up mercies new and old; there he will treasure up all
plenty, rariety, and variety; there he will lay up all that heart can wish, or
need require. O the many drops of myrrh that falls from Christ's fingers upon
their hearts! O the many secrets that Christ reveals in their ears! O the many
love letters that Christ sends to these! O the many visits that he gives to
these! O the turns, the walks that he has in Paradise with these! there are
none in the World for experience, and intelligence to these. Ah! Young men,
young men, as you would be rich in the best riches, begin to be good betimes,
as there is no riches to spiritual riches, so there is no way to be rich in
these riches, but by beginning to be good (in good earnest) betimes.

As for worldly riches, If there were any happiness in riches, the Gods would
not want them says Seneca.
Philosophers have contemned them, and preferred a contemplative life above
them; and shall not Christians much more, the Prophet calls them thick clay,
which will fooner break the back than lighten the heart, they cannot better the
soul, they cannot enrich the soul. Ah! how many thredbare souls are to be found
under silken cloaks and gowns, how often are worldly riches like hang-men, they
hide men's faces with a covering, that they may not see their own end, and then
they hang them. And if they do not hang you, they will shortly leave you, they
make themselves wings and fly away; when one was a commending the riches and
wealth of Merchants, I do not love that wealth said a Heathen that hangs upon
ropes, if they break, the ship miscarrieth, and all is lost. He is rich enough
(says Jerome) that lacks not bread, and high enough in dignity that is not
forced to serve.

This worlds wealth that men so much desire,
May well be likened to a burning fire,
Whereof a little can do little harm,
But profit much our bodies well to warm
But take too much and surely thou shall burn,
So too much wealth, to too much woe does turn.
It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bauyer, Emperor of Germany (hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes quae cum naufragio simul enatent) such goods are worth
getting and owning, as will not sink or wash away if a shipwreck happen, but
will wade and swim out with us, we see such are the spiritual riches that will
attend those who in the spring and morning of their youth, shall know the Lord,
and serve the Lord, and get an interest in the Lord, and thus much for the
third motive.

The fourth motive to provoke young ones to be really good betimes, is, to
consider that the present time, the present day is the only season that you
are sure of, time past cannot be recalled, and time to come cannot be
ascertained. Heb. 3.15
To day if you hear his voice harden not your hearts. Behold now is the
acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6.2 The whole Earth hangs on a point, so does heaven
and eternity on an inch of opportunity.
now is the day of Salvation; some there be that trifle away their time, and
fool away their souls and their salvation; to prevent this, the Apostle beats
upon the (...), the present opportunity, because if that be once past, there is
no recovering of it; therefore as the Mariner takes the first fair wind to
sail; and as the Merchant takes his first opportunity of buying and selling,
and as the Husbandman takes the first opportunity of sowing and reaping, So,
should young men take the present season; the present day (which is their day)
to be good toward the Lord, to seek him, and serve him, and not to post off
the present season, for they know not what another day, another hour, another
moment may bring forth: that door of grace that is open to day, may be shut to
morrow; that golden Scepter of mercy that is held forth in the Gospel this day,
may be taken in the next day; that love that this hour is upon the bare knee,
entreating and beseeching young men to break off their Sins by repentance, to
return to the Lord, Isa. 27.4, 5
to lay hold on his strength, and be at peace with him, may the next hour be
turned into wrath. Ah! the noble motions that have been lost, the good purposes
that have withered, the immortal souls that have miscarried, by putting off the
present season, the present day. Paul discoursing before Felix of
righteousness, Act. 24.25
temperance and judgment to come, and in this discourse striking at two special
vices that Felix was particularly guilty of, he falls a trembling, and being
upon the wrack to hear such doctrine, he bids Paul depart for that time, and he
would call for him at a convenient season, here Felix neglects his present
season, and we never read that ever after this, he found a convenient time or
season to hear Paul make an end of the subject he had begun; So Christ made a
very fair offer to the Young man in the Gospel, Go and sell that thou have,
Mat. 21, 22, 23, 24
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, here Christ
offers heavenly treasures for earthly treasures; unmixt treasures for mixed
treasures; perfect treasures for imperfect trealures; satisfying treasures for
unsatisfying treasures; lasting treasures for fading treasures; but the young
man slips his opportunity, his season, and goes away sorrowful; and we never
read more of him.

Ah! Young men, young men, do not put off the present season, Often consider
what the damned would give (were it in their hands) for one season of grace,
for one opportunity of mercy.
do not neglect the present day, there is no time yours, but the present time;
no day yours but the present day; and therefore do not please your selves, and
feed your selves with hopes of time to come, and that you will repent but not
yet; and lay hold on mercy, but not yet; and give up your selves to the Lord
next week, next mouth, or next year; for that God that has promised you mercy,
and favor, upon the day of your return, he has not promised to prolong your
lives till that day comes, when a Soldier was brought before Lamacus a
Commander, for a mis-behaviour, and pleaded he would do so no more, Lamacus
answered ( non licet in bello his peccare) no man must offend twice in War; So
God (especially in these Gospel days, wherein the motions of Divine justice are
more smart and quick, than in former days) happily will not suffer men twice to
neglect the day of grace, Heb. 3.2.
and let slip the seasons of mercy.

Ah young men! young men, you say you will be good toward the Lord before you
die, but if you are not good toward the Lord to day, you may dye to morrow;
nay justice may leave him to be his own executioner to morrow, who will not
repent, nor seek the Lord to day. Otho the Emperor slew himself with his own
hands, but slept so soundly the night before, Plutarch reports the like of
Cato.
that the grooms of his Chamber heard him snort.

Young men, I will suppose you to be good accountants; now if you please to
count the number, and mark the age of the Sacrifices in the old Testament, you
shall find more Kids and Lambs offered than Goats, and old Sheep; You have no
lease of your lives, you are not sure that you shall live to Isaacks age, Genesis
27.1.
to live till your eyes wax dim; you are not sure that you shall live to Jacobs
years, and die, Heb. 11.21.
leaning upon the top of a staff. Job 36.14.
You read of them who die in their youth, and whose lives are among the
unclean. Slip not the present season, neglect not this day of grace; let not
Satan keep your souls and Christ any longer asunder, by telling of you, As out
of the boughs of a tree are taken wedges to cleave it in pieces; so out of our
own lusts Satan works Engines to destroy us.
that you are too young; that hereafter will be time enough. Austin tells us,
that by this very temptation the Devil kept him off from receiving of Christ,
from closing with Christ Seven years together: he could no sooner think of
inquiring after Christ, of getting an interest in Christ, of leaving off his
sinful courses, etc. but Satan would be still a suggesting, thou art too young
to leave thy drunkenness, thou art too young to leave thy Dalilahs, to leave
thy Harlots; till at last he cried out, how long shall I say it is too soon?
why may I not repent to day? and lay hold on Jesus Christ to day? etc. Ah young
men! this is your day, this is your season, if you will not now hearken and
obey, you may perish for ever. Caesar had a letter given him by Artemidorus,
that morning he went to the Senate, wherein notice was given him of all the
conspiracy of his murderers; so that with ease, he might have prevented his
death; but neglecting the reading of it, was slain; he slipped his season, and
dies for it. Ah! how many for sliping gracious seasons and opportunities have
died for ever? Soul-opportunities are more worth than a thousand worlds; mercy
is in them, grace and glory is in them, heaven and eternity is in them.

Fifthly, To provoke you to be good betimes, consider, how just it is with God
to reserve the dregs of his wrath for them, who reserve the dregs of their
days for him: how can a husband embrace that wife in her old age, who has
spent all the time of her youth, in following after strangers? Will any man
receive such into his service, who has all their days served his enemies? and
received such wounds, blows, and bruses, that renders them unfit for his
service?

Ah young men! young men, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
do not thus foolishly and unwisely requite the Lord, for all his patient
waiting, his gracious wooing, and his merciful dealing with you. Ah! do not put
off God to old age, Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda. Horatius. Many are the
inconveniences that do encompass an old man.
for old, lame, and sick Sacrifices rarely reach as high as Heaven. Is not old
age very unteachable; in old age are not men very unapt to take in, and as
unapt to give out? In old age (oftentimes) men are men, and no men, they have
eyes, but see not, ears, but hear not, tongues, but speak not, feet, but walk
not. An aged man is but a moving Anatomy, or a living Mortuary; now how
unlovely, how uncomely, how unworthy, nay, how incensing, how provoking a thing
must this needs be, The reproach of the evil of wickedness is not to be
added to old age (Solet enim senectus esse deformis, infirma, obliviosa,
edeutula, luerosa, indocilis, and molesta) says Plutarch, in Apothegm. Romans
For old age uses to be deformed, weak, forgetful, toothlesse, covetous,
unteachable, unquiet.
when men will dally with God, and put him off till their doting days have
overtaken them; till their spring is past, their Summer overpast, and they
arrived at the fall of the leaf, yea till winter color have stained their
heads with gray and hoary hairs. How provoking this is, you may see in those
sad words of Jeremiah, Jer. 22.21, 22. I spoke unto thee in thy proserity, but
thou said, I will not hear; this has been thy manner from thy youth, that
thou obeyest not my voice: But will God put up this at their hands? no,
therefore it follows in the next verse, Surely thou shall be ashamed and
confounded for all thy wickedness.

Oh that young men would let this Scripture lie warm every morning upon their
hearts, that so they may not dare to put off God, and provoke him to their own
confusion; though you are young and in your strength, yet, are you stronger
than God; can you make your party good with him? if you will needs be a
provoking, provoke them that are your matches, and do not contend with him that
is mightier than you, that can command you into nothing, or into Hell at
pleasure.

Sixthly, consider, that the sooner you are good on earth, the greater will be
your reward in Heaven; the sooner you are gracious, Psalm. 58.11. Genesis 15.1.
Psalm. 19.11.
the more at last you will be glorious; you read in the Scripture of a reward,
of a great reward, Matthew. 5.12. Heb. 10.35. John 2.8.
and of a full reward; now those that are good betimes, that know, seek, serve,
and love the Lord in the spring, and morning of their youth, they are in the
fairest way of gaining the greatest, and the fullest reward.

And this I shall make clear by that which follows.

First, The sooner any man begins to be really good, the more good he will do
in this world. Now the more good any man does on earth, the more glory he
shall have in Heaven. Therefore my beloved Brethren, 1 Cor. 15.58.
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as you know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Man's wages,
man's reward shall be according to his works; he that does most work here,
shall have most reward hereafter. God will at last proportion the one to the
other, 2 Cor. 9.6.
the reward to the work. He which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and
he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Though no man shall be
rewarded for his works; yet God will at last measure out happiness, and
blessedness to his people, Romans 2.5, 6, 7.
according to their service, faithfulness, diligence, and work in this world.
Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the full; glory is nothing
else but a bright constellation of graces, happiness, nothing but the
quintessence of holiness. Grace and glory differ (non specie, sed gradu) in
degree, not kind, as the learned speak. Grace and glory differ very little, the
one is the seed, the other is the flower; grace is glory militant, and glory is
grace triumphant; and a man may as well plead for equal degrees of grace in
this world, as he may plead for equal degrees of glory in the other world.
Surely the more grace here, the more glory hereafter; and the more work
Christians do on earth, the more glory they shall have in Heaven; and the
sooner men begin to be good, the more good they will do in this world, and the
more they do here, the more they shall have hereafter. Philosophers seem to
weigh our virtues with our vices, and according to the preponderation of
either, denominate us good, or bad, and so deliver us up to reward or
punishment.

No man can commend good works magnificently enough, (says Luther) for one
work of a Christian is more precious than Heaven and Earth, and therefore all
the world cannot sufficiently reward one good work. And in another place says
the same Author, If I might have my desire, I would rather choose the meanest
work of a Country Christian (or poor maid) than all the victories and triumphs
of Alexander the great, and of Julius Caesar.

And again, whatsoever the Saints do, though never so small and mean, it is
great and glorious, because they do all in faith, and by the word, says the
same Author. To prevent mistakes you must remember that the works that Jesus
Christ will reward at last, are supernatural works; they are 1 Works of God, 2
Wrought from God, 3 For God, 4 In God, 5 According to God; they are works that
flow from supernatural principles; and they are directed to supernatural ends,
and performed in a supernatural way; now the sooner a man begins to be good,
the more he will abound in these good works, and the more doubtless any man
abounds in such good works on earth; the greater reward he shall have in
heaven; yet it must not be forgotten, that the best actions; the best works of
Hypocrites, and all men out of Christ, are but (splendida peccata) fair and
shining sins, beautiful abominations. And as the Phoenix in Arabia gathers sweet
odoriferous sticks together, and then blows them with her wings, David made use
of his bow, but did not trust to his bow. The Dove made use of her wings, but
did not trust in her wings, but in the Ark.
and burns her self with them; so many a carnal professor, burns himself with
his own good works, that is, by his expecting and trusting to receive that by
his works, that is only to be received and expected from Jesus Christ. Though
all that man can do toward the meriting of Heaven, is no more than the lifting
up of a festraw toward the meriting of a Kingdom; yet such a proud piece man
is, that he is ready enough to say with proud Vega (Coelum gratis non
accipiam) I will not have Heaven of free cost. Merces non est debita, sed
gratuita.
A proud heart would fain have that of debt, which is merely of grace, and
desires that to be of purchase, which God has intended to be of free mercy;
which made one to lay, that he would swim through a Sea of Brimstome, that he
might come to Heaven at last; but he that swims not thither through the Sea of
Christ's blood, shall never come there; man must swim thither, not through
brimstone, but through blood, or he miscarries for ever.

2 Again, the sooner a man begins to be good, the more serviceable he will
be to others, and the more he will provoke others to good; now all the good
that you provoke others to, by counsel, or carriage, shall be put down to your
account (as all the sins that men provoke others to, is put down to their
accounts: 2 Samuel 12.8.9 Isa. 38.3 Neh. 13.14.
David did but send a Letter concerning the death of Uriah, and the charge
comes, thou have slain Uriah with the Sword) the more I stir up others to
sow, the more at last I shall reap; the sooner a man begins to be good, the
more good he will do, the more serviceable he will be in the Town or City
where he dwells, in the family where he lives, among his relations (wife,
children, kindred, servants, etc.) with whom he converses.

The sooner a man begins to be gracious, Synesius speaks of some who having a
treasure of rare abilities in them, would as soon part with their hearts as
their conceptions, but such are rather monsters than men.
the sooner and the more useful will his arts, his parts, his gifts, his
graces, his mercies, his experiences, his life, his labors, his prayers, his
counsels, his examples, be, to all that are with him, to all that are about him.

Lilmod Lelammed, we therefore learn that we may teach, is a Proverb among the
Rabbis. And I do therefore lay in, and lay up (says the Heathen) that I may
draw forth again, and lay out for the good of many.

Ah! Young men, Young men, as you would be useful and serviceable to many,
begin to be good betimes, and to lay in, and lay up, and lay out betimes, for
the profit and advantage of others. Augustine accounted nothing his own, that he
did not communicate to others. The Be does store her hive out of all sorts of
Flowers, for the common benefit. It Is a base and unworthy spirit, for a man to
make himself the center of all his actions; The very Heathen man could say,
that a man's Country, and his friends, and others, challenge a great part of
him; And indeed the best way to do our selves good, is to be a doing good to
others, the best way to gather, is to scatter; Memorable is the story of
Pyrhias a Merchant of Ithaca, who at Sea espying an aged man, a Captive in a
Pirates ship, took compassion of him, and redeemed him, and bought his
Commodities which the Pyrate had taken from him, which were certain barrels of
pitch; The old man perceiving, that not for any good service he could do him,
nor for the gain of that commodity, but merely out of charity and pity he had
done this, discovered a great mass of treasure hidden in the pitch; whereby the
Merchant in a very short time became very rich, at which very time God made
that word good, He that sows liberally; 2 Cor. 9.6
shall reap liberally, and that word, The liberal soul shall be made fat,
Prove. 11.25
and that word, The liberal devises liberal things, Isa. 32.8
and by liberal things shall he stand. It is fabled of Midas, that what ever he
touched he turned it into Gold, it is certain that a liberal hand, a liberal
heart turns all into gold, into gain, as Scripture and experience do abundantly
evidence: now if you put all these things together, nothing is more evident,
than that those that begin to be good betimes, are in the ready way, the high
way to be high in heaven, when they shall cease from breathing on earth; and
therefore young men as you would be high in heaven, as you would have a great
reward, a full reward, a massy weighty Crown, O labor to be good betimes!
labor to get acquaintance with the Lord, and an interest in the Lord, in the
spring and morning of your days.

The seventh Motive or consideration to provoke and incite you to be good
betimes, is, to consider that the Lord is very much affected, and taken with
your seeking of him, and following after him in the spring and morning of your
youth. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, I remember thee, Jer. 2.2
the kindness of thy Youth, the love of thine esspousals, when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.

Ah! how kindly, how sweetly did the Lord take this at their hands, that they
followed him in their youth, while their bones were full of marrow, while they
were strong and fit for service, while nature was fresh, lively and vigorous:
In the Law God called for the first of all things; Exodus 23.19
he required not only the first fruits, but the very first of the first; The
first of the first fruits of thy land, thou shall bring into the house of the
Lord thy God. God is the first being, the first good, and therefore deserves
the first of the first; and the best of the best; It Is truly said of God that
he is Omnia su per omnia.
the first and the best is not too good for him, who is goodness it self, God
in that of Leviticus 2.14. is so passionately set upon having the first of the
first, that he will not stay till the green ears of Corn be ripe, but will have
the green ears of corn dried in the fire, least he should loose his longing.

As many young women, and sickly children cannot stay till the fruit be ripe,
but must have it while it is green, even so says God, my heart, my desires,
are so vehemently set upon the first fruits, the first things, that I cannot
stay, I cannot satisfy my self without them, and what would God teach us by
all this, but to serve him with the first fruits of our age, the prim-rose of
our childhood, the morning of our youth. God has given you of the best, do
not put him off with the worst, with the worst of your time, the worst of your
days, the worst of your strength, least he swear in his wrath, that you shall
never enter into his rest.

The eighth Motive or Consideration to provoke you to be good betimes, to seek
and serve the Lord in the morning of your youth, is, Early Converts will never
have cause to say, as that despairing Pope said, the Cross could do him no
good, because he had so often sold it away.
to consider that this may be a special means to prevent many black
temptations, and an encouragement to withstand all temptations that you may
meet with from a tempting Devil, and a tempting World; an early turning to the
Lord will prevent many temptations to despair, many temptations to neglect the
means openly, to despise the means secretly: many temptations about the being
of God, the goodness, faithfulness, truth, and justice of God; temptations to
despair, temptations to lay violent hands on a man's self: temptations to
question all that God has said, and that Christ has suffered, arises many
times from men's delaying and putting off of God to the last, all which, with
many others; are prevented by a man's seeking and serving of the Lord in the
spring and morning of his youth. It is reported of the Hearts of Scythia, that
they teach their young ones to leap from bank to bank, from rock to rock, from
one turfe to another (by leaping before them) by which means when they are
hunted, no beast of prey can ever take them; so when persons exercise
themselves in godliness, when they are young, when they leap from one measure
of holiness to another, when they are in the morning of their days, Satan that
mighty hunter after souls, may pursue them with his temptations, Heb. 11 Genesis
39 Dan. 31. ult.
but he shall not overtake them, he shall not prevail over them. As you see in
Moses, Joseph, Daniel, and the three children, these knew the Lord, and gave up
themselves to the Lord in the prime, and Prime-rose of their Youth, and these
were all temptation-proof; Satan and the World pursued them, but could not
overtake them, when the Devil and the World had done their worst, the young
men's bows abode in strength, Genesis 49.23, 24
and their hands (to resist) were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of
Jacob, Ego non sum ego, said that young convert when tempted, I am not the man
that I was.

Luther tells of a young Virgin that used to resist all temptations with this,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian. Early Converts may say when tempted, as he,
tell me not Satan what I have been, but what I am and will be; or as he in
the like case, whatsoever I was, Bernard. Beza.
I am now in Christ, a new creature, and that is it which troubles thee; or,
as he, Augustine. Such as thou art now, I was once, but such as I am now, thou will never be, said Diogenes to a base fellow that told him, he had once been a
forger of money.
the more desperate my disease was, the more I admire the Physician. Yea thou
may yet strain it a peg higher, and say the greater my sins were, the
greater is my honor. As the Devils which once Mary Magdalen had, are mentioned
for her glory: when Pyrrhus tempted Fabritius the first day with an Elephant,
so huge and monstrous a beast as before he had not seen, the next day with
money and promises of honor; he answered, I fear not thy force, I am too wise
for thy fraud.

Ah! Young men, Young men, as you would be free from the saddest and darkest
temptations, and as you would be armed against all temptations, O labor as for
life, to be good betimes, seek and serve the Lord in the morning of your Youth,
no way like this for the preventing earthquakes, heart-quakes, stormy days, and
winter nights, etc.

The ninth Motive or Consideration to stir up young men to be good betimes, to
seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of their youth, is, to
consider the worth and excellency of souls.

A soul is a spiritual immortal substance, Luke 23.43 Mat. 10.28 Act. 7. ult.
it is capable of the knowledge of God, it is capable of union with God, of
communion with God, Phil. 1.23
and of a blessed and happy fruition of God.

Christ left his fathers bosom for the good of souls; Heb. 2.13, 14, 15, 16
he assumed man's nature for the salvatition of man's soul; Christ prayed for
souls, he sweat for souls, he wept for souls, he bled for souls, Isa. 63.3, 4
he hung on the Cross for souls, he trod the Wine Press of his fathers wrath
for souls, he dyed for souls; he rose again from death for souls, Ioh. 14.1,
2, 3
he ascended for souls, he intercedes for souls, and all the glorious
preparations that he has been a making in heaven this sixteen hundred years,
is for souls.

Ah! young men, young men, do not play the Courtier with your precious souls,
the Courtier does all things late, he rises late, dines late, sups late, goes
to bed late, repents late.

Ah Sirs! the good of your souls is before all, and above all other things in
the World, to be first regarded and provided for' and that partly because, O
anima Dei in signita imagine, desponsata fide, donata spiritu, Bern.
it is the best and more noble part of man, and partly because therein mostly,
and properly is the Image of God stamped, and partly because it is the first
converted, and partly because it shall be the first, and most glorified.

Ah! Young men, Young men, if they be worse than Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8
that make not provision for their families, what monsters are they, that make
not provision for their own souls? this will be bitterness in the end.

Caesar Borgias being sick to death, lamentingly said, when I lived I provided
for every thing but death, now I must dye, and am unprovided to dye, this was a
dart at his heart, and it will at last be a dagger at yours, who feast your
bodies, but starve your souls; who make liberal provision for your ignoble
part, but no provision for your more noble part; If they deserve a hanging, who
feast their slaves, and starve their Wives; that make provision for their
enemies, but none for their friends; James 4.2, 3 Hos. 7.13, 14
how will you escape hanging in hell, who make provision for every thing, yea
for your very lusts, but make no provision for your immortal souls? We hate
the Turks for selling Christians for Slaves, and what shall we think then of
those who sell themselves, their precious souls for toys and trifles that
cannot profit, who practically say, Callenuceus relates this story.
what once a profane Noble man of Naples verbally said, viz. that he had two
souls in his body, one for God, and another for whosoever would buy it.

Ah young men, young me^! do not pawn your souls, do not sell your souls, do
not exchange away your souls, do not trifle and fool away your precious souls,
they are Jewels more worth than a thousand worlds, yea than Heaven and earth;
if they are safe, all is safe; but if they are lost, all is lost; God, lost,
and Christ lost, and the society of glorious Angels and blessed Saints lost,
and Heaven lost, and that for ever. Grandensis tells of a woman that was so
affected with souls miscarryings, that she besought God to stop up the passage
into Hell with her soul and body, that none might have entrance.

Ah! that all young persons were so affected with the worth and excellency of
their souls, and so allarmed with the hazard and danger of loosing their
souls, as that they may in the spring and morning of their days, enquire after
the Lord, and seek him, and serve him with all their might, that so their
precious and immortal souls may be safe and happy for ever; but if all this
will not do, then in the last place

Tenthly, Consider, young men, that God will at last bring you to a reckoning,
he will at last bring you to judgment. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth,
Eccles. 11.9.
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all
these things, God will bring thee unto judgment. In these words you have two
things, 1 An ironical concession, he bids him rejoice, etc. he yields him
what he would have by an irony, by way of mockage, and bitter scoff. Now thou
art young, and strong, lively, and lusty, and thy bones are full of marrow;
thou art resolved to be proud, and scornful, to indulge the flesh, and to
follow thy delights, and pleasure; well take thy course if thou dare, or if
thou have a mind to it, Hierom still thought that that noise was in his ears
(surgite mort^i, and venite ad judicium) arise you dead, and come to judgment.
if thy heart be so set upon it. Rejoice in thy youth, etc. The second is a
commination, or a sad and severe praemonition. But know thou, that for all
these things, God will bring thee into judgment; will bring thee, these words
import two things, first, the unwillingnesse of youth to come to judgment;
secondly, the unavoidableness that youth must come to judgment; but how soon
you shall be brought to judgment, is only known to God.

Augustine confesses in one of his books, that as long as his conscience was
gnawed with the guilt of some youthful lust, he was once ensnared with, the
very hearing of a day of judgment, was even a Hell to him.

Histories tell us of a young man, who being for some capital offense condemned
to dye, grew gray in one nights space, and was therefore pitied, and spared.

Ah young men! young men, that the serious thoughts of this great day, might
put you upon breaking off the sins of your youth; and the dedicating of your
selves to the knowledge, love, and service of the Lord, in the spring and
flower of your days. An young men, consider the errors of your lives, the
wickedness of your hearts, the sinfulness of your ways, and that strickt
account that ere long you must be brought to before the Judge of all the World.

The Heathens themselves had some kind of dread, and expectation of such a
day; and therefore when Paul spoke of judgment to come, Felix trembled, though
a Heathen. The bringing into judgment is a thing which is known by reason,
Act. 24.25. The Philosophers had some dreams of a severe day of accounts; as
appears by Plato's Gorgi, as many passages in Tully, etc.
and is clear by the light of nature; wherefore in Austria one of the Nobles
dying, who had lived fourscore and thirteen years, and had spent all his life
in pleasures and delights, never being troubled with any infirmity, and this
being told to Frederick the Emperor, from hence says he, we may conclude
the souls immortality; for if there be a God that rules this world (as
Divines and Philosophers do teach) and that he is just, no one denies, surely
there are other places to which souls aster death do go, Eneas Sylvius.
and do receive for their deeds, either reward, or punishment, for here we
see, that neither rewards are given to the good, nor punishments to the evil.

Ah young men! 2 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11.
knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, and the terror of this day, Oh
that you would be persuaded to flee from the wrath to come, to cast away the
Idols of your souls, to repent and be converted in the Prim-rose of your
youth, that your sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19.
or else woe, woe to you that ever you were born. I have read a story of one,
who being risen from the dead, and being asked in what condition he was, he
made answer, no man does believe, no man does believe, no man does believe. And
being further asked what he meant by that repetition, he answered, no man does
believe, how exactly God examineth, how strictly God judges, how severely he
punishes. Oh that the ways of most young persons did not declare to all the
world that they do not, and that they will not believe the dead, and terror of
that day that will admit of no plea, nor place for Apology, or appeal; The
Turks have a tradition, and frantic opinion, that wicked men shall at the
great day carry their sins in latchels after their Captain Caine, but well
would it be for them, if this should be all their punishment in that great
day.
the highest and last Tribunal can never be appealed from, or repealed.

Now if for all that has been said, you are resolved to spend the flower of
your days, and the prime of your strength, in the service of sin and the
world, then know, that no tongue can express, no heart can conceive that
trouble of mind, that terror of soul, that horror of conscience that fear and
amazement, that weeping and wailing, that crying and roaring, that sighing and
groaning, that cursing and banning, that stamping and tearing, that wringing of
hands, and gnashing of teeth, that shall certainly attend you, when God shall
bring you into judgment for all your loosnesse, and lightness, for all your
wickedness, and wantonness, for all your profaneness, and baseness, for all
your neglect of God; your grieving the comforter, your trampling under foot the
blood of a Savior, for your dispising of the means, for your prizing Earth
above Heaven, and the pleasures of this world, above the pleasures that be at
Gods right hand. Chrysosteme speaking of this day, says, for Christ at this
day to say, depart from me, is a thing more terrible than a thousand hells,
Chrysostom. Hom -- ad Pop. Antioch.


Oh how will you wish in that day when your sins shall be charged on you, when
justice shall be armed against you, when conscience shall be gnawing within
you, when the world shall be a flaming fire about you, when the gates of
Heaven shall be shut against you, and the flame of Hell ready to take hold of
you, when Angels and Saints shall sit in judgment upon you, and for ever turn
their faces from you, when evil spirits shall be terrifying of you, and Jesus
Christ for ever disowning of you, how will you (I say) wish in that day that
you had never been born, or that you might now be unborn, or that your mothers
wombs had proved your Tombs? O how will you then wish to be turned into a
bird, a beast, a stock, a stone, a Toad, a Tree! O that our immortal souls were
mortal, O that we were nothing, Joan Damasc. et Author. Anonym. de quat.
Noviss. Impr^ss. Daven. Anno. 1494.
O that we were any thing but what we are.

I have read a remarkable story of a King, that was heavy and sad, and wept,
which when his brother saw, he asked him why he was so pensive? because
(says he) I have judged others, and now I must be judged my self; And why
(says his brother) do you so take on for this, it will (hapily) be a long
time ere that day come, and besides that, it is but a flight matter. The King
said little to it for the present. Now it was a custom in that Country when
any had committed Treason, there was a Trumpet sounded at his door in the night
time, and he was next day brought out to be executed, now the King commanded
a Trumpet to be sounded at his brothers door in the night time, who awakening
out of his Sleep, when he heard it, arose, and came quaking and trembling to
the King; How now says the King, what is the matter you are so affrighted, I am
says he attached of Treason, and next morning I shall be executed, why says
the King to him again, are you so troubled at that, knowing that you shall be
judged by your Brother, and for a matter that your Conscience tells you, you
are clear off, How much more therefore may I be afraid, seeing that God shall
judge me, and not in a matter that my conscience frees me off, but of that
whereof I am guilty; and beside this, if the worst come, is but a temporary
death you shall die, but I am liable to death eternal both of body and soul. I
will leave the Application to those young persons, that put this day afar off,
and whom no arguments will move to be good betimes, and to acquaint themselves
with the Lord in the morning of their youth.

But now to those young men and women who begin to seek, serve, and love the
Lord in the Primerose of their days, the day of judgment will be to them
(melodia in aure, ubilum in cord) like music in the ear and a jubilee in the
heart, Act. 3.19, 20, 21, 22. Mic. 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 19.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Mat. 25.34. to v. 41.
this day will be to them, a day of refreshing, a day of redemption, a day of
vindication, a day of coronation, a day of Consolation, a day of Salvation, it
will be to them a marriage day, a harvest day, a pay day, now the Lord will
pay them for all the Prayers they have made, for all the Sermons they have
heard, for all the tears they have shed, in this great day Christ will remember
all the individual offices of love and friendship showed to any of his, now he
will mention many things for their honor and comfort that they never minded,
now the least and lowest acts of love and pity toward his, shall be
interpreted as a special kindness showed to himself. Now the Crown shall be
set upon their heads, 2 Timothy 4.8 Mal. 3.17, 18
and the Royal Robe put upon their backs, now all the World shall see that
they have not served the Lord for naught: Now Christ will pass over all their
weaknesses, and make honorable mention of all the services they have performed,
of all the mercyes they have improved, and of all the great things that for his
name and glory, they have suffered,

Quest. But here an apt question may be moved. viz. Whether at this great day,
the sins of the Saints shall be brought into the judgment of Discussion and
discovery or no, whether the Lord will in this day publicly manifest,
proclaim, and make mention of the sins of his people, or no?

I humbly judge according to my present light, that he will not; and my reasons
for it are these, viz.

The first is drawn from Christ's judicial proceedings in the last day, set down
largely and clearly in the 25 of Matthew, where he inumerateth only the good
works they had done, but takes no notice of the spots and blots, Deuteronomy. 3.2, 4,
5, 6
of the stains and blemishes, of the infirmities, and innormities, of the
weaknesses and wickednesses of his people. My

Second Reason is taken from Christ's vehement protestations that they shall not
come into judgment, Vide Aquin. 87. Suppl. Est. in l. 4. Sendist. 47.
John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation: but is passed from death unto life. Those words shall not come
into condemnation, are not rightly translated, the Original is (...) shall not
come into judgment, not into damnation, as you read it in all your English
books, I will not say what should put men upon this exposition rather than a
true Translation of the Original word: further, it is very observable, that no
Evangelist uses this double asseveration but John, and he never uses it but
in matters of greatest weight and importance, John 1.51. chapter 3.3.11. chapter
6.20.32.47.53. etc.
and to show the earnestness of his spirit, and to stir us up to better
attention, and to put the thing asserted out of all question, and beyond all
contradiction; as when we would put a thing for ever out of all question, we
do it by a double asseveration, verily verily, it is so, etc.

Thirdly, Because his not bringing their sins into judgment, does most and
best agree with many precious and glorious expressions that we find scattered
(as so many shining sparkling Pearls) up and down in Scripture, as

First, With those of Gods blotting out the sins of his People, Isa. 43.25
I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, Isa.
44.22
and will not remember thy sins. I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. Who is this that blots out
transgressions? he that has the keys of heaven and hell, at his Girdle, that
opens and no man shuts, that shuts and no man opens, he that has the Power of
life and death, of condemning and absolving, of killing and of making alive,
he it is that blots out transgressions; if an under officer, should blot out
an indictment, that perhaps might do a man no good, a man might for all that
be at last cast by the Judge; but when the Judge or King shall blot out the
indictment with their own hand, then the indictment cannot return, now this is
every believers case, and happiness.

Secondly, to those glorious expressions, of Gods not remembering of their
sins any more, Isa. 43.25. And I will not remember thy sins; And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, Jer. 31.34
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me
from the least of them, to the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. So the
Apostle, Heb. 8.12
for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their
iniquities will I remember no more. And again the same Apostle says, This is
the covenant that I will make with them. after those days, says the Lord, Heb.
1^.17: That which Cicero said flatteringly of Caesar, is truly affirmed of God.
Nihil oblivisci solet praeter injurias, he forgets nothing but the wrongs
that daily are done him by his.
I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them:
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. The meaning is, their
iniquities shall quite be forgotten, I will never mention them more, I will
never take notice of them more, they shall never hear more of them from me,
though God has an iron memory to remember the sins of the wicked, yet he
has no memory to remember the sins of the righteous.

Thirdly, His not bringing their sins into judgment, does most and best
agree with those blessed expressions, of his casting their sins into the
depth of the Sea, and of his casting them behind his back. Mich. 7.19
He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea,
where sin is once pardoned, the remission stands never to be repeated,
pardoned sins shall never come in account against the pardoned man, before
God any more, for so much does this borrowed speech import, if a thing were
cast into a River, it might be brought up again, or if it were cast upon the
sea, it might be discerned, and taken up again, but when it is cast into the
depths, the bottom of the Sea, it can never be boyed up again.

By the Metaphor in the Text, the Lord would have us to know, that sins
pardoned shall rise no more, they shall never be seen more, they shall never
come on the account more, he will so drown their sins, that they shall never
come up before him the second time; And so much that other Scripture imports.
Isa. 38.17
Behold for peace I had great bitterness, but thou have in love to my soul
delivered it from the pit of corruption; for thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back: these last words are a borrowed speech taken from the manner of men,
who are wont to cast behind their backs, such things as they have no mind to
see, regard, or remember. A gracious soul has always his sins before his face
(I acknowledge my transgressions, Psalm. 51.3.
and my sin is ever before me;) and therefore no wonder if the Lord cast them
behind his back. The Father soon forgets, and casts behind his back those
faults that the child remembers, and has always in his eyes; so does the
Father of spirits.

Fourthly, His not bringing their sins into judgment, does best agree with
that sweet, and choice expression of Gods pardoning the sins of his people; And
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, Jer. 33.8.
whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities,
whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. So
Micha. Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage (as though he would not see it,
Mic. 7.18.
but wink at it) he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights
in Mercy. The Hebrew word ( Nose from Nasa) that is here rendered pardons,
signifies a taking away; when God pardons sin, he takes it sheere away; that
if it should be sought for, yet it could not be found, as the Prophet speaks;
In those days, and in that time, Jer. 50.20.
says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall
be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will
pardon them whom I reserve; and those words, and passes by, in the
(aforecited) seventh of Micha, (...)
and the 18. according to the Hebrew (Vegnober Gnal) is, Gnabar he passed over.
and passes over; God passes over the transgression of his heritage; that is,
he takes no notice of it, as a man in a deep muse, or as one that has haste
of business, sees not things before him, his mind being busied about other
matters, he neglects all to mind his business. As David, when he saw in
Mephibosheth the feature of his friend Jonathan, took no notice of his
lamenesse, or any other defect, or deformity. So God beholding in his people
the glorious image of his Son, winks at all their faults and deformities, which
made Luther say, do with me what thou will, since thou have pardoned my sin;
and what is it to pardon sin, Isa. 40.1, 2.
but not to mention sin.

Fifthly, in his not bringing their sins into the Judgment of discussion, and
discovery, does best agree to those expressions of forgiving, and covering,
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Psalm.
32.1.
In the original it is in the plural. Blessednesses, lo, here is a plurality
of blessings, a chain of pearls.

The like expression you have in the 85. Psalm and the 2. verse. Thou have
forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin. Selah.
For the understanding of these Scriptures aright; take notice that to cover, is
a Metaphorical expression; covering is such an action, Sic velantur, ut in
judicio non revelentur.
which is opposed to disclosure; to be covered, is to be so hid and closed,
as not to appear. Some make the Metaphor from filthy loathsome objects, which
are covered from our eyes, as dead carcasses are buried under the ground; some
from garments, that are put upon us to cover our nakedness, others from the
Egyptians that were drowned in the red Sea, and so covered with water; others
from a great gulf in the earth, that is filled up and covered with earth,
injected into it: And others make it in the last place an allusive expression
to the Mercy-seat, over which was a covering, now all these Metaphors in the
general tend to show this, that the Lord will not look, he will not see, he
will not take notice of the sins he has pardoned, to call them any more to a
judicial account.

As when a Prince reads over many treasons, and rebellions, and meets with such
and such which he has pardoned, he reads on, he passes by, he takes no
notice of them, the pardoned person shall never hear more of them, he will
never call him to account for those sins more. So here, etc. When Caesar was
painted, he put his finger upon his scar, his wart. God puts his fingers upon
all his peoples scars, and warts, upon all their weaknesses, and infirmities
that nothing can be seen but what is fair and lovely; Thou art all fair, my
Love, and there is no spot in thee, Can. 4.7.

Sixthly, it best agrees to that expression of not imputing of sin. Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit
there is no guile. So the Apostle in that, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. now not to impute
iniquity, is not to charge iniquity, not to set iniquity upon his score, who is
blessed and pardoned, etc.

Seventhly and lastly, it best agrees with that expression that you have in the
103. Psalm. and the 11, and 12. verse. For as the Heaven is high above the
Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him: As far as the East is
from the West; so far has he removed our transgressions from us. What a vast
distance is there betwixt the East and the West? of all visible latitudes, this
is the greatest; and thus much for the third Argument. The

Fourth Argument, that prevails with me to judge that Jesus Christ will not
bring the sins of the Saints into the judgment of discussion, and discovery in
the great day, is, because it seems unsuitable to three considerable things, for
Jesus Christ to proclaim the infirmities, and miscarriages of his people to all
the world.

First, It seems to be unsuitable to the glory and solemnity of that day, which
to the Saints will be a day of refreshing, a day of restitution, a day of
redemption, a day of coronation, as has been already proved; now how suitable
to this great day of solemnity, the proclamation of the Saints sins will be, I
leave the Reader to judge.

Secondly, It seems unsuitable to all those near and dear relations, that Jesus
Christ stands in toward his, Isa. 9 6. Heb. 2.11, 12 Ephesians. 1.21, 22, Rev.
19.7. John 15.1. John 2.1, 2^
he stands in therelation of a Father, a Brother, a head, a Husband, a Friend,
an Advocate; now are not all these by the law of relations bound rather to hide
and keep secret (at least from the world) the weaknesses and infirmities of
their near and dear relations, and is not Christ? is not Christ much more? by
how much he is more a Father, a Brother, a Head, a Husband, etc. in a
spiritual way than any others can be in a natural way, etc.

Thirdly; It seems very unsuitable to what the Lord Jesus requires of his in
this world, the Lord requires that his people should cast a mantle of love, of
wisdom, of silence, and secrecy over one another weaknesses and infirmities.
Prove. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8.
Hatred stirs up strifes; but love covers all sins; loves mantle is very
large; love will find a hand, a plaster to clap upon every sore. Flavius
Vespasianus (the Emperor) was very ready to conceal his friends vices, and as
ready to reveal their virtues: So is divine love in the hearts of the Saints.
If thy Brother offend thee, Mat. 18.15.
go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone; if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy Brother. As the Pills of reprehension are to be gilded
and sugared over with much gentleness, and softness; so they are to be given
in secret, tell him between him and thee alone. Tale-bearers, and Tale-hearers
are alike abominable, Heaven is too hot, and too holy a place for them, Psalm.
15.3. now will Jesus Christ have us carry it thus toward offending Christians,
and will he himself act otherwise? nay, is it an evil in us to lay open the
weaknesses and infirmities of the Saints to the world? and will it be an
excellency, a glory, a virtue in Christ, to do it in the great day? etc.

A fifth Argument is this, it is the glory of a man to pass over a
transgression. Prove. 19.11.
The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression; or to pass by it, Non amo quenquam nisi offendam, said a
Heathen.
as we do by persons or things, we know not, or would take no notice of. Now
is it the glory of a man to pass over a transgression, and will it not much
more be the glory of Christ, silently to pass over the transgressions of his
people, in that great day? The greater the treasons and rebellions are that a
Prince passes over, and takes no notice of, the more is it his honor, and
glory; and so doubtless it will be Christ's in that great day. To pass over all
the treasons and rebellions of his people, to take no notice of them, to forget
them, as well as forgive them.

The Heathens have long since observed, that in nothing man came nearer to the
glory and perfection of God himself, than in goodness and clemency. Surely if
it be such an honor to man, to pass over a transgression, it cannot be a
dishonor to Christ, to pass over the transgressions of his people, he having
already buried them in the Sea of his blood. Again says Solomon, It is the
glory of God to conceal a thing. Pro. 25.2.
And why it should not make for the glory of divine love to conceal the sins of
the Saints, in that great day, I know not: and whether the concealing the sins
of the Saints in that great day, will not make most for their joy, and wicked
men's sorrow, for their comfort and wicked men's terror and torment. I will
leave you to judge, and time and experience to decide; And thus much for the
resolution of that great question. Having done with the Motives that may
encourage and provoke young men to be good betimes, to know, love, seek, and
serve the Lord in the spring and morning of their days.

I shall now come to those directions and helps, that must (by assistance from
Heaven) be put in practice, if ever you would be good betimes, and serve the
Lord in the Prim-rose of your days. Now all that I shall say, will fall under
these two heads. First, Some things you must carefully and warily decline, and
arm your selves against; and secondly, there are other things that you must
prosecute and follow. First; there are some things that you must warily
decline, and they are these,

First, If ever you would be good betimes, if you would be gracious in the
spring and morning of your youth, Oh then take heed of putting the day of death
far from you. Amos 6.3.
Young men are very prone to look upon death afar off, to put it at a great
distance from them, they are apt to say to death, Exodus 10.28.
as Pharaoh said to Moses, Get thee from me, and let me see thy face no more;
if old men discourse to them of death, they are ready to answer as the
High Priest did Judas (in a different case) what is that to us, Mat. 27.4.
look you unto it? we know sickness will come, and death is a debt that we
must all pay, but surely these guests are a great way from us, for does not
David say, Psalm. 90.10.
The days of a man are threescore years and ten? we have calculated our
nativities, and we cannot abate a day, a minute, a moment of threescore and
ten; and therefore it is even a death to us to think of death, there being so
great a distance between our birthday, and our dying-day, as we have cast up
the account.

Ah young men! it is sad, it is very say, when you are so wittily wicked, as to
say with those in Ezekiel, Behold they of the house of Israel say, Ezekiel. 12.27
the vision that he sees is for many days to come, and he prophecyeth of
the times that are afar off.

Ah young men! young men, by putting far away this day, you gratify Satan, you
strengthen sin, you provoke the Lord, you make the work of faith and repentance
more hard and difficult, you lay a sad foundation for the greatest fears and
doubts.

Ah! how soon may that sad word be fulfilled upon you. The Lord of that
servant that says, Mat. 24.48, 49, 50, 51.
his Lord delayeth his coming, shall come in a day when he looks not for
him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder (or cut
him off) and appoint him his portion with Hypocrites, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. When Sodom, when Pharaoh, when Agag, when Amalek, when
Haman, when Herod, when Nebuchadnezzar, when Belshazzar, when Dives, when the
fool in the Gospel were all in their prime, their pride, when they were all in
a flourishing state, and upon the very top of their glory, how strangely, how
suddenly, how sadly, how fearfully, how wonderfully, were they brought down to
the grave, to Hell!

Good Couns to Young men
Ah young man! who art thou, and what is thy name, or fame, what is thy power
or place, what is thy dignity or glory, that thou dare promise thy self an
exemption from sharing in as sad a portion as ever Justice gave to those who
were once very high, who were seated among the stars, but are now brought down
to the sides of the pit? ^sa. 13.10, 11, ^2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
I have read a story of one, that gave a young Prodigal a Ring with a deaths
head, on this condition, that he should one hour daily for seven days
together, look and think upon it, which bred a great change in his life.

Ah young men! the serious thoughts of death may do that for you, that neither
friends, counsel, examples, prayers, Sermons, tears has not done to this very
day. Well, remember this, to labor not to die, is labor in vain, and to put
this day far from you, Senibus mors in januis, adolescentibus in insidiis.
Bernard. De convers. ad Cler. c. 14.
and to live without fear of death, is to die living. Death seizes on old men,
and lays wait for the youngest. Death is oftentimes as near the young man's
back, as it is to the old man's face.

It is storied of Charles the fourth, King of France, that being one time
affected with the sense of his many and great sins, he fetched a deep sigh, and
said to his wife, by the help of God, I will now so carry my self all my life
long, that I will never offend him more; which words he had no sooner uttered,
but he fell down dead, and died.

Do not young men put this day far from you, least you are suddenly surprised,
and then you cry out (when too late) a Kingdom for a Christ, a Kingdom for a
Christ; as once Crookt-back Richard the third in his distress, a Kingdom for
a horse, a Kingdom for a horse.

Ah young men! did you never hear of a young man that cried out; Oh! I am so
sick that I cannot live, and yet (woeful wretch that I am) so sinful, that I
dare not die; Oh that I might live! Oh that I might die! Oh that I might do
neither. Well young men, remember this, the frequent, the serious thoughts of
death will prevent many a sin, 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14. Eccles. 9.10.
it will arm you against many temptations, it will secure you from many
afflictions, it will keep you from doting on the World, it will make you do
much in a little time, it will make death easy when it comes, and it will make
you look out betimes for a Kingdom that shakes not, for riches that corrupt
not, and for glory that fades not away. Therefore do not, O do not put the day
of death far from you. Take heed of crying, Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow,
says Luther, for a man lives forty years before he knows himself to be a
fool, and by that time he sees his folly, his life is finished, so men dye
before they begin to live.

Secondly, If you would be good betimes, then take heed of leaning to your own
understanding.

This Counsel wise Solomon gives to his son (or the young men in his time) My
son forget not my Law, Prove. 3.1.5 Lean not, is a Metaphor from an old or
sick man leaning on his staff, etc.
but let thy heart keep my Commandments: Trust in the Lord with all thy heart,
and lean not to thy own understanding.

Youth is the age of folly, of vain-hopes, and overgrown confidence. Ah! how
wise might many have been; had they not been too early wise in their own
opinion.

Rehoboams young Counselors proved the overthrow of his Kingdom. It Is brave
for youth in all things to be discreet and sober minded. Three virtues they
say are prime ornaments of youth, modesty, silence, and obedience.

Ah! Young men, keep close in every action to this one principle, viz. in every
action resolve to be discreet and wise, rather than affectionate and singular.

I Remember that a young Gentleman of Athens being to answer for his life,
hired an Orator to make his defense, and it pleased him well at his first
reading, but when the young man by often reading it, that he might recite it
publicly by heart, begun to grow weary and displeased with it, the Orator
bid him consider that the J^dges and the People were to h^ar it but once, and
then it was l^kely that they at the first instant might be as well pleased as
he.

Ah! Young men, your leaning upon your selves, or upon others, will in the end
be bitterness and vexation of spirit; Young men are very apt to lean on their
own Wit, Wisdom, Arts, parts, as old men are to lean on a staff to support
them; (...)
(as the Hebrew word signifies, that is rendered lean, Shagnan.
in that of Prove. 3.5.) this has been the bane of many a choice Wit, the loss
of many a brave head, the ruin of many a subtle pate.

Ajax thought it was for cowards and weaklings to lean upon the Lord for
succor, not for him, whence he was foiled; lean not to great parts, lean not
to natural or acquired accomplishments, least you loose them and your selves
too. Leaning to natural, or moral excellencies is the ready way to be stripped
o^ all. Babylon that bore her sel^ bold upon her high Towers thick walls, and
twenty year^ provision laid in for a siege, wa^ surprised by Cyrus.

It Was said of Caesar, that he received not his wounds from the swords of
enemies, but from the hands of friends, that is, from trusting in them.

Ah! How many young men have been wounded, yea, slain by trusting to their own
understanding, their own abilities. It Was an excellent saying of Austin (in te
stas, et non stas) he that stands upon his own strength shall never stand. A
Creature if like a single drop left to it self, it spends and wastes it self
presently, but if like a drop in the fountain and Ocean of being, it has
abundance of security.

Ah! Young men, Young men, 2 Pet. 1.4 Psalm. 27.1
if you will needs be leaning, then lean upon precious Promises, lean upon the
rock that is higher than your selves, lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ as John
did, who was the youngest of all the Disciples, and the most beloved of all the
Disciples. John 21.20. chapter 13.23.
John leaned much, and Christ loved him much. O lean upon Christ's wisdom for
direction, lean upon his power for protection, Can. 8.5
lean upon (his Purse) his fullness for Provision, lean upon his eye for
approbation, lean upon his righteousness for justification, lean upon his blood
for remission, lean upon his merits for salvation. As the young Vine without
her wall to support her, will fall and sink: So will you young men without
Christ puts under his everlasting arms to support you, and uphold you;
therefore above all leanings, lean upon him, by leaning on him you will engage
him; by leaning on him you will gain more honor than you can give; by leaning
on him, you may even command him, and make him eternally yours, etc.

Thirdly, If you would be good betimes, if you would seek and serve the Lord
in the spring and morning of your days, then take heed of flatterers and
flattery. Ah! how many Young men might have been very good, who are now
exceeding bad, by harkening to flatterers, and affecting flattery. Flattery
undid young Rehoboam, 1 Kin. 12. and chapter 22. Act. 12.22.23, 24.
Ahab, Herod, Nero, Alexander, etc. Flatterers are soul-murderers, they are
soul-undoers, they are like evil Chyrurgions that skin over the wound, but
never heal it.

Anastatius the Emperors motto was (mellitum venenum blanda oration) smooth
talk proves often sweet Poison; Flattery is the very spring and mother of all
impiety, it blows the Trumpet and draws poor souls into rebellion against God,
as Sheba drew Israel to rebel against David, it put our first Parents upon
tasting the forbidden fruit, it put Absolou upon dethroning of his father, it
put Haman upon plotting the ruin of the Jews, it put Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
upon rebelling against Moses; it makes men call evil good, and good evil,
darkness light, and light darkness, etc. it puts persons upon neglecting the
means of Grace, upon undervaluing the means of Grace, and upon contemning the
means of Grace; it puts men upon abasing God, slighting Christ, and vexing the
spirit, it unmans a man, it makes him call black, white, and white black, it
makes a man change Pearls for Pebles, and Gold for Counters, The Flatterers
told Dionysius that his spittle was as sweet as honey. Rev. 3.17, 18
it makes a man judge himself wise, when he is foolish; knowing, when he is
ignorant; holy, when he is Profane; free, when he is a Prisoner; rich, when
he is Poor; high, when he is low; full, when he is empty; happy, when he is
miserable. Ah! Young men, young men, take heed of Flatterers, they are the very
worst of sinners, they are left of God, blinded by Satan, hardened in sin, and
ripened for hell. God declares sadly against them, and that in his word, and in
his works; in his word, as you may see by comparing these scriptures together,
Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20. Psalm. 78.36 Psalm. 36.1.2. Job. 17.5. Ezekiel. 12.24. Dan.
11.21, 32, 34. Ps. 12.2, 3. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor,
with flattering lips, and with a double heart, do they speak. Karath signifies
any cutting off, either by death or banishment, etc.
The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud
things; And as God declares sadly against them in his word, so he has
declared terribly against them in his works, as you may run and read in his
judgments executed upon Ahabs flattering Prophets, and upon Haman, and upon
Daniels (Princely) false accusers, etc. And why then will not you stop your
ears against those wretches, that the hand and heart of God is so much against?

Again, A preacher in Constantines time, presumed to call the Emperor Saint to
his face, but he went away with a check. Eusebius. de vit. Constable l. 4.4
As God declares against them, so good men detest them, and declare against
them, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures together, Psalm. 5.8, 9, 10.
Prove. 2.16. Prove. 7.21. Prove. 28.23. Job 32.21, 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.20. Prove.
20.19. Meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips? Why so? why, because
a man that flattereth his Neighbor, spreads a net for his feet, Prove. 29.5.
The Hebrew word ( Mahhalik from hhalak) that is here rendered flatterer,
signifies a smooth boots, a soft butter-spoken man, because flatterers uses
smooth soft speeches. Also the word signifies to divide, because a Flatterers
tongue is divided from his heart. Flatterers have their nets, and those that
give ear to them will be taken to their ruin. A lying tongue hates those
that are afflicted by it, The Hebrew word
and a flattering mouth works ruin, (...)
Prove. 26. ult. A flattering mouth ruins name, Dahbah, signifies such aviolent
forceing of one, as he cannot stand, it signifies to throw down, to drive on
forwards till a man fall into destruction.
same, estate, body, soul, life.

Valerian the Roman Emperor used to say (Non acerba sed blanda) not bitter,
but flattering words do all the mischief. When Alexander the Great, was hit
with an Arrow in the siege of an Indian City which would not heal, he said to
his Parasites, you say that I am Jupiters son, but this wound cries that I am
but a man.

Now shall good men detest them, and abhor them as they are the pest of pests,
the plague of plagues, and will you own them, will you take pleasure in them,
to your ruin here and hereafter, the Lord forbid? Oh say to all flatterers, as
he to his Idols, Hos. 14.8
Get you hence, for what have I more to do with you.

Nay once more consider, that not only the good, but the bad, not only the
best, but (some of) the worst of men have manifested their detestation of
Flatterers and flattery.

Leo the Emperor used to say, (occulti inimici pessimi) a close enemy is far
worse than an open. When a Court Parasite praised Sigismund the Emperor above
measure, the Emperor gave him a sound box on the ear.

When Aristobulus the Historian presented to Alexander the Great book that he
had written of his glorious acts, wherein he had flatteringly made him greater
than he was, Alexander (after he had read the book) threw it into the River
Hydaspes, and said to the Author, it were a good deed to throw thee after it.

When the Flatterers flattered Antigonus, he cried out (mentiris, mentiris in
gutture, Hae virtutes non laetent in me) thou lie, thou lie in thy throat,
these virtues that thou speak of, I have not in me, but I am like a Leopard
that have ten black spots to one white.

Augustus Caesar, and Tiberius Caesar, were deadly enemies to flatterers,
insomuch that they would not be called Lords by their own children.

A good Symbol is attributed to Trebonianus Gallus, viz. (Nemo amicus idem et
adulator) no Flatterer can be a true friend.

Aristippus (the Philosopher) seeing Diogenes washing of herbs for his dinner,
said, if Diogenes knew how to make use of Kings, he need not live upon raw
herbs as he does, to which Diogenes replied, that if Aristippus could content
himself with herbs, he need not to turn Spaniel, or to flatter King Di nysius
for a meals meat.

Ah! Young men, Young men, shall God, shall good men, shall bad men, detest and
declare against Flatterers and flattery, and will not you turn a deaf ear upon
them, yea fly from them, as from a Serpent, and shun them as you would shun
hell it self, if you do not, the very Heathens but now cited, will rise in
judgment against you.

Flatterers are the very worst of sinners. The Flatterers told Caesar that his
freckles in his face, were like the stars in the Firmament, they bought and
sold Aurelius the Emperor at pleasure. And Augustus complained when Varrus was
dead, that he had none now left that would deal plainly and faithfully with
him.

So men may gain by Flattery they will be like Harpaelus, who said (Quod Regi
placet, mihi placet) that which pleases the King, pleases me,

When Astyages set his own Son before him to feed upon him; O but let every
young man say, (into whose hands this treatise shall fall) Quod Deo placet mihi
placet) that which pleases God pleases me. I have been the longer upon this
out of love to young men's souls, Whilst an Ass is stroaked under the belly
you may lay on his back what burden you please.
who are so apt to be ensnared in the Flatterers net, if ever you would be
good in good earnest, you must abhor Flatterers as the first born of the Devil,
and as such that are most pernicious to men's happiness both here and hereafter.

It is reported of one Oramazes that he had an enchanted Egg, in which (as he
boasted himself) he had enclosed all the happiness of the World, but being
broken, nothing was found in it but Wind. Flatterers are the greatest cheaters,
the greatest deceivers, in the world.

They say of the Crocodile, that when he has killed a man, he will weep over
him, as if he were sorry; and did repent for what he had done, the Application
is easy.

Fourthly, If you would be good betimes, if you would seek and serve the Lord
in the spring and morning of your days, then take heed of engageed affections
to the things of the World. The Young man in the Gospel took many a step
toward heaven, Mat. 19.16-24
All these things have I kept from my Youth up, what lack I yet? Christ makes a
very fair offer to him in the next words, Jesus said unto him, if thou will be
perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me; thou shall have heaven for earth,
a Sea for a drop, a treasure for a mite, a crown for a crum. I but the young
man's affections were strongly engaged to the things of the world, Multi amando
res noxias sunt miseri, babend^ miseriores. August. in Psalm. 26.
and therefore he turns his back upon Christ, and goes away sorrowful, because
he had great possessions. O the madness, the folly of this young man, who to
enjoy a little temporal felicity, has bid an everlasting farewell to Christ
and Glory, in that Genesis 13.2. it is said that Abraham was very rich in Cattle,
in silver, and in gold, the Hebrew word (Cabedh) that is here rendered rich,
signifies heavy, it signifies a burden, to show us that riches are a heavy
burden, and a hinderance many times to heaven and happiness, and this young
man in the Gospel found it so to his eternal undoing. Though the Lodestone
cannot draw the Iron when the Diamond is in presence, yet earthly possessions
did draw this young man's soul away, when Christ the Pearl of price was present,
the World is a silken net, and this young man found it so; the world is like
Golden fetters, and this young man found it so; the world is like sweet poison,
and this young man found it so; They are dulce venenum, a sweet poison. Bern.
for he had drunk so large a draught of it, that there was no room in his soul
for Christ or heaven, for grace, or glory. Some say that when the Serpent
Scytale cannot overtake the flying Passengers, she does with her beautiful
colors so astonish and amaze them, that they have no power to pass away, till
she have stung them; such a Serpent the World proved to the young man in the
Gospel, it did so affect him and take him, so amaze him, and amuze him, that
he could not stir till it stung him to death. When the Moon is fullest it is
furthest from the Sun, so the more men have of the World, the further
(commonly) they are from God, and this the young man in the Gospel made good.

Many have ventured life and limb, If money were thrown to the dogs, they would
not so much as smell at it, the greater is their folly and madness that will
go to hells gates for it.
and many a better thing to gain the things of this World, and yet after all,
they have got nothing at all. Achans golden wedge, proved a wedge to cleave
him, and his garment, a garment to shrowed him.

The whole world is circular, the heart of man is triangular, and we know a
circle cannot fill a triangle; yea if it be not filled with the three persons
in Trinity, it will be filled with the world, the Flesh, and the Devil. The
World may be resembled to the fruit that undid us all, which was fair to the
sight, smooth in handling, sweet in taste, but deadly in effect and operation.

Ah! Young men, young men, have none of you found it so?

The World in all its bravery is no better than the Cities which Solomon gave
to Hiram, 1 King. 9.13
which he called Cabul, that it to say, displeasing -- or dirty, the World
will afford nothing but trivial Flowers, surrounded with many briars: O the
Vanity! the uncertainty, the imperfection of all things below, if a man should
weigh his pay and his pains together, his miseries, and his pleasures together,
his joys and his sorrows together, his mercies, and his crosses together, his
good days, and his bad days together, will he not conclude vanity of Vanity,
and all is Vanity?

It was a wise and Christian Speech of Charles the fifth, In my other Trearises
you may read more of the vanity, insufficiency, impotency, mutability,
uncertainty, and inconstancy of the World, and to them I refer you.
to the Duke of Venice, who when he had showed him the glory of his Princely
Palace and earthly Paradise, instead of admiring it or him for it, only
returned him this grave and serious memento (Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos
mori) these are the things which make us unwilling to dye, it was a good saying
of one to a great Lord (upon his showing him his stately house and pleasant
Gardens) Sir you had need make sure of heaven, or else when you dye, you will
be a very great looser.

Ah! Young men, Young men, it is only heaven that is above all winds, storms,
and tempests, nor has God cast man out of Paradise for him to think to find
out another Paradise in this world, the main reason, why many young men dote
upon the world, is because they are not acquainted with a greater glory; men
ate Acorns till they were acquainted with the use of Wheat. Rev. 12.1
The woman had the Moon under her feet when she was clothed with the Sun, and
had a Crown of twelve stars upon her head.

Ah! Young men, were you but clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, and had
you a crown set upon your heads, by the hand of faith, you would have all the
things of this world which are as low, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26, 27, 35. chapter 10.34.
bespotted, and mutable, as the Moon, under your feet; well young men, as ever
you would be good betimes, sit loose from the things of this world, be no
longer worshippers of this Golden calf, and never let the World, that should
be but your Servant, become your Lord; O Oh let not the Devil and the World
have more service for an ounce of gold! than Christ shall have for the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Ah young men! the world and you must part, or Christ and you will never meet;
you cannot serve God, and Mammon. Mat. 6.24.
The two poles shall sooner meet, than the love of Christ, and the love of the
world.

Fifthly, if you would be good betimes if you would know, seek, and serve the
Lord in the spring and morning of your youth; then take heed betimes of carnal
reason, Gal. 1.15, 16.
take heed of consulting with flesh and blood; many a hopeful young man has
been undone temporally, and undone eternally by hearkening to those evil
counselors. Cicero a Heathen could say, that man would not be so wicked, and
do so wickedly, were it not for his reason.


Carnal reason is an enemy, yea an utter enemy, nay, it is not only an utter
enemy, but it is enmity, yea enmities, Romans 8.7. An enemy may be reconciled,
but enmity can never be reconciled. Carnal Reason is not only averse, but it
is utterly averse to all goodness; it builds strong holds and syllogisms
against the most glorious Gospel Truths, and accounts the precious things of
Christ as a strange thing; carnal Reason will make God and Gospel do homage to
it; when carnal Reason is in the Throne, Christ and his truths must all bow, or
be judged before its bar.

Ah young men, young men! as ever you would be good betimes, stop your ears
against all carnal Reasonings within you; carnal Reason judges the choicest
things of the Gospel to be mere foolishness; 1 Cor. 1.23.
it is purblinde, and cannot see how to make a right judgment of Christ, his
word, his ways, and yet will control all.

If you are resolved to be still scholars to this Master, then you must
resolve to be unhappy here, and miserable hereafter. But

It is safer and better for you to imitate those young men, who in the morning
of their days have graciously, wisely, and resolutely withstood those evil
Counselors; carnal Reason, flesh and blood; Joseph and Moses, Daniel, Genesis
39.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Dan. 1.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; all these in the Prim-rose of their youth
were good, at turning the deaf ear to carnal counsel, and carnal counselors.

Cassianus reports of a young man that had given himself up to a Christian
life, and his Parents mis-liking that way, they wrote letters to him, to
persuade him from it; and when he knew there were letters come from them, he
would not open them, but threw them into the fire; this example is worth a
following.

Another famous example you have in the story of King Edward the sixth, when
Cranmer and Ridly came to him, and were very earnest to have him give way to
his Sister the Lady Mary to have Mass; he stood out and pleaded the case with
them that it was a sin against God, and provoking to the eyes of his glory,
etc. but they still continued to use many carnal arguments to persuade the King
(who was but a child about fifteen years of age) but he withstood them a great
while, but at length when he saw he could not prevail with all his pleading
against those grave men, but that they still continued their suit, he burst
out into bitter weeping, and sobing, desiring them to desist; the motioners,
seeing his zeal and constancy wept as fast as he, and being overcome, they
went away, and told one that the King had more divinity in his little finger,
than they had in all their bodies. Ah young men! it will be your safety, and
your glory to write after this princely copy, when you are surrounded with
carnal reason, and carnal counselors, etc.

Sixthly, and lastly, If you would be good betimes, then take heed of
comparing your selves with those that are worse than your selves. Joh. 9.39, 40.
Young men are very apt to compare themselves with those that are worse than
themselves, and this proves a snare unto them, yea oftentimes their bane, their
ruin; As it did the young Pharisee in the Gospel, Luke 18.11, 12, 13, 14.
Thales one of the seven sages being asked what was the easiest thing in the
world to do, answered, to know other men's faults, and none of our own.
who pleaded his negative Righteousness, he was not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, and stood on his comparative goodness, nor
as this Publican; he stands not only upon his comparisons, but upon his
disparisons, being blind at home, and too quick-sighted abroad, he contemns
and condemns the poor Publican who was better than himself; making good, that
saying of Seneca the nature of man, says he, is very apt (utimur perspicillis
magis quam speculis) to use spectacles to behold other men's faults, rather than
looking-glasses to behold our own; such Pharisees do justly incur the censure
which that sour Philosopher past upon Grammarians, Diogenes apud L^^ium. l. 6.
that they were better acquainted with the evil of Ulysses, than with their own.

Ah young men, young men! you know, he that drinks poison, though he drinks
not so much as another, and he that commits treason, though not so great, so
high treason as another, shall yet as certainly be poisoned, and hanged, as
he that has drunk a greater quantity of poison; and committed higher acts of
treason.

Sirs, do not delude and befool your own souls, if you are not as wicked as
others, Mat. 11.22, 23, 24, 25. As in Heaven one is more glorious than another,
so in Hell one shall be more miserable than another. Aug.
you shall not be as much tormented as others, but yet you shall be as
certainly damned as others, you shall as certain to hell as others, you shall
as sure be shut out for ever from God, Christ, Saints, Angels, and all the
treasures, pleasures, and glories of Heaven, as others, except it be
prevented, by timely repentance on your side, and pardoning mercy on Gods. Will thou count it madness Oh young man in him that is sick to reason thus, I am
not so sick as such and such, and therefore I will not send to the Physician,
and in the wounded man to say, I am not so desperately wounded as such and
such, and therefore I will not send to the Surgeon; and in the traitor to say,
I am not guilty of so many foul and heinous treasons as such and such, and
therefore I will not look after a pardon; and in the necessitous man, to say, I
am not so hard put to it as such and such, and therefore I will not welcome a
hand of charity? and will thou not count it the greatest madness in the world
for thee to put off thy repentance, and thy returning to the Lord in the spring
and morning of thy youth, because that thou art not as sinful as wicked as such
and such, if to have a softer bed, a milder punishment in hell, than others,
will satisfy thee, then go on; but if thou art afraid of the worm that never
dies, and of the fire that never goes out, being like that stone in Arcadia,
which being once kindled, could not be quenched; O then begin to be good
betimes; O seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of your days!
Chrysostom. Hom. 44. in Matthew.


To think often of Hell, is the way to be preserved from falling into hell. Ah!
Young men, Young men, that you would often consider of the bitterness, of the
damneds torments, and of the pittilesness of their torments, and of the
diversity of their torments, and of the easelesnes of their torments, and of
the remedilesness of their torments. (Momentaneum est quod delectat, Aeternum
quod cruciat.) The sinners delight here is momentany, that which torments
hereafter is perpetual; when a Sinner is in hell, do thou think Oh young man,
that another Christ shall be found to dye for him, or that the same Christ will
be crucified again for him, or that another Gospel should be preached to him,
Surely no.

Ah, Why then will thou not betimes return and seek out after the things that
belong to thy everlasting Peace. Jac. Rev. hist. Pontif. Romans 199.
I have read of Pope Clement the fifth, that when a young Nephew of his dyed,
he sent his Chaplain to a Necromancer, to know of him how it fared with him in
the other World, the Conjurer showed him to the Chaplain lying in a fiery bed
in hell, which when the Pope understood, he never joyed more, etc.

Ah! Young man, that these occasional hints of hell, may be a means to
preserve thee from lying in those everlasting Flames.

Bellarmine tells us of a certain advocate of the Court of Rome, that being at
the point of death, Bellar. de art moriendi. l. 2. c. 10.
was stirred up by them that stood by to repent and call upon God for mercy,
he with a constant countenance, and without sign of fear, turned his speech
to God, and said, Lord, I have a desire to speak unto thee, not for my self,
but for my wife and Children, for I am hastening to hell, neither is there any
thing that thou should do for me; and this he spoke says Bellarmine (who
was present and heard it) as if he had spoke of a journey to some Village, or
Town, and was no more affrighted.

Sir Francis Bacon also in his History of Henry the Seventh, relates how it was
a common byword of the Lord Cords, that he would be content to lie seven
years in hell, so he might win Calice from the English; but if thou O young
man art given up to such desperate Atheism, and carnal Apprehensions of Hell;
I am afraid God will confute thee one day by fire and brimstone, but I would
willingly hope better things of all those young persons, into whose hands this
Treatise shall fall, and thus you see what things must be declined and
avoided, if ever you would be good betimes, if ever you would seek and serve
the Lord in the spring and morning of your days.

But in the second place, as those things must be declined, so other things
must carefully and diligently be practiced, if ever you would be good betimes.
I shall instance only in those that are most considerable and weighty, as

First, if ever you would be good betimes, etc. then you must labor to be
acquainted with four things betimes,

First, You must labor to acquaint your selves with the Scripture betimes, you
must study the Word betimes, David studied the Word in the morning of his days
in the primrose of his youth, Psalm. 119.97; 98 99, 100, 101, 102, 103
and this made him wiser than his enemies, yea, than his teachers, this made
him as much excel the Ancients, as the Sun excels the Moon, or as the Moon
excels the twinkling stars. Timothy was good betimes, and no wonder, for in the
prime-rose of his days, 2 Timothy 3.15 (...). from a suckling.
he was acquainted with the Scripture, he was inured to the Word from his
childhood, yea from his infancy, as the word properly signifies, so in that
119 Psalm the 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
according to thy Word; there is no way to a holy heart, and a clean life, but
by acquainting of your selves with the Word betimes; one has long since
observed, Aug.
that God has bowed down the Scriptures to the capacity even of babes and
sucklings, that all excuse may be taken away; and that young men may be
encouraged to study the Scripture betimes. Ah! Adoro Plenitudinem Scripturarum.
Tertullian.
Young men, no Histories are comparable to the Histories of the Scriptures, 1
for Antiquity. 2 Rarity. 3 Variety. 4 Brevity. 5 Perspicuity. 6 Harmony. 7
Verity. All other books cannot equal Gods, either in age, or authority, in
dignity, or excellency, in sufficiency, or glory.

Moses is found more ancient and more honorable, than all those whom the
Grecians make most ancient and honorable; as Homer, Hesiod, and Jupiter
himself, whom the Greeks have seated in the top of their divinity.

The whole Scripture is but one entire love letter, Gregory, calls the
Scripture (Cor and animam Dei) the heart and soul of God.
dispatched from the Lord Christ to his beloved Spouse, and who then but would
still be a reading in this love letter? Like Caecilia a Roman maiden of Noble
Parentage, who carried always about her the New Testament, that she might
still be a reading in Christ's love letter, and behold the sweet workings of his
love, and heart, toward his dear and precious ones.

Luther found so much sweetness in the Word, in Christ's love letter, that made
him say, he would not live in Paradise if he might, without the word (at cum
verbo etiam in inferno facile est vivere) but with the Word he could live in
hell it self.

The Word is like the stone Garamantides, that has drops of Gold in it self,
enriching of the believing soul. This the Martyrs found, which made them
willing to give a load of hay for a few leaves of the Bible in English.

Augustine professes that the Sacred Scriptures were his holy delight; Hier.
Epistola. ad Heliod. in Epitaphium Nepotiani.
And Hierom tells (us) of one Nepotianus, who by long and assiduous meditation
on the holy Scriptures, had made his breast the library of Jesus Christ. And
Rabbi Chiia in the Jerusalem Talmud, says, that in his account all the World
is not of equal value with one word out of the Law. That which a Papist reports
lyingly of their Sacrament, of the Mass, viz. that there are as many mysteries
in it, as there be drops in the Sea, dust on the earth, Angels in heaven,
stars in the sky, Atoms in the Sunbeams, or sand on the Seashore, etc. may
be truly asserted of the holy Scriptures.

Oh the mysteries, the excellencies, the glories, that are in the Word; Ah, no
book to this book, none so useful, none so needful, none so delightful, none so
necessary to make you happy, and to keep you happy, as this. It is said of
Caesar, (major fuit cura Caesari libellorum quam purpurae) that he had greater
care of his books, than of his Royal Robes, for swimming through the waters to
escape his enemies, he carried his books in his hand above the waters, but
lost his Robe, now what are Caesar's books to Gods books?

Ah! Ps. 119
Young men, young men, the Word of the Lord is a light to guide you; a
Counselor to counsel you, a comforter to comfort you, a staff to support you,
a sword to defend you, and a Physician to cure you, the word is a Mine to
enrich you, a Robe to cloth you, and a Crown to crown you, it is bread to
strengthen you, and wine to cheer you, and a honeycomb to feast you, and
music to delight you, and a Paradise to entertain you.

Oh! The Jewish Rabbis were wont to say, that upon every letter of the saw,
there hangs mountains of profitable matter.
Therefore before all, and above all, search the Scripture; study the
Scripture, dwell on the Scripture, delight in the Scripture, treasure up the
Scripture, no wisdom to scripture Wisdom, no knowledge to Scripture
knowledge, no experience to Scripture experience, no comforts to Scripture
comforts, no delights to Scripture delights, no convictions to Scripture
convictions, nor no conversion to scripture conversion.

Augustine hearing a voice from heaven, Toll lege.
that bad him take and read, whereupon turning open the New Testament, he fell
upon that place, Romans 13.13, 14
Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife, and envying. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. This Scripture so sunk into his heart, as that it proved the means of
his conversion, as himself reports; Lib. 8. conf. cap. 12.
this Augustine as he was once Preaching, his memory failing of him contrary to
his purpose, he fell upon reproving the Manicheans, and by a scripture or two
not before thought of, Poffidon de vita, Augustine.
to confute their heresies, he converted Firmus a Manichaean, as he after
acknowledged to Augustine, blessing God for that sermon.

It is reported of one Adrianus, who seeing the Martyrs suffer such grievous
things in the cause of God, he asked what was that which caused them to suffer
such things, and one of them named that text, Cor. 2.9
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love him, and this
text was set home, with such a power upon him, as that it converted him, and
made him to profess Religion, and not only to profess it, but to dye a martyr
for it.

Cyprian was converted by reading the Prophecy of Jonah. Junius was converted
by reading the 1 Chapter of John the Evangelist.

I have read of a scandalous Minister that was struck at the heart, and
converted in reading that scripture, Romans 2.21
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self, etc?

We read that Paphnutius converted Thais and Ephron, two famous strumpets from
uncleanness, only with this Scripture Argument, That God sees all things in
the dark, Heb. 4.13.
when the doors are fast, the windows shut, the Curtains drawn, etc.

I have read of a poor man, who persuaded a young Scholar to leave reading of
Poetry, etc. and fall upon reading of the Scripture, which accordingly he did;
and it pleased the Lord, before he had read out Genesis, to change his heart,
and to turn him to the Lord in the Primrose of his days, he being then but
twenty years of age.

I have read of a young Lady, Origin was her Schoolmaster.
called Potamia, of a very illustrious family, who endured very much in her
Martyrdom, by the extreme cruelty of Basilides her executioner, yet after her
death he bethinking himself of the holy words, and Scripture expressions that
were uttered by her, during her cruel torments, became a Christian, and within
few days after, was himself likewise crowned with Martyrdom.

James Andreas a godly Minister, hearing of a Jew, that for theft was hanged by
the heels, with his head downward, having not seen that kind of punishment,
he went to the place where he was hanging between two Dogs that were always
snatching at him to eat his flesh, the poor wretch repeated in Hebrew some
verses of the Psalms, wherein he cried to God for mercy, whereupon Andreas
went near to him, and instructed him in the Principles of Christian Religion,
about Christ the Messiah, etc. Exhorting him to believe in him, A miracle of
mercy.
and it pleased God so to bless his Scripture exhortations to him, that the
Dogs gave over tearing of his flesh, and the poor Jew desired him to procure
that he might be taken down and baptized, and hung by the neck for the
quicker dispatch which was done accordingly.

I might produce other instances, but let these suffice to provoke all young
persons to a speedy, serious, diligent, and constant study of the Scripture.
Much in the word is wrapped up in a little. It is more to be admired, than to
have Homers Iliads comprised in a nut shel. Heb. 9.4.
Ah sirs! you do not know how soon your blind minds may be enlightened, your
hard hearts softened, your proud spirits humbled, your sinful natures changed,
your defiled consciences purged, your distempered affections regulated, and
your poor souls saved, by searching into the Scriptures, by reading the
Scripture, and by pondering upon the Scripture; you should lay up the Manna of
Gods word in your hearts, as Moses laid up the Manna in the golden pot. And as
Tamar did with the staff and signet that she received from Judah, Genesis 38.18.
-- 36.
she laid them up till she came to save her life, and did save her life by
it, as you may see in holy story. The laying up of the word now, may be the
saving of your souls another day.

I have read of little Bees, that when they go out in stormy weather, they will
carry a little of their comb or gravel with them, that they may be balanced,
and not carried away with the wind.

Ah young men, young men! you had need to have your thoughts and hearts
balanced with the precious word, that you may not be carried away with every
wind of Doctrine, as many have been in these days, to their destruction and
confusion.

Narcissus a beautiful youth, though he would not love them that loved him,
yet afterward fell in love with his own shadow: Ah! how may young men in these
days, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
who were once lovely and hopeful, are now fallen in love with their own and
others shadows, with high empty aerie notions, and with strange monstrous
speculations to their own damnation.

Holy Melancthon being newly converted, thought it impossible for his hearers
to withstand the evidence of the Gospel, but soon after, he complained that
old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

Ah young men, young men! if you do not in good earnest give up your selves to
the reading, to the studying, to the pondering, to the believing, to the
affecting, to the applying, and to the living up to the Scripture, Satan will
be too hard for you, the world will be too hard for you, your lusts will be
too hard for you, temptations will be too hard for you, and deceivers will be
too hard for you, and in the end you will be miserable; and thus much for the
first thing, etc.

Secondly, if you would be good betimes, then you must acquaint your selves
with your selves betimes; if you would be gracious in the spring, and morning
of your days: then you must see betimes how bad you are, how vile, how sinful,
how wretched you are? no man begins to be good, till he sees himself to be
bad; the young Prodigal never began to mend, Luke 15.12, ^^ 22.
he never thought of returning to his Father, till he came to himself, till
he began to return into his own soul, and saw himself in an undone condition.

Ah! Young men, Young men, you must see your selves to be children of Wrath,
Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.12, 13. Romans 6.16. John 8.44. 2 Timothy 2.26.
to be Enemies, to be Strangers, to be afar off from God, from Christ, from
the Covenant, from heaven, to be Sins servants, and Satan's bond slaves, the
ready way to be found, is to see your selves lost, the first step to mercy, is
to see your misery, the first step toward Heaven is to see yourselves near to
hell, you will not look after the Physician of souls, Austin says, he would
willingly go through hell to Christ, so will all that see their need of Christ.
you will not prize the Physician of souls, you will not desire the Physician of
souls, you will not match with the Physician of souls, you will not fall in love, in
league with the Physician of souls, you will not resign up your selves, to the
Physician of souls, till you come to see your wounds, till you come to feel
your disease, till you see the tokens, the plague sores of divine wrath, and
displeasure upon you; as the whole do not need the Physician, so they do not
desire, they do not care for the Physician.

Ah! Young men, Zanche writ a Tractat, Quod nihil scitur.
as you would be good betimes, begin to acquaint your selves with your sinful
selves betimes, begin to acquaint your selves betimes with your natural and
undone condition.

There is a threefold self.

1 There is a natural self, as a man's parts, wit, reason, will, affections, and
inclinations, etc.

2 A Religious self, and so a man's duties, graces, obedience, righteousness,
holiness, are called ones self.

3 There is a sinful self, Luther said, that if a man could perfectly see his
own faults, the sight thereof would be a very hell unto him.
and so a man's corruptions, lusts, sinful nature and dispositions are called
ones self, now if ever you would be good betimes, you must acquaint your
selves with your sinful selves betimes.

Demonicus being asked at what time he began to be a Philosopher, answered,
when I began to know my self. So a man never begins to be a Christian, till
he begins to know himself. And indeed for a man to know himself, to acquaint
himself with himself, is one of the hardest works in all the World. For as the
eye can see all: things but it self, so most can discern all faults but their
own. Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany his usual speech was ( Multi multa
sciunt, se autem nemo) many know much, but few know themselves.

The very heathens did admire that saying as an Oracle ( nosce teipsum) know
and be acquainted with thy own self. The main exhortation of Chilo one of the
seven Sages, was, know thy self. And Plato records, that this saying of
Chilo, know thy self, was written in letters of Gold, upon the Portal of
Apolloes Temple.

Juvenal says, that this saying know thy self came from heaven. Macrobius
says, that the Oracle of Apollo being demanded what course should be taken
for attaining to felicity? answered, only teach a man to know himself.

Thus you see that both Divinity and Philosophy does agree in this, that the
best and surest way to true felicity, is, to know our selves, to acquaint our
selves with our selves.

This duty the Apostle charges upon the Ephesians, Remember that you being in
times past Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.11.12 Of dull and insensible men, one
long since thus complained ( patientius far Christi jacturam, quam suam) that
they did more calmly pass by the injuries done to Christ, then those that were
done unto themselves; O the plague of unsensiblenesse.
that at that time ye were without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of
Isreal's and strangers from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without
God in the world. Here are five withouts, without Christ, without the Church,
without the Promise, without hope, and without God in the world; man in his
natural state is afar off (he is without) three manner of ways.

1 In point of opinion and apprehension. 2 In point of fellowship and
communion. 3 In point of grace and conversion.
As you would be good betimes, dwell much upon your corrupt nature betimes; Ah!
Such is the corruption of our nature, that propound any divine good to it, it
is entertained as fire by water, or wet wood, with hissing; propound any evil,
then it is like fire to straw, it is like the foolish Satyr, that made haste
to kiss the fire, it is like that unctious matter, which the naturalists say,
sucks and snatches the fire to it, with which it is consumed; till you come to
be sensible of this, you will never begin to be good, you will never look to
have your hearts changed, and your souls saved.

The Ethiopians paint Angels black, and Devils white, in favor of their own
complexion, and they say, that if the brute creatures could draw a picture of
the divine nature, they would make their shape the Copy, and thus they flatter
and delude themselves; take heed young men, take heed, that you don't put the
like cheats upon your own souls, take heed that you be not like those Limners,
who so as they can make a man's picture gay and gaudy, care not to draw it, so
as to resemble him, it is safest and best O young man! to know the worst of thy
self, and to know thy self as thou art in thy self, and not as thy own
flattering heart, or as other flatterers may represent thee to thy self.

Thirdly, If you would be good betimes, then you must acquaint your selves
with Jesus Christ betimes, you must know him betimes, a man never begins to
be good, till he begins to know him that is the fountain of all goodness; John
17.3
This is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent.

The knowledge of Christ is the beginning of eternal life, it is the way to
eternal life, it is a taste of eternal life, it is a sure pledge and pawn to
the soul of eternal life.

The Spaniards say of Aquinas, that he that knows not him, knows not any
thing, but he that knows him, knows all things; he that knows Jesus Christ,
not notionally only, but practically, not apprehensively only, but
affectively, he knows all things that may make him happy; but he that knows
not Jesus Christ, knows nothing that will stand him in stead when he shall lie
upon a dying bed, and stand before a judgment seat.

Justin Martyr relates, that when in his discourse with Tryphon, he mentioned
the knowledge of Christ, as conducing to our happiness, and perfection;
Tryphons friends laughed at it; but I hope better things of all those into whose
hands this treatise shall fall.

Sirs, the Sun is not more necessary to the world, the eye to the body, the
Pilate to the ship, the General to the army, etc. then the knowledge of Christ
betimes, is necessary for all those that would be good betimes.

Dear hearts, as ever you would be good betimes, you must labor even as for
Life, to know and be thoroughly acquainted with these six things, concerning
Jesus Christ betimes.

First, If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes that there is
every thing in Christ, that may encourage you to seek him, and serve him, to
love him, Nec Christus, acc ^oelum, patilur hyperbolen.
and obey him, to believe on him, and to marry with him. If you look upon his
names, his natures, his offices, his graces, his dignities, his excellencies,
his royalties, his glories, his fulnesses, they all speak out as much. Are you
poor? why Christ has tried Gold to enrich you; Rev. 3.18
are you naked? Christ has white raiment to cloathe you; are you spiritually
blind? Christ has eye salve that will enlighten you; are you in straits? he
has wisdom to Counsel you; 1 Cor. 1.30
are you unrighteous? he will be righteousness to you; are you unholy? he
will be holiness and sanctification to you; are you hungry? John. 6 48 Isa.
55.1 Mat. 11.28 Mat. 9.12
he is bread to feed you; are you thirsty? he is wine and milk to satisfy
you; are you weary? he is a bed, a seat, to rest you; are you sick? why, he
is a Physician to cure you, etc. ( Omne bonum in summo bono) all good is in the
chiefest good. The Creatures have their particular goodness, health has its
particular goodness, and wealth has its particular goodness, and learning has
its, and the favor of the Creature has its, etc. but now Jesus Christ he is
an universal good, Christ is the Bonum in quo omnia bona.
all the petty excellencies that are scattered abroad in the Creatures, are
united to Christ; yea all the whole volume of perfections which is spread
through heaven and earth is epitomized in him. ( Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia
in ipso uno bono, bona sunt omnia. Aug. One Christ will be to thee instead of
all things else, because in him are all good things to be found. Abraham's
servant brought forth jewels of silver, Genesis 24.53
and jewels of gold to win Rebeccah's heart to Isaac; so should you, O young
men, be often in presenting to your own view, all those amiable and excellent
things that be in Christ, to win your hearts over to Christ betimes.

Secondly, If you would be good betimes, Heb 7.25. (...). Perpetually,
Constantly. Mat. 9.28 Isa. 63.1 Mighty to save
then you must know betimes that Jesus Christ is mighty to save, he is able to
save to the uttermost, all them that come unto him, that believe in him, that
cast themselves upon him. The Lord has laid help upon one that is mighty,
Christ saves perfectly, thoroughly, perpetually, them that come unto him.

The three tongues that were written upon the Cross, in Greek, Latin, and
Hebrew, to witness Christ to be the King of the Jews, do each of them in their
several Ideoms avouch this Axiom, that Christ is an all-sufficient Savior,
and a threefold cord is not easily broken. They say it is true of the Oil at
Rhemes, that though it be continually spent in the auguration of their Kings of
France, yet it never wastes; Christ is that pot of Mannah, that cruse of Oil,
Christ is never vacuis manibus, empty-handed.
that bottomeless Ocean, that never fails his people; there is in Christ an
all sufficiency, for all Creatures at all times, in all places.

The great Cham is said to have a tree full of pearls hanging by ^^^sters, but
what is the great ^^ams tree, Rev. 22.2 Christ is like the trees of the
sanctuary, which were both for meat and for medicine. Ezekiel. 47.12
to Christ our tree of Life, who has all variety and plenty of fruit upon him;
the happinesses that comes to believers by Christ are so many, that they cannot
be numbered, so great that they cannot be measured, so copious that they
cannot be defined, so precious that they cannot be valued, all which speaks
out the fullness and all sufficiency of Christ.

There is in Christ ( plenitudo abundantiae, and plenitudo redundantiae) a
fullness of abundance, and a fullness of redundancy, as well as a fullness of
sufficiency.

There is in Christ.
1 The fullness of the spirit. 2 The fullness of grace. 3 The fullness of the
Image of God. 4 The fullness of the Godhead. 5 The fullness of glory.
But I must not now open, nor dilate on these things, least I should tire both
my self, and ^e Reader.

Plutarch in the Life of Phocion, tells us of a certain Gentlewoman of Jonia,
who showed the wife of Phocion all the rich jewels and precious stones she
had; she answered her again, all my riches and jewels is my husband Phocion; so
may a penitent sinner say of his blessed Savior. Christ is all my jewels, my
riches, my Treasures, my pleasures, etc. his sufficiency is all these, and more
then these to me.

The Spanish Ambassador coming to see the treasury of Saint Mark (in Venice)
which is cried up thorow-out the World, fell a groping to find whether it had
any bottom, and being asked why, answered in this amongst other things, my
great Masters treasure differs from yours, in that his has no bottom, as I
find yours to have, alluding to the Mines in Mexico, and Potosy* but what are
the Spaniards Treasures to Christ's Treasures; a man may without much groping
find the bottom of all earthly treasures, Ipse Deus sufficit ad praemium.
Bern.
but who can find the bottom of Christ's treasures? should all created
excellencies meet in one glorified breast, yet they could not enable that
glorious God-like creature to sound the bottom of those riches and treasures
which are in Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. All which speaks out Christ's all sufficiency,
and thus much for the second thing.

Thirdly, If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes that there
is a mavelous willingness and readiness in Christ, to embrace, to entertain,
to welcome returning sinners, and to show mercy and favor to them. Luke 15.20,
21, 22.
The young Prodigal did but think of returning to his father, and he ran and
met him, and instead of kicking or killing him, he kissed him, and embraced him;
his bowels rolled within him, and his compassions flowed out freely to him.
Isa. 55.1 The meaning is, sell thy self, thine own wit, reason, self-worth, and
that is all Christ desires, says Augustine upon the words.
Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy, and eat, yea, come buy wine, and milk, without money, and
without price. Nazianzen improveth this place thus, Oh this easy way of
contract, he gives more willingly than others sell, if thou will but accept,
that is all the price, though you have no merits, though you have nothing in
your selves to encourage you, yet will you accept? if you will, all is freely
yours; the waters shall be yours to cleanse you, and the milk yours to nourish
you, and the bread yours to strengthen you, and the wine yours to comfort you;
here poor Sinners are called three times to come; come says Christ, come,
come, to show how mavelous ready and willing he is, that poor sinners should
taste of Gospel delicates, so in that John 7.37. Jesus stood and cried, if any
man thirst, let him come to me and drink. So in that Rev. 22.17. Let him that
is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely; so
in that Rev. 3.20. Cant. 2.8 Christ comes leaping upon the Mountains, and
skipping upon the hills; to show his readiness and willingness to do good to
souls.
Behold; I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me; and so in
that Luke 14.21. The Master of the house, said to his Servant, go out quickly
into the streets, and lanes of the City, and bring in hither the Poor, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind. Here is no man of quality, of dignity, of
worldly pomp, or glory, or of any self-sufficiency, that is invited to the
feast, but a company of poor raged, deformed, slighted, neglected,
impoverished, wounded sinners, these are invited to feast with Christ.

Concerning this willingness of Christ, I shall speak more when I come to deal
with Old sinners in the close of this discourse, and to that I refer you, for
further and fuller satisfaction, concerning the great readiness and willingness
of Jesus Christ, to entertain returning Sinners.

Fourthly, If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes that Jesus
Christ is designed, sealed, and appointed by the Father, to the office of a
Mediator. John 6.27 The father sealed, even God, so the Greek has it.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him has God
the father sealed: God the father has made Christ's Commission authentical, as
men do theirs by their Seal. It is a metaphor, a simile taken from them who
give Commissions under hand and seal. God the father has given it under his
hand and seal, that Jesus Christ is the only person that he has appointed,
and sealed allowed, and confirmed to the office of our redemption. If Jesus
Christ were never so able to save, and never so willing, and ready to save poor
Sinners, yet if he were not appointed, designed, and sealed, for that work,
the awakened Sinner would never look out after him, nor desire union with him,
nor interest in him, and therefore it is of very great consequence to know that
God the father has sent and sealed Christ to be a Savior to his people, him
has God the father sealed; sealed by way of destination, and sealed by way of
qualification, sealed by his doctrine, sealed by his miracles, sealed by his
baptism, sealed by his Resurrection, but above all, sealed by his glorious
unction. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3 Luke 4.18 Christ was anointed of God, 1 By way of
designation. 2 By way of Qualification. 3 By way of Inauguration. This
anointing was ordinarily used in the installing men to offices of any eminence.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the Prison to
them that are bound. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might
be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified, neither Saints, nor Angels, are sealed and anointed to the great
work of redemption, but the Lord Jesus is, you should always look upon the Lord
Jesus as sealed and anointed to the Office of a Mediator, and accordingly
plead with him.

Ah Lord! It is thy Office as thou art a sealed and an anointed Savior, and
Redeemer to subdue my sins, to change my nature, to sanctify my heart, to
reform my life, and to save my soul, and therefore do it for thy names sake, O
do it for thy Office sake, do it for thy glories sake. Psalm. 41.8 Act. 4.27
Thou art anointed with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows; thou have a
larger effusion of the spirit upon thee than others, thou art anointed with the
Holy Ghost, Act. 10.38
and with power after an extraordinary measure and manner, thou art endued with
all Heroical gifts and excellencies, plentifully, John 1.16 John 3.34
abundantly, transcendently, thou art sealed, and predestined, thou art
invested into this office of Mediatorship under the fathers hand and seal, and
therefore whether should I go for salvation, for remission, for redemption, for
grace, for glory, but to thee?

Fi^thly, If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes, that there
is no way to salvation but by Jesus Christ, Act. 4.12 (...) that is by or
through the mediation of any other.
neither is there salvation in any other (speaking of Christ) for there is none
other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved; if ever you
are saved, you must be saved by him, and him only, you must not look for
another Savior, nor you must not look for a co-savior, you must be saved
wholly by Christ, and only by Christ, or you shall never be saved; Act. and
Mon.
you must cry out as Lambert did (when he was in the fire, and lifted up his
hands, and fingers ends flaming) none but Christ, none but Christ. When
Augustus Caesar desired the Senate to join two Consuls with him for the better
government of the State, Suetonius.
the Senate answered, that they held it as a diminution of his dignity, and a
disparagement of their own judgment, to join any with so incomparable a man as
Augustus.

Ah Friends, It is a dimiuntion of Christ's dignity, sufficiency, and glory, in
the business of your salvation, to join any thing with the Lord Jesus, and it
is the greatest disparagement in the World to your own judgments, knowledge,
Prudence, and wisdom, to yoke any with Christ in the work of Redemption, in
the business of salvation.

Augustine says, that Mercellina hung Christ's picture, and the picture of
Pithagoras together, many there are not only in Rome, but in England (yea I am
afraid in London) who join Christ, and their works together, Christ and their
Prayers together, Christ and their Teachers together, Christ and their
mournings together, Christ and their hearings together, Christ and their Alms
together.

Ah! what a poor, what a weak, what an impotent, what an insufficient Savior
does these men make Jesus Christ to be. Except these men come off from these
things, and come up only to Jesus Christ in the great business of salvation,
they will as certainly, and as eternally perish (notwithstanding their hearing,
knowing, and talking much of Christ) as those that never heard of Jesus Christ.

In the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 22.11. chapter 19. v. 19
God commands them not to wear a Garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and
linen together. Neither shall a garment mingled of Linen and woollen come
upon thee.

This Law was figurative, and shows us that in the case of our justification,
acceptance, and salvation, we are not to join our works, our services, with
the righteousness of Christ; Phil. 3.9, 10 Rev. 19.8 Gal. 3.28. c. 2.16
God abhors a linsy-woolsy righteousness. And as by the Letter of this Law in
the Hebrews account, one thread of wool in a Linen garment, or one Linen
thread in a Woollen garment, made it unlawful; So the least manner of mixture
in the business of justification, makes all null and void. And if by grace,
then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace; Romans 11.6 Ephesians.
2.5 Rom 5.15, 16, 8
But if it be of works, then it is no more grace: otherwise work is no more
work; he that shall mix his Righteousness with Christ's, he that shall mix his
puddle with Christ's purple blood, his rags with Christ's royal Robes; his copper
with Christ's Gold, his water with Christ's wine, etc. is in the ready way to
perish for ever.

On earth Kings love no consorts, power is impatient of participation. Christ
will be Alexander or ( Nemo) no body, he will be all in all in the business
of Justification, 1 Cor. 1.30 Romans 5.19, 20
or he will be nothing at all; we must say of Christ, as it was once said of
Caesar (socium habet neminem) he may have a companion, etc. but he must not
have a competitor.

Let us say of Christ, as the Heathen once said of his Petty gods ( contemn
minutulos istos Deos, modo Jovem propitium habeam) so long as he had his
Jupiter to friend, he regarded them not; So, so long as we have our Jesus to
friend, Ephesians. 3.9, 10 Psalm. 71.15, 16, 19, compared.
and his righteousness and blood to friend, we should contemn all other things,
and abhor the bringing of any thing into competition with him; a real Christian
cares not for any thing that has not ( aliquid Christi) Something of Christ in
it. He that holds not wholly with Christ, does very shamefully neglect Christ;
Aut totum mecum tene, aut totum omit, says Gregory Nazienzen.

There is no other name, no other nature, no other blood, no other merits, no
other person to be justified and saved by but Jesus Christ; Isa. 55.2. Romans
10.3.
you may run from Creature to Creature, and from duty to duty, and from
Ordinance to Ordinance; and when you have wearied and tired out your selves in
seeking ease and rest, satisfaction and remission, justification and salvation,
in one way and another, you will be forced after all to come to Christ, and to
cry out, Ah! none but Christ, none but Christ. Ah! none to Christ, none to
Christ, no works to Christ, no duties, no services to Christ, no prayers, no
tears to Christ, no righteousness, no holiness to Christ. Well friends,
remember this, that all the tears in the world cannot wipe off (meritoriously)
one sin nor all the grace and holiness that is in Angels and men, buy out the
pardon of the least transgression. All remission is only by the blood of Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, If you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes,
that the heart of Jesus Christ is as much set upon sinners now he is in
Heaven, as ever it was when he was upon earth. Christ is not less loving,
less mindful, less desirous of sinners eternal welfare now he is in Heaven
(in a far Country) than he was when he lived on earth: 2 Cor. 5.20.
witness his continuing the Ministry of Reconciliation among poor sinners, in
all ages; witness the constant Treatise that by his Ambassadors and Spirit he
still has with poor sinners, about the things of their peace, the things of
eternity; Rev. 3.20. Isa. 16.4. Isa. 27.5.
witness his continual knockings, his continual callings upon poor sinners by
his word, Rod, Spirit, to open, to repent, to lay hold on mercy, and to be at
peace with him; witness his continual wooing of poor sinners in the face of all
neglects, Cant 1.2, 3. Luk, 14.
and put offs, in the face of all delays and denials; Pro. 6.9. Mat. 22.4.23,
37.
in the face of all harsh entertainment and churlish answers; in the face of
all gain-sayings and carnal reasonings; in the face of all the scorn and
contempt that wretched sinners put upon him; and witness that plain word,
Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
and to day, and for ever. Christ is the same aforetime, in time, and after
time, he is unchangeable in his essence, in his promises, and in his
affections. I am Alpha and Omega, Re. 1.8, 11. chapter 21.6. chapter 22.13,
the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and
which is to come. The phrase is taken from the Greek letters, whereof Alpha is
the first and Omega the last; It was a custom among the Turks to cry out every
morning from an high Tower God always was, and always will be, and so salute
their Mahomet.
the first and last letter of the Greek Alphabet is a description of me, says
Christ, who am before all, and after all, who am above all, and in all, who am
unchangeable in my self, and in my thoughts and good will to poor sinners;
therefore do not poor souls, entertain any hard thoughts concerning Jesus
Christ, as if he was less mindful, less pitiful, and less merciful to poor
souls now he is in Heaven, than he was when his abode was in this world: And
thus I have gone over those six things that you must know concerning Christ
betimes, if ever you would be good betimes. When Pope Leo lay upon his death
bed, Cardinal Bembus citing a text of Scripture to comfort him, he replied (
Apage has nug as de Christo) away with these bawbles concerning Christ; but I
hope better things of you, and do desire that you will say of all things below
this knowledge of Christ (that I have opened to you) as that devout Pilgrim,
who traveling to Jerusalem, and by the way visiting many brave Cities, with
their rare monuments, and meeting with many friendly entertainments, would
often say, I must not stay here, this is not Jerusalem. Ah! so do you young men
and women, in the midst of all your worldly delights and contents, cry out, Oh
we must not stay here, this is not Jerusalem, this is not that knowledge of
Christ that I must have, if ever I am happy here, and blessed hereafter.

Fourthly and lastly, If you would be good betimes, then you must acquaint
your selves with those that are good betimes; if you would be gracious in the
spring and morning of your youth, then you must begin betimes to be much in
with them, who are much in with Christ, who lie near his heart, and knows much
of his mind: pro. 13.20.
He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall
be destroyed, or as the Hebrew has it, (...)
shall be broken in pieces, Shall be broken, or shall be worse from (...) to
be naught.
as when an army is broken and routed by an enemy. ( Holech from Halach)
walking with the wise, he shall be wise, for so the Original has it; 'Twas
the saying of one, as often as I have been among wicked men, I return home, less
a man than I was before.
it is not talking with the wise, but walking with the wise that will make you
wise; it is not your commending, and praising of the wise, but your walking
with the wise, that will make you wise; it is not your taking a few turns with
the wise, that will make you wise, but your walking with the wise, that will
make you wise; there is no getting much good by them that are good, but by
making them your ordinary and constant companions.

Ah friends! you should do as Joseph in Egypt, of whom the Scriptures says,
Psalm. 105.22. (according to the Hebrew phrase) that he tied the Princes of
Pharaohs Court about his heart: If ever you would gain by the Saints, you must
bind them upon your souls, you must labor to have very near, close, and
intimate communion with them. The Jews have a Proverb, that two dry sticks put
to a green one will kindle it; the best way to be in a flame Godward,
Christ-ward, Heavenward, and Holinesse-ward, is to be among the dry sticks,
the kindle-coals, the Saints, for as live coals kindle those that are dead, so
lively Christians will heat and enliven those that are dead God-wards,
Christ-wards, Heaven-wards, and holinesse-wards. As Iron sharpeneth Iron, so
does the face of a man his friend. Men's wits, Prove. 27.17.
parts, gifts, and industry, commonly grow more strong, vigorous, and quick, by
friendly conference, and communion. And as he that comes where sweet spices
and ointments are stirring, carries away a sweet savor with him, so he that
converseth with those that are good, shall carry away that goodness and
sweetness with him, that shall render him sweet, desirable, and delectable to
others. Polemon that Augustine speaks of, Arg. Ep. 130.
who was all for Wine and play, etc. became a brave man when he came
acquainted with the Philosophers School. So many young men, that have been all
for Wine and women, for playing and toying, for vanity and folly, have become
brave men, precious men, by the company, counsel, and example of those who were
gracious. Doctor Tailor the Martyr rejoiced that ever he came into prison,
because he came thither to have acquaintance with that Angel of God, John
Bradford (as he calls him,) So doubtless many young persons there be that
have much cause to rejoice, and for ever to bless the Lord that ever they came
acquainted with such and such (who fear the Lord, and who walk in his ways)
for the good that they have received by them.

Algerius an Italian Martyr said, he had rather be in prison with Cato, Moses
was of the same mind, and metal. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26, 27.
than with Caesar in the Senate House.

Ah young men, young men! you were better be with the people of God, when they
are in the lowest and most contemptible condition, than with the great (wicked)
ones of the world; when they are in all their Royalty and glory; in the day of
account you will find that they have made the best Market, who have rather
chosen to keep company with Lazarus, though in his rags, then they would (with
others) keep company with Dives, though in his purple Robes.

Well young men, remember this, clothes and company do often times tell tales
in a mute, but significant language. Those that keep ill company, are like
those that walk in the Sun, who are tan^d insensibly.
Tell me with whom thou go, and I will tell thee what thou art, says the
Spanish Proverb. Cicero (though a Heathen) had rather to have no companion,
than a bad one; the Lord grant that this Heathen (and others among them that
were of the same mind with him) may never rise up in judgment against any of
you, into whose hands this Treatise may fall. And thus I have dispatched those
four things that you must be acquainted with betimes, ( viz. the Scripture,
your own hearts and conditions, the Lord Jesus Christ, and those that fear him)
if ever you would be good betimes.

Secondly, If you would be good betimes, if you would seek and serve the Lord
in the spring and morning of your days, then you must shun the occasions of
sin betimes; a man will never begin to be good, till be begin to decline
those occasions that have made him bad, We must shun ( quicquid fuerit male
coloratum) whatsoever looks but ill-favouredly, as Bernard hath^ i^.
1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. You must shun and be shie
of the very appearance of sin, of the very shows and shadows of sin. The word
(...), which is ordinarily rendered; appearance, signifies kind, or sort; and so
the meaning of the Apostle seems to be this, abstain from all sort, or the
whole kind of evil; from all, that is truly so, be it never so small. The
least sin is dangerous; Caesar was stabbed with Bodkins, and many have been
eaten up of Mice, and Lice. The least spark may consume the greatest house; the
least leak may sink the greatest ship; the least sin is enough to undo thy
soul, and therefore shun all the occasions that leads unto it. Job 31.1. Genesis
39.10.
Job made a covenant with his eyes; Joseph would not be in the room where his
Mistress was; Psa. 26.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and David (when himself) would not sit with vain persons. As long as there is
fuel in our hearts for a temptation, we cannot be secure; he that has
Gunpowder about him, had need keep far enough off from sparkles; he that is
either tender of his credit abroad, or comfort at home, had need shun, and be
shie of the very show and shadow of sin; he that would neither wound
conscience, nor credit, God, Jude 23.
nor Gospel, had need hate the Garment spotted with the flesh. The sin, and the
coat of the sin is to be hated, says Ambrose.
In the Law God commanded his people, not only that they should worship no
Idol, but that they should demolish all the monuments of them, and that they
should make no covenant nor affinity with those who worshipped them, and all,
least they should be drawn by these occasions to commit Idolatry with them;
Latet anguis in herba. Snakes are found among Roses. Number. 6.3, 4.
he that would not taste of the forbidden fruit, must not so much as gaze on
it; and he that would not be bit by the Serpent, must not so much as parley
with the Serpent.

It is very observeable, that in the Law the Nazarite was not only commanded to
abstain from wine and strong drink, Quid est vitare peccata, nifi vitare
occasiones peccatorum? Melanct.
but also he might not eat Grapes, whether moist or dry, nor any thing that
is made of the Vine tree, What is it to avoid sin, but to avoid the occasions
of sins?
from the kernels, even to the husk; but why not these small things, in which
there could be no danger of drunkenness? surely least by the contentment of
these, he might be drawn to desire the wine, and so be brought on to sin, to
break his vow, (and so make work for Hell, or for the Physician of souls.) God
here by forbidding the most remote occasions, shows how wary, and exactly
careful men should be to shun, and avoid all occasions, provocations, and
appearances of evil; and indeed we had need to keep off from slippery places,
who can hardly stand fast on dry ground; he that ventures upon the occasion of
sin, and then prays, Lord lead me not into temptation, is like him that
thrusts his finger into the fire, and then prays that it may not be burnt; or
like him that is resolved to quench the fire with oil, which instead of
quenching it, is as fuel to feed it, and increase it. It was a notable saying
of one, Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 65.
(Majus est miraculum inter vehementes occasiones non cadere, quam mortuos
suscitare) it is a greater miracle not to fall, being among strong occasions,
than it is to raise up the dead; he that would not be defiled must not touch
pitch, he that would not be burnt must not carry fire in his bosom, Prove
6.27, 28, 29.
he that would not cat the Meat, Nondiu intus est, periculo pronimus Cypr. He
is not long safe that is near to danger.
must not meddle with the broth, he that would not fall into the pit, must not
dance upon the brink; he that would not feel the blow must keep off from the
train; keep thee far from a false matter. Exodus 23.7. He that will not fly
from the occasions and allurements of sin (though they may seem never so
pleasant to the eye, or sweet to the taste) shall find them in the end to be
more sharp than Vinegar, more bitter than Wormwood, more deadly than poison.

There is a great truth in that saying of the son of Syrach, He that loves
danger, Eccles. 3, 26, 27.
shall perish therein; he that will not decline danger, shall not be able to
decline destruction.

Socrates speaks of two young men that flung away their belts, when being in an
Idol Temple, the lustrating water fell upon them, detesting (says the
Historian) the Garment spotted by the flesh! and will you, O young men play and
toy with the occasions of sin? the Lord forbid.

There are stories of several Heathens that have shunned and avoided the
occasions of sin, and will you dare to venture upon the occasions of sin?

Alexander would not see the woman after whom he might have lusted.

Scipio Africanus warring in Spain, took new Carthage by storm, at which time a
beautiful and noble Virgin fled to him for succor, to preserve her chastity,
he being but four and twenty years old (and so in the heat of youth) hearing
of it, Aure, victor.
would not suffer her to come into his sight, Dio. in vita.
for fear of a temptation, but caused her to be restored in safety to her
Father.

Livia counseled her Husband Augustus, not only not to do wrong, but not to
seem to do so, etc.

Caesar would not search Pompeyes Cabinet, least he should find new matters
of revenge.

Plato mounted upon his horse, and judging himself a little moved with pride,
did presently light from his horse, least he should be overtaken with
loftiness in riding.

Thesius is said to cut off his golden locks, least his enemies should take
advantage by taking hold of them.

Ah young men, young men! shall the very Heathen thus shun and fly from the
occasions of sin, and will not you? will not you, who sit under the Sunshine
of the Gospel; these will in the great day of account be sad, and sore
witnesses against those that dally and play with the occasions of sin.

To prevent carnal carefulness, Christ sends his Disciples to school, to the
irrational Creatures, Mat. 6.26, -- 32. And to prevent your closing with the
occasions of sin, let me send you to school to the like Creatures, that you
may learn by them to shun and avoid the occasions of sin.

The Sepiae, a certain kind of fish perceiving themselves in danger of taking,
by an instinct which they have, they do darken the water; and so many times
escape the net, which is laid for them.

Geese (they say) when they fly over Taurus, they keep stones in their
mouths, lest by gagling they should discover themselves to the Eagles which
are amongst the mountains waiting for them; now if all these considerations put
together, will not work you to decline the occasions of sin, I know not what
will. There is a truth in that old saying, He that will no evil do,
Must do nothing that belongs thereto.


The Israelites must have no leaven in their houses, Exodus 22.19.
till the passover be done, lest they should be tempted to eat of it.

Thirdly, If you would be good betimes, then you must remember the eve of God
betimes, if you would seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of your
days then you must study Gods omnipresence betimes. Psalm. 139.2.14.
Does not he see my ways, Job 31.4. chapter 34.21, 12, etc.
and count all my steps; for his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees
all his goings? There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves.

I have read that Paphnutius converted two famous young strumpets, Thais and
Ephron, Non se putent adulteri noctis tenebris, vel parietum obtegi. Beda.
from uncleanness, only with this argument, that God sees all things in the
dark, when the doors are fast, the windows shut, and the curtains drawn. By
this very Argument Solomon labors to take off his young man from carnal and
sinful courses; Pro. 5.20, 21. Noli peccare, Deus videt, angeli a^ant. etc,
Take heed what thou do, God beholds thee, Angels observe thee.
And why will thou my Son be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the
bosom of a stranger? for the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and
he pondereth all his goings. Thou may deceive all the World, like that
counterfit Alexander in Josephus his story, but Augustus will not be deceived,
he has quicker and sharper eyes.

Ah young men, young men! you may deceive this man and that, and as easily
deceive your selves, but you cannot deceive him who is ((...), totus oculus)
all-eye. As the eyes of a well drawn picture are fastened upon thee which way
soever thou turnest, so are the eyes of the Lord. I have read of one, who being
tempted to Adultery, said, they could not be private enough, and being carried
from room to room, answered, we are not yet private enough, God is here. Jer.
12.27. chapter 29.23.
Ah friends! his eyes which are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun,
compasses thy words, thy ways, thy works, thy thoughts, thy bed, thy board,
thy bench. The Egyptian Hieroglyphick for God, was an eye on a Scepter, showing
that he sees and rules all things.

Ah friends! all thoughts, words, hopes, and hearts, are naked, Heb. 4.13.
Tetra helismena.
opened, dissected and quartered before that God, with whom you have to do. God
is very curious, and exact in marking and observing what is done by men, that
he may render to every man according to his works.

Augustine speaks of an old Comaedian, Aug. de civ. De^. l. 6. c. 10
when having no other spectators, went usually into the Theater, and acted
before the Statues of the Gods.

Ah! Young men, and women, the eye of God should be more to you than all the
World besides; O, that that Scripture might be written with the pen of a
Diamond upon your hearts. Hear ye not me (says the Lord) and will you not
tremble at my presence? Jer. 5.21, 22
There is a great truth in that saying of his ( Magna nobis ex hac indita est
probitatis necessitas, Boethius de consol. l. 5
quia omnia ante oculos judicis facimus cuncta cernentis,) A great necessity of
goodness is from hence put into us, because we do all things before the eyes
of a judge, that sees all things.

Fourthly, If you would be good betimes, then you must hearken to the voice of
Conscience 2 Timothy 1.3
betimes; a man will never begin to be good, till he begins to hearken to
what Conscience speaks; So long as a man turns a deaf ear to Conscience, Psalm.
58.4 Joh. 3.20, 21
he is a safe prisoner to Satan, and a sure enemy to good.

Ah how good might many have been, had they but begun betimes to hearken to
Conscience?

Ah Young men, do not daily with Conscience, do not play, do not trifle with
Conscience, do not stop your ears against Conscience, he that will not in his
Youth give Conscience audience, Such shall find Conscience to be index, judex,
vindex.
shall at last be forced to hear such lectures from conscience, as shall make
his life a very hell. A sleepy Conscience is like a sleepy Lion, when he
awakes he roars and tears, so will conscience, Mar. 9.22. Conscience is (
mill testes) a thousand witnesses for or against a man; he that has long
turned the deaf ear to Conscience, shall at last find his Conscience like
Prometheus's vulture, that lies ever a gnawing. Judas found it so, and Spira
found it so, and Blaer a great Counselor of Scotland, found it so.

I have read of one John Hofmeister, that fell sick in his Inn, Jo. Wolf.
lect. memor. To. 2. ad an 1547
as he was traveling toward Auspurge in Germany, and grew to that horror of
Conscience, that they were fain to bind him in his bed with chains, where he
cried out, that he was for ever cast off by God, and that the promises that
were set before him would do him no good, and all because he had wounded his
Conscience, and turned a deaf ear to conscience.

Well young men, if you will not betimes hearken to Conscience, you shall at
last hear Conscience saying to you, as the probationer Disciple said to Christ,
Mat. 8.19
Master I will follow thee whither soever thou go; so says Conscience,
Sinner I have called upon thee many a thousand times, and told thee that I must
by commission, be thy best friend, or thy worst enemy; but thou would not
hear, and therefore now I will follow thee, whither ever thou go; fast, and
I will follow thee, and fill thee with horrors, and terrors; feast, and I will
follow thee, and show thee such a hand writing upon the wall, as shall cause
thy countenance to change, thy thoughts to be troubled, Dan. 5.5, 6 Toll
conscientiam, toll omnia. Take away Conscience, and take away all, said the
Heathen.
the joints of thy loins to be loosed, and thy knees dashed one against
another; stay at home, and I will follow thee, from bed to board; go abroad,
and I will follow thee into all places and companies; and thou shall know that
it is an evil and a bitter thing, that thou have so often and so long neglected
my calls, and disobeyed my voice, and walked contrary to me; now thou shall
find a truth in that saying of Luther ( una guttula malae conscientiae totum
mare, etc.) one drop of an evil Conscience swallows up the whole Sea of
worldly joy.

Well Young men! There is a day a coming, wherein a good Conscience will be
better than a good purse, for then the Judge will not be put off with a suit
of Complements, or fair words, nor drawn aside with hope of reward; and
therefore as you would be able to hold up your heads in that day, make
conscience of harkening to the voice of Conscience in this your day.

Fifthly, if you would be good betimes, then you must know betimes, wherein
true happiness lies; for a man will never begin to be good, till he begins
to understand wherein his happiness consists.

The Philosophers speaking of happiness, Quot homines tot sententiae, so many
men, so many minds
were divided into two hundred eighty eight opinions, every one intending
something, and yet resolving nothing. Therefore the man in Plutarch, hearing
them wrangle about man's ( Summum bonum) chiefest good; one placing it in this,
and another in that, he went to the market and bought up all that was good,
hoping among all he should not miss of it, but he did; many look for happiness
in sin, Isa. 56.12 Job 28.14
others look for it in the Creatures, but they must all say it is not in us,
(Nil dat quod non habet) nothing can give what it has not, if the Conduit Pipe
has no water, it can give no water; if a man has no money, he can give no
money; if the Creatures have no happiness, they can give no happiness; Now this
jewel, this pearl, happiness, is not to be found in the breast, in the bosom
of creatures, in a word, because I must hasten to a close, man's happiness lys,

First, In his communion with God? as experience and Scripture demonstrates.
Happy is that people, Psalm. 144.15
that is in such a case (but give me that word again) yea, happy is that
people, whose God is the Lord. A man whose soul is in communion with God, shall
find more pleasure in a desert, in a dungeon, in a den, yea, in death, than in
the Palace of a Prince; than in all worldly delights, and contents, etc.

Secondly, In pardon of Sin; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
whose Sin is covered. Psalm. 32.1, 2
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile. It is not blessed is the honorable man, but blessed
is the pardoned man; it is not blessed is the rich man, but blessed is the
pardoned man; it is not blessed is the learned man, but blessed is the pardoned
man; it is not blessed is the politic man, but blessed is the pardoned man; it
is not blessed is the victorious man, but blessed is the pardoned man; Do with
me what thou will, since thou have pardoned my sins, says Luther.

Thirdly, In a complete fruition and enjoyment of God, when we shall be here
no more. Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8
for they shall see God. Now they see him but darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12
but in heaven they shall see him face to face, they shall know as they are
known; but of these things I have spoken largely elsewhere, and therefore shall
satisfy my self with these hints.

Lastly, If you would be good betimes, then you must break your covenant with
sin betimes, you must fall out with your lusts betimes; you must arm and fence
your selves against Sin betimes; Isa. 28, 15.18
a man never begins to fall in with Christ, till he begins to fall out
with his Sins, till sin and the soul be two, Christ and the soul cannot be
one; Now to work your hearts to this, you should always look upon sin under
these notions:

First, If you would have the league dissolved betwixt sin and your souls
betimes, then look upon sin under the notion of an enemy betimes.

Dearly beloved, 1 Pet. 2.11 Sins especially against knowledge (are peccata
vulner antia et divastantia) wounding and wasting.
I befeech you as strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul. As the Viper is killed by the young ones in her belly;
so are poor Sinners betrayed and killed by their own lusts, that are nourished
in their bosoms.

Pittacus a Philosopher, challenging Phlyon the Athenian Captain (in their
wars against them) to single combat, carried a net privily, and so caught
him, and overcame him; So does Sin with poor Sinners, the dangerous, pernicious
malignant nature of Sin, you may see in the story of the Italian, who first
made his Enemy deny God, and then stabbed him to the heart, and so at once
murdered both body, and soul. Sin betrays us into the hand of the Devil, as
Dalilah did Sampson into the hands of the Philistims.

Sugared poisons go down pleasantly; Oh! But when they are down, they gall and
gnaw, and gripe the very heart strings asunder, it is so with sin; Ah! Souls
have not you often found it so?

When Phocas the Murderer, thought to secure himself by building high-walls, he
heard a voice from heaven telling him, that though he built his bulwarks ever
so high, yet Sin within, would soon undermine all.

Ambrose reports of one Theotimus, that having a disease upon his body, the
Physician told him, that except he did abstain from intemperance, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, he would loose his eyes; his heart was so desperately set upon his
Sins, that he cries out, then ( vale lumen amicum) farewell sweet light.

Ah! how did his lusts war both against body and soul.

The Old man is like a treacherous friend, and a friendly Traitor; though it
be a harder thing to fight with a man's lusts, than it is to fight with the
Cross; yet you must fight or dye, if you are not the death of your Sins, they
will prove the death of your souls.

The Oracle told the Cirrheans (diesque belli gerendum) they could not be happy
unless they waged war night and day; As one of the Dukes of Venice dyed
fighting against the Nauratines with his weapons in his hand.
no more can we, except we live and dye fighting against our lusts.

Ah Young men! Can you look upon Sin under the notion of an enemy, and not
break with it, and not arm against it?

Well, remember this, the pleasure and sweetness that follows victory over sin,
is a thousand times beyond that seeming sweetness that is in sin, and as
victory over sin is the sweetest victory, so it is the greatest victory, there
is no conquest to that which is gotten over a man's own corruptions. He that is
slow to anger, is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, than
he that takes a City. It is noble to overcome an enemy without, but it is
more noble to overcome an enemy within; it is honorable to overcome fiery
flames, but it is far more honorable to overcome fiery lusts.

When Valentinian the Emperor was upon his dying-bed, among all his victories
only one comforted him, Romans 7.22, 23 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5, 6. Gal. 5.17.
and that was victory over his worst enemy, viz. his own naughty heart.

Ah young men, young men! your worst enemies are within you, and all their
plots, designs, and assaults are upon your souls, your most noble part; they
know if that fort Royal be won, all is their own, and you are undone, and
shall be their slaves for ever; and therefore it stands you upon, to arm your
selves against these inbred enemies, and if you engage Christ in the quarrel,
you will carry the day, and when you shall lie upon your dying-beds, you will
then find that there is no comfort to that, which arises from the conquests
of your own hearts, your own lusts.

Secondly, If you would break covenant with sin, if you would arm and fence
your selves against sin betimes, 2 Pet. 3.6. Gal. 3.10. Joh. 8.34.
then look upon sin as the souls bonds, for as bonds tie things together, so
does sin tie the sinner, and the curse together, it binds the sinner and wrath
together, it links the sinner and hell together. I perceive that thou art in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; iniquity is a chain, a
bond; now bonds and chains gall the body, and so do sin the soul, and as poor
captives are held fast in their chains, so are sinners in their sins; they
cannot redeem themselves by price, 2 Timothy 2. uit.
nor by power.

Ah young men, young men! no bondage to soul-bondage, no slavery to
soul-slavery; the Israelites bondage under Pharaoh, and the Christians bondage
under the Turks, Augustine says of Rome, that she was the great Mistress of
the world, and the great drudge of sin.
is, but the bondage of the body, of the baser and ignoble part of man, but
yours is soul-bondage, soul-slavery, which is the saddest and greatest of all.

Ah friends! You should never look upon your sins, but you should look upon
them as your bonds; yea as the worst bonds that ever were; all other chains are
golden chains, chains of Pearl, compared to those chains of Iron and Brass;
those chains of lusts with which you are bound. Ah! who can thus look upon his
chains, his sins, and not loathe them, and not labor for freedom from them?
Justinus the Emperors Motto was ( Libert as res inestimabilis) liberty is
unvaluable; if civil liberty be, surely spiritual liberty is much more; if you
ask souls that were once in a state of bondage, but are now Christ's freemen,
they will tell you so.

It was a good observation of Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. 19. in prior. Epist.
ad Corinth.
that Joseph was the freeman, and his Mistrisse was the servant, when she was
at the beck of her own lusts, when she tempted, and he refused. Such as live
most above sin and temptation are the greatest freemen, others that live under
the power of their lusts, are but slaves, and in bonds, though they dream and
talk of freedom, Tit. 3.3.

Thirdly, If you would break league with sin, and arm and fence your selves
against it, then look always upon sin under the notion of fire. Jude 23.
Arpazontes signifies a violent snatching, as the tenderhearted Mother to save
the life of her child pulls it hastily, and with violence out of the fire.
And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Oh! snatch them out
of their sins, as you would snatch a child, a friend out of the fire; or as the
Angel snatched Lot out of Sodom, hastily, and with a holy violence; natural
fire may burn the house, the goods, the treasure, the servant, the child, the
wife, the body, but this fire burns the soul, it destroies and consumes that
noble part, which is more worth than all the treasures of a thousand worlds;
every man has a hand, and a heart to quench the fire which burns his
neighbors house, but few men have either hands or hearts to quench the fire
that burns their neighbors souls, this is, and this shall be for a
lamentation. D. Denisons theeefold resolution. part. 2. Sect. 2.


I have read of one, who upon the violence of any temptation to sin, would lay
his hand on burning coals, and being not able to abide it, would say to
himself, Oh how unable shall I be to endure the pains of hell? and this
restrained him from evil; but what is the fire of hell, to the fire of sin; now
to provoke you to look upon sin under the notion of fire, consider with me the
sundry resemblances between material, and immaterial fire, between corporal
common fire, and between this spiritual fire. Sin, As

First, Fire is terrible and dreadful; a ship on fire, a house on fire, Oh how
dreadful is it! so sin set home upon the conscience is exceeding terrible and
dreadful. Mine iniquity (so the Hebrew) is greater than I can bear; sin or
iniquity is often put for the punishment of sin, by a Metonymie of the
efficient for the effect; Genesis 4.13. Mentiris Cain, thou lie Cain, says one
on the Text.
for sin is the natural Parent of punishment. Mine iniquity says Cain, is so
great, and lies so heavy, so terrible and dreadful upon my conscience, that it
cannot be forgiven; and thus by his diffidence, he stabs two at once, the
mercy of God, and his own soul. So Judas, Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.
I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood, and he went and hanged
himself. As there is no fighting with a mighty fire, so there is no bearing up,
when God sets home sin upon the conscience; a man will then choose strangling,
or hanging, rather than living under such wounds and lashes of conscience.
Histories abounds with instances of this nature, but I must hasten to a close.

Secondly, Fire is most dangerous and pernicious when it breaks forth of the
chimny, or of the house, so it is with sin. Sin is bad in the eye, 2 Samuel 12.9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
worse in the tongue, worser in the heart, but worst of all in the life. Fire,
when out of its proper place, may do much hurt in the house, but when it flames
abroad, then it does most mischief to others; Sin in the heart may undo a man,
but sin in the life may undo others, as well as a man's self. Set a guard upon
thy eye, Job. 31.1. Prove. 4.23. Ephesians. 5.15.
a greater upon thy heart, but the greatest of all upon thy life.

Salvian relates how the Heathen did reproach some Christians, Salvianus de G.
D. l. 4.
who by their lewd lives made the Gospel of Christ to be a reproach; where
(said they) is that good Law which they do believe? where are those rules of
godliness which they do learn? they read the holy Gospel, and yet are unclean;
they hear the Apostles writings, and yet are drunk, they follow Christ, and yet
disobey Christ, they profess a holy Law, and yet do lead impure lives.

But the lives of other Christians have been so holy, that the very Heathens
observing them have said, surely this is a good God, whose servants are so
good. It is brave when the life of a Christian is a commentary upon Christ's
life. One speaking of the Scripture, Augustine.
says (verba vivenda, non legenda) they are words to be lived, and practiced,
not read only. Plutarch.
A Heathen advises us to demean our selves, so circumspectly, as if our
enemies did always behold us. And says another, for shame, Epictetus.
either live as Stoics, or leave off the name of stoics. Sirs, live as
Christians, or lie down the name of Christians.

Thirdly, Fire hardens, it makes the weak and limber clay to become stiff and
strong for the Potters use. So sin hardens, it hardens the heart against the
commands of God, the calls of Christ, Jer. 5.3. chapter 19. ult. Isa. 9.13.
and the wrestlings of the Spirit. As you see in Pharaoh, the Jews, and most
that are under the sound of the Gospel. Ah! how many has this fire (sin)
hardened in these days, by working them to slight soul-softening means, Jer.
2.25. chapter 18.12.
and by drawing them to entertain hardening-thoughts of God, and to fall in
with soul-hardening company, and soul-hardening Principles, and soul-hardening
examples, of hardened and unsensible sinners; one long since thus complained
that they did ( patientius far Christi jacturam, quam suam) more calmly pass
by the injuries done to Christ, than those which are done unto themselves; this
age is full of such hardened unsensible souls.

Fourthly, Fire is a lively active element, so is sin. Genesis 22. Psalm. 51. Job
3. Mat. 26. Romans 1.15, etc.
Ah how lively and active was this fire in Abraham, David, Job, Peter, Paul,
and other Saints? though Christ by his death has given it its mortal wound,
yet it lives, and is, and will be active in the dearest Saints. Though sin and
grace were not born together, neither shall they dye together; yet while
believers live in this world, they must live together. There is a History that
speaks of a Fig Tree that grew in a stone wall, and all means was used to kill
it, they cut off the branches, and it grew again, they cut down the body, and
it grew again, Isedore the Monk was very much out, who vaunted that he had
felt in himself no motion to sin forty years together.
they cut it up by the root, and still it lived, and grew until they pulled
down the stone-wall; till death shall pull down our stonewalls; Sin will live,
this fire will burn.

We may say of sin, as some say of Cats, that they have many lives; kill them
and they will live again, kill them again, and they will live again; so kill
sin once, and it will live again, kill it again, and it will live again, etc.
Sin oftentimes is like that Monster Hydra cut off one head, and many will rise
up in its room.

Fifthly, Fire is of a penetrating nature, Isa. 1.5, 6. Romans 7.13.17. Sin is (
malum Catholicum) A Catholic evil ( Quodcunque in peccato, peccatum est)
whatsoever is in sin, is sin.
it peirceth and windeth it self into every corner and chinck, and so does sin
wind it self into our thoughts, words, and works; it will wind it self into
our understandings, to darken them; and into our judgments, to pervert them;
and into our wills, to poison them; and into our affections, to disorder them;
and into our consciences, to corrupt them; and into our carriages, to debase
them. Sin will wind it self into every duty, and every mercy, it will wind it
self into every one of our enjoyments and concernments.

Hannibal having overcome the Romans, put on their armor on his shoulders, and
so by that policy they being taken for Romans, won a City; but what are
Hannibals wiles, to sins wiles, or Satan's wiles? if you have a mind to be
acquainted with their wiles, look over my Treatise called Precious Remedies
against Satan's Devices.

Sixthly and lastly, Fire is a devouring, a consuming Element, Psalm. 21.9.
it turns all fuel into ashes; It is a Woolf that eats up all, 2 Pet. 2.5, 6.
Pro. 6.32. Eccles. 9.18. Prove. 13.13. chapter 20.29.1. Pro. 11.3. chapter 15.25. chapter
21.7
so Sin is a fire that devours and consumes all, it turned Sodom and Gomorah
into ashes, it has destroyed the Caldaean, Persian, and Grecian Kingdoms,
and will at last destroy the Roman Kingdom also; this Woolf ate up Sampsons
strength, Absoloms beauty, Achitophels policy, and Herod's glory, etc. It has
drowned one world already, and will at last burn another, even this. Oh the
hopes, the hearts, the happiness, the joys, the comforts, the souls that this
fire (Sin) has consumed and destroyed! etc.

Peter Camois Bishop of Betty in France, in his draught of Eternity, Number. 75.
tells us that some devout personages caused those words of the Prophet Isaiah
(to be written in letters of gold upon their chimny pieces) Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? Isa. 33.14.
who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Ah young men, young men! I desire that you may always look upon sin under the
notion of fire, yea as such fire as lays the foundation for everlasting fire,
for everlasting burnings, and this may work when other things will not.

I have read of a grave and chaste Matron, who being moved to commit folly with
a lewd Russian, after some discourse, she called for a pan of burning coals,
requesting him for her sake to hold his finger in them but one hour, he
answered, it is an unkind request, to whom she replied, that seeing he would
not do so much as to put one finger upon the coals for one hour, she could not
yield to do that, for which she should be tormented both body and soul in
hell fire for ever. The application is easy, etc.

Fourthly, If you would break with Sin betimes, if you would arm against Sin in
the spring and morning of your days, then you should look upon Sin under the
notion of a Thief, and indeed Sin is the greatest Theif, the greatest Robber in
the World, it robbed the Angels of all their glory, 2 Pet. 2, 4 Genesis 3
it robbed Adam of his Paradise, and felicity, and it has robbed all the Sons
of Adam of five precious Jewels, the least of which was more worth than heaven
and earth.

1 It has robbed them of the holy and glorious Image of God, which would have
been fairly engraven upon them, had Adam stood, etc.

2 It has robbed them of their sonship, and of sons have made them slaves.

3 It has robbed them of their friendship, Well did one of the fathers call
Pride and Vainglory the sweet spoiler of spiritual excellencies, and a
pleasant theif
and made them enemies.

4 It has robbed them of their communion and fellowship with Father, Son, and
Spirit, and made them Strangers and Aliens.

5 It has robbed them of their glory, and made them vile and miserable. It
has robbed many a nation of the Gospel, and many a parish of many a happy
guide; and many a Christian of the favor of God, the joys of the spirit, and
the Peace of Conscience.

Oh the health, the wealth, the honor, the friends, the relations, that Sin
has robbed thousands of.

Nay, It has robbed many of their gifts, their arts, their parts, their
memory, their judgment; yea their very reason, as you may see in Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Achitophel, Haman, Herod, and those Babylonish
Princes that accused Daniel. And so in Menipus of Phenicia, who having lost his
goods, strangled himself. And so Dinarcus Phidon at a certain loss; cut his
own throat to save the charge of a cord. And so Augustus Caesar (in whose time
Christ was born) was so troubled and astonished at the relation of an overthrow
from Varrus, Suetonius.
that for certain months together, he let the hair of his beard and head grow
still, and wore it long; yea and other whiles would run his head against the
doors, crying out Quintilius Varrus, deliver up my Legions again; by all which,
it is most apparent, that Sin is the greatest thief in all the World. Oh then
who would not break league and covenant with it, and be still in pressing of
God, to do justice upon it? etc.

Fifthly, Nah. 1.1 Hab. 1.1 Mal. 11
If you would break with Sin, and arm and fence your selves against Sin
betimes, then you must look upon sin under the notion of a burden betimes;
and indeed sin of all burdens is the heaviest burden in all the world.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, Psalm 40.12
mine iniquities have taken hold upon me; so that I am not able to look up;
they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me; and
again, Mine iniquities are gone over my head (says the same person) as an
heavy burden, Psalm. 38.4
they are too heavy for me to bear. Sin is a weight that easily besets poor
souls, Heb. 12.1
it is a burden that so troubles them, and puzzles them, that so curbs them,
and girds them, Romans 7.13. ult.
that so presses and oppresses them, as that it wrings many bitter tears from
their eyes, and many sad and grievous sighs and groans from their hearts.

Again, As Sin is a burden to Christians, so it is a burden to heaven, Jud^ 6
it made heaven weary to bear the Angels that fell; no sooner had they sinned,
but heaven groans to be eased of them; and it never left groaning till justice
had turned them a groaning to hell.

Again, Numb. 16.26.35.
as Sin is a burden to Heaven, so it is a burden to the earth, witness her
swallowing up, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, their Wives, children, Goods,
servants, etc. Ah! Sinners your sins makes the very earth to groan; they make
the earth weary of bearing you. Oh! How does the earth groan and long to
swallow up those earthly wretches, whose hopes, whose hearts are buried in the
earth, these shall have little of heaven, but enough of earth when they come to
dye.

Cornelius Alapide, tells a story, that he heard of a famous Preacher, Romans
8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23
who showing the bondage of the Creature, brings in the Creature complaining
thus; Oh! that we could serve such as are Godly; Oh! that our substance and
our flesh, might be incorporated into godly people, that so we might rise
into glory with them; Oh! that our flesh might not be incorporated into the
flesh of sinners, for if it be, we shall go to hell, and would any creatures
go to hell? Oh! we are weary of bearing sinners, we are weary of serving of
sinners; thus the creatures groan, thus the creatures complain, the Sinners
sins forcing them to it, etc.

Again, Sin is a burden to God, Behold I am pressed under you, Amos. 2.13
as a cart is pressed that is full of shcaves, by this plain pithy country
comparison, God shows how sadly he is pressed and oppressed, how sorely he is
wearied and tired with those peoples Sins; Divine patience is even worn out;
Justice has lift up her hand, and will bear with them no longer. God seems to
groan under the pressure of their Sins, as a Cart seems to do under a heavy
load; of this God complains by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 43.24
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities. I am as weary of your Sins, as a Traveling woman is weary of her
pains, says God. Sin was such a burden to God, that he sweeps it off with a
sweeping Flood, Genesis 7. etc.

Again, Luke 22.44 A strange watering of a garden. Bern. 1 Pet. 2.24
Sin is a burden to Christ, it made him sweat, as never man sweat; it made him
sweat great drops of clotted or congealed blood; Sin put Christ's whole body
into a bloody sweat, it made him groan pittiously when he bare our Sins in his
body on the Tree. Sin made his soul heavy even to the death, and had he not
been one that was mighty, Isa. 6.6
yea, that was all-mighty, he had fainted and failed under his burden. And
thus you see what a burden Sin is, to man, to the Creatures, to heaven, to
earth, to God, to Christ; and therefore as you would break with Sin betimes,
look always upon it as a burden, yea, as the greatest and heaviest burden in
all the world, etc.

Sixthly and Lastly, If you would break Covenant with Sin, and arm, and fence
your selves against it betimes, then you must look upon it betimes under the
notion of a Tyrant, Tit. 3.3
and indeed Sin is the worst and greatest Tyrant in the world. Other Tyrants
can but Tyranize over our bodies, but Sin is a Tyrant that tyranizes over both
body and soul, as you may see in the sixth and seventh of the Romans, Sin is a
Tyrant that has a kind of jurisdiction in most men's hearts; it sets up the
Law of Pride, the Law of Passion, the Law of Oppression, the Law of Formality,
the Law of Hypocrisy, the Law of Carnality, the Law of Self-love, the Law of
Carnal-Reason, the Law of unbeleef, and strictly Commands, Subjection to them,
and proclaims fire and sword to all that stand out; this Saints, and sinners,
good men and bad, do sufficiently experience.

Sin is a Tyrant of many thousand years standing, Thales one of the seven
Sages, used to say that few Tyrants lived to be old; but it is far otherwise
with this Tyrant Sin. Prove. 4.16
and though it has had many a wound, and many a foil, and received much
opposition, yet still it plays the Tyrant all the World over. O! the hearts
that this Tyrant makes to ache, the souls that this Tyrant makes to bleed.

Pharoahs Tyranny was nothing to Sins Tyranny, this Tyrant will not so much as
suffer his slaves to sleep. They sleep not except they have done mischief; and
their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall. The wicked are like
the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Isa.
57.20, 21.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

Other Tyrants have been brought down, and brought under by a humane power, but
this cannot, but by a divine; the power of man has brought down many of the
Tyrants of this World; but it is only the power of Christ, that can bring down
this Tyrant, that can cast down his strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
therefore engage Christ in the conflict, draw him into the battle, and in the
end the conquest will be yours.

Vitellius, who had been Emperor of all the World, yet was driven through the
streets of Rome stark naked, and thrown into the River Tyber, etc.

Andronicus the Emperor, for his cruelty toward his People, was by them at
last shamefully deposed, and after many contumelies hanged up by his heels.

Ptolomy was put on a Cross. Bajazet in an iron Cage. Phoras broken on the
Wheel. Lycam cast to the Dogs (as well as Jezabel.) Attales thrust into a
Forge. King Gath into a Beer-barrel, etc. But none of these that have tameed
these Tyrants, that have brought down these mighty Nimrods, have been able to
tame, to bring under the Tyrants, the sins, the lusts, that has been in their
own bosoms; many a man has had a hand in bringing down of worldly Tyrants,
who notwithstanding have dyed for ever by the hand of a Tyrant within, etc.

And thus much for the directions that young men must follow, if they would be
good betimes, if they would seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning
of their days.

The Young man's objections Answered
I shall now give some brief Answers to the Young man's Objections, and the Old
man's scruples, and so close up this discourse.

Ob. But some young men may object and say; you would have us to be good
betimes, and to seek and serve the Lord in the Prime-rose of our days, but it
may be time enough hereafter to follow this Counsel; we are young, and it may
be time enough for us to mind these things hereafter, when we have satisfied
the flesh so and so, or when we have got enough of the world, and laid up
something that will stand us instead, and that may oil our joints when we are
old. Now

To this Objection I answer.

First, That it is the greatest folly and madness in the world to put off God,
and the great things of eternity with maybees, what Tradesman, what Merchant,
what Mariner so mad, so foolish, so blockish, as to put off a present season,
a present opportunity of profit and advantage upon the account of a may-bee? It
may be I may have as good a season, it may be I shall have as golden an
opportunity to get, and to enrich my self as this is; and therefore farewell to
this. No men that are in their right minds will argue thus; and why then should
you especially in the things that are of an everlasting concernment to you?

I have read of one Monarcho a frantic Italian, who thought that all the Kings
of the Earth were his Vassals, and as frantic are they, who wilfully neglect
present seasons of grace, upon the account of a future may-bee, etc.

Secondly, I answer, it may be if thou neglectest this present season, and
opportunity of grace, thou may never have another; Young men, if you will
but go into burial places, you shall find graves exactly of your length.
it may be mercy may never knock more, if thou do not now open; it may be
Christ shall never be offered to thee more, if now thou do not close with
him, and accept of him; it may be the Spirit will never strive more with thee,
if now thou do resist him, and withstand him; it may be a pardon shall never
be offered to thee more, if now thou will not take it; it may be the Gospel
shall never sound more in thy ears, if now thou will not hear it; now set one
may-bee against another may-bee, set Gods may-bee against thine own may-bee, but

Thirdly, Doubtless there are many thousand thousands now in Hell, who have
pleased themselves, and put off God, and the seasons of grace with a may-bee,
hereafter may be time enough. It may be when I have gratified such a lust, It
was an unspeakable vexation to King Lysamachus, that his staying to drink one
draught of water lost him his Kingdom.
and when I have treasured up so much of the world, I will return and seek, and
serve the Lord, but before ever this season or opportunity came, justice has
cut the thread of their lives, and they are now miserable for ever; and now
they are still a cursing themselves, because they have slipped their golden
opportunities upon the account of a may-bee, etc. But

Fourthly and lastly, This putting off of God, and the present seasons of grace
with a may-bee, is very provoking to God, as you may see if you will but read
from the 20. verse to the 33. of the first of Proverbs. Nothing stirs and
provokes a Master more, than his servants putting off his service, or his
commands with a may-bee; it may be I will, it may be I may do this and that,
nothing puts a Master sooner into a heat, a flame, than this; nor nothing puts
God more into a flame than this, as you may see by comparing Psalm. 95. ver. 6.
to the end; with that 3. of the Hebrews and the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. read the words, and tremble at the thought of a may-bee, at the
thoughts of putting off of God, and the seasons of grace.

I have read of two, who cut off their right hand one for another, and then
made it an excuse, a put off, they were lame, and so could not serve in the
Galleys of Francis the first, King of France, but this practice of theirs did
so insense and provoke the King, that he sent them both to the Gallows. I
suppose the reader is not so young, but knows how to apply it.

Object. If I should begin to be good betimes, and to seek and serve the Lord
in the spring and morning of my days, I should lose my friends, I should lose
their favor, for they are carnal and worldly, and had rather I should seek
after gold, than God, the Creature, than Christ, Earth, than Heaven, etc.

Now to this I answer, Surely you are out, for

First, This is the high way, the ready way to gain the best, the surest, and
the soundest friends. Prove. 16.7.
When a man's wa^es please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. Job ^^ 23,^,28.
When a man falls in with God, God will work the Creatures to fall in with him.
Joseph found it so, and Jacob found it so, and Job found it so, the three
Children found it so, and Daniel found it so, as you all know that have but
read the Scripture. And many in this age (as bad as it is) have found that the
best way to make friends, is first, to make God our friend. Ah young men, young
men! you shall not lose your friends (by seeking and serving of the Lord in the
spring and morning of your days) but only exchange bad ones for good ones, the
worst for the best; he that gives up himself betimes to the Lord, shall have
God for his friend, and Christ for his friend, and the Angels for his friends,
and the Saints for his friends; Christ will be to such, First, An omnipotent
friend. Secondly, An omniscient friend. Thirdly, An omnipresent friend.
Fourthly, An indeficient friend. Fifthly, Luke 15.7.10. Isa. 6.7, 8, 9. Heb. 4
13. Isa. 59.16, 17 Isa. 44.24, Mal. 3.6, Psa. 121.4, ^.
An independent friend. Sixthly, An immutable friend. Seventhly, A watchful
friend. Eighthly, A loving friend.

Ninethly, A faithful friend. Tenthly, 1 John 4.16 Tit 1.2. Isa. 63.9
A compassionate friend. Eleventhly, A close friend. There is a friend that
sticks closer than a brother, Prove. 18.24. such a friend is Christ, and such
a friend is as ones own soul, a rare happiness, hardly to be matched.
Twelfthly, An universal friend, a friend in all cases, and a friend in all
places. Christ is so a friend to every one of his, as if he were a friend to
none besides; hence it is that they say, not only our Lord our God, but my
Lord, and my God. Luke 1.43 John 20.28 Phil. 4.19
Christ is such an universal friend, as that he supplies the place, and acts
the part of every friend.

Thirteenthly, He is our first friend, Psalm. 90.1. before we had a friend in
all the World, he was our friend, John 13.1 Alexander the Great cannot cut that
knot of friendship that is tied betwixt Christ and his.
Prove. 8.21.

Lastly, He is a constant friend, whom he loves he loves to the end.

Augustus Caesar would not suddenly entertain a league of friendship with any,
but was a constant friend to those he loved ( Amare nec cito desisto, nec
temere incipio) late ere I love, as long ere I leave; Where Christ begins to
love, he always loves. Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
Now who would not venture the loss of all friends in the world, to gain such a
friend as this is?

Ah! Young men, and women, let me say to you what Seneca said to his friend
Polibius (Fas tibi non est de fortuna conqueri, salvo Caesare) never complain
of thy hard fortune, as long as Caesar is thy friend; so say I, never complain
of your loss of Friends, so long as by loosing of them, you gain Christ to be
your friend.

Secondly, Thou were it better be without their friendship and favor, than to
enjoy it upon any sinful and unworthy accounts, thou were it better run the
hazard of loosing thy friends, and their favor, by seeking and serving the
Lord in the Primerose of thy days, then to run the hazard of losing God,
Christ, heaven, Mat. 16.26 Mark. 8.36
eternity, and thy soul for ever, by neglecting the things of thy peace.

It was a gallant return which the noble Rutilius made his friend, requesting
of him an unlawful favor, in such language as this, I had as good be without
such a friend, as with him who will not let me speed in what I ask; to whom
he replied, I can want such a friend as you, if for your sake, I must do that
which is not honest. The application is easy.

Well Young man, remember this, the torments of a thousand hells were there so
many, comes far short of this one vice to be turned out of Gods presence with
a ( Non novi vos) I know you not. Mat. 7.23


Ah! Young man, Young man, thou were better ten thousand, thousand times to
be cast out of the thoughts and hearts of thy carnal friends, and relations,
than to be cast out of Gods presence with cursed Cain for ever, Genesis 4
than to be excommunicated out of the general Assembly of the Saints, Heb.
12.23.
and Congregation of the firstborn which are written in heaven, and therefore
away with this objection; but

Thirdly, The favor and friendship of such carnal persons, is very fickle and
inconstant, it is very fading and withering; Now they stroke, and anon they
strike, now they lift up, and anon they cast down, now they smile, and anon
they frown; now they kiss, and anon they kill; now they cry Hosanna, Hosana,
and anon they cry Crucify him, crucify him; Haman is one day feasted with the
King, and the next day made a feast for Crows; Esth. 7.
The Princes of Babylon were highly in King Darius his favor one day, Dan. 6
and cast into the Lions den the next; The Scribes and Pharisees that cried up
Judas one day, did in effect bid him go and hang himself the next day. Mat.
27.3, 4.5


Such men's favor and friendship, Valerian, Valens. Belisareus. Baj^zet.
Pythias. Dionysius. Pompey William the Conqueror, and many other, have found it
so.
are as Venice Glasses quickly broken, and therefore not much to be prized or
minded. Histories abounds with instances of this nature, but I must hasten,
only remember this, that every days experience tells us, that wicked men can
soon turn Tables, and cross their books, their favor and friendship is usually
like to a morning cloud, or like to Jonahs Gourd, one hour flourishing, and the
next hour withering; and why then should thou set thy heart upon that which
is more changeable than the moon, Glaucus who changed his Armor of Gold with
Diomedes, for his Armor of Brass, stands upon record for a fool.
etc. But

Fourthly, and Lastly, who but a mad man would adventure the loss of the Kings
favor to gain the favor of his Page? who but a stark Bedlam would run the
hazard of loosing the Judges favor upon the Bench, to purchase the good will
of the Prisoner at the Bar?

Socrates preferred the Kings countenance before his Coin; and so must you
prefer the favor of God, Psalm. 4.6, 7
the countenance of Christ, and the things of eternity, above all the favor
and friendship of all the men in the World; when your nearest friends and
dearest relations stands in competition, Psalm. 45.10 Mat. 10.37 Luke 14.26, 27
with Christ or the things above, you must shake them off, you must turn your
backs upon them, and welcome Christ and the things of your Peace; he that
forsakes all relations for Christ, shall certainly find all relations in
Christ, he will be father, friend, husband, Child, he will be every thing
to thee, who take him for thy great all.

Object. 3. I but I shall meet with many reproaches from one and other, if I
should labor to be good betimes; if I should seek and serve the Lord in the
spring and morning of my youth; now to this I answer.

First, What are reproaches to the great things that others have suffered, for
Christ, his Gospel, Heb^ews chapter 10.^^. read the ten persecutions.
and the maintaining of a good conscience; what is a prick of a pin to a stab
at the heart, what is a chiding to a hanging, a whipping to a burning; no more
are all the reproaches thou can meet with, to the great things that others
have suffered for Christ's sake.

Ah! Young men, you should be like the Scythian that went naked in the Snow,
and when Alexander wondered how he could endure it; Answered, I am not ashamed,
for I am all forehead. So should you in the cause and way of Christ, you should
not be ashamed, you should be all forehead, you should be stout and bold.
Colonus the dutch Martyr under all his reproaches, called to the judge that had
sentenced him to death, and desired him to lay his hand upon his heart, and
then asked him, whose heart did most beat, his or the Judges; All the
reproaches in the world, should not so much as make a Christians heart beat,
they should not, in the least, trouble him, nor disturb him; but

Secondly I Answer; That all the reproaches thou meetest with in the way of
Christ, and for the sake of Christ, they do but add Pearls to thy Crown, they
are all additions to thy happiness and blessedness. 1 Pet. 4.14
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of
glory, and of God rests upon you; on their part, he is evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified; the more you are reproached for Christ's sake on
earth, Mat. 5.11, 12
the greater shall be your reward in heaven; they that are most loaded with
reproaches here, shall be most laden with glory hereafter. Christ has written
their names in golden letters in his book of life, that are written in black
letters of reproach for his sake on earth. It Was a good saying of one,
Chrysostom.
a Reproacher (says he) is beneath a man, but the reproached that bear it
well, are equal to Angels; of all Crowns the reproached man's Crown, will weigh
heaviest in heaven. But

Thirdly, So was Joseph, Mephibosheth, Naboth, and in latter times. Luther whom
they said dyed despairing, when he was alive to confute it. And that Beza run
away with another man's wif^. And that Calvin was branded on the shoulder for a
Rogue, but there would be no end of this stuff, should I say all that might be
said.
I Answer, the best men have been mostly reproached, David was, Psalm. 69.7.
Psalm. 89.50. Psalm. 119.22. Psalm. 31.11. Psalm. 109.25. and Job was. Job 19, 35.
chapter 20.3. Job. 16.10. and Jeremiah was, Jer. 20.7.10. Yea, this has been the
common portion of the people of God in all ages of the World; in Nehemiahs time
it was so, Neh. 1.3. And they said unto me, the remnant that are left of the
captivity, are in great affliction and reproach. In David's time it was so,
Psalm. 79.4. and Psalm. 44.13, 14. And in Jeremiahs time it was so, Lam. 5.1.
Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us: Consider and behold our reproach. And
in Daniels time it was so, Dan. 9.16. Thy people are become a reproach, to all
that are about us; and it was so in the Apostles time; Romans 3.8. And not rather
as we be slanderously reported, as some affirm, that we say, let us do evil,
that good may come: whose damnation is just, 2 Cor. 6.8. By honor, and
dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as Deceivers, and yet true: so in
that 1 Timothy 4.10. for therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because
we trust in the living God, etc. And it was so in the Primitive times, for
when the Christians met together before Sun to pray, the Heathens reported of
them, that they worshipped the Sun, Tertullian.
and aspired after Monarchy, and committed Adulteries, and unnatural
uncleanness; Now who is troubled, who complains of that which is a common
lot, as Cold, Winter, Sickness, Death, etc. No more should any complain of
reproaches, it being the common lot of the people of God in all ages; yea,
Christ himself was sadly reproached, falsely accused, and strangely traduced,
disgraced, and scandalized; he was called a Glutton, a Drunkard, a friend of
Publicans and Sinners, and judged to use the Black Art, casting out Devils by
Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils; Mat. 9.34. chapter 12.24
Christ has suffered the greatest, and the worst reproaches, why then should
you be afraid to wear that Crown of Thorns that Christ has wore before you?
(there is a great truth in what he said (Non potest qui pati timet, ejus ess^
qui passus est) he that is afraid to suffer, Tertul. de fuga in persecut.
cannot be his Disciple, who suffered so much; if the Master has been marked
with a black coal, let not the servant think to go free. I am heartily angry
(says Luther) with those that speak of my sufferings, which if compared with
that which Christ suffered for me, are not once to be mentioned in the same
day; But

Fourthly, I Answer, that all reproachers shall at last be arraigned at the
highest bar of justice, for all the reproaches that they have cast upon the
people of God. They think it strange (or they think it a new world) that you
run not with them to the same excrss of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4 Xenizontai
Blasphemountes. Wonder and Blaspheme.
speaking evil of you: who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the
quick and the dead. I am in an ecstasy (says Picus Myrandula) to think how
profane men rail upon those now, whom one day they will wish they had
imitated. It was excellent Counsel that the Heathen Orator gave his hearers.
(ita vivamus, Cic. 4. in Verr.
ut rationem nobis reddendam arbitremur) let us live as those that must give an
account of all at last.

Chrysostom brings in Christ comforting his Disciples against reproaches,
speaking thus unto them; what, is the wrong grievous to you? that now they call
you Seducers, and Conjurers, it will not be long before they shall openly call
you the Saviors and blessings of the whole world, that time that shall declare
all things that are now hid, shall rebuke them for their lying words against
you, and shall kindle the splendour of your virtue; Mal. 3.17 Mic. 7.9, 10, 11 1
Cor. 6.3, 4
So they shall be found Liars, evil speakers, false accusers of others, but
you shall be more clear and illustrious than the Sun, and you shall have all
men witnesses of your glory. Such as wisely and humbly bear reproaches now,
shall judge reproachers at last. But

Fifthly, I answer, that God does many times even in this life, bear sad
witness and testimony against the reproachers of his people, Gen 12.3 2 Samuel
16.11, 12, 13
I will bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them that curse thee;
Divine Justice is like Vulcans iron net, that took the Gods; It apprehends and
condemns all that are reproachers and enemies to his people
God will even in this life curse them with a witness: who curse them that he
blesses; Pharaoh found it so, and Saul found it so, and Jezabel found it so,
and Haman found it so and the Princes of Babylon found it so, and the Jews find
it so to this very day.

And Oh the dreadful judgments and curses that God has poured out upon the
reproachers of his name, of his Son, of his spirit, of his word, of his
Ordinanees, and of his people in these days wherein we live. I might give you
many sad instances of such in our days, whose feet justice has taken in the
snare, men of abstracted conceits, and sublime speculations; and indeed such
usually prove the great wise fools, who like the lark soareth higher and
higher, peering and peering, till at length they fall into the net of the
fowler, and no wonder, for such persons usually are as censorious, as they are
curious.

Sixthly, I Answer, Paul rejoiced more in his suffering reproaches for Christ's
sake, than he did in his being wrapped up in the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.10.
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, (Crudelitas vestra gloria nostra)
your cruelty is our glory said they in Tertullian. Fire, sword, prison, famine,
are all delightful to me says Basil.
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's
sake, for when I am weak, then am I strong. And therefore you have him often a
singing this Song, I Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, not I Paul wrapped up in
the third Heaven; He looked upon all his sufferings, as Gods love tokens, he
looked upon all reproaches, as pledges and badges of his Sonship, and
therefore joys and glories under all. Christ showed his love to him in wraping
him up in the third heaven, and he showed his love to Christ in his joyful
bearing of reproaches for his sake. Paul rattles his chain (which he bears for
the Gospel) and was proud of it, as a woman of her ornaments, says
Chrysostom. Now why should that be matter of trouble and discouragement to
you, that was matter of joy and rejoicing to him? shall he look upon
reproaches as a Crown of honor, and will you look upon reproaches as a Crown of
thorns? Oh Look upon reproach as a royal-Diadem, Sufferings are the ensigns of
heavenly Nobility, says Calvin.
look upon it as Christ's livery, and count it your highest ambition in this
World, to wear this Livery for his sake, who once wore a Crown of Thorns for
your sakes; When Babylas was to dye, he required this favor, to have his
chains buried with him as the ensigns of his honor. But

Seventhly, I Answer, It was an Observation of Mr. John Lindsay, that the very
smoke of Mr. Hamilton, converted as many as it blew upon.
That by a wise and gracious behavior under the reproaches thou meetest with
for Christ's sake, thou may be isntrumental to win others to Christ. It was
a notable saying of Luther, (Ecclesia totum mundum convertit sanguine et
oratione) the Church converted the whole world by blood and prayer.

Diverse have been won to Christ by beholding the gracious carriages of
Christians under their sufferings, and reproaches for Christ.

We read of Cicilia a poor Virgin, who by her gracious behavior under all her
sufferings and reproaches for Christ, was the means of converting four hundred
to Christ.

Adrianus beholding the gracious cheerful carriages of the Martyrs under all
their sufferings and reproaches, was converted to Christ, and afterward
suffered Martyrdom for Christ.

Justin Martyr, was also converted by observing the holy and cheerful behavior
of the Saints, under all their sufferings and reproaches for Christ. See also
the Hist. of the Council of Trent. p. 418.2. Edit.
During the cruel persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, the Christian faith
was spread through all places of the Empire, because the oftener they were mown
down (says Tertullian) the more they grew.

And Austin observed, that though there were many thousands put to death for
professing Christ; yet they were never the fewer for being slain.

Ah! Young men, you may by a wise and gracious bearing of reproaches for
Christ, be instrumental to win others to Christ; and therefore never plead
there is a Lion in the way, but I must hasten; and therefore in the eighth and

Last place, Consider, How bravely several of the very Heathen have bore
Reproaches and let that provoke you in the face of all Reproaches, to seek and
serve the Lord in the morning of your youth, etc.

When Demosthenes was Reproached by one, I will not says he strive with thee
in this kind of fight, in which he that is overcome is the better man.

When one came and Reproached Xenophon, says he, you have learned how to
reproach, and I have learned how to bear Reproach.

And Aristippus (the Philosopher) said, you are fit to cast Reproaches, and I
am fit to bear Reproaches.

Demochares an Athenian Orator, was sent to King Philip as Ambassador, Philip
asked him how he might pleasure the Athenians, for-sooth said he, if you will
hang your self; the Prince patiently sent him home again, and bid him ask
whether were more Noble, the patient hearer, or venture of such unseemly
language.

When one wondered at the patience of Socrates toward one who reviled and
reproached him; if we should meet one says he, whose body were more unsound
then ours, should we be angry with him, and not rather pity him? why then
should we not do the like to him whose soul is more diseased than ours?

Augustus Caesar, (in whose time Christ was born) bid Catullus the railing Poet
to Supper, to show that he had forgiven him.

It is a notable example that we find of one Pericles, Plutarch in vita peric.
who as he was sitting with others in a great meeting, a foul mouthed fellow,
bitterly Reproached him, and railed all the day long upon him, and at night
when it was dark, and the meeting up, the fellow followed him, and railed at
him, even to his door, and he took no notice of him, but when he came at home,
Themistocles professed that if two ways were showed him, one to hell, and the
other to the bar, he would choose that which went to hell, and forsake the other.
this is all he said, friend it is dark, I pray let my man light you home.

Josephus reports of that Herod that is made mention of in that Act. 12.23.
that when one Simon a Lawyer, had grievously Reproached and scandalized him
before the people; he sent for him, and caused him to sit down next to him, and
in a kin^e manner he spoke thus to him. Tell me I pray thee, what thing thou
see fault worthy, or contrary to the Law in me. Simon not having any thing
to answer, besought him to pardon him, which the King did, and was friends with
him, and dismissed him, bestowing gifts on him. Ah young men, young men shall
the very Heathen make nothing of reproaches, shall they bear up so prudently
and bravely under the greatest loads of reproaches, and will not you? will not
you? who in your light, in your mercies, and in all Gospel engagements, are so
highly advanced above them? Oh that none of them may be called to the Bar in
the great day, to witness against any of you, into whose hands this Treatise
shall fall; and so much by way of answer to the third Objection; But

Fourthly, The young man objects and says you press us to be good betimes,
and to seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of our days; but we
observe that most men mind not these things, but rather give liberty to
themselves, to walk in ways that are most pleasing to the flesh; and why then
should we be singular and nice, we were better do as the most do, etc. Now
to this I answer.

1 That though bad examples are dangerous to all, yet usually they prove most
dangerous and pernicious to young persons, who are more easily drawn to follow
examples, than precepts, especially those examples that tends most to undo
them, Praecepta docent, exempla movent, Precepts may instruct, but examples do
persuade.
2 King. 15.9. It is said of Zacharia, the King of Israel, that he did evil in
the sight of the Lord, as his Fathers had done; he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam, he would be as his Father was, and do as his Father did,
whatever came on it. So the Samaritans of whom it is said, 2 King. 17.41. These
Nations feared the Lord, (that is, they made some kind of profession of the
true Religion, as the ten tribes had done) and served their graven Images (too)
both their Children, and their Childrens Children (did thus) as did their
Fathers, so do they unto this day: By evil examples they were both drawn to
Idolatry, and rooted and confirmed in it; so the main reason why the Kingdom
and Church of Judah were so settled in their Idolatry, that there was no hope of
reclaiming them, was this, that their Children remembered their Altars, and
their groves by the green trees upon the high hills, Jer. 17.1, 2. Tinder is
not apter to take fire, nor Wax the impression of the seal, nor Paper the ink,
than youth is to follow ill examples. You may see in Radbod, King of Phrisia,
who coming to the Font to be baptized, asked what was become of his Ancestors;
answer was made, that they dyed in a fearful state unbaptized, he replied,
that he would rather perish with the multitude, than go to Heaven with a few.

I remember the Heathen brings in a young man, who hearing of the adulteries,
and wickednesses of the gods, said, what, Aethiopians lame themselves, if their
King be lame, says Diodorus. Elian reports that there was a Whore that did
boast that she could eafily get scholars away from Socrates, but Socrates
could get away no scholars from her.
do they so? and shall I stick at it? no, I will not. Sinful examples are very
drawing, and very encouraging, many have found it so to their eternal undoing;
those that have no ears to hear what you say, have many eyes to see what you
do. Bad Princes make bad Subjects, bad Masters make bad Servants, bad Parents
make bad Children, and bad Husbands make bad Wives; it is easier for the bad to
corrupt the good, than for the good to convert the bad; it is easier to rundown
the hill with company, than to run up the hill alone.

I would desire all young men often to remember that saying of Lactantius (Qui
malum imitatur, bonus esse non potest) he who imitates the bad, cannot be
good. Young men, in these professing times, stand between good and bad
examples, as Hercules in his dream stood between virtue and vice. Solicited by
both, choose you must who to follow. Oh that you were all so wise as to follow
the best; as a woman that has many suitors is very careful to take the best;
so should you, life, Heaven, happiness, eternity hangs upon it.

But before I come to the second answer, Sin is bad in the eye, worser in the
tongue, worser in the heart, but worst of all in the life; and that because it
then indangers other men's souls, as well as a man's own.
let me leave this note or notion with those who make no conscience of undoing
others by their examples, viz. That a more grievous punishment is reserved for
them who cause others to offend, than for them which sin by their occasion, or
example. Thus the Serpent was punished more than Eve, and Eve more than Adam,
So Jezabel felt a greater and sorer Judgment than Ahab. To sin (says one)
has not so much perdition in it, as to cause others to sin. Friends, you have
sins enough of your own to make you for ever miserable, why should you by
giving bad examples to others, make your selves far more miserable? the lowest,
the darkest, the hottest place in hell, will be for them that have drawn
others thither by their example. Mar. 23.15
Dives knew, that if his Brethren were damned, he should be double damned,
Luke 16, 28.
because he had largely contributed to the bringing of them to hell by his
wicked example; and therefore he desires that they might be kept out of hell
(not out of any love, or good will to them) but because their coming thither
would have made his hell more hot, his torments more insufferable; But

Secondly, I answer, if you sin with others; you shall suffer with others; if
you will partake of other men's sins, Rev. 18.4. Non minus ardebit, qui cum
multis ardebit. August. He burns no less, that burns with company. Genesis 6.
Genesis 19.
you shall also partake of other men's plagues They that have been (like Simeon
and Levi) brethren in iniquity, they shall be brethren in misery; they that
have sinned together impenitently, shall be sent to hell jointly, they shall
perish together eternally. If you will needs be companions with others in
their sins, you shall be sure to be companions with them in their sorrows.
The old world sin together, and are drowned together; the Sodomites burning in
lusts together, were burnt with fire and brimstone together, Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, they sin together, they murmr and provoke the Lord together, Numb.
16.26, -- 34.
and the earth opens her mouth, and swallows them up together. Exodus 14.
Pharaoh and his hosts pursue Israel together, Numb. 25.
and they are drowned in the Sea together. Zimri and Cozbi commit folly,
uncleanness together, and Phineas stabs them both together. The Hebrew Doctors
have a very pretty parable to this purpose; A man planted an Orchard, and going
from home, was careful to leave such watchmen as might both keep it from
strangers, and not deceive him themselves; therefore he appointed one blind,
but strong of his limbs, and the other seeing, but a cripple. These two in
their Masters absence conspired together, and the blind took the lame on his
shoulders, and so gathered the fruit, their Master returning and finding out
their subtilty punished them both together; so will Justice deal with you at
last, who sin with others; therefore take heed young men of doing as others do.
But

Thirdly, I answer, you must not live by examples, but by precepts; you are not
to look so much at what others do, Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed
facit. Prosper.
as at what God requires you to do, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many
to wrest judgment, Romans 12.2. fashion not your selves like unto this world,
that is, do not fashion and conform your selves to the corrupt customs and
courses of wretched worldlings, who have made gold their God, and gain their
glory; the running cross to a divine command, cost the young Prophet his life;
(though he did it under pretense of Revelation from God) as you may see in
that sad story, 1 King. 13. chapter etc. (Non parentum, aut majorum authoritas, sed
Dei docentis imperium) the command of God must outweigh all authority and
example of men. Jerome.
And we must be as careful in the keeping of a light commandment, as an
heavy commandment: says a Rabby, Divine commands must be obeyed against all
contrary reasonings, wranglings, and examples. Austin brings in some excusing
their compliance with the sinful customs and examples of those times in
drinking healths, The complaint is ancient in Seneca, that commonly men live
not ad rationem, but ad similitudinem. Seneca de vita beata. c. 1.
thus. Great personages urged it, and it was at the Kings banquet where they
judged of loyalty by luxury, and put us upon this election, drink, or die, the
not drinking of a health had been our death; he gives this answer, that God
who sees that for love to him, and his commands, thou would not conform to
their drunken customs, will give thee favor in their eyes, who thus
threatens thee to drink.

Ah young men! you that dote so much upon examples now, will find that a
stinging, terrifying question, when put home by God, or conscience, who has
required these things at your hands? Isa. 1, 12. But

Fourthly, I answer, company and allurements to sin, will be found no
sufficient excuse for sin. If Eve lay her fault on the Serpent, Genesis 3.
and Adam lay his on Eve, God will take it off, and lay the curse on both.
Saul's provocation by the people (and by Samuels long stay) to offer Sacrifice
would not bear him out, 1 Samuel 15.14, 15, 26, 27.
but for his disobedience he must lose both his Crown, and life. The young man
in the Proverbs, Pro. 7.14, 15, 21.
though tempted and solicited by the Harlot, yet has a dart struck thorough
his heart; though Jonah did plead Gods gracious inclinations to show mercy, and
his fear of being disproved, yea and though he might have pleaded his fear of
cruel and savage usage from the Ninevites, (whose hearts were desperately set
upon wickedness) And his despair of ever doing good upon a people so blinded,
and hardened; and that they were Gentiles, and he a Jew, and why should he
then be sent with so strange, so terrible a message, to such a people, nothing
being more hateful and distasteful to a Jewish Palate? but all these pleas and
excuses will not bear off the blow; Jonah must into the Sea for all this,
Oculos quos peccatum claudit, paena apperit. Gre. The eyes that sin shuts,
affliction opens, and Jonab found it so.
yea he must to the bottom of hell, as himself phrases it; it is in vain for
the bird to complain, that it saw the corn, but not the pitfall, or for a fish
to plead, it saw the bait, but not the hook. So it will be in vain for sinners
at last, when they are taken in an infernal pit-fall, to plead company and
allurements by which they have been intised to undo their souls for ever.

Dionysius the Sicilian King, to excuse himself from the present delivery of
the golden garment he took from his God Apollo, answered, that such a robe as
that was, could not be at any season of the year useful to his god, for it
would not keep him warm in the winter, and it was too heavy for the summer, and
so put off his Idol god; but the God of spirits, the God of all flesh, will not
be put off with any excuses or pretenses, when he shall try and judge the
children of men: But

Fifthly and lastly, Mat. 18.7.
I answer, that it is a very great judgment to be given up to follow evil
examples: a man given up to evil examples, is a man sadly left of God, woefully
blinded by Satan, and desperately hardened in sin; it speaks a man ripe for
wrath, for ruin, for hell, Jer. 6.21. This particle Behold is sometimes a note
of derision, Genesis 3.22. 2 A Note of Attention often, Isa. 28.6. Mal. 1.1. Luke
1.20. 3 A Note of Admiration often. 4 A Note of Asseveration. 5 A Note of
Castigation, in all these senses we may take it here.
Behold, I will lay stumbling blocks before this people, and the Fathers and
the Sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbor and his friend shall
perish. Oh! it is a dreadful thing when God shall make the sinful examples of
others to be stumbling blocks to a people, at which they shall stumble, and
fall, and perish for ever; good had it been for such persons, that they had
never been born, as Christ once spoke concerning Judas. The Rhodians and
Lydians enacted several Laws, that those sons which followed not their Fathers
in their virtues, Varro.
but followed vicious examples, should be dis-inherited, and their lands given
to the most virtuous of that race, not admitting any impious heir whatsoever to
inherit; and do you think that God will not disinherit all those of Heaven, and
happiness, who follow vicious examples! doubtless he will, 1 Cor. 10.5, --
12.

The fifth and last Objection (I shall mention) is this, God is a God of mercy,
in him are bowels of mercy; yea a Sea, an Ocean of mercy; he loves mercy, he
delights in mercy, and he is ready to show mercy to poor sinners, when they
are even at the last cast, when there is but a short stride between them and
the grave, between them and eternity; as we see in his extending mercy to the
Thief, and in his giving a pardon into his hand, and the assurance of Paradise
into his bosom, when he was ready to be turned off the Ladder of life; and
therefore I may spend the Prim-rose of my days in following sin, and the
delights, profits, vanities, and contents of this world, and at last cast, I
may have mercy as well as the Thief. God is a God made up of mercy, and surely
he will not deny some crumbs of mercy to a poor sinner in misery, etc.

Now to this Objection I shall give these following answers.

First, God is as just as he is merciful, witness his casting the Angels out
of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise, God is as well all hand to punish, as he
is all grace to pardon.
witness all the threatenings, the curses, the woes, that the Bible is filled
with, from one end, to the other; witness the hell, the horror, the terror
and amazement that he raises in the consciences of sinners; witness the
devastations that he has made of the most stately flourishing Towns, Cities,
Countries and Kingdoms, that have been in all the world; witness the variety
of diseases, calamities, miseries, dangers, deaths, and hells, that always
attends the inhabitants of the world; but above all witness Christ's treading
the Wine Press of his fathers wrath; witness his hiding his face from him, and
the pouring out of all his displeasure, and vengeance upon him.

Zaleucus the Locrensian Lawgiver, Valerius lib. 6. cap. 5
thrust out one of his own sons eyes, for his transgressing of a wholesome Law,
which he had enacted, but God the father thrust out both Christ's eyes for our
transgressing of his royal Law; Oh! the justice and severity of God. But

Secondly, I Answer, that there is not a greater evidence of blindness,
profaneness, hard-heartedness, spiritual madness, and hellish desperateness
in all the World, than to make that an Argument, an encouragement, to sin (viz.
the mercy of God) which should be the greatest Argument under heaven, to keep a
man from Sin, as all know that have but read the scripture; neither are there
any Sinners in the World, that God delights to rain Hell out of Heaven upon,
Read Isa. 22 12, 13, 14, 15 and Ezekiel. 24.11, 12, 13, 14
as upon such, who by their abuse of mercy, turns the God of mercy, into a God
of cl^^ts, and goes on out-daring justice it self, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. And it come
to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have Peace (God is a God of mercy) though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare
him, but then the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against that
man, and all the Curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. In these words you may
observe, that God is absolute in threatening, to show that he will be resolute
in punishing, Psalm. 11.5, A lover of Iniquity is a liver in Iniquity upon
choice.
6. The wicked, and him that loves iniquity; does his soul hate. Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this
shall be the portion of their cup.

Ah! That all poor sinners would make these two Scriptures their companions,
their constant bed-fellows, till they are got above that sad temptation of
turning the mercy of God into an encouragement to sin.

Whilst Milo Crotoniates was tearing a sunder the stock of an Oak, his
strength failing him, the clift suddenly closing, was held so fast by the
hands, that he became a prey to the beasts of the field; All the abusers of
mercy will certainly, and suddenly, become a prey to the justice of God, that
will rent and tear them in pieces as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 50.22. Woe, woe,
to that soul that fights against God with his own mercies, that will be bad,
because he is good; that will be sinful, because he is merciful; that will
turn all the kindnesses of God (that should be as so many silver cords, to tie
him to love and obedience) into arrows, and so shoot them back into the heart
of God. Abused mercy will at last turn into a Lion, a fierce Lion; and then woe
to the abusers and despisers of it. But

Thirdly, In Answer, to that part of the Objection, concerning the Thief on the
Cross, I offer these things briefly to your thoughts.

First, Exemplum latronis servati est admirandum, non imitandum
That as one was saved to teach Sinners, not to despair, so another was damned
to teach them not to presume. A pardon is sometimes given to one upon the
Gallows, but who so trusts to that, the rope may be his hire, it is not good
(says one) to put it upon the Psalm of miserere, and the neck verse; for
sometimes he proves no Clerk, and so hangs for it.

Secondly, It is an example without a promise, here is an example of late
repentance, but where is there a promise of late repentance.

Oh! Let not his late and sudden conversion, be to thee a temptation, till thou
have found a promise for late and sudden conversion; it is not examples, but
promises that are foundations for faith to rest on; he that walks by an example
of mercy, without a precept to guide him, and a promise to support him, walks
but by a dark Lanthorn, that will deceive him: well young man remember this,
examples of mercy increase wrath, when the heart is not bettered by them; But

Thirdly, This was a rare miracle of mercy, with the glory whereof Christ did
honor the ignominy of his Cross, and therefore we may as well look for another
crucifying of Christ, as look for a sinners conversion, when he has scarce
time enough to reckon up, all those particular duties, which make up the
integrity of its constitution. But

Fourthly, I Answer, This Theif knew not Christ before, he had not refused,
neglected, nor slighted Christ before; the Sermon on the Cross was the first
Sermon that ever he heard Christ preach, and Christ's prayer on the Cross, was
the first prayer that ever he heard Christ make; he knew not Christ till he
met him on the Cross (which proved to him a happy meeting) his case was as if a
Turk, or Heathen, should now be converted to the faith, and therefore thou have
little reason; O young man, to plead this example to keep Christ, and thy soul
asunder, who art every day under the call, the entreaties and wooings of
Christ. But

Fifthly, and Lastly, I Answer, The circumstances of time, and place, are
rightly to be considered; Now when Christ was triumphing on the Cross over sin,
satan, and the world, when he had made the devils a publik spectacle of scorn
and derision, when he was taking his leave of the world, and entering into his
glory; Now he puts a pardon into the Theifs hand, and crowds other favors and
kindnesses upon him.

As in the Roman Triumphs, the Victor being ascended up to the Capitol in a
Chariot of state, used to cast certain pieces of coin among the people for them
to pick up, which he used not to do at other times; So our Lord Jesus Christ,
in the day of his Triumph, and solemn inauguration into his heavenly kingdom,
scatters some heavenly jewels that this Theif might pick up; which he does not,
nor will not do every day; Or as in these days it is usual with Princes to save
some notorious malefactors at their coronation, when they enter upon their
kingdoms in Triumph, which they do not use to do afterward; So did Jesus
Christ carry it toward this Thief; but this is not his ordinary way of saving
and bringing souls to glory, and therefore do not O young man, let not the
Thiefs late conversion, prove a temptation, or an occasion of thy delaying thy
repentance, and trifling away the primerose of thy days in vanity and folly;
And thus much may suffice to have spoken, by way of Answer, to the Young man's
Objections.

The old man's Doubts Resolved
I shall now speak a few words to Old men, and so close up. Now

Is it so commendable, so desirable, and so necessary for young men to be good
betimes, to seek and serve the Lord in the spring and morning of their Youth,
as has been sufficiently demonstrated in this Treatise? Oh then that I could
so woo aged persons as to win them (who yet have put off this great work) to
seek and serve the Lord, before their glass be out, their Sun set, and their
souls lost for ever.

Oh that that counsil of the Prophet might take hold upon your hearts. Jer.
13.16
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your
feet stumble (through age) upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

I but aged Sinners may reply, is there any hope, any help for us? is there any
probability, is there any possibility? that ever such as we are should return
and find mercy and favor with the Lord? we who have lived so long without
him, we that have sinned so much against him, we that to this day are strangers
to him, yea in arms against him; Is there any hope that we white-headed
sinners, who have withstood so many thousand offers of grace, and so many
thousand motions of the spirit, and so many thousand checks of conscience, and
so many thousand tenders of Christ, and heaven, that ever we should obtain
mercy, that ever we should have our old hearts turned, our millions of Sin
pardoned, our vile natures changed, and poor souls saved, etc.

I Answer, that there is hope even for such as you are; all the Angels in
heaven, and all the men on earth, cannot tell, but that you, even you, may
obtain mercy and favor, that your souls dye not; with the Lord nothing is
impossible, and for the grace of the Gospel, nothing is too hard; now this I
shall make evident by an induction of partilars, thus

First, Mat. 20.1^^^17 The Roman penny was seven pence half penny.
All were not called nor sent to work in the Vineyard, at the first-hour; some
were called at the third-hour; others, at the sixth; others, at the ninth; and
some at the eleventh. God has his several times of calling souls to himself:
the eleventh hour was about five in the afternoon, an hour before Sunset, when
it was even time to leave work: and yet at this hour some were called,
employed, and rewarded, with the rest.

Some of the fathers by the several hours mentioned in this Parable, do
understand the several ages of man, viz. Childhood, youth, middle-age, and
Old Age, wherein poor souls are called and converted to Christ, the scope of
the Parable, is to signify the freegrace of God in the calling of some in the
spring and morning of their days, and in the calling of others in their
Old Age, in the evening of their days. But

Secondly, Abraham in the Old Testament, Genesis 12.4 Joh. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. chapter 7.50.
and Nicodemus in the New, were called and converted in their old age; when
there were but a few steps between them and the grave, between them and
eternity; therefore let not the gray headed sinner despair, though his spring
be past, his summer over past, and he arrived at the fall of the leaf. But

Thirdly, Divine promises shall be made good to returning souls, to repenting
souls, to believing souls, Isa. 1.18 Jer. 3.12. Isa. 43.22, 23, 24, 25 Isa.
57.17, 18 Jer. 5^.5 John 3.16 Mar. 16.16.
be they young or old, 2 Chronicles. 30.9. The Lord your God is gracious and
merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if you return unto him,
Joel 2.13. And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God: for he is gracious and merciful; slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon: or he will multiply to pardon. More of this you may see by reading the
Scriptures in the margent; all sorts of sin shall be pardoned, to all sorts of
believing and repenting sinners.

The new Jerusalem has twelve Gates, to show that there is every way access
for all sorts and ranks of Sinners to come to Christ. He was born in an Inn, to
show that he receives all comers, young and Old, poor, and rich, etc. But

Fourthly, The Lord has declared by Oath, a greater delight in the conversion
and salvation of poor sinners (whether they are young or old) than in the
destruction and damnation of such, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways? for why will ye dye, O ye
house of Israel; two things make a thing more credible.

1 The quality or dignity of the person speaking.

2 The manner of the speech; Now here you have the great God, not only
speaking, promising, but solemnly swearing, that he had rather poor sinners
should live than dye, be happy, than miserable; therefore despair not, Oh aged
sinner, but return unto the Lord, and thou shall be happy for ever. But

Fifthly, Vna guttula plus valet, quam caelum and terra. Luther. One little
drop is more worth than heaven and earth.
there is virtue enough in the precious blood of Jesus Christ to wash and
cleanse away all sin; not only to cleanse away the young man's sins, but also to
cleanse away the old man's sins; not only to cleanse a sinner of twenty years
old, but to cleanse a sinner of fifty, sixty, yea a hundred years old, 1 John
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin; not simply
from sin, but from all sin; there is such a power and efficacy in the blood of
Christ, as is sufficient to cleanse all sorts of sinners, from all sorts of
sins; there is virtue in the blood of the Lamb to wash out all the spots that
are in the oldest sinners heart; and therefore let not old sinners despair, let
not them say, there is no hope, there is no help, as long as this fountain the
blood of Jesus Christ is open, for all sorts of sinners to wash in. But

Sixthly, The call and invitations of Christ in the Gospel, are general, and
indefinite, excluding no sort of sinners, Rev. 3.20 Behold, I stand at the
door, and knock; if any man (mark the indefinitenesse of personal admittance)
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him,
and he with me; let the sinner be old or young, a green head, or a gray
head, if he will but open the door, Christ will come in, and have communion
and fellowship with him. So in that, Mat. 11.28. Isa. 55.1. John 7.37. Rev.
22.17. turn to these Scriptures, and dwell upon them, they all clearly evidence
the call and gracious invitations of Christ to be to all sinners, to every
sinner, he excepts not a man, no, though never so old, nothing shall hinder
the sinner, any sinner, the worst and most aged sinner, from obtaining mercy,
if he be willing to open to Christ, and to receive him as his Lord and King,
John 6.37. But

Seventhly, Christ's pathetical lamentation over all sorts and ranks of sinners,
declares his willingness to show mercy to them, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem (says
Christ, Luke 19.41, 42.
weaping over it) that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong
to thy peace, Psalm. 81.13.
etc. O that my people had hearkened unto me! Christ weeps over Jerusalem; so
did Titus, and so did Marcellus over Syracuse, and so did Scipio over Carthage;
but they shed tears for them, whose blood they were to shed; but Christ weeps
over the necks of those young and old sinners, who were to shed his blood. As a
tender hearted Father weeps over his rebellious Children, when neither smiles,
nor frowns, neither counsels, nor entreaties will win them, or turn them from
their evil ways. So does Jesus Christ over these rebellious Jews upon whom
nothing would work; But

Eighthly and lastly, though aged sinners have given Christ many thousand
denyals, yet he has not taken them, but after all, Psalm. 65.1, 2. Romans 10.21.
and in the face of all denyals, he still re-inforces his suit, and continues
to beseech them by his Spirit, 1 John 5.2, 3.
by his word, by his wounds, by his blood, by his messengers, and by his
rebukes, to turn home to him to embrace him, to believe in him, and to match
with him, that they may be saved eternally by him; all which bespeaks
gray headed sinners, not to despair, nor to dispute, but to repent, return, and
believe that it may go well with them for ever. Consider seriously what has
been spoken and the Lord make you wise for eternity.

There are three other Books lately published by Mr. Brooks.
1 Precious remedies against Satan's devices, or salve for Believers and
unbeleevers sores, being a companion for those, that are in Christ, or out of
Christ, that slight or neglect ordinances under a pretense of living above
them, that are growing in spirituals, or decaying, that are tempted or
deserted, afflicted or opposed, that have assurance or want it, 2 Cor. 2.11.

2 Heaven on Earth, or a serious discourse touching a well grounded assurance,
of men's everlasting happiness and blessedness, discovering the nature of
assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs, and Degrees of
it, with the resolution of several weighty questions, Romans 8.32, 33, 34.

3 The unsearchable Riches of Christ, or meat for strong men, and milk for
babes; held forth in two and twenty Sermons from Ephesians, 3.8. preached on
his lecture nights at Fishstreet-hill.

All three Printed for, and sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Popeshead-Alley, next to Cornhill. 1657.

FINIS.

