VERA EFFIGIES EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS CAROLI MAG. BRITAN: FRAN. and
HIBERNIAE. HAEREDIS.


Viuat o Viuat Princeps CAROLINUS, et Orbi.
Imperet, in^umeris decorans sua secla Triumphis.
Flourish brave Prince, out shine thy Glorious Name.
Triumphant Laurels ever Crown thy Fame.
CAROLUS inter Reges ut Lilium inter Flores
VEROLAM.
LINCO^^^
LONDON.
YORK.
A ROMAN
A SAXON
A DANE
A NO^^^^
CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND From the Time of the ROMANS Government unto
the Reign of our Sovereign LORD KING CHARLES.

Containing all Passages of State and Church, With all other Observations
proper for a CHRONICLE.

Faithfully Collected out of Authors Ancient and Modern; and digested into a
new Method.

By Sr R. Baker, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Red
Bull in Little Britain. 1643.



To the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall:
Eldest Son of our Sovereign Lord, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France,
and IRELAND.
SIR,
THE Dedication of Chronicles has in all times been thought worthy of the
greatest Princes: Gulielmus Gemiticensis writ a Chronicle of the Dukes of
Normandy, and Dedicated it to William the Conqueror. Thomas Walsingham writ a
Chronicle of the Kings of England, and Dedicated it to King Henry the sixth:
And of late time, Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount Saint Albans, and Lord
Chancellor of England, writ a History of the Reign of King Henry the seventh,
and Dedicated it to Your Royal Grandfather of blessed memory, King James: For
indeed, as nothing makes Princes more Illustrious then Learning; So no Learning
makes them more Judicious then History; Other Learning may fill their minds
with knowledge; This only with Judgment: And seeing it is Judgment that must
sit as President over all their Actions, it is fit that History should sit as
President over all their Studies. History gives an Antedate to Time; and brings
Experience without gray hairs: Other Knowledges make You but see Quod
antepedes est; History is the true perspective Glass, that will make You see
things afar off: And though it make not men to become Prophets, yet it makes
their conjectures to be little less then Oracles^ But most Illustrious Prince,
there accrues to your Highness, by this Chronicle, a greater benefit then all
this; For if it were an Excitation of great force to virtue, to have it said,
Et Pater Aeneas and Avunculus excitet Hector; of how great Force must it needs
be, when You shall read the Noble Acts of so many your worthy Progenitors;
Some Eternized for their valourous Achievements in War: Some for their
prudent government in Peace: Some Renowned for Mercy, some for Justice: And
although the Example of your Royal Father be not amongst them, yet it may be
sufficient that while you have the Acts of others upon Record, you have his
under View, by which he seems to say unto you, Disce Puer virtutem exme,
verumque laborem; Fortunam ex aliis. And if in any of your Progenitors, there
appear, as it were Maculae in Orb Lunae, will it not invite you to a higher
Orb, that Your Actions may shine with the clearer Beams? and then how happy
will the eyes be, that shall see you sitting in your Throne? For my self, I
should account it happiness enough, that I have lived to see the days of your
Illustrious Father; if it were not a great unhappines to see them overcast with
clouds; and yet when these clouds shall be dispel'd, will it not make him shine
with the greater Splendour? And this as old as I am, I doubt not to live my
self to see, and having once seen it, shall then willingly say my Nunc
Dimittis, and l^ave the joy of your glorious times for another Age: In the
mean time prostrating my self humbly at your feet; and wishing to your
Highness, as D^iphobus did to Aeneas; -- I Decus, I Nostrum, Melioribus utere
Fatis.

Your most humble and most devoted Servant, RICHARD BAKER.

An Epistle to the READER.
THis Book, I suppose will no sooner come abroad; but the question will be
asked, why any man would take so superfluous a Labor, to write that which has
been written by so many; by some so copiously, by some so elegantly, that
nothing can be added: To which Objection, I confess my self unable to make a
better Answer then by President: For when many excellent men had written the
Story of the Roman Emperors, both accurately and eloquently; yet Suetonius
Tranquillus coming after them, wanted not his part of Commendation. For though
he added nothing in the matter or substance, yet be altered much in the form
and disposition, distinguishing that into Classes and Chapters, which the
former had delivered in one continued Narration: as being both less tedious to
the Reader, like a way marked out by Miles; and more plainly Informing, where
Distinction took away confusion. Besides, many have Written the Reigns of our
English Kings, copiously indeed, but so superfluously, that much may justly be
pared away; Some again Elegantly indeed, but so succinctly, that much as
justly may be added: And this, if I have endeavored to do, I cannot be blamed;
If done it, I deserve acceptance. Again, where many have written the Reigns
of some of our Kings, excellently as in the way of History, yet I may say they
have not done it so well in the way of Chronicle; For whilst they insist wholly
upon matters of State, they wholly omit meaner Accidents, which yet are
Materials as proper for a Chronicle, as the other. For my self, if in some
places I be found to set down whole passages, as they are already set down by
others, and may seem rather to transcribe then to write; yet this I suppose
may be excused, as being all of one common stock; and no matter from whence
the water comes, so it come clean to the Readers use. Lastly, for the Work it
self; I dare be bold to say, that it has been Collected out of Authors both
Ancient and Modern, with so great care and diligence, that if all other
Chronicles should be lost, yet this only would be sufficient to inform
Posterity of all passages memorable or worthy to be known; which of any other
general Chronicle, cannot perhaps be said.

RICHARD BAKER.

A CATALOGVE OF VVRITERS, BOTH ANCIENT AND MODERN, Out of whom this CHRONICLE
has been Collected.
1 GIldas Britannicus, surnamed the Wise, was the first writer of our English
Nation; who amongst other his Works; writ a Treatise De Excidio Britanniae, He
was borne in the year 493. and dyed in the year 580. 2 Nennius a Monk of
Bangor, writ the Story of Britain, and lived about the year 620. 3 Venerable Bede, a Saxon and a Priest, writ the Ecclesiastical Story of the English
Nation, from the coming in of Julius Caesar, to the year 733. about which
time he dyed. 4 Ethelwardus, a writer next to Bid the most ancient, writ a
general Chronicle from the Creation to the end of King Edgar. 5 Radulphus de
Diceto, who lived about the year 685. 6 Segebert King of the East Angles, writ
an Institution of Laws, in his later days became a Monk, and was slain by
Penda King of the Mercians, in the year 652. 7 Cymbertus Bishop of Lindsey, in
the kingdom of Mercia, writ the Annals of that Country, and lived about the
year 730 8 Daniel Wentanus a Bishop, writ the History of his Province: and the
Acts of the South Saxons, and dyed in the year 746. 9 Asserius Menevensis,
borne in Pembrokeshire, Bishop of Salisbury, writ the Story of Britain, and
the Acts of King Alphred, and lived about the year 890. 10 Alphredus the
great, King of the Angles, ^ourth son of King Ethelwolph; writ, besides many
other works, a Collection of Chronicles, and dyed at Winchester in the year
901. 11 Osbernus a Benedictine Monk, writ the life of the Archbishop Dunstan,
and other works: and lived about the year 1020. 12 Colman^us Anglicus, writ a
Chronicle and a Catalogue of the English Kings, and lived about the year 1040.
in the time of King Harold the first. 13 Gulielmus Gemeticensis, a Norman and a
Monk, writ the lives of the Dukes of Normandy, to William the Conqueror, to
whom he Dedicated his Work: and after enlarged it to the death of King Henry
the first, in the year 1135. at which time he lived. 14 Marianus Scotus a
Monk, writ Annals from the beginning of the world to his own time, and dyed in
the year 1086. 15 Alphredus a Priest of Beverly, writ a History, from the
first Original of the Britains to his own time, and lived about the year
1087. in the time of William the Conqueror. 16 Veremundus a Spaniard, and a
Priest, but who lived much in Scotland, writ the Antiquities of the Scottish
Nation, and lived about the year 1090. 17 Lucianus a Monk, and an English
writer, and lived in the first times of the Normans. 18 Ingulphus Abbot of
Croyland, writ from the year 664. to the year 1066. and lived in the time of
William the Conqueror, whose Secretary he had been. 19 Turgotus an
Englishman, first Deane of Durham, and afterward Bishop of Saint Andrews in
Scotland, writ a History of the Kings of Scotland, also Chronicles of Durham,
Annals of his own time, and the life of King Malcolm, and lived in the year
1098. in the time of King William Rufus. 20 G^lielmus Pictaviensis, writ a
Treatise of the Life of William the Conqueror. 21 Gualterus Mappaeus, writ a
Book, De Nugis Curialium, and lived about the Conquerours time. 22 William of
Malmesbury, a Benedictine Monk, writ a History of the English Nation, from the
first coming of the Saxons into Britain, to his own time, which Work he
Dedicated to Robert Duke of Gloucester, base Son of King Henry the First, and
lived to the first years of King Henry the Second. 23 Florentius Bravonius, a
Monk of Worcester, compiled a Chronicle from the Creation, to the year 1118.
in which year he dyed; his Work was continued by another Monk to the year
1163. 24 Eadmerus a Monk of Canterbury, writ the lives of William the
Conqueror, William Rufus, and King Henry the First, in whose time he lived. 25
Raradocus borne in Wales, writ the Acts of the Britain Kings, from Cadwallader
to his own time, and lived in the time of King Stephen. 26 Gervasius
Dorobernensis, a Benedictine Monk, writ a History of the English Nation, and
lived about the year 1120 27 Johannes Fiberius commonly called De Bever, writ
short Annals of the English Nation, and lived about the year 1110. in the time
of King Henry the first. 28 Henry, Archdeacon of Huntington, writ a History of
the Kings of England, to the Reign of King Stephen, in whose time he lived. 29
Geoffrey of Monmouth, a Benedictine Monk, and afterward Bishop of Asaph, writ
a History of the Britains, and was the first that makes mention of Brute and
of Merlins Prophecies, for which he is much taxed by diverse Authors of his
own time; and after; he lived about the year 1150. in the time of King
Stephen. 30 William of Newborough, borne at the beginning of King Stephens
Reign, writ a History of the English Nation, and bitterly inveighes against
Geoffrey of Monmouth, as a Deviser of Fables. 31 Sylvester Gyraldus, borne in
Wales, and thereof called Cambrensis; after long travail abroad was called
home, and made Secretary to King Henry the Second; and after was sent Tutour to
his Son John into Ireland; he writ the History of that Nation very
exquisitely; also an Itinerarium of Wales and Britain; the Life of Henry the
Second; the Acts of King John, and a Chronicle of the English Nation, and lived
about the year 1190. in the times of King Richard the First, and King John. 32
John of Hagulstad, a Town in the North, a Benedictine Monk in Durham, writ
the most memorable things, from the ninth year of King Henry the Second, to
the first year of King Richard the first, in whose time he lived, about the
year 1190. 33 Roger Hoveden, a Priest of Oxford, writ the Annals of the Kings
of England, and the memorable passages under the Romans, Picts, Saxons, Danes,
and Normans; he lived in the time of King Richard the first, and dyed in the
time of King John. 34 Johannes Tilberiensis, a secular Priest, writ a History
of the English Nation; and lived in the time of King Richard the first. 35
Richardus Canonicus, traveled with King Richard the first into Palestine; and
writ of his Journey and Acts there. 36 Aluredus Rivallensis, or de Rivallis, a
Cistersian Monk, in the Diocese of York, writ the Life of Edward King of
England, and David King of Scots, and dyed in the year 1166. 37 Simon
Dunelmensis, a Benedictine Monk, writ a History of the English Nation, from
the death of Venerable Bede, to the year 1164. and lived in the time of King
Henry the second. 38 John de Oxenford, first Deane of Salisbury, and after
Bishop of Norwich, writ the British History, and continued it to his own time;
wherein he agrees much with Geoffry of Monmouth; and lived about the year
1174. in the tim^ of King Henry the second. 39 Johannes Sarisberiensis, writ an
excellent Book De Nugis Curialium; and lived about the year 1182. in the time
of King Henry the second. 40 Gulielmus Parvus, a Canon Regular in the Province
of York, writ a History of the Norman Kings; and li^ed about the year^ 1216.
in the time of King John. 41 Johannes Campobellus, a Scotch man writ the
History of the Scots, from the first Original of the Nation to his own time:
and lived in the year 1260. 42 John Breton an Englishman, Bishop of Hereford,
writ a Book De Juribus Anglicanis, and lived in the year 1270. in the time of
King Henry the third. 43 Thomas Wyke an Englishman, a Canon Regular of Osney
near Oxford, writ a short History from the comm^ng in of William the
Conqueror to his own time, and lived in the year 1290. in the time of King
Edward the first. 44 Thomas Langford an Englishman, a Dominican Friar of
Chemsford in Essex, writ an Universal Chronicle, from the beginning of the
world to his own time, and lived in the year 1320. in the time of King Edward
the second. 45 Radulphus de Rizeto an Englishman, writ a Chronicle of the
English Nation, and lived about the year 1210. in the time of King John. 46
Robertus Montensis, a benedictine Monk, writ a Chronicle from the year 1112.
to the year 1210. at which time he lived. 47 Johannes Burgensis an Englishman,
a benedictine Monk, writ Annals of the English Nation. 48 Thomas Spot^ey an
Englishman, a benedictine Friar of Canterbury, writ the Chronicles of
Canterbury, and lived about the time of King Edward the second. 49 Matthaeus
Westmonasteriensis, called Florilegus, for collecting Flores Historiarum,
chiefly of Bri^aine, containing from the beginning of the world to the year
1307. about which time he lived. 50 Ranulphus Higden, a benedictine Monk of
Chester, writ a Book which he called Polychronicon, containing from the
beginning of the world to the sixteenth year of King Edward the third in whose
time he lived. 51 Matthew Paris, a benedictine Monk of Saint Albans, writ a
History, chiefly Ecclesiastical, of the English Nation, from William the
Conqueror, to the last year of King Henry the third, and lived about the time
of King Edward the third. 52 William Pachenton an Englishman, writ a History of
the English Nation, and lived about the tim^ of King Edward the third. 53
Bartholmeus Anglicus, a Franciscan Friar, writ a Book Entitled De
Proprietatibus rerum, and a Chronicle of the Scots, and lived in the year
1360. in the time of King Edward the third. 54 Nicholas Trivet, borne in
Norfolk, of a worshipful Family, became a Domidican Friar, writ many
excellent works in Divinity and Philosophy; also Annals of the English Kings,
from King Stephen, to King Edward the second, and lived in the year 1307. in
the time of King Edward the third. 55. Alexander Essebiensis Pryor of a
Monastery of Regular Canons, writ diverse learned works, amongst other an
Epitome of the British History: and lived in the year 1360. in the time of
King Edward the third. 56 John Froyssart borne in the Low Countries, writ a
Chronicle in the French tongue, containing seventy four years; Namely,
beginning with King Edward the third, and ^nding with King Henry the fourth, in
whose time he lived; whose Chronicle, Sir John Bourchier knight translated into
English, and John Sleyden a French man has lately contracted into an Epitome.
57 Thomas de la Moore, borne in Glocestershire, in the time of King Edward the
first, by whom as having twenty pounds land, holden by knights service, he was
made a Knight, and afterward being very inward with King Edward the second,
writ a History of his life and death. 58 Thomas Rodbourne an Englishman, and a
Bishop, writ a Chronicle of his Nation, and lived in the year 1412. in the
time of King Henry the fourth. 59 John Trevisa borne in Glocestershire, a
Priest, translated Polychronicon into English, adding to it an Eighth Book,
Entitled De Memorabilibus eorum temporum, containing from the year 1342. to
the year 1460. He writ also of the Acts of King Arthur, and Descriptions both
of Britain and Ireland, and lived in the time of King Edward the fourth. 60
John Harding a Gentleman of a good Family in the North, writ a Chronicle in
verse, of the Kings of England, to the Reign of King Edward the fourth;
wh^rein he all^dgeth many Records, which he had got in Scotland, that testify
the Scottish Kings submissions to the Kings of England he lived in the year
1448. in the time of King Henry the sixth. 61 John Capgrave, borne in Kent, an
Hermit Friar, writ many learned works in Divinity, and a Catalogue of the
English Saints, and lived in the year. 1464. in the time of King Edward the
fourth. 62 John Lydgate, Monk of Saint Edmundsbury in Suffolk, writ diverse
works in verse, and some in prose: as the lives of King Edward, and King
Ethelstan, of the round Table of King Arthur, and lived in the year 1470. in
the time of King Edward the fourth. 63 John Weathamstead, Abbot of Saint
Albans, in his work of English Affairs, accuses Geoffrey of Monmouth, of
mere Fabulousnesse, and lived about the year 1440. 64 Gulielmus Elphinston a
Scotchman, Bishop of Aberdene, writ the Antiquiti^s of Scotland, and the
Statutes of Counsels, and lived in the year 1480. in the time of James the
third King of Scotland. 65 George Buchanan a Scotchman, writ the story of
Scotland from Fergusius, to Queen Mary, in whose time he lived. 66 William
Caxton an Englishman, writ a Chronicle to the three and twentyeth year of King
Edward the Fourth, which he calls Fructus Temporum: also a Description of
Britain, the life of Saint Edward, and the History of King Arthur, and lived
in the year 1484. 67 Thomas Walsingham borne in Norfolk, a Benedictine Monk
of Saint Albans, writ two Histories; One shorter, the other larger; the first
beginning from the year 1273. and continued to the year 1423. The other,
beginning at the coming in of the Normans, and continued to the beginning of
King Henry the sixth, to whom he Dedicated his work. 68 Robert Fabian a
Sheriff of London, writ a Concordance of Histories, from Brute the first King
of the Britains, to the last year of King Henry the second; and another work
from King Richard the first, to King Henry the seventh, in whose time he lived.
69 Sir Thomas Moore borne in London, Lord Chancellor of England; besides many
other learned works, writ the Life of King Richard the third; and dyed for
denying the Kings Supremacy, in the Reign of King Henry the Eight, in the
year 1535. 70 Hector Boethius a Scotchman, writ a Catalogue and History of the
Kings of Scotland: also a Description of that kingdom, and lived in the year
1526. in the time of James the fifth, King of Scotland. 71 Polydor Virgill, an
Italian, but made here in England Archdeacon of Wells; amongst other his
learned works, writ the History of England, from its first beginning, to the
thirtyeth year of King Henry the Eighth, to whom he Dedicated his Work. 72
Edward Hall a Lawyer, writ a Chronicle which he calls the Union of the two
Roses, the Red and the White, containing from the beginning of King Henry the
fourth, to the last year of King Henry the eighth, and dyed in the year 1547.
73 John Leland, a Londoner, amongst diverse other works, writ a Book of the
Antiquity of Britain, and of the famous men and Bishops in it, and lived in
the year 1546. in the time of King Henry the Eighth. 74 John Rogers, first a
Papist, and afterward a Protestant, amongst other his learned works writ a
History from the beginning of the world; and lived most in Germany, in the
year 1548. in the time of King Edward the sixth. 75 Philip Commines, a knight
of Flanders, writ the lives of Lewis and Charles the Eighth, Kings of France,
wherein he handles many passages between them and the Kings of England their
contemporaries.
Of the Modern, These:
76 Richard Grafton a Citizen of London, writ a Chronicle from the beginning of
the world, to the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in whose time he
lived. 77 Raphaell Holinshed, a Minister, writ a large Chronicle, from the
Conquest to the year 1577. and was continued by others, to the year 1586. 78
Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, writ the Lives of King Henry the eight, King
Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary, and lived in the time of Qu. Elizabeth 79
Doctor Heyward writ the History of the first Kings, William the Conqueror,
William Rufus, and Henry the first, also the Reign of King Henry the fourth,
and Edward the sixth, and lived to the time of King James. 80 Samuel Daniel
writ a Chronicle of the Kings of England, to the end of King Edward the third,
and is continued by John Trussell to the beginning of King Henry the seventh.
81 Sir Francis Bacon Viscount, Viscount S. Albans, has written a History of
the Reign of King Henry the seventh, in a most elegant style, and lived in the
time of King James. 82 John Fox writ three large Volumes of the Acts and
Monuments of the Church; particularly treating of the English Martyrs in the
Reigns of King Henry the eighth, and Queen Mary, and lived in the time of
Queen Elizabeth. 83 Thomas Cowper, Bishop of Winchester, writ Chronicle Notes
of all Nations, specially of England, from the beginning of the world to his
own time, and lived in the time of Queen Elizabeth. 84 William Camden King at
Arms, writ the life of Queen Elizabeth, and a Description of Britain, and
lived in the time of King James. 85 William Martin Esquire, writ the Reigns of
the Kings of England, from William the Conqueror, to the end of King Henry the
eighth: to which was afterward added the Reigns of King Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. 86 Francis Biondi an Italian Gentleman, and of
the Privy Chamber to King Charles, has written in the Italian tongue, the
Civil Wars between the two Houses of Lancaster and York, from King Richard
the second, to King Henry the seventh: Translated elegantly into English by
Henry Earl of Monmouth, now living. 87 Henry Isaacson a Londoner, has written
a Chronology of all kingdoms, from the beginning of the world to the year
1630. being the fifth year of King Charles his Reign. 88 Nicholas Harpsefield
Archdeacon of Canterbury, has written a Chronicle of all the Bishops of
England, to which Edmund Campian the Jesuit, made an Addition. 89 John Stow
Citizen of London, writ a Chronicle from Brute to the end of Qu. Elizabeth, and
is continued to this present time, being the 18. year of King Charles, by
Edmund Howes a Londoner. 90 John Speed a Londoner, writ the Story of Britain,
from the first beginning to the year 1605. being the second year of King
James. 91 William Abington Esquire, has written the Reign of King Edward the
fourth in a very fine style, and is yet living. 92 Thomas Fuller Batchelour of
Divinity, and Prebendary of Sarum, has written the Holy War in very fine
language, wherein he relates the Acts of our Kings of England in the Holy Land,
and is now living. 93 Andre du Chesne, a Frenchman, Geographer to the King of
France, has written the History of England, Scotland and Ireland, from their
first beginnings, to the seventeenth year of our present Sovereign Lord King
Charles.
The end of the Catalogue of Authors.
A CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND from the time of the Romans Government,
unto the Reign of King CHARLES.
Of the first known times of this Island.
ALthough we begin the Era of our Computation from William called the
Conqueror, as though he were the first King of our English Nation: Yet before
him; were many other excellent Kings; and their Acts perhaps as worthy to be
known, if they could be known. But seeing after ages can know nothing of
former times but what is Recorded by writing: It has followed that as the
first Writers were Poets: So the first writings have been Fictions; and nothing
is delivered to Posterity of the most ancient times, but very Fables: Such as
is the story of Albina (of whom they say, this Island was called Albion: though
others say, ab albis rupibus, of the white cliffes) that she should be^ the
eldest of the two and thirty daughters of Dioclesian King of Syria, (such as
never was) who being married to two and thirty Kings, in one night killed all
their husbands: for which fact, they were put in a ship, themselves alone
without any Pylo^, so to try their adventure, and by chance arrived in this
Island, of whom Giants were begotten. And if you like not of this; then have
you the story of Albion the son of Neptune, of whom the Island took its
name. But when these are exploded; there follows another with great
Attestation, and yet as very a Fable as these; namely the story of the Trojan
Brute, (of whom the Island they say, was called Britain: though many other
causes are given of the name:) as likewise the story of Brutes cousin Corinaeus,
(of whom they say, the Country of Cornwall had its name, to whom it was given,
for overcomming the Giant Gogmagog:) and that Brute having three sons,
Lectrine, Albanact, and Camber; he gave at his death to his eldest son
Locrine, all the land on this side Humber, and called it Lo^gria; to his second
son Albanact, all the land beyond Humber, of whom it was called Albania, (now
Scotland:) and to his youngest son Camber, all the land beyond the river of
Severne, of whom it was called Cambria, (now Wales:) with other such stuff,
which may please children, but not riper Judgments; and were first broached by
Geoffry Archdeacon of Monmouth: for which all the Writers of his time cried
shame upon him; and yet can scarce keep many at this day, from giving credit
to his Fictions.

And when we are once gotten out of Fables, and come to some truth; yet that
truth is delivered in such slender draughts, and such broken pieces, that very
small benefit can be gotten by the knowing it, and was not till the time of
Julius Caesar, a thousand years after the Fable of Brute: at which time, the
Island was yet but in manner of a Village, being without Walls, as having no
shipping, (which are indeed the true Walls of an Island) but only certain
small vessels, made of boards and wicker. And as they had no ships, for defense
without: So neither had they any Forts, for defense within: scarce any houses
but such as were made of stakes and boughs of trees fastened together; Neither
was it yet come to be a Kingdom, but was Governed by a number of petty Rulers:
So as Kent only had in it (as Caesar calls them) four Kings; Cingetorix,
Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax: which division, as it made the Britains
the more easy to be conquered, so it made the Romans the longer in conquering.
For if they had been one united body, one or two battles might have made a
conquest of the whole, where being thus divided, there was need to be as many
battles as there were divisions; So as it was many years, before the Romans
could conquer the whole Island; even from the time of Julius Caesar, to the
time of the Emperor Domitian; not much less then two hundred years. It is
true, after Caesar's first coming, the Island grew sensible of this defect of
their division, and thereupon by consent of a great part, made choice of
Cassibelan, King of the Trinovants, who had his seat at Verulam, to be
General of their wars; which made indeed some little stop to the Romans
proceedings, but after the loss of a battle or two, they fell again into a
relapse of their former defect, and thought it better to secure every one his
own, by his own means, then by a general power, to hazard all at once;
whereby it came afterward to be true: Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur.
Yet before the Country could be wholly Conquered; at first by reason of the
Nations valor, seeking to keep themselves free, and afterward by reason of
the insolency of the garrison soldiers, that sought to make them slaves, many
great oppositions were made, amongst which the most memorable was that of
Voadicia, a certain Queen of the Country, who having been by the Roman
soldiers herself abused, and her daughters ravished, used means to levy an
Army of six score thousand men, whom she led herself into the field, and set
upon the Romans in their chief towns, which were London, Verulam, and
Camalodunum (now Malden in Essex;) of whom she flew above seventy thousand: but
then in a second battle, had fourscore thousand of her own Army slain,
after which defeat, for avoiding of slavery, she poisoned herself.

This Island for a long time, was so much esteemed of the Romans, that their
Emperors sometimes came hither in person; as first the Emperor Adrian, in the
year 124. who made a great wall of earth between England and Scotland, and
having set the Country in order, returned. After him sometime, Severus the
Emperor in the year 212. came over into Brit^ine to repress the Incur^ions of
the Picts and Scots, by whom in a battle near York, he was wounded and
thereof dyed, or as others say, he dyed of age and sickness. Afterward in the
year 305. Constantius the Emperor came into Britain, and ended his life at
York, making that City famous for the death and burial of two great Emperors;
and yet more famous for the honor done to Constantine the Great, son of
Constantius, who in that City was first saluted Emperor. But notwithstanding
the great estimation the Romans a long time made of this Island, yet at last,
after five hundred years they had kept it in subjection, they voluntarily left
it: the charge of keeping it, being greater, then the benefit; for to keep it
in subjection, they maintained no fewer than fourscore thousand soldiers in
pay, and when wars grew amongst themselves at home, they could no longer
spare so many abroad, but recalled them home: but then, though they left
Britain, yet they left not the Britains, but carried them, at least, a great
part of them away with them; of whom the most were slain in their service, and
the rest planted in that part of France, which of them was afterward, and is to
this day called Britain. And now one would think, the Island should be in
good case, being freed from them that kept them in subjection, but it proved to
be in worse case being at liberty, then it was before in servitude, for being
deprived of their ablest men, and at the same time, their King Lucius happening
to dye without issue, they were left as a few loose sticks without the bond of
a Governor: which the Picts and Scots observing, thought now was the time to
make the Country their own, and thereupon made invasions upon it with all
their Forces. Whereupon the Britains having none left of their Native Kings to
succeed; and knowing they could ill manage the Body of an Army without a Head:
they make choice of Vortigerne Earl of Cornwall, one extracted from the
British Line; and he, whether so advised by his Cabinet Counselor, the
Prophetical Merlin, or as finding his own strength too weak to make
resistance; implores first aid of the Romans, and they making answer, they
had business enough to do of their own, and leaving them to themselves, he
then fled to the Saxons for aid; a warlike people of Germany, and who had
greater swarms then their hives would well hold.

And here we may plainly see how dangerous a thing it is for a Nation, to call
in strangers to their aid, and especially in any great number; for though they
come at first but mercenaries, yet once admitted, and finding their own
strength, they soon grow Masters, as here it proved with the Saxons.

But before we speak further of the coming in of the Saxons, who were at that
time Infidels, and brought with them their two Idols, Woden and Frya, (whereof
two of our week days, Wednesday and Friday, take their names; it will be fit
to say something of the state of the Christian Church in this Island. First
then, it is recorded, that in the year 63. what time Arviragus reigned here,
Joseph of Arim^thea (who buried the body of Christ) came into this Island, and
laid the foundation of the Christian Faith in the Western parts, at a place
called then Hvalon; now Glastenbury; and that there came with him, Mary
Magdalen, Lazarus, and Martha: and more then this, that Simon Zelotes one of
the Apostles suffered martyrdom here in Britain: and more then this, that
both St. Peter and St. Paul came into this Island and Preached the Gospel; all
which and more to this purpose, is Recorded by Authors of good Account: though
it be hard believing, That persons, and specially women of so great age, as
these must needs be at this time, should take so long a journey. But howsoever
it was, certain it is, that the doctrine of Christianity was about this time
planted in this Island, though it made afterward but small progress, and that
with some persecution; as in which time, St. Alban suffered martyrdom at
Verulam, and at Liechfield shortly after, no fewer then a thousand. After this,
in the year 180 what time Lucius was King of this Island, Eleutherius then
Bishop of Rome, sent Faganus and Damianus to him: upon whose preaching, the
Temples of the Heathenish Flamins and Arch-flamins (one and thirty in number)
were converted to so many Bishops Sees; whereof London, York, and Caerleyn
(now St. David's) were made the Metropolitans of the Province. And there is a
Table remaining at this day, in the Parish Church of St. Peter on Cornhill
London, which records; that the Foundation thereof was laid by this King
Lucius, and that this Church was the Cathedral to that Archbishops See. In the
year 359. a Council was holden at Ariminum in Italy; where four hundred
Western Bishops were Assembled, whereof three went out of Britain, and gave
their voices against the Arian Heresy. After this, about the year 420. rose
up in this Island, one Pelagius a Monk, brought up in the Monastery of Bangor
in Wales, who spread the poison of his Heresy, first in this his Native
Country, and afterward all the world over. And these had been the chief
passages in matters Ecclesiastical within this Island, when the Saxons were
called in, about the year 450.

And now under the Conduct of two brothers, Hengist and Horsa, came over nine
thousand Saxons with their wives and children, to a^^ist the Britains against
the Scots, and were appointed the Isle of Thanet to Inhabit. With which
assistance the Britains give their enemies battle, and overcome them: So as
they accounted the Saxons as Angels sent from heaven, and then allowed them
Kent also for their Inhabiting. Not long after Hengist obtained of King
Vortigern the property of so much ground, as he could enclose with a Bulls Hide:
which cutting into thongs, he there built the Castle, Facti de nomine, called
Thong Castle. And now having built it he invites V^rtigern to a Feast, where
falling in love with Rowena, the beautiful daughter of Hengist, and marrying
her, it put Hengist into such a height of boldness, that he began to aspire,
sending for greater Forces to come over to him; as meaning to transplant
himself hither, and to make this Island his Inheritance: which the British
Lords perceiving, and not able to weane their King from his new wife, and her
father Hengist, they Depose him; and in his place set up his son Vortimer, a
true lover of his Country: who presently in a pitched battle near unto
Aylesford in Kent, set upon the Saxons; where Catigern the brother of Vor^imer,
and H^rs^, of Hengist, in single ^ight hand to hand slew each other. In which
place Catigern was buried, and a Monument in memory of him Erected, the stones
whereof at this day are standing in a great Plain in the Parish of Aylesford;
which instead of Catigern, is corruptly called Kits-Cotyhouse. Another the like
Monument was erected for Hors^, though now defaced; remembered only by the
Town where it stood, called Horstead. Three other battles after this were
fought between the Britains and the Saxons: one at Craford; another at
Weppeds-fleete; the third upon Colmore: in which last, the Britains got so
great a victory, that the Saxons were clean driven out of Kent, and in Thanet
also not suffered also to rest; so as shortly after, Hengist with his Saxons
departed the Kingdom, as being now out of hope to make his Fortune in this
Island. But while Vortimer was th^s intentive for his Countries liberty; Rowena
the former Kings wife, being daughter to Hengist, was as intentive to bring it
into servitude; which knowing she could not do as long as Vortimer lived, she
used means by poison, to take away his life, after he had been King the space
of four years, and then by the witchcraft of fair words, so enchanted the
British Nobility, that her husband Vortigern was again established in the
Kingdom; which was no sooner done, but Hengist, (relying upon his son
Vortigerns love) with a mighty Army attempts to return again into the Island;
when being resisted, he makes a show, as if he desired nothing but to fetch
away his daughter Rowena, and to have a friendly conference for continuance of
amity: which motion seeming reasonable, a place and time of conference was
appointed: the time upon the first of May; the place upon the Plain of Ambrii,
now called Salisbury; whither the plain meaning Britains came unarmed,
according to agreement; but the fraudulent Saxons under their long Cassocks had
short skeynes hidden, with which, upon a watchword given, they set upon the
Britains, and of their unarmed Nobility slew three, some say five hundred, and
took the King himself prisoner, whom they would not release, till they were
put in possession of these four Counties, Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, and
Norfolk. Whereupon Vortigern, whether fearing a second Deposing, or whether so
advised by his Cabinet Counsailour the Prophetical Merlin, betook him into
Wales, and there built him a strong Castle for his safeguard; while the Saxons
coming daily in great swarms into the Land, had at this time overrunne all;
if Aurelius Ambrosius a Roman borne, but affected to the British Nation, had
not landed at To^nes in Devonshire, to whom resorted great troops of
Britains. His first expedition was against Vortigern, (as the first cause of
the Britains misery) whose Castle he besieged; and whether by wild fire, or
by fire from Heaven, both he and his Castle, and all that were in it were burnt
to ashes. To this Ambrosius is ascribed the admirable Monument in Wiltshire,
now called Stoneh^^ge, in the place where the Bri^aines had been treacherously
^laughtered and interred; and of whom the Town of Ambersbury bears its name.
After this he set upon the Saxons, and in many batrailes discom^ited them; till
at last falling sick in the City of Winchester, a Saxon, in show a Britain,
and in habit a Physician, was sent unto him, who instead of Physic, ministered
poison, whereof he died, in the year 497. after he had reigned two and thirty
years.

After Ambrosius, succeeded Uter, (some say his brother, others, a Britain)
called Pendragon, of his Royal Banner borne ever before him; wherein was
portrayed a Dragon with a golden Head, as in our English Camps, it is at this
day borne for the Imperial standard. And he also in many battles discomfited
the Saxons, till after eighteen years Reign he came to his end by treachery;
dying by poison put into a Well, whereof he usually drank; in the year 515.

After him succeeded his son Arthur, begotten of the fair Lady Igren, wife
of the Duke of Cornwall, to whose bed the Art of Merlin brought him in the
likeness of her husband; and he in t^elve set battles discomfited the
Saxons; but in one most memorable in which gi^ding himself with his sword
called Callibourne, he flew upon his Enemies, and with his own hand slew eight
hundred of them; which is but one of his wonderful deeds, whereof there are
so many reported, that he might well be reckoned amongst the Fabulous, if
there were not ^now true to give them credit. Amongst other his Acts, he
Instituted the Order of Knights of the Round Table, to the end there might be
no question about Precedence, and to teach Heroical minds, nor to stand upon
place, but Merit. But this great Prince, for all his great valor, was at last
in a battle wounded, whereof he died, in the year 542. after he had reigned
six and twenty years.

After King Arthur succeeded his cousin Constantine; and after his three years
reign, Aurelius Conanus the Nephew of King Arthur; whose Reign is so
uncertain, that some say, he reigned only two, some, three years, some
again thirty, and some three and thirty. After Conanus succeeded Vortiporus,
who after many victories against the Saxons, and four years Reign, died.
After whom succeeded Malgo Conanus, and Reigned six years. After him
Careticus, who setting upon the Saxons and beaten, ^led into the Town of
Chichester, whereupon the Saxons catching certain Sparrowes and fastening fire
to their feet, let them fly into the Town, where lighting upon ^traw, and
other matter apt to take fire, the whole City in short space was burnt; and
thereupon Careticus flying, secured himself amongst the Mountains of Wales,
where he dyed, after he had unprosperously Reigned three years: and from that
time forth, the Britains lost their whole Kingdom in the East part of the
Island, and were confined in the West by the rivers Severne and Dee. After
Careticus succeeded Cadwan, who Reigned two and twenty years. After him his
son Cadwallo, who Reigned eight and forty years, and then died; whose body
was buried in St. Martins Church near Ludgate, and his Image of brass placed
upon the same gate, for a terror to the Saxons. In his time, the doctrine of
Mahomet began to spread it self all the Eastern world over. After Cadwallo
succeeded his son Cadwalladar; in whose time so great a Famine, and afterward
Mortality happened, continuing eleven years, that the Land became in a manner
desolate: in so much, that the King and many of his Lords were driven to
forsake their native Country, and Cadwalladar himself went to his cousin Alan
King of little Britain in France. At which time the Saxons taking advantage of
his absence, came over in swarms, and dispossessed the forlorn Britains of
all they had, and divided the Land amongst themselves. Whereupon Cadwalladar,
obtaining assistance of his cousin Alan, was coming over to restrain their
insolences; when making prayers to God for good success, an Angel appeared
to him, or at least to his seeming he heard a voice, that forbad him the
enterprise, declaring that it was not Gods will, the Britains should rule this
Land any longer, and therefore bade him hie him to Rome, and receive of Pope
Sergius the habit of Religion, wherein he should die and rest in peace. Which
accordingly he did: and in him ended the blood of the British Kings; in the
year 689. So as Britain now, was no longer Brit^ine; but a Colony of the
Saxons.

And now is time to speak of the Heptarchy of the Saxons; so much spoken of,
by all Writers^ and to show by what degrees the Britai^es lost, and the Saxons
got the whole possession of this Island: for this Heptarchie or division of
this Island into seven Kingdoms, came not in all at once, nor yet in an equal
partition, but some good distance of time, one after another, and as the
Invadour had strength to expel the Natives.

The first Kingdom being of Kent.
THe first Kingdom of the Saxons began by Hengist, in the year 455.
containing all Kent, and continued 372. years, during the reigns of
seventeene Kings, of whom as many as performed any memorable Act, shall be
remembered, and for the rest, it will be no loss to pass them over in silence.
Of these seventeene Kings, Ethelbert being the fifth, was the first Saxon
Christian King of this Island, converted by Austin the Monk, whom Pope Gregory
sent hither to that purpose, with forty others, in the year 595. to whom King
Ethelbert gave his chief City of Canterbury, and his own Royal Palace there,
made since the Cathedral of that See; withdrawing himself to Re^ulver in the
Isle of Thanet, where he erected a Palace for himself and his successors. He
gave him also an old Temple, standing without the East wall of the City, which
he honored with the name of St. Paneras, and then added a Monastery to it, and
Dedicated it to St. Peter and Paul, appointing it to be the place for the
Kentish Kings Sepulchers. But in regard of Austin the procurer, both Pan^ras,
Peter, and Paul were soon forgotten, and it was; and is to this day, called
St. Austines: which Abbey St. Austin enriched with diverse Relics which he
brought with him from Rome; amongst which was a part of Christ's seamelesse
Coat, and of Aarons Rod. This King after his own conversion, converted also
Sebert King of the East Angles, and assisted him in the building of the
Cathedral Church o^ St. Paul London; as also the Church of St. Peter, on the
West of London, then called Thorny: and himself at Rochester built the
Cathedral Church there, which he Dedicated to the Apostle St. Andrew; and
dying, when he had Reigned six and fifty years, was buried at Canterbury. And
thus by this first Saxon Kingdom, was all Kent lopped off from the Britains
Dominion; and this was their first impairing, and this happened in the Reign
of Ambrosius before spoken of. The sixth King of Kent was Ethelbald; who at
first an Apostata, was afterward converted, and built a Chapel within the
Monastery of St. Peter and Paul at Canterbury. The seventh King was Ercombert,
a virtuous and religious Prince, who first commanded the observing of Lent; and
in his days, the Archbishop Honorius divided Kent into Parishes. The eighth
King was Egbert, who obtained the kingdom by murdering his Nephews: whose
sister the Lady Dompnena, founded the Abbey of Minster in Kent. The eleventh
King was Withred, who founded the Priory of St. Merton at Dover. The last was
Baldred, who overcome by Egbert King of the West Saxons, left Kent a Province
to that Kingdom, in the year 827.

The second Kingdom being of the South Saxons.
THe second Kingdom of the Heptarchie, was of the South Saxons, and began by
Ella, in the year 488. containing Sussex and Surrey, and continued 113 years,
during the reign of five Kings only, of whom Cissa being the second founded
the City of Chichester, and reigned as some say threescore and sixteen years.
And then Berthan being the last King, was overcome by Ine King of the West
Saxons, and his Country became a Province to that Kingdom, in the year 601.
and thus as Kent before, so now Sussex and Surrey were lopped off from the
Britains Dominion: and this was a second impairing, which also happened in the
Reign of the British King Ambrosius.

The third Kingdom being of the West Saxons.
THe third Kingdom of the Heptarchie, was of the West Saxons, and began by
Cerdic, in the year 519. containing Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorse^shire,
Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Barkeshire, and continued 561. years,
during the Reigns of nineteen Kings, of whom this Cerdic was the first: in
whose time, Porth a Saxon landed in the West, at a place from him called
afterward Portesmouth, and aided Cerdic in his conquest. And this happened in
the Reign of King Arthur: and as Kent, Sussex, and Surrey before, so now these
seven other shires were lopped off from the Britains Dominion: and this was a
third impairing. The sixth King of the West Saxons was Kingills, who was the
first Christian King of this kingdom, converted by Berynus an Italian Divine,
to whom he gave the City of Dorchester, near to Oxford; who therein erected
his Episcopal See. The seventh King was Kenwald, who at first an Apostata was
afterward converted, and founded the Cathedral of Winchester, and the Abbey of
Mamesbery; whose wife Segburg also built a house of devotion in the Isle of
Sheppey, wherein herself became a Nun, and was afterward elected Abbess of
Ely. The eleventh King was Ine, who ordained many good laws, which are yet
extant in the Saxon tongue, and are translated into Latin, by the learned
Master William Lambert. This King built a College at Wells bearing the name of
St. Andrews, which afterward King Kenulph made an Episcopal See. He also in
most stately manner new built the Abbey of Glastenbery; and out of his devotion
to the Sea of Rome, he enjoined every one of his Subjects, that possessed in
his house of any one kind of goods to the value of nineteen pence, to pay
yearly upon Lammas day, one penny to the Pope; which at first was contributed
under the name of the Kings Alms, but afterward was paid by the name of Peter
pence. At last he went to Rome, and there took upon him the habit of
Religion, and therein died. His wife also became a veyled Nun, and afterward
was made Abbess of Barking near London. The thirteenth King was Cuthred, who
first permitted the bodies of the dead to be buried within the walls of their
Cities, which before were used to be buried in the fields. The foureteenth was
Sigebert, who for his cruelty and exactions, was by his subjects forced to fly
into the woods to hide himself, where by a swinherd he was slain. The
fifteenth was Kenwolph, who founded the Cathedral Church of St. Andrews at
Wells, and was afterward slain by Kynoard, whom he had banished. The sixteenth
King was Brithrick, whose Queen Ethelburg, having prepared a poison for
another, the King chanced to taste it, and thereof died. In fear of which
chance the Queen fled into France; where Charles the then King for her
excellent beauty, offered her the choice of himself or his son in marriage:
but she out of her lustful humor choosing the son, was thereupon debard of
both, and thrust into a Monastery, where committing adultery, she was driven
from thence, and ended her life in great misery. For her sake the West Saxons
ordained a Law, that no Kings wife should hereafter have the Title or Majesty
of a Queen, which for many years after was severely executed.

The fourth Kingdom being of the East Saxons.
THe fourth Kingdom of the Heptarchy was of the East Saxons, and began by
Erchenwyn, in the year 527. containing Essex and Middlesex, and continued 281
years, during the Reigns of fourteen Kings; of whom the third was Sebert,
who first built the Cathedral of St. Paul London, which had formerly been the
Temple of Diana: He likewise Founded the Church of St. Peter in the West of
London, at a place called Thorny, where some time stood the Temple of Apollo,
which being overthrown by an Earthquake, King Lucius new built for the service
of God; and that again being decayed, this King restored to a greater beauty,
and with his Queen Athelgarda was there buried. The ninth King was Sebba, who
after thirty years peaceable Reign relinquished the Crown, and took upon
him a Religious habit, in the Monastery of St. Paul London; where dying, his
body was Intumbed in a Coffin of gray Marble, the cover coaped, and as yet
stands in the North wall of the Chancell of the same Church. The twelveth was
Offa, famous for the beauty of his countenance, who both enlarged with
buildings, and enriched with lands the Church of Westminster, and after eight
years Reign went to Rome, and was there shorn a Monk, and in that habit
died. The fourteenth was Suthred, whom Egbert King of the West Saxons subdued,
and made his Kingdom a Province to his own. And thus besides the former
Shires, these two also were lopped off from the Britains Dominion, and this
was a fourth impairing.

The fifth Kingdom being of Northumberland.
THe fifth Kingdom was of Northumberland, and began by Ella and Ida, in the
year 547. Containing Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland,
and Northumberland, and continued 379. years, during the Reigns of three and
twenty Kings, of whom nothing is recorded of these two first, but that they
builded the Castle of Bamburg. The seventh King was Ethelfryd, who at
Caerlegion (now Westchester) made a slaughter of twelve hundred Christian
Monks, and was himself afterward slain, by Redwald King of the East Angles.
The thirteenth King was Osred, whose wife Cutburga, out of a loathing
weariness of wedlock, sued out a divorce from her husband, and built a
Nunnery at Winburne in Dorsetshire, where in a Religious habit she ended her
life. The sixteenth King was Cednulph, who after eight years Reign, left his
Royal robes, and put on the habit of a Monk, in the Isle of Lindesfern or
Holy Island. Unto this King the Venerable B^de, a Saxon and a Priest in the
Monastery of Peter and Paul at Werimouth near to Durham, Dedicate^ his work
of the English History, which he continued from the first entrance of the
Saxons into this Island, to the year 731. containing after his own account
285. years. The seventeenth King was Egbert, who after twenty years Reign
forsook the world also, and shore himself a Monk; whose-brother being
Archbishop of York, erected a notable Library there, and stored it with an
infinite number of learned books. The last King was Oswald, after whom this
Kingdom yielded to the protection of Egbert King of the West Saxons, who was
now in the year 926. become absolute Monarch of the whole Island. And thus by
the erection of this fifth Kingdom, were the six Northern shires lopped off
from the Britains Dominion, and this was a fifth impairing.

The sixth Kingdom being of Mercia.
THe sixth Kingdom was of Mercia, and began in Crida, in the year 522.
containing Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, Warwickshire, Leycester,
Northampton, Derbyshire, Oxfordshire, Cheshire, Shropshire, Glostershire,
Staffordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartfordshire, and continued
202. years, during the Reigns of twenty Kings; eight of whom in a continued
succession kept the Imperial Crown of the Heptarchie: for though other
Reigned as Kings in their own Territories, yet among them ever one was the
supreme head of the rest, and was called King of Engle-lond, till Egbert the
West Saxon brought them all into one. The fifth of these Kings of Mercia was
Penda, who was the first Christian King of the Mercians, and laid the
Foundation of a fair Church at Medeshamstead, now called Peterborough. The
seventh King was Ethelred, who Reigned thirty years, and then gave over the
Crown, and became a Monk in the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolnshire, where
in the year 716. he died. The eighth King was Kenred, who after four years
reign went to Rome, where he took upon him the habit of a Monk, and after
other four years dyed. The tenth King was Ethelbald, who at first was given
to much lasciviousness of life, but being reprehended for it by Boniface
Archbishop of Ments, was so far converted that he Founded the Monastery of
Crowland, driving in mighty piles of Oak into that Marish ground, where he
laid a great and goodly building of stone; and after two and forty years Reign
was slain in a battle by Cuthred King of the West Saxons. The eleventh King
was Offa, who greatly enlarged his Dominions; reigned nine and thirty years,
and Founded the Monastery of St. Albans. The thirteenth King was Kenwolph, who
reigned two and twenty years, and Founded the Monastery of Winchcombe in the
County of Gloucester, where his body was interred. The eighteenth King was
Withlafe, who overcome by Egbert King of the West Saxons, held his Country
afterward as his substitute and Tributary, acknowledging Egbert as now the sole
Monarch of this Island. And by erection of this Mercian Kingdom, were
seventeene shires mo^e lopped off from the Britains Dominion, and was a sixth
and a great impairing, so as now they were driven into a narrow room.

The seventh Kingdom being of the East Angles.
THe seventh Kingdom was of the East Angles, and began by Uffa, in the year
575. containing Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely, and
continued 353. years, during the reign of fifteen Kings, of whom the fifth
was Sigebert, who first brought the light of the Gospel into his Dominions,
and built a School for education of youth, but whether at Oxford or Cambridge,
is left a Quaere; and after three years Reign shore himself a Monk in the
Abbey of Cumbreburg, which himself had built: but being afterward violently
drawn from thence by his Subjects the East Angles, to resist the Mercian King
Penda, and refusing to use any other weapon but only a white wand, was in a
battle by him slain. The seventh King was Anna, who after thirteen years
reign, was also slain by Penda the Mercian King. This King Anna was memorable
chie^ly for the holiness of his children, of whom his son Erkenwald was
Bishop of London, and built the Abbey of Barking near London. His eldest
daughter Etheldrid was twice married, and yet continued a Virgin still, and at
last became a Nun, and is remembered to posterity by the name of St. Audrie.
His second daughter named Sexburg, his third named Ethelburg, his fourth (a
Natural daughter) named Withburg: all entered into Monasteries, and are
Canonized all for Saints. The foureteenth King was Ethelbert, a learned and
religious Prince, who being invited by Offa the Mercian King to marry Elfrid
his daughter, came for that purpose to Offa's Court, then seated at Sutton
Walleys in the County of Hereford, and there by him was cruelly murdered. In
whose memorial notwithstanding, he afterward built a fair Church at
Hereford, the Cathedral of that See, as though he could expiate a murder of
the living, by a Monument to the dead, and were not rather a Monument of his
own impiety. The fifteenth King was Edmund, who assaulted by the Danes for his
possessions, was more assaulted for his profession: for continuing constant in
his Christian Faith, those Pagans first beat him with bats, then scourged him
with whippes, and lastly bound him to a stake, and with their arrows shot him
to death; whose body was buried at the Town where Sigebert the East Anglian
King, one of his Predecessors, had built a Church, and where afterward (in
honor of him) was built another most spacious, of a wonderful frame of
Timber, and the name of the Town upon the occasion of his burial there,
called to this day St. Edmunds bury. This Church and place, Suenus the Danish
King burnt to ashes: but when his son Canutus had gotten possession of the
English Crown, terrified with a Vision of the seeming St. Edmund; in a
religious devotion to expiate his Fathers sacrilege, he built it anew most
sumptuously, and offered his own Crown upon the Martyrs Tomb. After the
death of this Edmund, the East Angles Country was possessed by the Danes, and so
continued the space of fifty years, until that Edmund surnamed the Elder,
expelled those Danes, and made that Kingdom a Province to the West Saxons.

By that which has been said, it plainly appears, by what degrees the
Britains lost, and the Saxons got the whole possession of this Island. For
after that Vortigern in the year 455. had called in the Saxons, every Britain
King that succeeded him, lost some part or other of it to the Saxon^, till at
last in the year 689. C^dw^llader the last Britain King lost all; and then
the Saxon Kings striving amongst themselves for sovereignty, they still gained
one upon another, till at last in the year 818 Egbert King of the West Saxons
reduced them all under his subjection, and then caused all the South of the
Island to be called England, according to the Angles of whom himself came;
after whom they were no longer properly called Saxon Kings, but Kings of
England, and so continued till the Danes, in the year 1017. made an
interruption; of whose succession now comes the time to speak.

Of the Saxons that Reigned sole Kings of this Island, and may properly be
called English Kings.
EGbert the eighteenth King of the West Saxons, is now become the first of the
Kings of England, in whose time the Danes began first to infest the Land; as
thinking they might do as much against the Saxons, as the Saxons had done
against the Britains; but though they made diverse Invasions, and did great
spoil, yet they were still repelled. This King reigned six and thirty years,
and dying in the year 836. was buried at Winchester. Of his issue, his
daughter Edith was made Governesse of a Monastery of Ladies, by her planted in
a place which the King her brother had given her, called Pollesworth, situate
in Arden, in the North part of the County of Warwick, where she died and was
buri^d, and the place in memory of her called St Edyths of Pollesworth.

To Egbert succeeded his son Ethelwolph, who in his youth was so addicted to
a Religious life, that he was first made Deacon, and after Bishop of
Winchester; but his father dying, he was entreated by his people to take upon
him the Crown, and by Pope Gregory the fourth, was to that end absolved of his
Vow. His reign was infested with many and great Invasions of the Danes, to
whom notwithstanding he gave incredible overthrowes. In the time of his
Reign, remembering his former Religious profession, he ordained that riches and
lands due to holy Church, should be free from all Tribute or Regal services,
and in great devotion went himself to Rome, where he lived a year; confirmed
the grant of Peter pence, and agreed beside to pay yearly to Rome three
hundred Marks. Returning home through France, and being a Widower, he there
married Judith, the beautiful daughter of Charles the Bald then Emperor; in
honor of whom, in his own Court, he ever placed her in a chair of Estate,
with all other Majesticall complements of a Q^^ene, contrary to the Law of the
West Saxons formerly made; which so much displeased his Lords, that for it they
were ready to Depose him; but howsoever he lived not long after, having
Reigned one and twenty years. His youngest son Neoto, was much addicted to
learning, and was one of the first Divinity Readers in the University of
Oxford, and Founded a Monastery in Cornwall, which of him was called
Neotestock; and being dead his body was Interred in the County of Huntington,
at a place then called Arnulphsbury, and afterward, in regard of his Interment,
St. Neotes, and now St. N^edes. This King was famous, for having four sons,
who all of them were Kings of this Land successively.

First after him Reigned his eldest son Ethelbald, in the year 857. who to
his eternal shame, took to wife Judith his fathers widow, Reigned but two
years and dying, was buried at Shirborn in Dorsetshire, at that time the
Episcopal See. From this Judith, married afterward to the Earl of Flanders,
after diverse descents, came Maude the wife of William the Conqueror, from whom
are descended all our Kings ever since.

Next to the eldest Reigned the second son Ethelbert, all whose Reign, which
was only five years, was perpetually disquieted with Invasions of the Danes,
which yet were at last repelled. He died in the year 866. and was buried at
Shirborne in Dorsetshire.

Next to the second Reigned his third son Ethelred, whose Reign was more
disquieted with the Danes then any others before: for they Invading the Land,
under the leading of Hungar, and Hubba, spoiled all the Country as they went,
not sparing Religious places; amongst other, the goodly Monasteries of Bradney,
Crowland, Peterborough, Ely, and Huntington, they laid level with the ground:
the Monks and Nuns they murdered or ravished; at which time a rare example
of Chastity and Fortitude was seen in the Nuns of Coldingham. For to avoid
the ba^barous pollutions of these Pagans, they deformed themselves by cutting
off their upper lips and noses. Nine battles in one year this King fought
with the Danes, in most o^ them victorious; but at last received a wound
whereof he died, and was buried in the Church at Winborne in Dorsetshire.

Next to the third Reigned his fourth son Alfred, in whose time came over
greater swarms of Danes then ever before, and had now got footing in the
North, the West, and South parts of this Island, leaving this King nothing of
all his great Monarchy, but only Somerset, Hampton, and Wiltshire; and not
these neither altogether free, so as he was forced sometimes to fly into the
Fennes and Marish grounds to secure himself, where he lived by Fishing and
Fowling, and hunting of wild beasts, till at last learning policy from
adversity, and gathering courage from misery, he ventured in the habit of a
common Minstrell, to enter the Danes Camp; where having viewed the manner of
their Encamping, and observed their security, he returned back, showing his
Lords in what condition he found them: whereupon setting upon them at unawares,
he not only made of them a great slaughter, but brought upon them a greater
terror: for presently upon this the Danes sue for Peace, and deliver Hostages
for performance of these Conditions; that their King should receive Baptism,
and their great Army depart quietly out of the Land. But though upon this
agreement they departed for the present into France, yet the year following
they returned with greater Forces, forraging all parts of the Country in most
cruel manner, though still encountered by this Valorous Prince, till he ended
his life in the year 901. after he had Reigned nine and twenty years. The
virtues of this King, if they were not incredible, they were at least
admirable, whereof these may be instances. The day and night containing four
and twenty hours, he designed equally to three special uses, observing them
by the burning of a Taper set in his Chapel; (there being at that time, no
other way of distinguishing them) Eight hours he spent in Contemplation,
Reading and Prayers: Eight in provision for himself, his Health and
Recreation: and the other eight in the Affairs of the Commonwealth and State.
His Kingdom likewise he divided into Shires, Hundreds and Tythings; ordaining
that no man might remove out of his Hundred without security: by which course
he so suppressed Thieves and Robbers, which had formerly increased by the long
wars, that it is said a boy or girl might openly carry a bag of gold or
silver, and carry it safely all the Country over. Besid^s his great Piety, he
was also learned; and ^s far as it may be a commendation in a Prince, a
skillful Musician and an excellent Poet. All former Laws he caused to be
survayed, and made choice of the best, which he translated into the English
tongue; as also the Pastoral of St. Gregory, the History of Bid, and Boethius
his consolation of Philosophy; the Psalms of David likewise he began to
translate, but died before he could finish it. And so great a love he had to
learning, that he made a Law, that all Freemen of the Kingdom, possessing two
Hides of land, should bring up their sons in learning, till they were
fifteen years of age at least, that so they might be trained to know God, to
be men of understanding, and to live happily. His buildings were many, both for
Gods service and for other public use: as at Edlingsey a Monastery, at
Winchester a new Minster, and at Shaftesb^ry a house of Nuns; whereof he made
his daughter Ethelgeda the Abbess; but his Foundation of the University of
Oxford, exceeded all the rest: which he began in the year 895. and to furnish
it with able Scholars, drew thither out of France, Grimbaldus and Scotus, and
out of Wales, Asser, (who wrote his life) whose Lectures he honored often with
his own presence. And for a stock of Frugality, he made a Survey of the
Kingdom; and had all the particulars of his Estate, registered in a Book;
which he kept in his Treasury at Winchester. He Reigned seven and twenty
years, and dying was buried in the Cathedral Church of Saint Peter at
Winchester, though removed afterward, into the Church of the new Monastery,
without the North-gate of the City called Hyde. His Wife Elsewith, Founded a
Monastery of Nuns at Winchester, and was there buried. Their second daughter
Ethelgeda, took upon her the Vow of Virginity; and by her Fathers appointment
was made a Nun of Shaftesbery, in the County of Dorset, in the Monastery
^ounded there by him, who is also accounted the Founder of the Town it self.

King Alfred being deceased, his son Edward (called Edward the Elder)
succeeded: not so learned as his Father; but in Valor his Equal, and
Superior in Fortune. For, first, he overcame his Cousin Ethelwald, who aspired
to the Crown; then the Danes, whose chief leader he ^lew in battle; lastly
the Welsh; but these last, more by humility showed to their Prince Leolyn, then
by force of A^mes. But yet he must not have all the glory of his time; some
must be imparted to his sister Elflede; who being married to Ethelred Earl of
Mercia, had by him a daughter, but with so grievous pa^nes in her travail,
that ever after she refused the nuptial bed of her Husband, saying, it was a
foolish pleasure, that brought with it so excessive pains. And thereupon after
her husbands death, made choice to follow the wars; assisting her brother
both against the Welsh, and against the Danes, whom she brought to be at her
disposing. Dying she was buried at Gloucester, in the Monastery of Saint Peter,
which her Husband and her self had built. King Edw^rd himself, after four
and twenty years Reign, deceased at Faringdon in Barkshire, in the year 924.
and was buried in the new Monastery of Winchester, which his Father began, and
himself wholly finished: having had by his three Wives, six Sons and nine
Daughters, of whom his eldest son Athelstan succeeded him in the kingdom,
whom his Grandfather King Alfred had with his own hands Knighted^ in an
extraordinary manner; putting upon him a purple Robe, and girding him with a
girdle wrought with Pearl. His second son Elfred, he so loved, that he
caused him to be Crowned King with himself, which yet he enjoyed but a short
time, being taken away by death. His third son Elsward, presently upon his
Fathers death, dyed himself also. His fourth son Edwyn, was by his brother
Athelstan, out of jealousy of state, put into a little Pinnace, without either
Tackle or Oars, accompanied only with one Page; with grief whereof, the
young Prince leaped into the Sea and drowned himself. His fifth, and sixth
sons, Edmund, and Edred, came in succession to be Kings of England. Of his
Daughters, the eldest Edytha, was married to Sithricke the Danish King of
Northumberland, and he deceasing, she entered into a Monastery, which she began
at Tamworth in Warwickshire, and there dyed. His second daughter Elflede, took
upon her the vow of Virginity, in the Monastery of Ramsey, in the County of
Southhampton, where she dyed and was interred. His third daughter Eguina, was
first married to Charles the Simple, King of France, and after his decease, to
Herbert, Ea^le of Vermandois. His fourth daughter Ethelhild, became a Nun in
the Monastery of Wilton, which was sometime the head Town, giving name to the
whole County of Wil^shire, and anciently called Ellandon. That we may see in
those first times of Religion, when there was lea^t knowledge, there was most
devotion. His fifth daughter Edhold, was married to Hugh, surnamed the Great,
Earl of Paris, and Constable of France. And Edgith his sixth daughter, to
Otho, the Emperor of the West, ^urnamed the Great. His seventh daughter
Elgina, was married to a Duke of Italy. His ninth Edgina, to Lewis Prince of
Aquitaine in France.

After the death of King Edward, his eldest son Athelstan succeeded, and was
Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, in the County of Surrey, by Athelmu^
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 924. The beginning of whose Reign, was
molested with the Treason of one Elfrid a Nobleman, who being apprehended and
sent to Rome to purge himself, and there denying the Act upon his Oath, fell
suddenly down, and within three days dyed, to the eternal ^errour of all
perjured persons. Presently upon this, another dysaster befell King Athelstan,
for having caused his brother Edwyns death, (as before is showed) chiefly
procured by his Cupbearers suggestions: It happened not long after, that his
Cupbearer, in his service at a Festival, stumbling with one foot, and
recovering himself with the other, and saying merrily, See how one brother
helps another; His words put the King in remembrance of his Brother, whose
death he had caused, and with remorse thereof, not only caused his Cup Bearer
to be put to death, but did also seven yeare^ penance: and built the two
Monasteries of Middleton, and Michelnesse, in the County of Dorset, in
expiation of his offense. This King ordained many good Laws; and those to
bind as well the Clergy, as the Laity; amongst which, one was the Attachment
of Felons, that stole above twelve pence, and were above twelve years old. Of
this King, there is one Act related, that may seem ridiculous; another that
may seem miraculous; For what more ridiculous, then that, going to visit the
Tomb of Saint John of Beverley, and having nothing else of worth to offer, he
offered his knife in devotion to the Saint? Yet the mirac^lous is more
apparent: For going to encounter the Danes, and praying to God for good
success, he prayed withal, that God would show some sign of his rightful
cause, and thereupon striking with his sword, he struck it an ell deep into a
hard stone, which stood so cloven a long time after. But whether this be true
or no, this certainly is true, that he obtained many great victories against
the Danes, against the Scots, against the Ir^sh, and against the Welsh, whose
Princes he brought to be his Tributaries, entering Covenant at Heref^rd, to pay
him yearly twenty pound weight of gold, three hundred of silver, and five and
twenty hundred head of Cattle, besides a certain number of Hawks and Hounds.
Lastly, he joined Northumberland to the rest of his Monarchy, and enlarged his
Dominions beyond any of his Predecessors, which made all Neighboring Princes
to seek his friendship, and to gratify him with rare presents, as Hugh King of
France sent him the sword of Constantine the Great, in the hilt whereof, was
one of the nails that fastened Christ to his Cross; He sent him also the
spear of Charles the Great, reputed to be the same that pierced Christ's side;
as also part of the Cross whereon Christ suffered, and a piece of the Thorny
Crown put upon his head. Likewise Otho the Emperor, who had married his
sister, sent him a vessel of precious stones, artificially made, wherein were
seen Landskips with Vines, Corn, and Men, all of them seeming so artificially
to move, as if they were growing, and alive. Likewise the King of Norway sent
him a goodly Ship, with a gilt Ste^ne, purple ^ayles, and the deck garnished
all with gold. Of these accounted Holy Relics, King Athelstan gave part to
the Abbey of Saint Swithin in Winchester, and the rest to the Monastery of
Mamesbury, whereof Adelm was the Founder, and his Tutelar Saint. He new built
the Monasteries of Wilton, Michelnesse, and Middleton; Founded Saint Germans in
Cornwall, Saint Petrocus at Bodmyn, and the Priory of Pilton; new walled and
beautifyed the City of Exceter, and enriched either with Jewels or Lands, every
special Abbey of the Land. But the chiefest of his works for the service of
God, and good of his Subjects, was the Translation of the Bible into the Saxon
Tongue, which was then the Mother tongue of the Land. He Reigned fifteen^
years, Dyed at Glocest^r, and was buried at Mamesbery, in the year 940.
having never been married.

After the death of Athelstan, his brother Edmund, the fifth son of his
Father succeeded; and was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames; but no sooner was
the Crown set upon his head, but the Danes were upon his back; and in
Northumberland made Insurrections, whom yet he not only repressed in that
part; but took from them the Towns of Lincoln, Leycester, Darby, Stafford
and Nottingham; compelling them withal to receive Baptism, and to become his
Subjects, so as the Country was wholly his as far as Humber. Cumberland also,
which had been an entire Kingdom of it self, and was now aided by Leolyn
King of South Wales, he utterly wasted, and gave it to Malcolme King of Scots,
to hold of him by Fealty. After his returning home, he ^et himself to ordain
Laws for the good of his People; which Master Lambert has since transla^ed
into Latin. But after all his noble Acts both in War and Peace, he came at
last to a lamentable end; for at his Manor of Pucklekerks, in the County of
Gloucester, interposing himself to part a fray between two of his servants, he
was thrust through the body, and so wounded that he dyed, and was buried at
Glastenbury, after he had Reigned five years and seven months, leaving
behind him two young Sons, Edwyn, and Edgar.

King Edmund dying, his brother Edred, in the minority of his Nephews, was
Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, by Otho Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
year 946. Not as Protector; (It seems that kind of Authority was not yet
come in use) but as King himself, though with purpose to resign, when the
right Heir should come of age, which at this time needed not, for while the
right Heir was scarce yet fourteen years old, he resigned to him the
Kingdom, by resigning his life to Nature, after he had twice repressed the
rebelling Northumbrians, and twice forgiven their rebelling, which yet was not
a simple Rebellion; for they had sent for Anlafe the Dane out of Ireland, and
made him their King; which place for four years he held; and then weary of
his government, they thrust him out and take one Hericus to be their King, whom
not long after they put down also; and then partly allured by the lenity of
King Edred; and partly forced by his Arms; they submit themselves to him, and
ask forgiveness; to whom he, as a merciful Prince, giants an Act of
Oblivion, and received them again into protection. This Prince was so devout
and humble, that he submitted his body to be chastised at the will of Dunstan
Abbot of Glastenbury, and committed all his Treasure and Jewels to his custody.
The stately Abbey of Mich at Abington near Oxford, built by King Inas, but
destroyed by the Danes, he newly re-edified; endowing it with revenues and
Lands, the Charters whereof he confirmed with seals of Gold. He ordained Saint
Germans in Cornwall, to be a Bishops See, which there continued, till by
Canutus it was annexed to the Episcopal See of Kyrton in Devonshire; Both
which Sees were afterward by King Edward the Confessor, translated to the City
of Exceter. He left behind him two Sons, Elfred, and Bertfred, and was
buried in the old Minster, without the City of Winchester; whose bones with
other Kings, are to this day preserved in a gilt Coffer, fixed upon the wall,
in the South side of the Quire.

After Edred, not any of his sons, but his Nephew Edwyn, the eldest son of
King Edmund succeeded, and was anointed and Crowned at Kingston upon Thames,
by Otho Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 955. This Prince, though scarce
fourteen years old, and in age but a child, yet was able to commit sin as
a man; For upon the very day of his Coronation, and in sight of his Lords, as
they sat in Counsel, he shamefully abused a Lady of great Estate, and his
near kinswoman, and to mend the matter, shortly after slew her Husband, the
more freely to enjoy his incestuous pleasure. And whether for this infamous
fact, or for thrusting the Monks out of the Monasteries of Mamesbury, and
Glastenbury, and placing married Priests in their rooms, as also for banishing
Dunstan the holy Abbot of Glastenbury out of the Realm, a great part of his
Subjects hearts was so turned against him, that the Mercians and Northumbrians
revolted, and swore Fealty to his younger brother Edgar, with grief whereof,
after four years Reign, he ended his life, and was buried in the Church of
the New Abbey of Hyde, at Winchester.

After Edwyn, succeeded his younger brother Edgar, at the age of sixteen
years; but his Coronation, when, and where, and by whom, so uncertain, that
some say he was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Otho Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the first year of his Reign, others say, not till the twelfth,
and William of Mamesbery, not till the thirtyeth: Another Chronicle says, in
his eleventh year; and that in the City of Bathe, by the hands of Dunstan
Archbishop of Canterbury. This King, by reason of the tranquillity of his
Reign, was surnamed the Peaceable; for as he was something inclined to the
Danes, so the Danes never offered to stir in all his time; and as for the
Saxons, they acknowledged him their sole Sovereign, without division of
Provinces or Titles. His Acts were, some Virtuous, some Politic, some Just,
some Pious, and yet all these not without some mixture of vice. To repress
dunkennesse, which the Danes had brought in; he ma^e a Law, Ordaining a size,
by certain pinnes in the pot, with penalty to any, that should presume to
drink deeper then the mark. It was a Politic device which he used for the
destruction of Wolves, that in his days did great annoyance to the Land. For,
the tribute imposed on the Princes of Wales, by King Athelstan, he wholly
remitted, appointing in lieu thereof a certain number of Wolves yearly to be
paid; whereof the Prince of North Wales, for his part was to pay three hundred;
which continued for three years space: and in the fourth year, there was not
a Wolf to be found; and so the tribute ceased. He had in his Navy Royal,
three thousand and six hundred ships, which he divided into three parts,
appointing every one of them to a several Quarter, to scowre the Seas, and to
secure the Coasts from Pirates: and left his Officers might be careless, or
corrupted; he would himself in person sail about all the Coasts of his
Kingdom every Summer. It was a notable Act of Justice, that in his Circuits,
and Progresses through the Country, he would take special account of the
demeanor of his Lords; and specially for his Judges; whom he severely
punished, if he fonnd them Delinquents. Wars he had none in all his Reign,
only toward his end, the Welshmen moved some rebellion; against whom he went
with a mighty Army, and chastised the Authors; but when his Soldiers had
gotten great spoils, and made prey upon the innocent Country people; he
commanded them to restore it all back again; which, if it made some few
English angry, it made the whole Country of the Welsh well pleased, and sound
forth his praises. His Pious Acts were, that he built and prepared seven and
forty Monasteries, and meant to have made them up fifty, but was prevented by
death. But now his mixture of Vice marred all; especially being a Vice opposite
to all those Virtues, which was Lasciviousness. For first, he deflowred a
sacred Nun, called Wolfchild; on whom yet he begot a Saint, the chaste Edyth.
After her, another Virgin, called Ethelflede, for her excellent beauty surnamed
the White, on whom he begot his eldest Son Edward; for which Fact he did
seven years penance, enjoined him by the Archbishop Dunstan. After this he
chanced to hear of a Virgin, Daughter to a Western Duke, exceedingly praised
for her beauty, and coming to Andover, commanded her to his Bed. But the
Mother, tender of her Daughters honor, brought in the dark her maid to him;
who in the morning, making have to rise, and the King not suffering her to
depart, she told him what great work she had to do; and how she should
incur her Ladies displeasure, if it were not done; by which words, the King
perceiving the deceit, turned it to a jest, but so well liked her company, that
he kept himself true to her ever after, till he married. But now his marriage
it self happened by a greater vice then any of these; For hearing of the
admirable beauty of El^rida, the only daughter of Ordganus Duke of Devonshire,
Founder of Tavestocke Abbey in that Country, he sent his great Favorite Earl
Ethelwold, (who could well judge of beauty) to try the truth thereof; with
Commission, that if he found her such as Fame reported, he should seize her for
him, and he would make her his Queen. The young Earl, upon sight of the lady,
was so surprised with her love, that he began to woo her for himself, and got
her Fathers good will, so as the King would give his consent. Hereupon the
Earl posted to the King, relating to him, that the Maid was fair indeed, but
nothing answerable to the Fame that went of her: yet desired the King that he
might marry her, as being her Fathers heir, thereby to raise his Fortunes. The
King consented, and the marriage was solemnized. Soon after, the fame of her
beauty began to spread more then before, so as the King much doubting that he
had been abused, meant to try the truth himself, and thereupon taking
occasion of hunting in the Dukes Park, came to his house: whose coming
Ethelwold suspecting, acquainted his wife with the wrong he had done both her,
and the King, and therefore to prevent the Kings displeasure, entreated her by
all the persuasions he could use, to cloathe her self in such attire, as might
be least fit to set her forth; but she considering that now was the time, to
make the most of her beauty, and longing to be a Queen; would not be accessory
to her own wrong, but decked her self in her richest Ornaments; which so
improved her beauty, that the King at her first sight was struck with
admiration, and meant to be revenged of his persidious Favorite; yet
dissembling his passion, till he could take him at advantage, he then with a
Javelin ran him through; and having thereby made the fair Elfrid a Widow,
took her to be his Wife. This King founded the Monastery of Ramsey in
Hamshire, Reigned sixteen years, Lived seven and thirty, and with great
Fun^rall pomp was buried in the Abbey of Glastenbury. He had children by his
first wife Ethelfleda, one son named Edward; and by his second wife Elfrid,
two sons, one named Edmund, who dyed young, the other Ethelred. He had also one
natural Daughter, named Edgyth, by a Lady named Wolfchild, the daughter of
Wolholme, the son of Birding, the son of Nesting; which two latter bear in
their names, the memory of their Fortunes; the last of them being found in an
Eagles nest, by King Alfred as he was a hunting. This Edgyth built the
Monastery and Church of Saint Dennis at Wilton, and was there buried.

After the death of King Edgar, succeeded his son Edward, but not without
some opposition, for Queen Elfrid combined with diverse of the Lords, to make
her Son Ethelred King, saying that Prince Edward was illegitimate; on the
other side, the Archbishop Dunstan, and the Monks stood for Edward, abetting
his Title as being lawfully borne; but while the Counsel was assembled to
argue their Rights, the Archbishop came in with his Banner and Cross, and not
staying for debating De Iure, De Facto presented Prince Edward for their
lawful King, and the Assembly consisting most of Clergy men, drew the
approbation of the rest; and thereupon Prince Edward was admitted, being but
twelve years of age, and was Crowned King at Kingstone upon Thames, by
Archbishop Dunstan, in the year 975. In the beginning of his Reign, it fell
into debate whether married Priests were to be allowed to live in Monasteries
upon the revenues of the Church. The Mercian Duke Alferus, favoring the cause
of the married Priests, destroyed the Monasteries in his Province, cast out the
Monks, and restored again the ancient revenues to the Priests and their
wives. On the other side, Edelwyn Duke of the East Angles, and Brithnoth Earl
of Essex, who stood for the Monks, cast married Priests out of their
Provinces. The matter being debated in a Council at Westminster, the Monks
cause was like to have the foil, till it was referred to the Rood, placed on
the Refectory wall, where the Counsel sat. For to this great Oracle, Saint
Dunstan desired them devoutly to pray, and to give diligent ear for an Answer;
when suddenly a voice was heard to say, God forbid it should be so, God forbid
it should be so. This was thought authority sufficient, to suppress the
Priests, till they persuading the people, that this was but a cunning practice
of the Monks, in placing behind the wall, a man of their own, who through a
Trunk uttered these words in the mouth of the Rood, whereupon another Assembly
was appointed at Cleve in Wiltshire, whither repaired the Prelates, with most
of all the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom. The Synod being set, and the
matter at the height of discussing, it happened that the Joysts of the room,
where the Synod was held, suddenly brake, and the floor with all the people
thereon, fell down, whereof many were hurt, and some slain. Only the
Archbishop Dunstan then President, and mouth for the Monks, remained unhurt;
which whether it were done by practice, or were miraculous, it served the
Monks turn for justifying their cause; and married Priests were thereupon
discarded. It were infinite and indeed ridiculous, to speak of all the
Miracles reported to be done by this Saint Dunstan, which may be fit for a
Legend, but not for a Chronicle.

But now a most lamentable dysaster, comes to be remembered: For King Edward,
hunting one time in the Island of Purbacke: not far from Corfe Castle; where
his mother in Law Queen Elfrid, with his brother Prince Ethelred, were then
residing, he out of his love to both, would needs himself alone go visit
them; where the cruel woman, out of ambition to bring her own Son to the
Crown, caused one to run him into the back with a knife, as he was drinking
a cup of Wine on horse back at his departing, who feeling himself hurt, set
spurs to his horse, thinking thereby to get to his company, but the wound
being mortal, and he fainting through loss of much blood, fell from his Horse;
but one foot being entangled in the stirrup, he was thereby rufully dragged up
and down, through Woods, and Lands: And lastly left dead at Corfes gate; for
which untimely death, he was ever after called by ^he name of Edward the
Martyr. He Reigned only three years and ^ix months, and was Buried first at
Winchester, without all Funeral pomp; but after three years, by Duke Alferus
removed, and with great solemnity interred in the Minster of Shaftsbury. Queen
Elfrid, to expiate this her bloody fact, built the two Monasteries of
Almesbery, and Worwell, in the Counties of Wil^shire, and Southampton, in which
latter, with great repentance, she lived till her death.

After the death of Edward the Martyr, dying at the age of sixteen years, his
half brother Ethelred, at the age of twelve years, in the year 979. was
Crowned King at Kingston upon Thames, by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury,
though much against his will; which King, by reason of his backwardness in
Action, was commonly called the Unready. Before whose time, for two and twenty
years past^; the Danes had lived as quiet Inmates with the English, but
whether weary of so long doing nothing, or finding now opportunity of doing
something, in the second year of this King, they begin to stir, and inviting
from home more forces, who in seven Ships arrived upon the Coast of Kent, they
spoiled all the Country, specially the Isle of Thanet, and continued this
course of forraging the Kingdom, sometimes in one part, and sometimes in
another, for eleven years together: till at last in the year 991. the King,
by advice of his Lords, of whom Siricius, the now Archbishop of Canterbury was
chief, was contented to pay them ten thousand pounds, upon condition they
should quietly depart the Realm. This served the turn for the present, but
was so far from satisfying them, that it did but give them the greater
appetite: for the year following they came again, and that with a greater
Fleet then before, against whom the King prepared a competent Navy, and
committed it to Elfricke, Earl of Mercia, but he proving treacherous (as
indeed all other for the most part did, whom the King employed against the
Danes, as with whom they were allyanced in blood) the Dan^s so prevailed^ that
for the next Composition, they had sixteen thousand pounds given them, and a
year after, twenty thousand; and so every year more and more, till it came at
last to forty thousand: by which means, the Land was emptyed of all Coin, and
the English were brought so low, that they were feign to Till, and Ear the
Ground, whilst the Danes sat idle, and ate the fruit of their labors;
abusing the Wives and Daughters of their Hosts where they lay, and yet i^ every
place, for every fear, were called Lord-Danes; (which afterward became a word
of derision, when one would signify a lazy Lubber.) In this distressed state,
the King at last bethought himself of a course: He sent forth a secret
Commission, into every City within his Dominions, that at an appointed time,
they should massacre all the Danes that were amongst them; The day was the
thirteenth of November, being the Festival of Saint Bricius, in the year
1002. His command was accordingly performed, and with such rigor, that in
Oxford the Danes for refuge took into the Church of Saint Frideswyde, as into
a Sanctuary, when the English, neither regarding Place nor Person, set the
Church on site, wherein many of the Danes were burnt, and the Library thereof
utterly defaced. And who would not now think, but that England by this Fact
had clean shaken off the Danish yoke for ever? yet it proved clean otherwise:
For the news of this massacre, adding a new edge of revenge, to the old edge
of ambition: made the Danes sharper set against the English, then ever they had
been before; so as the year following, their King Sweyne, with a mighty Navy,
entered the Country, razed, and levelled with the ground the City of Exceter,
all along from the East Gate to the West; against whom the King levied an Army,
and made General over it, the Earl Edricke, his great Favorite; whom he had
created Duke of Mercia; and given him his Daughter Edgyth in marriage; yet all
this great favor could not keep him from being treacherous, for being sent
Ambassador to the Danes, to mediate for Peace, he revealed to them the
weakness of the Land, and treacherously dissuaded them from consenting to any
Truce. Upon this King Ethelred gave order, that every three hundred and ten
Hydes of Land should build a Ship, and every eight Hydes, find a complete
Armor furnished, yet all this great preparation came to nothing, but only to
make a show. After this, the King seeing no end of their invasions, nor promise
kept upon any composition; (for three Danish Princes, with a great Fleet, were
now newly arrived) He intended to adventure once for all, and to commit his
cause to God, by the fortune of a Battle. To which end he secretly gathered a
mightily Power, and coming unlooked for, when the Enemy was unprepared, he had
certainly given an end to the Quarrel, if the wicked Edricke had not
dissuaded him from fighting, and put him into a causeless fear, by forged
tales. After this, the Danes forraged many Countries; burnt Oxford, The^ford,
and Cambridge: and lastly entered Wiltshire, which was the seventh shire in
number, they had laid waste like a Wilderness. The year after, they make a
new Expedition, and besiege Canterbury; which by treason of a Churchman they
won, took Alphegus the Archbishop, and flew nine hundred Monks, and men of
Religion, besides many Citizens, without all mercy; for they Tythed the people,
slaying all by nines, and reserving only the tenth to live; so that of all the
Monks in the Town, there were but four saved, and of the Lay people, four
thousand eight hundred, by which account Master Lambert collecteth, that there
dyed in this Massacre, three and forty thousand, and two hundred persons. The
Archbishop Alphegus, for that he refused to charge his Tenants with three
thousand pounds to pay for his ransom, they most cruelly stoned to death at
Green^wich. Turkillus the leader of these murderers, took into his possession
all Norfolk and Suffolk, over whom he tyrannized in most savage manner; the
rest compounding with the English for eight thousand pounds, quietly for a
while sojourned among them. The year following came King Sweyne again, and
with a great Navy arrived in the mouth of Humber, and landed at Gainsborough,
to whom the Northumbrians, and the people of Lindsey, yielded themselves; So
that now over all the North from Watlingstreete, he Reigned sole King, and
exacted pledges of them for their further obedience. From the North he passed
into the South, subduing all before him, till he came to London, where he was
so valiantly encountered by the Londoners, that he was glad to retire, in which
retyring notwithstanding he entered Bathe; where Ethelmore Earl of Devonshire,
with his Western people, submitted himself to him. Yet after this, between
him and the English was struck a fierce battle, which had been with good
success, if the treachery of some in turning to the Danes, had not hindered
it. After this the Danes proceeded on victoriously, and had gotten most part of
the Land, and even London also by submission: whereupon the unfortunate King
Ethelred sending his Wife Emma, with her two sons, Edward and Alfred, to her
Brother, Duke of Normandy, himself also the Winter following passed thither,
leaving the Danes Lording it in his Realm. Sweyne now as an absolute King,
extorted from the English both Victuals, and Pay for his Soldiers; and
demanding such a Composition for preserving of Saint Edmunds Monastery in
Suffolk, as the Inhabitants were not able, and therefore refused to pay; he
thereupon threatened spoil, both to the Place, and to the Martyrs bones there
interred, when suddenly, in the midst of his jollity (says Hoveden) he cried
out, that he was struck by Saint Edmund with a sword, being then in the midst
of his Lords: and no man seeing from whose hand it came, and so with great
horror and torment, three days after; upon the third of February, he ended
his life at Thetford, or (as others say) at Gaynsborough. And now who would not
think, but this was a fair opportunity offered to the English, to free
themselves wholly from the Danish yoke? but when all was done, either crossed
by treachery, or frustrated by misfortune, nothing prospered. I^ is true, upon
this occasion of Sweynes death, King Ethelred returned out of Normandy, but at
his coming, Canutus the son o Sweyne, had gotten the people of Lindsey to be
at his devotion, and to find him both Horse and Men against their own King; so
as Ethelred was now to encounter as well his own Subjects^ as the Danes, which
he did so valiantly, that he made Canutus glad to return into Denmark, as
utterly hopeless of any good to be done in England. And now one would
certainly think the Danes had been removed, Root and Branch, out of
England, and never like to trouble the Land any more; and indeed there was all
the appearance of probability for it that could be. But it is a true saying,
That which will be, shall be, let all be done that can be. For now Turkill the
Dane, who had before revolted to King Ethelred, growing sensible of his fault,
which was this, or no way to be redeemed; and tender of his Countrymens case,
which was now or never to be helped; with nine of his Ships sailed into
Denmark, and first excusing himself to Canutus for his former defection, as
though he had done it of purpose, to learn all advantages against the English,
which now he could discover to him, he so prevailed with Canutus once again to
try his fortune, that with a Navy of two hundred Ships he set sail for
England, and landed at Sandwich, where he gave the English a great overthrow,
and passed victoriously through the Counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Wilts.
When ( Ethelred lying dangerously sick at Cossam) the managing of the War
was committed to Prince Edmund his son, who preparing to give the Danes
battle, had suddenly notice given him, that his Brother in Law Edricke, meant
to betray him into his Enemies hands, which made him suspend his proceeding;
and Edricke perceiving his design to be discovered, cast off the masque, and
with forty of the Kings ships fled openly to the Enemy; and thereupon, all the
West Countries submitted themselves unto Canutus. By this time King Ethelred
having recovered his sickness, prepared to go on with the Battle, which his
son Edmund had intended, but his Forces being assembled, he likewise had
suddenly notice given him, that his Subjects meant to betray him to the Danes.
Hereupon he withdrew himself to London, as the place in which he most
confided; where falling into a relapse of his former sickness, he ended his
unfortunate days, in the year 1016. when he had Reigned 37. years; and was
buried in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, whose bones as yet remain in
the North wall of the Chancell, in a chest of gray Marble; adjoining to that of
Sebba King of the East Saxons. He had by his two Wives, eight Sons, and four
Daughters; of whom, his youngest named Goda, was married to one Walter de
Maigne, a Nobleman of Normandy; by whom she had a son named Rodolph, which
Rodolph had a son named Harold, created afterward by King William the
Conqueror, Baron of Sudeley, in the County of Gloucester, and Ancestor to the
Barons of that place succeeding, and of the Lord Chandowes of Sudeley now being.

Ethelred being dead, his third son Edmund called Ironside (of his ability in
enduring labor) but the eldest living at his fathers death, succeeded, and was
Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Levingus Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
year 1016. A great part of the English both feared and favored, and indeed
out of fear favored Canutus; especially the Clergy, who at Southampton
ordained him their King, and swear Feaalty to him: but the Londoners stood
firm to Prince Edmund, and were the principal authors of his Election.
Canutus before the death of King Ethelred, had besieged the City, and now with
a large Trench encompassed it: but the new King Edmund coming on, raised the
siege, and made Canutus fly to the Isle of Sheppey, where having stayed the
winter, the Spring following, he assailed the West of England, and at Penham in
Dorse^shire, a battle was fought, and the Danes discomfitted. After this, in
Worc^stershire at a place called Sherostan, another battle was fought, where
the Danes were like again to be discomfited, but the traitorous Edrick
perceiving it, he cut off the head of a soldier like unto King Edm^nd both in
hair and countenance, and shaking his bloody sword, with the gasping head,
cried to the Army of the English, Fly ye wretches fly, and get away, for your
King is slain; behold, here is his head: but King Edmund having notice of this
treacherous stratagem, hasted to show himself where he might best be seen:
whose sight so encouraged his men, that they had gotten that day a final
Victory, if night had not prevented them. Duke Edrick excused his fact, as
being mistaken in the countenance of the man, and desirous to save the blood of
the English; upon which false color he was received into favor again. After
this, Canutus secretly in the night brake up his Camp, and marched toward
London, which in a sort was still besieged by the Danish ships: but King Edmund
hearing of his departure, followed him, and with small ado removed the siege,
and in Triumphant manner entered the City. After this, near unto Otford in
Kent, was another great battle fought, in which Canutus lost four thousand
five hundred men, and King Edmund only six hundred; the rest of the Danes
saving themselves by ^light; whom if King Edmund had pur^ued, it is thought
that day had ended the wars between these two Nations for ever. But the ever
traitorous Edrick, kept King Edmund from pursuing them, by telling him of
Ambushes and other dangers: So as Canutu^ had leisure to pass over into Essex,
but thither also King Edmund followed him; where at Ashdone three miles from
Saffron Walden, another battle was fought, in which ^he Danes being at the
point to be overthrown, the traitorous Edrick with all his Forces revoulted to
their side, by which treachery the English lost the day. There died of King
Edmunds Nobility, Duke Alfred, Duke Goodwyn, Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwyn,
Earl Urchill, Codnoth Bishop of Lincoln, Woolsey Abbot of Ramsey, with many
other. The remembrance of which battle is retained to this day, by certain
small hills there remaining, whence have been dug the bones of men, Armor,
and horsebridles. After this; at Dereherst near to the river Severn^, another
battle was ready to be fought; when suddenly a certain Captain steps forth,
and for saving of blood u^ed great persuasions, that either they should try the
matter by single Combat, or else divide the Kingdom betwixt them. Upon this
the Combat is agreed on, and the two Princes entering into a small Island
called Alney, adjoining to the City of Gloucester, in complete Armor assailed
each other, at first on horseback, and after on foot: when Canutus having
received a dangerous wound, and finding himself overmatched in strength,
desired a Compromise, and with a loud voice used these words. What necessity
should move us most Valiant Prince, for obtaining of a Title to endanger our
lives? were it not better to lay malice aside, and condescend to a loving
agreement? let us therefore become sworn brothers, and divide the Kingdom
between us. This motion was by King Edmund accepted, and thus was the Kingdom
divided between these two Princes; Edmund enjoying that part which lies upon
the coast of France, and Canutus the rest. But now Duke Edrick has his last
and greatest Act of treachery to play: for King Edmund being retired to a place
for natures n^cessity, he thurst from under the draught a sharp spear into
his body, and then cutting off his head, presented it to Canutus, with these
fawning words, All hayle, thou sole Monarch now of England, for here behold the
head of thy Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off. Canutus
though ambitious enough of sovereignty, yet aba^hed at so disloyal a fact,
replied and vowed, that in reward of that service his own head should be
advanced above all the Peers of his Kingdom, which soon after he performed;
for by his command the false Edricks head was cut off, and placed upon the
highest gate in London. The death of this King in this manner, some say was
acted at Oxford; other, that he died of natural sickness in London, but
howsoever he came to his death, his Reign was but only seven months, and his
body was buried at Glasten^ury, near to his Grandfather King Edgar. This King
Edmund had by his wife Algyt^, two sons; the eldest named Edward, surnamed
the Outlaw, because he lived out of England in Hungary as a banished man, for
fear of King Canutus: but when his Uncle King Edward the Confessor, had
obtained the Crown, he was recalled, and honorably entertained till he died.
He married Agatha, sister to Queen Sophia, wife to Solomon King of Hungary,
and daughter to the Emperor Henry the second; by whom he had Edgar surnamed
Atheling, the right Heir of the English Crown, though he never enjoyed it.
King Edmund had also two daughters, Margaret and Christian, of whom the younger
became a Veyled Nun at Ramsey in Hampshire; the elder Margaret, after sole
Heir to the Saxon Monarchy, married Malcolme the third King of Scotland, from
which Princely bed in a lineall Descent, our High and Mighty Monarch King James
the first, does in his most Royal person, unite the Britains, Saxons,
Normans, and Scottish Imperial Crowns in one.

Of the first Danish King in England.
CAnutus being possessed of half the Kingdom by composition with King Edmund,
now after his death seized upon the whole, and to prevent all further question,
he called a Council of the English Nobility, wherein it was propounded,
whether in the agreement betwixt Edm^nd and him, any claim of Title to the
Crown had been reserved for King Edmunds brethren or sons: to which (not
daring to say otherwise) they absolutely answered no, and thereupon took all
of them the Oath of Allegiance to Canutus. Being thus cleared of all Opposites
he prepared with great solemnity for his Coronation, which was performed at
London, by the hands of Levingus surnamed Elstane, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the year 1017. being the first Dane that Reigned Monarch of England. But
Canutus not thinking himself sufficiently safe, as long as any that might
pretend, were in the peoples eye, caused first Edwyn the son of King
Ethelred, and brother of Edmund, to abjure the Realm, who was yet afterward
recalled, and treacherously murdered by his own men, and his body buried at
Tavestock in Devonshire. Next were the two sons of Edmund Ironside, Edward
and Edmund, whom to the end the people might not see him shed the blood of
Innocents, he sent to his half brother King of Sweden to be made away. Then
remained Edward and Alfred, the sons of King Ethelred, and them their mother
Queen Emma had sent away before to her brother the Duke of Normandy, there to
be in safety: so as none of the Royal blood was now left in the land, to give
Canutus any fear of competition. After this, he took to wife the virtuous
Lady Emma, the Relict of King Ethelred, by which match he procured to himself
three great benefits: one that he won the love of the people by marrying a
Lady whom they so entirely loved; another, that he got the Alliance of the Duke
of Normandi^, a neighbou^ing Prince of great power; the third, that by marrying
the mother, he secured himself against the sons: as likewise Queen Emma was
not unwillingly persuaded to the match, upon agreement to make her issue, if he
had any by her, to inherit the Crown of England. And to win the love of the
people more, he caused great numbers of his Danes, who pestered the Country,
to return home, bestowing amongst them for their satisfaction four score and
two thousand pounds. And to win the love of the people yet more, he now set
himself to the making of good lawes^ in a Parliament at Oxford, whereof, for a
Pattern of those times, some that concern Religion, may not unfitly be here
related. First, for the celebration of divine Service, it was ordained, that
all Ceremonies tending to the increase of reverence and devotion should be
used as need required. Secondly, that upon the Sabbath day, all public Faires,
Markets, Synods, Huntings, and all secular actions should be forborne, unless
some urgent necessity should require it. Thirdly, that every Christian should
thrice in the year receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Fourthly, that if a Minister of the Altar killed a man, or committed any
notorious crime, he should be deprived both of his Order and Dignity. Fifthly,
that a married woman convict of adultery, should have her nose and ears cut
off. Sixthly, That a widow marrying within a twelvemonth after her husbands
decease, should lose her Jointure. These and many other good laws were made,
whereby the kingdom remained during all his time, in a most peaceable state
and government. In the third year of his Reign, he heard how the Vandales
taking advantage of his absence, had entered Denmark, and annoyed his subjects;
whereupon with a great Army of English he passed over the Seas, and gave them
battle, but with ill success the first day; when preparing for the next
days battle, the Earl Goodwyn who was General of the English, secretly in
the dead of the night, set upon the Vandals Camp, and with a great slaughter
of their soldiers, made their two Princes Ulfus and Anlave, to fly the field.
In the morning it was told Canutus, that the English were fled, for that their
station was left, and not a man of them to be found, which did not a little
trouble his patience: but he going in person to see the truth, found the great
overthrow the English had given, for which service ever after, he held the
English, and especially the Earl Goodwyn in great estimation. After this,
returning home he made a prosperous Expedition against Malcolme King of Scots;
and at last, in the fifteenth year of his Reign, wearied with the honorable
troubles of the world, and out of devotion, he took a Journey to Rome, to
visit the Sepulcher of St. Peter and Paul, from whence he writ to the Bishops
and Nobility of England, that they should carefully administer Justice, and
never seek to advance his profit by any undue ways, or with the detriment of
any man. At his return from Rome, he built in Essex the Church of Ashdone,
where he got the victory against King Edmund; in Norfolk, the Abbey of St.
Benets, which Saint he greatly reverenced; and in Suffolk the Monastery of St.
Edmund, which Saint he deadly feared. To the Church of Winchester he gave many
rich Jewels, whereof one was a Cross, valued to be worth as much as the whole
Revenue of England amounted to in one year. To Coventry he gave the arm of
the great St. Austin, which he bought at Pavia in his return from Rome, for
which he paid an hundred Talents of silver and one of gold. One strange Act is
recorded, which he did for convincing his fawning flatterers, who used to tell
him that his power were more then humane. For being one time at Southampton, he
commanded that his chair of State should be set on the shore when the Sea
began to flow, and then sitting down there in the presence of his many
attendants, he spoke thus to that Element: I charge thee that thou presume not
to enter my Land, nor wet these Robes of thy Lord that are about me. But the
Sea giving no heed to his command, but keeping on his usual course of Tide,
first wet his skirts, and after his thighs, whereupon suddenly rising, he thus
spoke in the hearing of them all. Let all the worlds Inhabitants know, that
vain and weak is the power of their Kings; and that none is worthy of the
name of King, but he that keeps both heaven and earth and sea in obedience.
After which time he would never ^uffer the Crown to be set upon his head, but
presently Crowned therewith the Picture of Christ on the Cross at Winchester:
from which example arose perhaps the custom, to hang up the Armor of Worthy
men in Churches, as Offerings consecrated to him who is the Lord of battle.
When he had Reigned nineteen years, he deceased at Shafte^bery in the County
of Dorset, the twelfth of November, in the year 1035. and was buried in the
Church of the old Monastery at Winchester, which being after new built, his
bones with many other English Saxon Kings, were taken up, and are preserved in
gilt Coff^rs, fixed upon the walls of the Quire in that Cathedral Church. He
had by his two wives, three sons, Sweyne, and Harold by his first wife
Alfgive; and Hardicnute by his second wife Queen Emma, and two daughters, of
whom the eldest, called Guinhilda, was married to the Roman Emperor Henry the
third, who being accused of adultery, and none found to defend her cause, at
last an English Page adventured to maintain her Innocence against a mighty
Gyantlike-Combatant; who in fight, at one blow cutting the sinews of his
adversaries leg, with another he felled him to the ground, and then with his
sword taking his head from his shoulders, redeemed both the Empresses life and
honor. But the Empress after this hard usage forsook her husbands bed, and
took upon her the Veyle of a Nun, in the Town of Burges in Flanders, where
she devoutly spent the r^st of her life.

Of the second Danish King in England.
KIng Canutus dying left his Kingdom of Norway, to his eldest Son Sweyn^, and
his Kingdom of England, to his youngest Son Hardikn^te, whom he had by his
wife Emma, but he being at the time of his Fathers death in Denmark, Harold
his elder Brother, by a former wife, taking advantage of his absence, lays
claim to the Crown. For determining of which Right, the Lords assembled at
Oxford, where Queen Emma pleaded for her son Hardiknute, urging the Covenant
of Can^tus at their marriage, and his last Will at his death; as also Earl
Goodwyn of Kent did the like, being left Guardian of her Children, and keeper
of his last Will. But Harolds presence, together with the favor of the
Londoners, Danes, and Northumbrians, so wrought with the Lords, that the absent
Hardiknute was neglected, and Harold was Proclaimed and Crowned King at Oxford,
by ^lnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1036.

Harold having now attained the Crown, was not so jealous of his Brother
Hardiknute, as of his mother in Law Queen Emma, and her Sons by King
Ethelre^ who were beyond Sea, and therefore how to secure himself against
these, was his first care. For effecting whereof, he framed a Letter, as
written by Queen Emma, to her two Sons Edward and Alfred; instigating them
to attempt the Crown usurped by Harold, against their Right: to which letter,
coming first to the hands of Alfred, he suspecting no fraud, returned Answer,
that he would shortly come over, and follow her Counsel. And thereupon with a
small Fleet, and some few soldiers, lent him by Baldwyn Earl of Flaunders, he
took the Sea for England, where coming to shore, Earl Goodwyn met him, and
bound himself by Oath to be his guide to his Mother Queen Emma, but being
wrought firm for Harold, he led him and his company a contrary way, and lodged
them at Guilford, making known to King Harold what he had done, who presently
committed them all to slaughter, sparing only every tenth man, for service or
sale. Prince Alfred himself he sent Prisoner to the Isle of Ely, where having
his eyes inhumanely put out, in grief and torment he ended his life. Some add
a more horrible kind of cruelty, as that his belly was opened, and one end of
his bowels drawn out, and fastened to a stake, his body pricked with Needles,
or Poignards, and forced about, till all his Entrails were extracted. This
done, he then set upon Queen Emma, confiscated her Goods, and banished her the
Realm. And now further to secure himself, he kept the Seas with sixteen
Danish Ships, to the maintenance whereof, he charged the English with great
payments; by which, if he procured the safety of his Person, he certainly
procured the hatred of his Subjects. This King for his swiftness in running
was called Harefoot; but though by his swiftness he outrunne his Brother for
the Kingdom, yet could he not run so fast, but that death quickly overtooke
him; For having Reigned only four years and some months, he dyed at Oxford^
and was buried at Westminster; having never had Wife or Children.

Of the third and last Danish King in England.
KIng Harold being dead, the Lords to make amends for their former neglect,
send now for Hardiknute, and offer him their Allegiance, who accepts their
offer, and thereupon taking Sea, arrived upon the Coast of Kent, the sixth day
after he had set sail out of Denmark; and with great pomp conveyed to
London, was there Crowned King by Elnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
year 1040. His first Act, was to be revenged of his deceased brother Harold,
whose body he caused to be dug up, and thrown into the Thames, where it
remained till a Fisherman found it, and buried it in the Church yard of Saint
Clement without Temple Bar, commonly called Saint Clement Danes, because it
was the burying place of the Danes, as some write. But toward his Mother, and
half Brother Prince Edw^rd, he showed true natural affection, inviting them
both to return into England; where he received them with all the honor, that
from a Son or Brother could be expected.

But now, as the King Harold, for his swiftness in running was surnamed
Harefoo^e; So this King for his intemperance in diet, might have been surnamed
Swines-mouth, or Bocc^di Porco; for his Tables were spread every day four
times, and furnished with all kinds of curious dishes, as delighting in
nothing but Gormandizing and Swilling; and as for managing the State, he
committed it wholly to his Mother Q^eene Emma, and to the politic Earl of
Kent, Godwyn; who finding this weakness in the King, began to think himself
of aspiring^ and to make the better way for it, he sought by all means to
alien the Subjects hearts from the Prince, amongst other courses, he caused him
to lay heavy Taxes upon them; only for Ship Money to pay his Danes, amounting
to two and thirty thousand pounds: which was so offensive to the people, that
the Citizens of Worcester slew two of his Officers, Thursta^ and Fe^dax, that
came to Collect it. But this King had soon the reward of his Intemperance; For
in a Solemn Assembly and Banquet at Lambeth, Revelling and Carowsing, he
suddenly fell down without speech, or breath, after he had Reigned only two
years, and was buried at Winchester. His death was so welcome to his Subjects,
that the day of his death, is to this day commonly celebrated with open
pastimes in the street, and is called Hocks-tide, signifying scorning or
contempt, which fell upon the Danes by his death. For with him ended the Reign
of the Danes in England; after they had miserably afflicted the kingdom, for
the space of two hundred and forty years, though in Regal Government, but
only six and twenty.

Of English Kings again, and first of Edward the Confessor.
KIng Hardiknute dying without issue, as having never been married, and the
Danish line clean extinguished, Edward, for his Piety called the Confessor,
half Brother to the deceased Hardiknute, and son to King Ethelred by his
Wife Queen Emma, was by a general consent admitted King of England, and was
Crowned at Winchester by Edsyne Archbishop of Canterbury, on Easter day, in
the year 1042. being then of the age of forty years. He was borne at Islip,
near to Oxford, and after his Fathers death, for safety sent into France, to
the Duke of Normandy his Mothers Brother, from whence he now came, to take upon
him the Crown of England. His Acts for gaining the Peoples love, were first,
the remitting the yearly tribute of forty thousand pounds, gathered by the
name of Danegilt, which had been imposed by his Father, and for forty years
together paid out of all men's Lands, but only the Clergy; and then, from the
diverse Laws of the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians, he
selected the best, and made of them one Body certain, and written in Latin,
being in a sort the Fountain of those which at this day we term the Common
Laws, though the forms of pleading, and process therein, were afterward
brought in by the Conqueror. The Reign of this King was very peaceable: Only
in his sixth year, the Danish Pirates entered the Port of Sandwich; which with
all the Seacoast of Essex they spoiled, and then in Flanders made merchandise
of their prey. As likewise the Irish, with thirty ships entered Severne, and
with the assistance of Griffyth King of Southwales, burnt or ^lew all in their
way, till at last, Reese the brother of Griffyth was slain at B^lenden, and
his head presented to King Edward at Gloucester. His Domestical troubles were
only by Earl G^dwyn and his sons; who yet after many contestations and
affronts, were reconciled, and Godwyn received again into as great favor as
before. But though King Edward forgave his Treasons, yet the Divine Providence
did not; for soon after, as he sat at Table with the King, on Easter Monday,
he was suddenly stricken with death, and on the Thursday following dyed, and
was buried at Winchester. Some make his death more exemplar; as that justifying
himself for Prince Alfreds death, he should pray to God, that if he were any
way guilty of it, he might never swallow down one morsel of bread, and
thereupon by the just Judgment of God, was choked by the first morsel he
offered to eat.

In this Kings time, such abundance of snow fell in January, continuing till
the middle of March following, that almost all Cattle and Foul perished, and
therewithal an excessive dearth followed.

Two Acts are related of this King, that seem nothing correspondent to the
general opinion had of his Virtue, one concerning his Mother, the other
touching his Wife. That concerning his Mother Queen Emma was this, that because
after King Ethelreds death, she married the Danish King Canutus, and seemed to
favor her issue by him, more then her issue by King Ethelred, therefore he
dispossessed her of all her Goods; and committed her to custody, in the Abbey of
Worwell; and more then this, so far hearkened to an aspersion cast upon her,
of unchaste familiarity with Alwyne Bishop of Winchester, that for her
Purgation, she was feign to pass the trial of Fire Ordeall, which was in this
manner; nine Plow-shares red hot we^e laid in unequal distance, which she must
pass bare-foote and blindfold; and if she passed them unhurt, then she was
judged Innocent, if otherwise, Guilty. And this trial she passed, and came off
fairly, to the great astonishment of all beholders. The other touching his
Wife was this; He had married Editha the beautiful, and indeed virtuous
daughter of the Earl Godwyn, and because he had taken displeasure against the
Father, he would show no kindness to the daughter; he had made her his wife,
but conversed not with her as his wife, only at board, bu^ not at Bed, or if
at bed, no otherwise then David with Abishagh, and yet was content to hear her
accused of Incontinency, whereof if she were guilty, he could not be innocent.
So as, what the virtues were, for which after his death, he should be reputed a
Saint, does not easily appear. It seems he was chaste, but not without injury
to his wife; Pious, but not without ungratefulness to his Mother; Just in his
present Government, but not without neglect of Posterity; for through his want
of providence in that point, he left the Crown to so doubtful succession,
that soon after his decease it was translated out of English into French, and
the Kingdom made servile to a fourth foreign Nation. One Ability he had which
raised him above the pitch of ordinary Kings, and yet at this day is ordinary
with Kings, that by his only touching and laying his hand upon it, he cured a
Disease, which from his Curing, is called The Kings Evil. His Mother Queen
Emma, in memory of the nine Plow-shares she had passed in her Trial, gave nine
Manors to the Minster of Winchester, and himself remembering the wrong he had
done her, bestowed on the same place, the Island of Portland in Dorsetshire,
being about seven miles in compass. He made also of a little Monastery in the
West of London^ by the River of Thames, a most beautiful Church, (called of
the place Westminster) where he provided for his own Sepulcher, and another
Dedicated to Saint Margaret, standing without the Abbey. This of Westminster he
endowed with many rich revenues, and confirmed his Charters under his broad
Seal, being the first of the Kings of England, who used that large and stately
Impression in their Charters and Patents. He Founded also the College of Saint
Mary Otterey in Devonshire, and gave unto it the Village of Otereg, and removed
the Bishops See from Cridington to Exceter, as to a place of far more
Dignity: and when he had Reigned the space of three and twenty years and six
months, he ended his life, the fourth of January, in that room of his Palace
at Westminster, which is now called the Painted Chamber, in the year 1066. and
was buried in the Church at Westminster, which he had builded.

Of Harold the second English King after the Danes.
KIng Edward the Confessor, being himself without issue, had in his life
time, sent into Hungary for his Nephew Edward called the Outlaw, the son of
Edmund Ironside; with a purpose to design him his Successor in the Crown,
but he dying soon after his coming into England, King Edward then gave his
Son Edgar the name of Atheling; as to say; Prince Edgar meaning to design
him for his Successor, but being prevented by death, before the successor was
fully established, and Edgar Atheling, though he had right, yet being young,
and not of power to make good his Right, Harold the son of Earl Goodwyn
steps into the Throne, and never standing upon ceremonies, set himself the
Crown upon his own head, wherein, though as a violater of holy Rites, he
offended the Clergy, yet not any either of Clergy or Layity, durst oppose him,
as being at that time the most martial man in the Kingdom; and such a one, as
the state of the Realm stood at that time in need of, and besides his own
worthiness had the assistance of Edwyn and Marchar, the two great Earls of
Yorkshire and Chester, whose sister Algyth he had married. It is true withal,
that King Edward had appointed the Crown after his own decease, sometimes to
William Duke of Normandy, sometimes to Edgar Atheling, and sometimes to this
Harold, so as he was Crowned by Aldred Archbishop of York, as not coming in
by intrusion or wrong, but by the appointment of King Edward, though that
appointment of King Edwa^d, was rather to make him Regent, during the minority
of Edgar, then to make him absolute King, but howsoever, being once in the
Throne, he was then able to make his own Title, and to make Prince Edgar some
amends, he created him Earl of Oxford, which was indeed to use him like a
Child, take away a Jewel, and please him with an Apple. Yet Harold having
once gotten into the Throne, he c^rryed himself with great Valor and Justice,
for the time he sat in it, which was but very short, as being indeed but
tottering from the very beginning, and that chiefly by means of his own
Brother To^stayne, who by diverting his Forces to suppress a Rebellion, made
him of less force to resist an invasion. But now that we have showed how
Harold entered the Throne, we must forbear to show how he was cast out, till we
come to him that cast him out, who because he was not only of another Family,
but of another Nation, we must necessarily take the beginning from a deeper
root, and indeed, seeing in him, we shall join our Island to the Continent,
which is a larger world: Our Kings hereafter, will afford a larger Extent for
matter of Discourse then heretofore they have done.

THE LIFE OF KING WILLIAM THE FIRST, CALLED THE CONQVEROUR.
His Parentage and Descent.
THere were six Dukes of Normandy in France, in a direct line succeeding from
father to son. The first was Rollo, who of a private man in Denmark, coming
forth with the exuberancy of his Nation, wrested by force of Arms from Charles
the Simple King of France, to be made Duke of Normandy. The second was William
his son, called Long Espee, or Long Sword. The third was Richard his son,
called the Hardy, who had Richard, and a daughter called Emma, married to
Ethelred King of England, father of Edward the Confessor. The fourth was
Richard the second his son, called the Good. The fifth was Richard the third
his son, who by a first wife had three sons, Richard, Robert and William,
and by a second, two other sons, William Earl of Argues, and Ma^ger,
Archbishop of Roan. So as Richard his eldest son by his first wife succeeded
him by the name of Richard the fourth, and dying without issue, the Dukedom
descended to Robert his second son by his first wife; which Robert was father
to our William the Conqueror, of whom it is thus recorded: that riding one
time abroad, he happened to pass by a company of Country Maids that were a
dancing, where staying a while to look upon them, he was so taken with the
handsomnesse and graceful carriage of one of them whose name was Arlotte, a
Skinners daughter, (from whence as some think our word Harlot comes) that
affection commanding him, and authority her, he caused her that night to be
brought to his bed; where being together, what was done or said between them
is no matter for History to record, though some Historians have recorded both;
making her not so modest as was fit for a Maid: only ten months after, it
appeared that at this time our Duke William was begotten; who proving a man of
extraordinary spirit, we may attribute it to the heat of affection in which he
was begotten.

His succeeding in the Dukedom, notwithstanding his Bastardie.
IT appears by many examples, that Bastardie in those days was no bar to
succession, till a law was afterward made to make it a bar. It brought some
disgrace where the mother was mean, but no impediment where the father was
Noble; and even his Bastardie seemed to have some allay, if it be true (as some
write) that his father took the said Arlotte afterward to be his wife, and yet
perhaps he had not the Dukedom so much by succession, as by gift. For when he
was about nine years old, his father calling his Nobility together, caused
them to swear Allegiance to this base son of his, and to take him for their
Liege Lord after his decease. Neither was this in those days infrequent, for
Princes to confer their Principalities after their own deceases upon whom
they pleased; counting it as lawful to appoint successors after them, as
substitutes under them; even in our time and Kingdom, the Duke of
Northumberland prevailed with King Edward the sixth, to exclude his two
sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, and to appoint the Lady Jane Gray, daughter of the
Duke of Suffolk, to succeed him.

His Education and Tuition in his minority.
HIs father having declared and appointed him to be his Successor, went soon
after (whether out of devotion, or to do Penance for procuring his brothers
death, whereof he was suspected) into the Holy Land, in which Journey he died,
having left the tuition of his young son to his two brothers, and the
Guardianship to the King of France, in whose Court for a time he was brought
up. A strange confidence, to commit the tuition of a son that was base, to
Pretenders that were legi^i^ate, and to a King of France, who aimed at nothing
more, then to reannexe this Dukedom to his Crown. But it seems his
confidence was grounded upon the proximitie of blood in his brothers, and upon
the merits of his own service formerly done to the King of France; which
though it proved well enough with him, yet is not to betaken into example to
follow.

His Troubles in his minority.
FIrst, Roger de Tresny, who derived his Pedigree directly from Rollo, and had
won much honor by his valor in the wars, (notwithstanding the Oath of
Allegiance he had formerly taken) takes exception to his Bastardy, and invites
Accomplices to assist him in recovering the Dukedom to ^ legitimate Race: a
fal^e pretext if the Fate of Duke William had not been against it; who though
he were himself but young, and could not do much in his own person, yet the
Divine Providence raised him up friends that supplied him with Assistance, and
particularly Roger de Beamont, by whose valor this Roger de Tresny, with his
two brothers, was defeated and slain. After Roger de Tres^y, William de Arques
his Uncle lays claim to the Duchy, and assisted by the King of France comes
to a battle, but by the valor of Count Gyfford, the Dukes General, was
likewise defeated: and these were troubl^s before he arrived to seventeene
years of age. After this, one Guy Earl of Burgoigne, Grandchild to Richard
the second, Duke of Normandy, grew sensible also of his Right to the Dukedom,
and joining with Viscount Neele, and the Earl of Bes^in, two powerful
Normans, conspired Duke Williams death, and had effected it, if a certain
Fool about him, had not stolen away in the night, to the place where the Duke
was, and never left knocking and crying at the gate, till he was admitted to
his presence, willing him to fly for his life instantly, or he would be
murdered. The Duke considering that being related by a Fool, it was like to
be the more palpable, and that there might be danger in staying, none in going,
rode instantly away, all alone, toward Falaise, his principal Castle, but
missing his way, he happ^ned to pass where a Gentleman was standing at his
door, of whom he asked the way, and was by him, as knowing him, directed;
which he had no sooner done, but the conspiratours came presently inquiring if
such a one had not passed that way, which the Gentleman affirmed, and
undertook to be their guide to overtake him, but leading them of purpose a
contrary way, the Duke by this means, came safely to F^l^ise; and from thence
journeyes to the King of France, complaining of his inj^ries; and imploring his
aid, as one that wa^ ^is homager, and committed to his care^ by his ^ervant his
Father. The King of France moved with his distre^se, and remembrance of his
Fathers meri^s, though he wish^d he was less then he was, yet he ^o aided him,
that he made him greater then he was; for himself in person, suffering much in
the Battle, procured him the Victory. By which we may see that folly, and
fortune, and even Enemies themselves are all assistants to the Destinies; or to
say better, indeed to the divine Providence. Many other affronts were offered
him, some by meaner Princes; some afterward by the King of France himself, who
was now grown jealous of his Greatness; all which he encountered with such
dexterity, that made his Bastardy, as it were become Legitimate, and Virtue her
self to grow proud of his person.

His Carriage afterward in Peace.
BY this time he was come to the age of two and twenty years, and where all
this while he had showed himself a valiant General in War, he now began to
show himself a provident Governor in Peace, composing and ordering his state,
wherein he so carried himself, that as his Subjects did both fear and love
him, so his Neighboring Princes did both fear and hate him, or if not hate
him, at least emulate him.

His Incitements for Invading of England.
HE was now grown about fifty years old: an Age that might well have arrested
all ambitious thoughts in him, but who can think himself too old for a
Kingdom; when Galba for attaining the Roman Empire, was contented to buckle
on Armor, being fourscore years old? The Duke in his time of peace came over
into England to visit his cousin King Edward, who besides his Princely
entertainment, made him at that time (as some think) a promise to leave him
his Successor in the Kingdom; and Harold after this, going over to the Duk^
in Normandy, for procuring some friends of his to be released, the better to
effect it, took his solemn Oath to assist him for obtaining the Kingdom. So
as having the word of Edward, and the oath of Harold, he had now sufficient
obligations to expect it. But hearing of the death of King Edward, and that
Harold was Crowned King, he thought himself not more forgotten by Edward, then
wronged by Harold; and therefore sent messengers to him to put him in mind of
K. Edwards P^omise, and his own Oath: but Harold puffed up with the conceit of
being a King, as though that very name were enough to expiate all breach of
Oaths, and that nothing could bind him, who had now the fetters in his own
hand; returned only slight answers, that his Oath was forced, and void in it
self, as being made without consent of the Kingdom. Whereupon the Duke thus
slighted by Harold, endeavors to make him an honest man by force, assuring
himself, he should find him the weaker Enemy, for finding him a perjured
Friend.

The Reasons that facilitated his Conquest of England.
DUke William incensed with Harolds answers, acquaints his Nobility with his
purpose, who with some ado consented to aid him, as likewise many other great
Lords of France, but specially Baldwyn Earl of Flanders, whose daughter he had
married; and who being at that time Guardian of the young King of France,
procured aid from him also; and to make the Enterprise the more successful,
Pope Alexander the second sent him a Banner with an Agnus of Gold, and one o^
the hairs of Saint Peter. So as the preparation of the Duke, both by Sea and
Land was very great, having three hundred sail of ships, and as some write,
890^ and as one Norman, above a thousand, and as Cemeticensis, three thousand:
and though Harold had likewise provided a warlike Fleet to encounter him, yet
it was at tha^ time unfortunately diverted another way; for Taustay^e his
Brother, being then in rebellion in the North, and Harold Harfager: King of
Norway, at the same time invading those parts, and perhaps upon a brute, that
the Dukes^ Fleet was not yet ready to come forth, removed both his Fleet and
Army thither: where though he got the Victory at Stamford, with the death both
of his Brother Toustayne, and of the King of No^way, yet it made way for the
Duke to land quietly, and he entered the Kingdom, as one may enter a house,
when the doors are all left open. By this means King Har^lds shipping, (the
best wall of defense to an Island) was utterly frustrate: and as for his Land
Forces, they were by his Battle at Stamford, exceedingly both weakened and
impaired; yet hearing that Duke William was landed at Pemsey, not far from
Hastings in Sussex, he repaired thither with all speed, and gathering together
his broken Forces, and increasing them by all the means he could, made
himself ready to give the Duke Battle. Duke William in the mean time, as
soon as he had landed his men, sent his ships presently away, that there might
be no thinking of any thing, but either Death or Victory. And then going
himself on land, it is said, his foot slipped, and he fell down; which some
that stood by, taking for an ill sign, No (says he) I have by this, taken
possession of this Land. And indeed Presages are but as Animus ejus qui
praesagit, as in this Dukes fall it afterward fell out. Many ways of
composition, between Duke William, and King Harold were propounded, yet Harold
would hearken to none, as nothing doubting of success, and perhaps thinking it
a disgrace, to capitulate for that, which was now his own: and when one of his
Brothers called Gyrth, being less interessed, and therefore clearer sighted,
entreated him to consider what a fearful thing it was to break an Oath,
which he so solemnly had sworn: Harold seemed to conceive, that nothing which
he did, being a private man, could be of force to bind him now being a Prince;
and so on the fourteenth day of October, being Saturday, in the year 1066.
(which day he liked the better, because it was his Birthday, hoping, that the
day of his Birth would not so much degenerate, to prove the day of his death,
though even this also bred no good blood to the Action, for the Soldiers of
Harold, thinking thereby to honor their Kings Birthday, spent the night
before in revelling and drinking, where the Soldiers of the Duke, out of
consideration of their next days work, spent the night in quietness and
devotion) they joined battle, (the Kentish-men being placed in the
Forefront, as by an ancient custom is their due, and King Harold with his
Londoners, leading the maine Battle) where though their Armies were not much
unequal in number, (for they were each of them near about threescore thou^and
men) yet there was great odds in the expertnesse of their Soldiers, and more
in the advantage of their weapons: for, the Duke had with him all the flower of
France and Flanders, where King Harold had lost his best men, in his late
Battle: and for advantage of weapons, the Normans had long Bows and Arrows,
which of the English at that time, were not at all in use: what mervaile then
that the Normans got the Victory, though King Harold losing his life, yet lost
no Reputation; and though the English Soldiers showed no less valor, in
being Conquered, then the Normans did in Conquering. One circumstance may not
be omitted, that King ^arold as an expert General, had ordered his men in so
firm a Body, that no force of the Normans could disorder their Ranks, till
Duke William^ used a Stratagem, commanding his men to retire, and to
counterfeit flight; by which he drew the English on, upon a hollow ground,
covered with earth, whereinto many of them fell, and perished, and besides into
an ambush of his Horsemen, which unexpectedly fell upon them, and cut them in
pieces. Withal, there seems one great error to have been committed (at
least, if it were an error, and not rather a nece^sity) that there was not a
supplementall Army provided; (as his Brother Gyrth would have had it) which
might have come on if the first had failed, and would have been of great
advantage against a wearyed Army. But when Sic visum est superis, all humane
force is weak and cannot withstand, all humane Providence is unprovided, and
cannot prevent. The body of Harold at his Mother Thyrace suite was recovered,
and lies buried in Waltham Abbey, which he had begun to build, at least to
repair. But here Gyraldus Cambrensis tells a strange story, that Harold was not
slain in the Battle, but only wounded and lost his left eye, and then
escaped by flight to Chester, where he afterward led a holy Anchorets life.

How Duke William proceeded after his victory at Hastings.
AS his Valor won him the Victory, so his Victory won him a Crown; that
now of an old Duke, he was suddenly become a young King: and indeed, nothing so
much renues life, and makes the years in a manner young again: as addition of
Honor, specially when it is the fruit of merit. First therefore, having given
public thanks to God for his happy success, he led his Army toward London,
not the direct way (perhaps doubting some new Encounter) but coasting about
through part of Kent, through Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire and Barkeshire, where
at Wallingford he passed over the Thames; and then through Oxford^shire,
Buckinghamshire, and Hartfordshire, until he came to Barkehamstead, where
there came unto him Aldred Archbishop of York, Woolstan Bishop of Worcester,
Willfere, Bishop of Hereford, and many other Prelates, accompanied with Edgar
Atheling, with Earl Edwyn and Mar^har, Brothers, and men of the greatest sway
in the Kingdom, and many others of the Nobility. It is true, upon the defeat
at Hastings, Earl Edwyn and Marchar, had a purpose to set up Edgar Atheling,
as next Heir of the Royal blood; and Grandchild to Edmund ^ronside, and so
beloved of the people, that he was called their Darling: but considering his
young years, and other inabilities, but specially finding the minds of the
Bishops, (who at that time bore all the sway) to be otherwise inclined, they
desisted from that course, and thus the Duke, without any opposition, coming
to London, was received by Bishops, and Lords and all, with great joy, though
small gladness, and if he had not their hearts, yet he had their knees, for in
most humble manner they submitted themselves to him, acknowledging him for
their Sovereign Lord, and upon Christmas Day after, he was Crowned at
Westminster by Aldred Archbishop of York, the Archbishop of Canterbury
Stigand, not being admitted to do that office, for some defect in his
Investiture; and perhaps for some aspersion in his manners.

How he rewarded his followers.:
THough he has had the name of Conqueror, yet he used not the Kingdom as
gotten by Conquest, for he took no man's living from him, nor dispossessed any
of their goods, but such only, whose demerit made unworthy to hold them; as
appears by his Act to one Warren a Norman, to whom he had given the Castle of
Sherborne in Norfolk; for when Sherborne, who was owner of it, acquainted the
King, that the Castle was his; and that he had never borne Arms against him;
he presently commanded Warren, to deliver it quietly up unto him^ Only
vacancies of Offices, and filling up the places of those who were slain or
fled, were the present means he made use of, for preferring his Followers. One
special preferment we cannot omit, that where one Herlowyn a Nobleman in
Normandy, had married his Mother Arlette, and had by her a Son named Hugh
Lupus, he gave to the said Hugh, the Earldom of Chester, to hold of him as
freely by his sword, as himself held England by his Crown, by virtue of which
Grant, the said Hugh ordained under him four Barons, Nigell he made Baron of
Halton: Malbanke, Baron of Nantwich: Eustace Baron of Mawpase; and Vernon,
Baron of Shipbrooke: Such an Honor, as no Subject before or since, ever
enjoyed the like.

What means he used for securing himself in the Kingdom:
BEsides the Oath of Fealty, which he took of all his Lords both Spiritual
and Temporal, at his Coronation; in Lent following, going into Normandy, he
took along with him the greatest part of the great men of the Kingdom, of
whom, Edwyn and Marchar, the two Earls of Northumberland and Mercia, Stigand
Archbishop of Canterbury, Edgar Atheling, Waltheoff son to Syward formerly
Earl of Northumberland, and Agelnothus Abbot of Glastenbury were the chief;
leaving the care of the Kingdom in his absence to Odo Bishop of Bayeux, his
Brother by the Mother; and to William Fits Osburne, whom he had made Earl of
Hereford. And to abate the greatness of the Prelates, which at that time was
grown in a manner unlimited, he ordained that from thenceforth, they should
not command with any Temporal Authority whatsoever. And because the common
people are no less to be feared for their number, then the Nobility for their
greatness, he first took from them all their Armor, to the end, that leaving
them without stings, they might afterward be but Droanes. And because there is
seldom any danger from singular numbers, but all the danger rises from
plurality: therefore to prevent conspiracies and combinations, which are
commonly contrived in the night, he commanded that in all Towns and Villages,
a Bell should be rung at eight a clock in the Evening, and that in every house
they should then put out their Fire and Lights (which was called Couure Feu)
and go to Bed. And for more security he erected Castles in the most doubtful
places of the Kingdom. One at York, another at Lincoln, a third at
Nottingham, (at that time called Snottingham) and a fourth at Hastings, where
he first Landed. By these means the Kingdom was quiet all the time of his
being away in Normandy, saving only that Edrick the Forester, in the County of
Hereford, calling in to his aid the Kings of Wales, made some small
disturbance. And indeed all the States of the Kingdom might in his very person
find something to make them apt to tolerate his Government. For first, the
People might think themselves in a sort advanced, being now made members of a
greater Body; when the Dukedom of Normandy should come to be annexed to the
Kingdom of England; and by experience of his good Government being a Duke,
they might well hope, he would not govern worse being made a King. And the
Nobility might be well content, as having a King of their former Kings
choosing, and though a Stranger, yet no Alien, as having in him many veins of
the same blood, and therefore likely also to have some ve^nes of the same
goodness, of their good King Edward. But specially the Clergy could not choose
but be content, as having a King who came commended to them, by a commending as
strong as a commanding, the Popes Benediction.

What Troubles or Insurrections were during his Reign.
BUt the Body of a State being more obnoxious to crudities and ill humors,
then the state of a Natural body; It is impossible to continue long without
distempers; notwithstanding any preservatives that can be applied. And
therefore in the second year of his Reign, brake forth the coffeehouse of
Edgar Etheling, justly the first, as having most cause, being the next of the
late Royal blood, and therefore most apt to be sensible of servitude; who
taking along with him his mother Agatha, and his two Sisters, Margaret and
Christine; stole secretly away to Sea, with intention to pass into Hungary,
the Country where he was borne; but by cont^ary winds was cast upon the Coast
of Scotland, where the King Malcolme, not only most kindly entertained him,
but for a stricter bond of kindness, took his Sist^r Margaret to Wife, by
whom he had many Children, out of which, in the second Generation after, a
match was found, by which in the person of King Henry the second, the Sax^n and
Norman blood were conjoined, the union whereof continues in the race of our
Kings of England to this day. Not long after to Edgar in Scotland, came the two
great Earls, Edwyn and Marchar, brothers to Agatha the late King Harolds Wife;
also Hereward, Gospatrick, and Syward, with many other Lords; and shortly after
Stigand and Aldred Archbishops, with diverse of the Clergy. And these Lords
being together in Scotland, did but watch opportunity, to recover that, which
for want of taking opportunity they had lost; And assisted by the Scots, they
invaded the North parts, spoiling the Country, and killing many for the fault
they had themselves committed, but all they could do, was but to forage the
Country, and so return.

After this, in the third year of his Reign, the two sons of Swayne King of
Denmark, Harold and Canutus, with a Fleet of 240. ships, entered Humber, and
invaded the North parts, with whom the English Lords in Scotland joined, and
^orraged all the Country, till they came near to York. When the Normans that
were in the Town, to save the City, set fire on the suburbs; but the fire not
so contented, by assistance of a violent wind, took hold of the City it
self, burning a great part of it, and which perhaps was more worth then the
City, a Library of excellent Books, and the Normans that were left in defense
of the City, to the number of three thousand, were all slain. King William
hearing hereof was so much incensed, that with all speed he raised an Army, and
entered Northumberland, wasting the Country that already lay wast; and yet for
all his great rage, was contented with a great sum of money, to purchase the
Danes departure. By these devastations in many Shires of the Kingdom, but
especially in Northumberland, so great a Dearth and Famine followed, that men
were glad to eat horses and dogs, cats and rats, and what el^e is most
abhorrent to nature; and between York and Durham, the space of 60. miles, for
nine years together, there was so utter desolation, as that neither any house
was left standing, nor any ground tilled.

Many other insurrections there were in his Reign; as at Exceter, at Oxford,
in the Isle of Ely, and many times by the Scots in the Northern parts; but all
these were easily suppressed, for they were but scattered Forces; Et dum singuli
pugnant, universi vincuntur; whereas if they had united themselves into an
Army, they might perhaps have made it a War, which now were little more then
Routs and Riots. Yet some write, that King William granted Cumberland to
Malcolme King of Scots, to hold from him conditionally, that the Scots should
not attempt any thing prejudicial to the Crown of England, for which Grant
King Malcolme did him Homage.

The greatest and last was an Insurrection raised in Normandy, by his son
Robert, the more dangerous because unnatural, for by the instigation and
assistance of Philip King of France, (emulous now of K. Williams greatness) he
entered Normandy, and claimed it as in his own right. His father indeed had
made him a promise of it long before, but Robert impatient of delay, as
counting so long staying to be little better then disinheriting, endeavored
by strong hand to wrest it from his father. But his father King William hearing
hereof, with a strong Army passes over into Normandy, where in a battle
meeting hand to hand with his son, was by him unhorsed, and hurt in the arm:
but his son perceiving him by his voice to be his father, suddenly leapes
off his horse, takes up his father, casts himself down at his feet, and
humbly entreats his pardon; which as a father he easily grants, embraces his
son, and ever after, the son from the father had fatherly love, and the
father from the son a filial obedience. But though his father did thus
pardon him, yet it seems there is a Nemesis, or to say better, a Divine
Providence, that did not pardon him; for after this, it is observed he never
prospered in any thing he undertook. It cannot perhaps be discovered, whether
the Kings severity begat his subjects Insurrections, or his subjects
Insurrections the Kings severity; but which of them soever was the mother, it
is certain they were nurses each of them to other.

His aptness to forget Injuries.
CErtainly there is no such goodness of nature, as aptness to be reconciled;
of which virtue it seems King William had a large proportion, for he seldom
remembered injuries after submission. Edric the first that rebelled against him,
he placed in Office near about him. Gospatric who had been a factious man,
and a plotter of conspiracies against him, he made Earl of Gloucester, and
trusted him with managing a War against Malcolme King of Scots. Eustace Earl
of Boleyne, who in the Kings absence in Normandy attempted to seize upon Dover
Castle, he received afterward into great favor and respect. The Earls Marchar
and Syward, with Wolnoth the brother of Harold, a little before his death, he
released out of prison. Edgar, who as next heir to the Saxon Kings, had often
attempted by Arms to recover his right, he not only after twice defection
pardoned, but gave him also allowance as a Prince: It is said twenty shillings
a day, or rather a pound weight of silver, and other large livings besides; so
as Edgar finding the sweetness of safety, and the pleasures of a Country life,
spent the rest of his days (which were many) retired from Court, neither
envying nor being envyed. Only Waltheoff Earl of Northumberland, and
Northam^ton, of all the English Nobility was put to death in all the time of
this Kings Reign; and not he neither, till he had twice falsified his Oath of
Allegiance.

Of new Acquests to this Kingdom, by this Kings means.
IN the thirteenth year of his Reign, he subdued Wales, and made it tributary
to him, as before in the seventh year of his Reign, he brought Malcolme King
of Scots to do him Homage, and thereupon to give him Hostages; that if England
made him greater then he was before, a King of a Duke; he no less made England
greater then it was before, three Kingdoms in one.

Of his Exactions and courses for raising of money.
AS his Taxations were many in number, so they were various in kind, not
always bringing in money directly, but sometimes obliquely saving it. The
first tax he laid upon his subjects was in the first year of his Reign,
after his return out of Normandy; a grievous tax all writers say, but none
what tax it was. In the third year of his Reign he ransacked all
Monasteries, and all the gold and silver of either Chalices or Shrines, he
took to his own use. Likewise he Sessed all Bishops and Abbots what number of
soldiers they should find to serve him in his wars: also the strangers
which he maintained in Pay, he dipsersed into Religious houses, and some also
among the Nobility to be maintained at their charge. Many other taxations he
made, but last of all in the eighteenth year of his Reign, by the advice of
Roger Earl of Hertford, he caused the whole Realm to be described in a
Censuall Roll, (whereof he took a President from King Alfred) so as there was
not one Hyde of Land, but both the yearly rent, and the owner thereof was
therein set down: How many Ploughlands, what Pastures, Fennes or Marshes,
what Woods, Farms, and Tenements were in every Shire, and what every one was
worth: Also how many Villains every man had; what Beasts, what Cattle, what
F^es, what other goods, what rent or commodity his Possessions did yield. This
book was called the Roll of Winton, because it was kept in the City of
Winchester. By the English it was called Doomesday book, either by reason of
the generality thereof, or else corruptly, instead of Domu^ Dei book, for that
it was laid in the Church of Winchester, in a place called Domu^ Dei. According
to this Roll taxations were imposed; sometimes two shillings, and at this time
six shillings upon every Hyde of Land, (a Hyde containing as some account it,
twenty Acres, bu^ as Master Lambert proves, a hundred Acres.) In all those
Lands which he gave to any man, he reserved Dominion in chief to himself, as
also a yearly rent, and likewise a Fine whenever the Tenant did alien or
dye. These were bound to him by Oath of Fealty and Homage, and if any died, his
heir being within age, the King received the profits of his Lands, and had the
custody and disposing of the heirs body, until his age of one and twenty
years. To be short, his greediness of money was so great, that he spared not
his own brother Odo, but found accusations against him^ to the end he might
seize upon his Treasure; which was infinite great, and which he had gathered in
hope to buy the Papacy. Only one kind of profit he forbear to meddle with,
that is, Vacancies of Abbeys and Bishoprics, which he always reserved for the
Successors: but then he took another course of far greater profit, for he
compelled all men to make new Fines at his pleasure, for confirmation of any
Grant or Privileges formerly granted by any Prince of the Realm: by which
devise he got into his possession, the greatest part of all the riches of the
Land, as well of the Clergy, as of the Laity. And one particular may not be
omitted that is reported of him, which was this: The Monks of Ely to purchase
their peace, agreed to give him seven hundred Marks, when coming to pay it,
there wanted a Groat in the weight, (for in those days greater sums were not
paid by tale, but by weight) which the King understanding, denied them all
composition for Peace, until with much suite he was entreated to accept of a
thousand Marks more.

Of his Laws and Ordinances, and Courts of Justice erected by him.
ALthough at his Coronation he had taken an Oath to observe the Laws of King
Edward then in use, yet afterward (perhaps counting his Coronation Oath but a
matter of course) he abrogated many, and in their stead brought in the Laws of
Normandy; commanding them to be written in French, and also that all Causes
should be Pleaded, and all matters of Form dispatched in French; upon a
pretense to dignifie the French tongue, but with a purpose to intrappe men
through ignorance of the language, as indeed it did: or perhaps to make the
Normans language predominant in the Kingdom as he had made their persons;
which yet he was so far from effecting, that there is not so much as any
footsteps remaining of the Norman language in the English tongue. Forms of
Judgment, and trials by Fire and Water, called Ordeal, formerly used, were in
short time after the Conquest disused, and in the end utterly abrogated by the
Pope, as derived from Paganism. That of Combat continued longer, but of no
ordinary use: and all actions both criminal and real, began now to be wholly
adjudged by the Verdict of twelve men, according to the custom of Normandy,
where the like Form is used, and called by the name of Enquest, with the same
cautions for the Jurours, as it is here continued to this day; though by the
Laws of Ethelred it appears, that the trial by twelve men was in use long
before his time. And where before the Bishop and the Alderman were the absolute
Judges to determine all business in every Shire, and the Bishop, in many
Cases, shared in the benefit of the Mulcts with the King; now he confined the
Clergy within the Privince of their own Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to
deal only in business concerning rule of souls, according to the Canons and
Laws Episcopal. And where the Causes of the Kingdom were before determined
in every Shire, and by a Law of King Edward, all matters in question were upon
special penalty decided in their Gemote, or Conventicle held monthly in every
Hundred: Now he ordained that four times in the year, for certain days, the
same businesses should be determined in such place as he would appoint, where
he constituted Judges to attend for that purpose. Also he Decreed there should
be Sheriffs in every Shire, and Justices of Peace for punishment of
Malefactors. Finally he ordained his Council of State, his Chancery, his
Exchequer, ( Scaccarium corruptly called so, of the word Statarium, or rather
of the Board or Table where the Officers sat;) also his Courts of Justice,
which always removed with his Court. These places he furnished with Officers,
and assigned four Terms in the year for determining controversies among the
people. The place of these Courts was Westminster, where King William Rufus
afterward built a stately Palace. Now for his provisionary Revenues, the Kings
Tenants who held Lands of the Crown, paid him no money at all, but only Corn
and other victuals; and a just note of the quality and quantity of every man's
ratement, was taken through out all the Shires of the Kingdom, and levied ever
certain, for maintenance of the Kings house. Only the Kentish men procured
the continuance of their ancient Laws by a trick; for King William riding
toward Dover, at Sw^nscombe two miles from Gravesend, the Kentish men met him,
but in the form of a moving wood, by reason of the great boughs they had cut
and carried in their hands, and compassing the King about, they only made
suite for the continuan^ of their Laws, which the King without any great
scruple granted, and glad he was so rid of them. A strange conceit in the
Kentish men, to hazard themselves more, for the preserving a simple Custom;
then for preserving the Liberty of themselves and their Country: But such is
the violence of conceit, till it be mastered by time, or rather so very a
Changeling is Humane Reason, that what they then cut down great Woods to
defend, they have since been content to see abolished, without cutting down
so much as a twigge. But one Law especially he made, extremely distastefull to
all the Gentry of the Land: for where before they might at their pleasure hunt
and take Dear which they found abroad in the Woods; Now it was Ordained, under
a great penalty, no less then putting out their eyes; that none should presume
to kill or take any of them, as reserving them only for his own delight. And
indeed so great delight he took in that kind of sport, that he depopulated a
great part of Hamshire, the space of thirty miles, where there had been (says
Car^on) six and twenty Towns, and fourscore Religious Houses, and made it a
Habitation for such kind of Beasts; which was then, and to this day is called
the New-Forest. But the lamentable dysasters that have happened to this Kings
Issue, do plainly show, that there is a power, that observes all our Actions,
and which we may know to be Memorem Fandi atque Nefandi. But in the first year
of this Kings Raign^, he granted to the City of London, their first Charter and
Liberties, in as large form, as they enjoyed them in the time of King Edward
the Confessor, which he granted at the suite of William a Norman, Bishop of
London; in grateful remembrance whereof, the Lord Major and Aldermen, upon the
solemn days of their resort to Paul's, do still use to walk to the
Gravestone, where this Bishop lies interred. Also this King was the first, that
brought the Jews to inhabit here in England, as likewise he made a Law, that
whosoever forced a woman, should lose his genitals: and in his time, long Bows
came first into use in England, which as they were the weapons with which
France under this King Conquered England: so they were the weapons with which
England under after-Kings, Conquered France; as if it were not enough for us to
beat them, if we did not beat them with their own weapons. This King also
appointed a Constable of Dover Castle, and a Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
with Immunities as they are at this day.

Affairs of the Church in his Reign.
IN the twelfth year of his Reign, Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, held
a Synod at London, where amongst other things, he removed Bishops Sees, from
small Towns to great Cities, as from Silliway to Chichester; from Kyrton to
Exceter; from Wells to Bathe; from Shirborne to Salisbury; from Dorchester to
Lincoln; and from Lichfield to Chester; and from thence again to Coventry;
and not long before, the Bishopric of Lindafferne, otherwise called Holy
Land, upon the river Tweede, had been translated to Durham. In the sixth year
of his Reign, a controversy arising between the two Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, they appealed to Rome, and the Pope remitted it to the
King and Bishops of England. Hereupon a Synod is holden at Windsor, where
sentence was given on Lanfranks then Archbishop of Canterburies side: that in
matters of Religion, the Archbishop of Yo^ke, should ever be subject to the
Archbishop of Canterbury: Only at Rome it was decreed, for matter of Title,
that the Sea of York should be styled Primas Angliae, and the Sea of
Canterbury, Primas totius Angliae, as it is at this day. And as the Archbishop
of York owes obedience to the Archbishop of Canterbury; So all the Bishops
of Scotland owe obedience to the Archbishop of York, as to the Primate of
Scotland.

But as this King took down the Prelates in Temporalties, for he ordained
they should exercise no Temporal Authority at all; So in Spiritualties, he
rather raised them, as may be seen by a passage between Aldred Archbishop of
York, and the King: for at a time, upon the repulse of a certain suite, the
Archbishop in great coffeehouse offered to depart, when the King, in awe of
his displeasure, stayed him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and
promised to grant his suite. The King all this while being down at the
Archbishops feet^ the Noblemen that were present, put him in mind that he
should cause the King to arise, Nay (says the Archbishop) let him alone, let
him find what it is to anger Saint Peter. And as by this story, we see the
insulting pride of a Prelate in those days: So by another, we may see the
equivocating false-hood of a Prelate at that time; For St^gand Archbishop of
Canterbury would often swear, he had not one penny upon the Earth, when under
the Earth it was afterward found he had hidden great Treasure. Also it is
memorable, but scarce credible of another Bishop, who being accused of Simony,
and denying i^, the Cardinal before whom he was to Answer, told him, that a
Bishopric was the gift of the Holy Ghost, and therefore to buy a Bishopric,
was against the Holy Ghost, and thereupon bid him say, Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghast; which the Bishop beginning, and often
essaying, could never say, [ and to the Holy Ghost] but said it plainly when
he was put out of his Bishopric. And yet was not the Church in that Age so
barren of Virtue, but that it afforded some good Bishops, as William Bishop of
Durham, Founder of University College in Oxford, but specially Bishop
Woolstan; whom, upon Lanfrankes reporting, to be insufficient for the place,
for want of Learning, the King commanded to put off his Pontifical Robes, and
to leave his Bishopric: when suddenly out of a divine Inspiration, Woolstan
answered: A better then you, O King, bestowed these Robes upon me, and to him I
will restore them. And therewithal going to Saint Edwards Shrine, who had made
him a Bishop, and putting off his Robes, he struck his Staff upon Saint
Edwards Monument, which stuck so fast in the stone of it, that by no strength
it could be drawn forth, till he drew it forth himself: which so terrifyed
both Lanfranke and the King, that they entreated him to take his Robes again,
and keep his Bishopric. Also Oswald Bishop of Salisbury, who devised a Form
of Prayers to be daily used in his Church, and was used afterward in other
Churches, from whence proceeded the common saying of Secundum usum Sarum. In
this Kings time was Berengarius, who denied the true body of Christ to be in
the Sacrament; Also in his time, Pope Gregory the seventh, removed married
Priests from executing Divine Service, whereof great troubles arose in England.

Works of Piety, by him, and others in his time.
THis King Founded the Abbey of Baltell in Sussex, where he overcame Harold;
the Abbey of Selby in Yorkshire; and a third near London, called Saint
Saviors. He founded also the Priory of Saint Nicholas at Exceter; and gave
great privileges to Saint Martins le Grand in London; which Church was founded
before the Conquest, by Ingelricus and Emardus his Brother, Cousins to King
Edward the Confessor. These were this Kings works of Piety in England, but in
Normandy he Founded also an Abbey at Caen: where his Wife Maude built likewise
a Monastery of Nuns. He gave also to the Church of Saint Stephens in Caen,
two Manors in Dorsetshire, one Manor in Devonshire, another in Essex, much
Land in Barkeshire, some in Norfolk, a Mansion house in Woodstreete; London,
with many Advowsons of Churches, and even he gave his Crown and Regal
Ornaments to the said Church, being of his own Foundation, for the redemption
whereof, his Son Henry gave the Manor of Brydeton in Dorsetshire. In this
Kings time, Robert, son to Hyldebert La^ie, Founded the Priory of Pon^fraite;
Henry Earl Ferrers Founded a Priory within his Castle at Tutbury; Alwyn
Child, a Citizen of London, Founded the Monastery of Saint Saviors at
Bermondsey in Southwarke, and gave to the Monks there diverse Rents in London:
Also in this Kings time, Mauric^ Bishop of London, after the firing of the
former Church of Saint Paul in London, began the Foundation of the new Church,
a work so admirable, that many thought it would never have been finished.
Toward the building of the East end whereof, the King gave the choice stones
of his Castle, at the West end of the City, upon the bank of the River Thames;
which Castle having been at that time fired, in place thereof Edward Kilwarby
Archbishop of Canterbury, did afterward Found a Monastery of Blacke-fryers.
The King also gave the Manor of Storford to the same Maurice, and to his
Successors in that See; after whose decease, Richard his next Successor,
bestowed all the Rents of his Bishopric, to advance the building of this
Church, maintaining himself by his private Patrimony; and yet all he could
do, made no great show, but the finishing of the work was left to many other
succeeding Bishops. In the fifteenth year of this Kings Reign, William Bishop
of Durham, Founded University College in Oxford: Also one Gylbert a Norman
Lord, Founded the Abbey of Merton in Surrey, seven miles from London; and
Thomas Archbishop of York, first builded the Minster of York. In this Kings
sixteenth year, his Brother Duke Robert, being sent against the Scots, builded
a Fort, where at this day stands New Castle upon Tyne: but the Town and
Walls were builded afterward by King John. Also in this Kings time, Ledes
Castle in Kent was builded by Creveken, and the Castle of Oxford, by Robert d'
Oily: two Noble men that came into England with him. Osmond Bishop of
Salisbury built the new Church there; Also Waring Earl of Shrewesbury, built
two Abbeyes, one in the Suburbs of Shrewesbury, and another at Wenlocke.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN the twentyeth year of his Reign, so great a fire happened in London, that
from the West-gate to the Eastgate, it consumed Houses and Churches all the
way, and amongst the rest the Church of Saint Paul, the most grievous fire that
ever happened in that City. Also this year, by reason of distemperature of
weather, there insued a Famine: and afterward a miserable mortality of Men and
Cattle. Also this year in the Province of Wales, upon the Sea shore, was
found the body of Gawen, sisters son to Arthur, the great King of the
Britains: reported to be fourteen foot in length. Also in this Kings time, a
great Lord ^itting at a Feast, was set upon by Mice, and though he were removed
from Land to Sea, and from Sea again to Land, yet the Mice still followed him,
and at last devoured him.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE had to Wi^e, and her only; Mathilde or Maude, Daughter to Baldwyn Earl of
Flanders. She was Crowned Queen of England, the second year of his Reign:
the seventeenth year of his Reign, she dyed; a Woman only memorable for
this, that nothing memorable is Recorded of her, but that she built a Nunnery
at Caen in Normandy, where she lies Buried. By her he had four sons and fiv^
daughters. His Sons were, Robert, Richard, William, and Henry: of whom Robert
the eldest, called Court-cayse, of his short thighs, or Court-hose, of his
short Breeches, or Courtois, of his courteous behavior: (for so many are the
Comments upon his name) succeeded his Father in the Duchy of Normandy. Richard
his second Son, was killed by misfortune, hunting in the New-Forest. William
his third Son, called Rufus, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of England.
Henry his youngest Son called Beauclerke, for his Learning, had by his
Fathers Will, five thousand pounds in money, and the inheritance also of his
Mother. His Daughters were Cicelie, C^nstance, Adela, Margaret, and Elenor, of
whom Cicelie was Abbess of Caen in Normandy. Constance was married to Alan
Earl of Britain. Adela to Stephen Earl of Blois. Margaret affianced to
Harold King of England, but never married, and dyed young. Elenor, betroathed
to Alphonsus King of Gallitia, but desiring to dye a Virgin, she had her wish,
spending her time so much in Prayer, that with continual kneeling, her knees
were brawned.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was but mean of stature, yet big of body, and therewithal so strong,
that few were able to draw his Bow: growing in years, he was bald before; his
beard always shaven, after the manner of the Normans; and where in his younger
time, he was much given to that infirmity of Youth, which grows out of strength
of Youth, Incontinency: after he was once married, whether out of satiety, or
out of Grace, he was never known to offend in that kind. Of so perfect health,
that he was never sick, till that sickness whereof he dyed. Of a stern
countenance, yet of an affable nature: In war, as expert as valiant: In
Peace, as provident as prudent: and in all his Enterprises, as Fortunate, as
Bold and Hardy. Much given to Hunting and Feasting, wherein he was no less
pleasant then magnificent. He made no great proficience in Learning; as having
had his education in the licentiousness of the French Court: yet he favored
learned men; and drew out of Italy, Lanfranke, Anselme, Durand, Traherne, and
diverse others, famous at that time for Learning and Piety. Very devout he was,
and always held the Clergy in exceeding great Reverence: And this is one
special honor attributed unto him, that from him we begin the Computation
of our Kings of England.

His Places of Residence.
HIs Christmas he commonly kept at Gloucester; his Easter at Wi^chester; and his
Whi^sontide at Westminster; and once in the year, at one of these places would
be new Crowned; as though by often putting on his Crown, he thought to make it
sit the easier upon his head. And for the houses which the Kings of England had
in those days in London; I find that at Westminster was a Palace, the ancient
habitation of the Kings of England, from the time of Edward the Confessor:
which in the Reign of King Henry the Eight, was by casual fire burnt down to
the ground. A very large and stately Palace this was, and in that Age, for
building incomparable. The Remains whereof, are the Chamber of assembling the
High Court of Parliament, and the next unto it, wherein anciently they were
wont to begin the Parliament, called Saint Edwards painted Chamber, because
the Tradition holds, that the said King Edward dyed in it. Adjoining unto
this, is the White Hall, wherein at this day the Court of Requests is kept;
Beneath this is the Great Hall, where Courts of Justice are now kept: This Hall
which we now have, was built by King Richard the second, out of the Ground; as
appears by his Arms engraven in the stone work: (when he had plucked down
the old Hall, built before by William Rufus) and made it his own habitation.
But the aforesaid Palace, after it was burnt down in anno 15^2. lay desolate,
and King Henry the Eighth shortly after translated the Kings seat, to a house
not far off, built by Cardinal Woolsey^ and is called White Hall. The Tower
of London also was anciently used by the Kings of England to lodge in. Other
Houses they anciently had; one where Bridewell now stands, out of the ruins
whereof, the now Bridewell was built. Another called the Tower Royal, now the
Kings Wardrobe. Another in Bucklers-bury, called Sernes Tower. Another where
now the Pope's Head Tavern is, over against the Old Exchange; and oftentimes
they made use of Baynards Castle. But these are all long since demolished, that
we may see Palaces and places have their Fa^es and periods as well as men.

His Death and Burial.
Toward the end of his Reign, he appointed his two sons Robert and Henry
with joint authority, Governors of Normandy: These went together, to visit the
King of France, lying at Constance, where entertaining the time with variety of
sports; Henry played with Lewis the Daulphin of France at Chesse, and winning
much money of him, Lewis grew so choleric, that he threw the Chess-men at
Henry's face; calling him the son of a Bastard: and thereupon Henry struck
Lewis with the Chess-board, and had presently slain him, if his Brother Robert
had not stepped in, and stayed him. Upon this the King of France invades
Normandy, and draws Robert, King Williams eldest son, to join with him
against his Father: but King William coming presently over with an Army, was
soon reconciled to his Son, yet being corpulent and in years, was by this
means much distempered in Body, and so retired to Roan, where he stayed, as
not being well in health. The French King hearing of his sickness, scoffingly
said, that he lay in Childe-bed of his great belly. Which so incensed King
William, that he swore by Gods Resurrection and his Brightness, (his usual
Oath) that as soon as he should be Churched of that Child, he would offer a
thousand Lights in France; and indeed he performed it; for he entered France in
Arms, and ^et many Towns and Corne-fields on fire, in which he was so
violent, that by reason of his travail and the unreasonable heat, being in
the month of August, it brought upon him a relapse of his sickness, and
withal, leaping on horseback over a ditch, his fat belly did bear so hard
upon the pommell of his saddle, that he took a rupture in his inner parts;
whereupon returning to Roan, his sickness so increased, that in short time he
dyed; and that which is scarce credible, yet Recorded for certain, the very
same day he dyed at Roan, his death was known at Rome, a thousand miles off.
In all the time of his sickness, he retained to the very last, his memory and
speech: and showed many demonstrations of Devotion, and true contrition,
specially for his severity used toward the English. And thus he who was a
Conqueror of men, was conquered himself by death; the ninth day of September,
when he had Reigned twenty years, and near eleven months, in the threescore
and fourth year of his age: I may well say, he was conquered by Death; seeing
death used him more despitefully^ then ever he living used any whom he had
conquered: For no sooner was the breath out of his body, but his attendants
purloyning what they could lay hands on, forsook him and fled: leaving his
body almost naked upon the Ground. Afterward, William Archbishop of Roan,
commanded his body should be conveyed to Caen, but his command was little
regarded: till at last, one H^rlewyne, a Country Knight, at his own charges
caused his body to be Embalmed, and conveyed thither; where the Abbot and
Monks meeting the Corpse, suddenly in the midst of their solemnities, a
violent fire brake out in the Town, with the fright whereof, every man left
the place; and thus was his body the second time left forlorn. In the end a
few Monks returned and accompanied the Hearse to the Abbey Church; but when the
Divine Office was ended, and the body ready to be laid in the Grave, one
Anselme Fits Arthur, stood up, and claimed that Ground to have been the Floor
of his Fathers house, which King William had violently wrested from him; and
thereupon charged them, as they would answer it before the dreadful face of
God, not to cover his Body with the Earth of his Inheritance. Whereupon after
some pause, agreement was made with him, and three pound was paid in hand for
the Ground broken up, and a hundred pounds more afterward for the Ground it
self, paid him by Henry the Kings youngest Son, who only of all his Sons
was present at the Funeral. And yet this was not all, but when his Body was to
be put in the Earth, it happened that the Sepulcher of Stone which stood within
the G^ave, was hewne somewhat too strait for his fat belly, so as they were
feign to press it down with some violence, with which, whether his bowels
burst, or whether some Excrements were forced out of their natural passage;
such an intolerable stink proceeded from him, that none were able to endure
it, but made all the have they could to be gone. And yet neither was this the
last of his miseries: For in the year, 1562. when Castillion took the City of
Caen, certain dissolute Soldiers opened his Tomb, and not finding the
Treasure they expected, threw forth his bones with great derision: whereof some
were afterward brought into England. So that if we consider his many troubles
in life, and after his death, we may well think, that notwithstanding all his
greatness, a very mean man would hardly be persuaded to change fortunes with
him.

Men of Note in his time.
MEn of Learning in his time, were but rare in this Island, yet some there
were, particularly Marianus Scotus, a Historiographer, and Alpheredus a Monk
o^ Beverley, a Writer also of Historical Argument. And as for Men of Valor,
they are not to be expected in a time of Servitude, but as if all the English
Valor were now remaining in the Kentish men, they only made resistance, when
all other Countries had submitted.

THE REIGN OF KING WILLIAM THE SECOND.
KING William the Second called Rufus, second Son to William the Conqueror,
appointed Successor by his Fathers Will; was upon the fifth of October, in the
year 1087. by Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, Crowned at Westminster King
of England. Wherein his Father seems to have followed the Example of Jacob,
who gave to his younger son Joseph, the Land which he had taken with his
Sword and his Bow: for with his sword and his Bow, had King William gotten the
Land of England; and therefore might justly bestow it on which of his Sons he
pleased. And besides, there was cause enough, why he should show this Son of
his some extraordinary favor, seeing in the Rebellion of his brother Robert,
yet he stood firmly for his Father; and in his quarrel incurred no small
hazard of his life, as wherein he received diverse wounds: and perhaps also, his
Father thought the rough disposition of this son, fitter to bridle the
insurrections of the English, then the softly disposition of his son Robert.

But though he have thus quietly gotten the Crown, he must not look to hold
it so; and indeed at his very beginning is assaulted with two troubles in one:
for both his Brother Robert prepares to recover it from him, and the Lords of
the Kingdom combine with Robert to assist him in it. The first mover of this
trouble was Odo Bishop of Bayeux, his Uncle, who finding himself not to bear
the sway he expected, and specially for an old grudge he bore to Lanfranke,
Archbishop of Canterbury, as by whose means, in the former Kings time he had
bin imprisoned (the Archbishop telling him, that though he might not imprison
a Bishop, yet he might imprison an Earl of Kent, as this Odo was made not long
before) he draws many other Bishops and Temporal Lords to join with him^ in
behalf of Duke Robert, against the King: but though the storm were violent
for a while, yet it soon passed over; that indeed of his Lords, with more
difficulty: but that of his brother Robert with more cost: For it was at last
agreed, that Rufus should pay him three thousand marks a year, during his
life, and leave him the Kingdom after his own decease. But there was
difficulty in repressing his Rebel Lords, by reason of their spreading
themselves abroad in many quarters. For Odo fortifyed himself in Kent; Roger
Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury, in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire;
Hugh de Grandmenill, in Leycestershire, and Northamptonshire; Robert Mowbray
Earl of Northumberland, possessed himself of Bristow; William Bishop of Durham,
of the North parts of the Realm; and diverse other of the Clergy, and Nobility,
fortify themselves in Herefordshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire, and all the
Countries adjoining to Wales, thinking by this means to distract the King that
he should not know where to begin, nor whither to turn him. But this course,
as it made it hard to repress them suddenly, so it made it easy to repress
them at leisure; for being thus divided, they were but as single sticks, that
are easily broken; where if they had united themselves, as into a Faggot, they
might have made a strength of far greater resistance. But the King having
Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, and Woolstan Bishop of Worcester, firm of
his side: partly by their Authority and love amongst the people; but chiefly
by his own promises, to restore their ancient Laws, and to allow them liberty
of hunting in his Forests, he so firmly won the hearts of all unto him; that
some of the Rebel Lords he reconciled with fair words, as Robert Montgomery;
(a principal sinew of the Faction) some again he mastered by strong hand, and
Odo the chief Engineere of all the work, he besieged in the Castle of
Rochester, took him Prisoner, and forced him to abjure the Realm. And thus
this great Rebellion was suppressed: In which it is observable, that though so
many hot bloods were up, yet there was but little blood spilt. A happy
rebellion for the English; for the Rebel Lords and Bishops being all Normans,
the King had none to trust to, but the English, whom for their faithfulness to
him in this service, he ever after respected more then he had done before.

After this storm was over in the South, there arises another in the North;
For now Malcolme King of Scots, thinking it a fit time to do some feats when
King William was troubled at home; invades Northumberland, and having burnt and
spoiled the Country, returns home laden with booties. Which King William
hearing, he takes his brother Robert along with him, and with a mighty Army
enters Scotland, brings Malcolme to acknowledge his ancient homage: and upon
Faith given, returns to London. After this, Duke Robert finding his brother
King William, not to keep his promise, in paying his Pension, complains to the
King of France, and with his aid, assaults and takes some Towns, which he
before had delivered in pawn for money to his brother King William; who
hearing of it, hastens into Normandy with an Army, and by the mediation of
money takes off the King of France, and makes his brother, being left destitute
of assistance, to ask him pardon: a wise and merciful course in King William;
for to buy his peace with the King of France, did cost him but money, where to
have purchased it by War, must besides money, have cost the lives of many.
After this Malcolme, King of Scots, came in kindness to visit King William at
Gloucester: but the King not vouchsafing so much as to see him, put him into so
great an indignation, that returning home, he makes ready an Army, invades
Northumberland, making great spoil and getting great spoils, but by Robert
Mowbray, the Kings Lieutenant there, was taken in ambush, and together with his
eldest son Edward, defeated and slain. This King Malcolme was a most valiant
Prince, as may appear by an Act of his of an extraordinary strain; for
hearing of a conspiracy plotted to murder him, whereof one was Author, whose
name is not recorded, he dissembled the knowing it, till being abroad one day a
hunting, he took the fellow apart from the company, and being alone, said unto
him: Here now is a fit time and place, to do that manfully, which you have
intended to do treacherously; draw your weapon, and if you kill me, none being
present, you can incur no danger: with which speech of the King, the fellow
was so daunted, that presently he fell down at his feet, confessed his fault,
humbly asked forgiveness, and being granted him, was ever after serviceable
and faithful to him. The death of King Malcolme and his Son, was so
grievous, and so grievously taken of Margaret his Queen, the sister of Edgar
Atheling, that she made it her Prayer, and had it granted, not to over-live
them, and so, within three days after dyed: a woman as full of virtues all her
life, as at this time of sorrows; whom yet I should not break order to
mention, but for one pious Act of hers, in causing a most barbarous custom of
Scotland to be abrogated, that when a man married, his Lord should lie the
first night with his Bride. Which custom by her endeavor was altered to a
payment in money.

After these troubles were ended in the North, a new trouble arises in the
West; for now the Welsh men hearing of King Williams distractions, enter upon
the English borders, making spoil and havocke of men and Towns: whom King
William went with an Army to encounter, but could do no good upon them, till
he was feign to return to London, and provide him a stronger Army. About this
time also Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, by whom Malcolme King of
Scots was in King Williams service formerly slain, finding his service not
rewarded as he expected, enters into Conspiracy against the King; but the King
being informed of the practice, seiseth suddenly upon many of his Compl^ces,
and himself, after many devises and shifts for flight, is taken and put in
prison, in the Castle of Windsor. After this, King William to take a further
revenge of the Welsh, and to make an absolute conquest of that unquiet people,
with a far greater Army then ever before, enters Wales, and thinks with new
devices of Castles and Forts, utterly to subdue them, but they defending
themselves, with their Woods, and Mountainous passages, tire and weary out the
King and his Army, so as he leaves the business to two Hughes, one, Earl of
Salop, the other of Chester, who first invaded and took Anglesey, (their
Island of refuge) where they used all kind of cruelty, pulling out of eyes,
and cutting off hands and noses: in prosecuting of which business, Hugh Earl
of Salop was slain, but Hugh Earl of Chester, entered Wales, and in the end,
with the slaughter of Rees, the last King of Wales, made an absolute Conquest
of the Country. For after this, though they often rebelled, yet they were in a
true subjection. And these for the most part, were all the troubles of his
Reign: where we may observe, that none of them did ever overtake him, but
still he met them, and from none of them he ever fled, but was still the
pursuer, and yet so many as might well have taken away all the comfort of a
Crown, and have made him willing to change his Diadem for a pair of Beads,
but that Ambition, though sometimes weary, yet never ty^es.

His Exactions and Courses for raising of money.
IN the second year of his Reign, Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury dyed,
who had kept the kingdom and King in some good Order, but as soon as he was
dead, the King, as though he were then got loose, ranged without reins, in all
licentiousness: preying especially upon the Clergy, as amongst whom he found
the richest Booties. When Bishoprics or Abbeyes were vacant, it was familiar
with him to seize them into his own hands, as this of Lanfranke, he kept to
his own use four years together, and longer would have kept it, if a
sickness of his Body had not healed this disease of his mind: For finding
himself in some hazard of death, he then conferred the Arch-bishopricke of
Canterbury upon Anselme, and the Bishopric of Lincoln, upon Robert Bloet,
two eminent men of that time; but as soon as he was well again, it repented
him of that he had done, and was not quiet, till he had drawn from the said
Bloet, five thousand pounds, and from Anselme also good sums of money. For he
repented not more in time of sickness for the evil he had done in health,
then being in health, he repented him of the good he had done in sickness;
that it may in a manner be said, there was nothing made him sick but health,
and nothing made him be in health but sickness. But this preying upon the
Clergy was grown into such a custom with him, that he kept in his hands at
one time, three Bishoprics, Canterbury, Winchester, and Salisbury; and twelve
Abbeys; all which he let out to Farm, and received the profits: and from this
King, the use is said to have risen first in England, that the Kings succeeding
had the Temporalties of Bishops Sees, as long as they remained void. Having
agreed to pay the King of France a great sum of money, he raised it in this
manner; He caused twenty thousand men to be levied, under pretense for his
wars in Normandy; but when they were ready to be shipped, it was signified to
them from the King, that whosoever would pay ten shillings toward the
levying of Soldiers in Normandy, should be excused from going, and stay at
home; which was so plausible an offer to the Army, that scarce a man was found
that accepted not the condition. When Duke Robert went into the Holy Land he
pawned his D^tchy of Normandy to his Brother King William for 6666. pounds, or
as some write, for 12600. which money King William took up part by a grievous
Imposition: so that Bishops melted their Plate, and the Temporal Lords spoiled
their Tenants for the payment thereof: and part by loan; but chiefly of
Religious persons. He sold the Abbey of Glastenbury to Thurstan for five
hundred pounds; and when he built Westminster Hall, he made that an occasion to
lay a heavy tax upon the people, who grudged at it, as done of purpose. He
usually sold all Spiritual preferments, to them would give most; and took
Fines of Priests for Fornication: as also he took money of Jews, to cause
such of them as were converted, to renounce Christianity, and return to
Judaisme, as making more benefit by their Unbelief then by their Conversion.
He caused diverse of the Nobility to pay grievous Fines for transgressing his
Laws, though the fault were never so small. He set forth a Proclamation that
none should go out of the Realm without his License, by which he drew much
money from many; for either they must tarry at home and live discontented, or
else content him for giving them leave to go abroad. And from thence the
Custom or Law of Ne exeas Regno, seems to have taken its beginning: for
Precedents of servitude are sure to live, where Precedents of Liberty are
commonly still-borne. These were his ways for raising of money, wherein
Promoters and Informers were his darling servants; and the most officious of
all was Ralph Bishop of Durham, of whom he would often say, there was not such
another man in the world to serve a Kings turn. And yet he was not so greedy
of lucre but that he did some Acts that may serve for examples: as one time, an
Abbey being vacant, two Monks of the Covent came suitors to him for the place,
offering great sums, and each of them out-bidding the other; whereupon the
King looking about, and espying another Monk standing not far off, asked him
what he would give for the place? Who answering, he neither had any thing to
give, nor would give any thing if he had it: Well (said the King) thou have
spoken honestly, thou art fitter to be Abbot then either of these; and so
bestowed the place upon him gratis.

Of his Magnanimity.
Word was brought him as he sat at dinner, that his City of Man's in Normandy
was besieged, and in great danger to be taken, if not presently relieved:
whereupon the King asked which way Man's lay; and then caused Masons presently
to take down the Wall, to make him passage the next way, and so rode instantly
toward the Sea. His Lords about him, advising him to stay till his people were
ready: No (says he) but such as love me I know will follow me. And being come
on Shipboard, and the weather growing very tempestuous, he was advised by the
Master of his Ship, to stay for some calmer season: No (says he) Fear
nothing, I never yet heard of any King that was drowned. And thereby coming to
Man's ^nexpected, he presently dispersed the Besiegers, and took Helias Count
de la Flesche, who had been Author of the tumult, Prisoner; who vaunting to
the King, and saying, Now indeed you have taken me by a wile; but if I were at
liberty again, you should find me to do other manner of feats: at which the
King laughing; Well then (says he) go your ways and do your worst, and let
us see what feats you will do. Being reconciled to his Brother Robert, he
assisted him to recover the Fort of Mount Saint Michael, which their Brother
Henry did forcibly hold in Normandy: during which siege, straggling one time
alone upon the shore, he was set upon by three horsemen, who assaulted him so
fiercely, that they drove him from his saddle, and his saddle from his horse;
but he taking up his saddle, and withal drawing out his sword, defended
himself till rescue came: and being afterward blamed for being so obstinate to
save his saddle, he answered: It would have angered me at the very heart, that
the knaves should have bragged they had won the saddle from me.

Of his justness in keeping his word.
THis virtue specially was commended in him, and he would often say, that even
God himself was obliged by his word. But if we observe the course of his life,
we shall find that howsoever he might keep his word in small matters, yet
certainly not in great^ For he kept not his word with his Brother Robert, to
whom he promised to leave the Kingdom of England after his decease, but
performed it not. Nor he kept not his word with his subjects, for in the
rebellion of the Norman Lords, he promised the English, if they would now stick
to him, they should have their ancient Laws restored, and be allowed liberty
to hunt in his Forests; which promise he either kept not at all, or at least
soon brake. Nor he kept not his word with God himself; for being sick at
Gloucester, and in some hazard of his life, he made a solemn vow, that if he
recovered, he would lead a new life, and give over all his disorderly courses:
but being recovered, he grew more disorderly then he was before that if
denomination be made from the greatest actions, it cannot be truly said that he
was just of his word; but such is the privilege of Princes over their
subjects, that if they make a promise it must be believed; and if they break
it, it must not be questioned.

Of his Incontinencie.
MUch is spoken of his lascivious life in general, but nothing in particular:
for neither is mentioned any violence he ever offered to any; nor is any woman
named to have been his Concubine, and Princes Concubines are seldom
concealed. It is true he was never married, and of a strong constitution of
body, and so probable he might be inclining to that vice; but probabilities are
not always concluding, and therefore whether it be a true accusation, or but a
slander, it may well be doubted: only one base son of his is spoken of, called
Bertrannus, whom he advanced in honor, and matched in a Noble Family. But why
should we more look for particulars of his Incontinency, then of his
Prodigality? for he was taxed no less for being Prodigal, then for being
Incontinent; and yet of his Prodigality there is not so much as one instance
recorded, unless we take this for an instance; that when his Chamberlain
brought him a pair of hose, which because they were new, he asked what they
cost? And being told they cost three shillings, in a great chafe he threw them
away; asking him, If he thought a pair of hose of three shillings, to be fit
for a King to wear? Get thee gone (says he) and let me have a pair of a
Mark. His Chamberlain went, and bringng him another pair scarce so good as
the former, and telling him they cost a Mark; I marry (says the King) these
are something like, and was better satisfied with hearing what they cost, then
with seeing what they were worth: and yet was this no imputation to his
wisdom, for to say the truth, it is no defect of wisdom in a King to be
ignorant what his clothes are worth.

Of his wavering in Religion.
HE appointed a disputation to be held between Christians and Jews, and
before the day came, the Jews brought the King a Present, to the end they
might have an indifferent hearing; The King took the Present, encouraging them
to quit themselves like men: and swore by Saint Lukes face (his usual oath)
that if they prevailed in Disputation, he would himself turn Jew, and be of
their Religion. A young Jew on a time was converted to the Christian Faith,
whose Father being much troubled at it, presented the King sixty Marks,
entreating him to make his son to return to his Judaisme; whereupon the King
sent for his son, commanding him without more ado to return to the Religion
of his Nation. But the young man answered, he wondered his Majesty would use
such words; for being a Christian, he should rather persuade him to
Christianity: with which answer the King was so confounded, that he commanded
the yo^g man to get him out of his sight. But his Father finding the King could
do no good upon his son, required his money again; Nay (says the King) I
have taken pains enough for it, and yet that you may see how kindly I will
deal, you shall have one half; and the other half you cannot in conscience
deny me. There were fifty Gentlemen accused for hunting and killing the Kings
Dear, which they denied, and were therefore condemned to the trial of fire;
which by Gods merciful judgment they passed through untouched: the King
hearing it, and deceived of the confiscation he expected, is said in a great
chafe to say; How happens this? Is God a just Judge in suffering it? Now a
murraine take him that believes it. It seems also he doubted of many points of
Religion, then in credit. For he would often prote^t, that he believed not that
Saints could profit any man in Gods sight, and therefore neither would he, nor
any other that were wise (as he affirmed) make Intercession either to Peter, or
to any other for help.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
THe King claimed the Investiture of Bishops to be his right, and forbad
Appeals and Intercourse to Rome; (for no Appeals had ever been used till
Anselme in this Kings Reign appealed to the Pope) upon whose complaint the
Pope was about to Excommunicate the King, but having a little before
Excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fourth (the first Christian Prince with
Sovereign author^ty, that was ever Excommunicate by any Pope) he forbore at
that time to do it, lest by making Excommunication common, he should make it
be slighted. At this time great contention arose between the King and the
Archbishop Anselme: and Ans^lme not yielding to the King in any point
prejudicial to the Popes authority; nor the King yielding to Anselme in any
point prejudicial to his own Prerogative; (which were points indeed
Incompatible) the contention continued long and hot, and the hotter, because
there were at that time two Popes on foot at once: one elected by the
Conclave, called Urbanus the second; another set up by the Emperor, called
Clement the third: for Anselme held with Urban, the King with Clement: and thus
not agreeing in a third, it was impossible they should agree between
themselves; and this contention, though palliated with pretentions, sometimes of
one side, sometimes of another, yet brake out again, and was renewed both in
this Kings time, and in the times of many Kings after. Anselme often threathing
his going to Rome, the King told him plainly he would not thrust him out of
the Realm, but if he would go without his leave, he would then keep him out
during his pleasure; and besides, he should carry nothing out of the Realm
wi^h him: yet Anselme ventured it, and the King performed it; for William
Warlewast was sent to rifle him in his passage at Sea of all he had, neither
was he suffered to return as long as the King lived; during all which time,
the King took the profits of his Archbishopric to his own use. It may not be
amiss to show a passage here concerning the first cause of contention between
the King and Anselme, which some say was this; The King required a thousand
Marks of him for having preferred him to that See: which Anselme refused to
give, as judging it no less Simony to give after the preferment then before:
but yet afterward offering five hundred pounds, the King refused to accept it,
as being worth (he said) five times as much: whereupon Anselme told him, Your
Grace may have me, and all that is mine, to serve your turn in a friendly
manner; but in the way of servitude and bondage, you shall never have me nor
mine: Which words so angered the King, that they could never after be
reconciled. In this Kings Reign Pope Urbane exhorted all Christian Princes to
join together for recovery of Jerusalem and the Holy Land: and by the
soliciting of Peter an Hermit, there assembled for that enterprise, under the
conduct of Godefry of Bulloigne, to the number of three hundred thousand men;
amongst whom was Robert Duke of Normandy, who so valiantly carried himself in
the action, that after Jerusalem was won, the Kingdom of it (as some write)
was offered to him: but he looking more after the Kingdom of England, and
therefore refusing it; It is observed he never prospered all his life after. In
this Kings Reign, although he had no command in Ireland, yet their Bishop of
Dublin was sent over to Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, to be Consecrated by
him; and the Citizens of Waterford also desiring to have a Bishop, procured
Murcherdach, King of Ireland, to write to Anselme, to give his consent. Also in
this Kings days, the Pope forbad the marriage of Priests.

Works of piety of this King, or by other in his time.
THis King gave to the Monks of Southwarke, the Church of Saint Savior of
Be^mondsey, and Bermondsey it self; he also Founded at York the Hospital of
Saint Leonards: He gave the Church of Saint Peter in the City of Bathe to be a
Bishops See. Hugh Earl of Chester, in this Kings days builded the Abbey of
Chester: Oswald Bishop of Salisbury, Founded the Cathedral Church of
Salisbury: Remigius Bishop of Dorchester, to the end his Bishopric might be
removed to Lincoln; began to build the Cathedral Church of Lincoln; and
Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury builded two Hospitals without the City; the
one of Saint John, the other at Harbaldowne, repaired Christ's Church, and
caused five and twenty Manors to be restored to that See, which had unjustly
been withholden. He repaired also the Abbey of Saint Albans, and the Church of
Rochester, where for four secular Priests, he placed to the number of fifty
Monks. In the sixth year of this Kings Reign, William Warren the first Earl
of Surrey, and Gundred his wife, Founded the Abbey of Lewis in Sussex: and
Warren Earl of Shrewsbury built two Abbeys, one in the Suburbs of Shrewsbury,
the other at Wenlock. In his twelfth year, Robert Losaunge, Bishop of
Thetford, removed his See from Thetford to Norwich, and founded there a fair
Monastery.

His buildings and Structures.
THis King enlarged the Tower of London, and compassed it with new walls: he
also built the great Hall at Westminster, being 270. foot in length, and 74.
in breadth; but thinking it too little, he intended to have built another Hall
which should have stretched from the Thames to the Kings street. He repaired
the City and Castle of Carlisle, which had been wasted by the Danes two hundred
years before, and because it had but few Inhabitants, he brought a Colony
thither out of the Southern parts. He finished New Castle upon Tyne, and many
other Castles he erected or repaired upon the borders of Scotland; many also
upon the frontires, and within the very breast of Wales.

Casualties happening in his Reign.
IN the fourth year of his Reign, on Saint Lukes day, above six hundred
houses in London were thrown down with tempest; and the roof of Saint Mary
Bow Church in Cheap, was so raised, that in the fall six of the beams being
27. foot long, were driven so deep into the ground: (the streets being not
then paved with stone) that not above four foot remained in sight, and yet
stood in such rank and order as the workmen had placed them upon the Church.
Also in this Kings Reign all the Lands in Kent, sometimes belonging to Earl
Godwin, were by breaking in of the Sea covered with Sands, and are called
Godwins Sands to this day. In his eleventh year, at a Town called
Finchamstead in the County of Barkshire, a Well cast out blood, as before it
had done water: and after by the space of fifteen days, great flames of fire
were seen in sundry places and at sundry times.

Of his Personage and Condition.
HE was but mean of stature, thick and square bodied, his belly swelling
somewhat round, his face was red, his hai^e deep yellow, whereof he was called
Rufus; his forehead four square like a window; his eyes spotted, and not one
like another; his speech unpleasant, and not easily uttered, specially when he
was moved with anger. Concerning the qualities of his mind, they may best be
known by looking upon the actions of his life; in which we shall find he was
never more assured, then when he was least sure, never less dejected, then
when in most extremity; being like a Cube, that which way soever he fell, he
was still upon his bottom. For his delights to pass the time, there was none
in more request with him then hunting, a delight hereditary to him, which was
the cause that as his Father had begun the great new Forest, so he enlarged
it to a far greater extent. Other delights of his we find not any, unless
we shall reckon his wars for delights: for though they were oftentimes forced
upon him, when he could not avoid them; yet sometimes he entered into them when
he needed not, but for his pleasure. And in general, it may be said that one
of his greatest virtues, was that which is one of the greatest virtues,
Magnanimity; and his worst vice, was that which was the worst of vices,
Irreligion.

Presages that preceded his Death.
AT Finchamstead in Barkshire, near unto Abington, a spring cast up liquor for
the space of fifteen days, in substance and color like to blood. The night
before the King was killed, a certain Monk dreamed, that he saw the King gnaw
the Image of Christ crucified with his teeth; and that as he was about to bite
away the legs of the same Image, Christ with his feet spurned him down to
the ground: and that as he lay on the earth, there came out of his mouth a
flame of fire, with abundance of smoke. This being related to the King by
Robert Fits Mammon, he made a jest of it, saying; This Monk would feign have
something for his Dream: Go, give him a hundred shillings; but bid him look
that he dream more auspitious Dreams hereafter. Also the same night, the King
himself dreamed that the veins of his arms were broken, and that the blood
issued out in great abundance: and many other like passages there were, by
which it seems he had friends somewhere, as well as Julius Caesar, that did
all they could to give him warning: but that as Caesar's, so his Malus Genius
would not suffer him to take it.

Of his Death and Burial.
KIng William having kept his Christmas at Gloucester, his Easter at Winchester,
his Whitsontide at Westminster, notwithstanding forewarned by many signs of
some great dysaster toward him, would needs the day after Lammas, go a
hunting in the New Forest; yet something resenting the many presages, he stayed
within all the forenoone: about dinner time, an Artificer came and brought him
six Crosse-bow Arrows, very strong and sharp; whereof four he kept
himself, and the other two he delivered to Sir Walter Tyrell, a Knight of
Normandy his Bow-bearer; saying, Here Tyrell, take you two, for you know how to
shoot them to purpose: and so having at dinner drunk more liberally then his
custom, as it were in contempt of Presages, out he rides into the new Forest,
where Sir Walter Tyrell shooting at a Dear, the arrow glanced against a tree,
or as some write, grazed upon the back of the Dear, and flying forward, hit
the King upon the breast; with which he instantly fell down dead. Thus it is
delivered by a common consent of all; only one Sugerius, a writer that lived
at that time, and was a familiar acquaintance of the said Tyrels; against the
current of all Writers, aff^irmes that he had often heard the said Sir Walter
swear that he was not in the Forest with the King all that day. I have been
the longer upon this point, because a more pregnant example of Gods judgment
remains not any where upon Record. For not only this King at this time, but
before this, a brother of his named Richard, a young Prince of great hope; and
also a Nephew of his, the son of his brother Robert, came all in this place
to violent deaths: that although King William the Founder of the Forest,
escaped the punishment in his own person, yet it was doubled and trebled upon
him in his issue. Thus died King William Ruf^s, in ^he three and fortieth year
of his age, and twelfth and some months of his Reign. His body was drawn in
a Colliers Cart with one Horse to the City of Winchester, where the day
following it was buried in the Cathedral Church of Saint Swithen, and was laid
there in the Quire under a Marble stone, till afterward it was translated, and
laid by King Canutus bones.

Men of Note i^ his time.
FOr men of valor, he must stand alone by himself: for men of learning, there
was Lanfranke, a Lombard, but Bishop of Canterbury: also Robert a Lorayne, who
Epitomized the Chronicle of Marianus Scotus: also Turgotus an English man,
Deane of Durham, who wrote the Annals of his own time, and diverse other works:
but especially Osmund Bishop of Salisbury, who composed the ordinary Office, or
book of Prayer.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE FIRST.
Of his coming to the Crown.
ALthough Henry came not to the Crown, as his Brother William did, by the gift
of his Father, yet he came to it by the Prophecy of his Father: For, when his
Father made his Will, and divided all his Estate in Land between his two
eldest Sons, giving to Henry his youngest only a portion in money, with
which division he perceived him to be much discontented; he said unto him,
Content thy self Harry, for the time will come, that thy turn shall be served
as well as theirs. And now the time was come that his prediction was
accomplished; for on the fifth of August, in the year 1100. he was Crowned
King of England, at Westminster, by Maurice Bishop of London, (as Deane of all
the Bishops of England, and therefore might do it without any prejudice to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, though he had been present, who was indeed at this
time in Exile.) But though it appears fuisse in Fatis, to be decreed by the
Divine Providence that it should be so, yet it would not have been so, if his
own endeavors had not been concurring. And therefore being in the New Forest,
when his Brother King William was killed, he never stayed to complement the
Dysaster, but rode presently to Winchester, and there, not without some
opposition of the keepers, seis^d upon his Brothers Treasure, as knowing
treasure to be the means for getting of Friends, and Friends the means for
getting the Crown; and having now gotten the first means, he made use of it
for the second, and both of them together brought him to this he is. Yet
withal there were circumstances in his own Person that conduced to it; his
Brother was borne, when their Father was but a Duke, he, when he was a King;
Robert was a Forrainer, being borne in Normandy, himself a Native, borne at
Selby in Yorkshire; and it was not the least circumstance, that he was called
Beauclerke, as to say, a good Scholar, having been bred in Cambridge; not
perhaps that his learning was so great, but that it was great, either in
respect of that age, which had but little; or in respect of his Brothers, who
had none at all: and the People having been oppressed before, by the ill
Government of two Kings, that were illiterate; could not choose but be glad to
come under the Government of a King that was Learned. And though his Brother
Robert, as being the Elder, had right unto it, yet he as out of sight was out
of mind, and perhaps neglected, as being himself negligent; withal it was
given out, that he was chosen King of Jerusalem, and therefore no looking for
him to come home; and to give force to all these reasons, Henry Newborough
Earl of Warwick was a principal ^urtherer.

His course for establishing himself in the Kingdom.
IT is a hard matter to keep that safely, which is unjustly gotten; and
therefore he took all possible care to overcome that hardness: which he
effected by these means; First, he called Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury
home from Exile; placed William Gyfford a learned man, in the Bishopric of
Winchester; and Monasteries that had been long vacant, he furnished with good
Abbots. And because it is no less pleasing to the People, to have bad
instruments punished, then the good to be advanced, he cast Ralph Bishop of
Durham, (a principal cause of their late oppressions) into prison: then
mitigated the rigor of the new Laws; and promised restitution of the old. And
that there might be no abuse in measures, he ordained a measure, made by the
length of his own Arm, which is called a Yard. He restored to his Subjects
the use of Lights and Fire in the night, which before had been forbidden after
eight a clock at night. He acquitted the People from the Tax of Danegelt, and
from all other unjust payments, which had been imposed upon them by the two
former Kings. He gave free liberty to the Nobility and Gentry of the Realm, to
enclose Parkes for Dear, and Warrens for Coneyes; and such like game. And
because he knew Scotland might be an ill Neighbor to him, if not tied by some
Bond, and none so sure as the Bond of Alliance, he therefore takes Matild
sister of the present King Edgar to be his Wife.

His Troubles during his Reign.
RAlph Bishop of Durham, the late King Williams great Instrument for Exactions,
that had by this King been committed to the Tower, made an escape, and passing
over to Duke Robert in Normandy; incenseth him, not to suffer himself to be
baffled by a younger Brother; as for his Brother William, there was some
reason, because his Father had given him the Kingdom by his Will, but what
could Henry pretend, who had his Portion given him in money? Besides, it was an
agreement with his Brother William, with consent of all the Lords of the
Re^lme, that the Surviver of them should succeed. With such like instigations,
and withal assuring him, there were many in England would take his part; he
easily persuaded the Duke to that, from which he could hardly have dissuaded
him; who thereupon with a convenient Army, puts to Sea, and lands at
Portsmouth, while Henry waited for his coming about Hastings; and being landed
there, much people resorted to him, that it was like to have been a bloody
business; but by mediation of Friends, working upon the flexible nature of
Duke Robert, it was brought at last to this agreement, that King Henry should
pay to Duke Robert, three thousand marks yearly, and Duke Robert should
succeed him in the kingdom, if he survived. And thus, this cloud, that
threatened so great a storm, brought with it, ^ather Sunshine and fair
weather: for now, to his possession of the Kingdom, there was added a right,
and he might now justify his being a King, without any scandal or usurpation.
After this, another little cloud arose, but was soon dispersed: For Robert de
Belesme Earl of Shrewsbury, a rash young man of disposition, but more through
coffeehouse, though discontented for nothing, but that having a great
Estate, he was not a King as well as some others, fortifyed the Town of
Shrewsbury, and the Castle of Bridgenorth, and got many Welshmen to assist him,
but the King coming with a mighty Army, so terrifyed the Welsh, that they
abandoned the Earl, and left him a prey to the King in his person, and more in
his Estate, for the King seized his Estate into his hands, but for his Person
he only banished it the Realm. For as yet, the shedding of blood and putting
to death, though for great Treasonable practices, was not much in use; Policy
of State was not yet grown to that height of severity. The like attempt, and
upon the like occasion, was made by William Earl of Mortaigne in Normandy, and
of Cornwall in England, Uncle to the King, only for denying him the Earldom
of Kent, which because he could not obtain, he entered into Treasonable
practices, by which he lost the Earledomes he had before. But these troubles
were but as the labor of a Woman that is safely delivered; painful for a
time, but ending in joy: and indeed for the most part this King had the fortune
to be a gainer by his losses.

After this, Duke Robert came in kindness into England, to visit^ his Brother
Henry; where he was so well pleased with his entertainment, that in requital
thereof, and to do a favor to the Queen, that was his God-daughter; he
released to King Henry, the three thousand marks, which he was yearly to pay
him. But returning into Normandy, and considering better what he had done, he
so repented him, that he spared not to give out, that his Brother had directly
cousened him. Which coming to King Henryes ear, so incensed him, that he
presently sent over a mighty Army, which forraged the Country, and won many
Towns and Cities, and soon after went over himself; where he so prevailed,
that he left Duke Robert but only Roan in all Normandy to put his head in, and
this done, returns into England. And now Duke Robert begins to be sensible
of his own weakness, and therefore comes over into England to try the
u^^ermost of his Brothers good nature; himself had sent him a Tun of Wine to
refresh him withal, when in a siege he was ready to perish for want of water:
and it cannot be, but that gratefulness and natural affection, meeting
together, must needs work something in the mind of a Brother. Thus resolved,
he presents himself to the King, referring both his Dukedom and himself, and
all differences and debates to his will and pleasure. But whether incensed with
the scandalous words, Duke Robert had given out of him, or whether aspiring to
join Normandy to England, as his Father had done before; King Henry scarce
vouchsafed to hear him speak, at least vouchsafed not to make him any answer,
but in a sullen manner turned away, and so left him: which scornful usage put
the Duke into such indignation, that he resolved to set his whole state at
stake, and either to redeem his disgrace, or to forfeit his life. So returning
into Normandy, he uses all his force in raising of Forces, but King Henry
suspecting his intentions, and not using to give Insurrections time to ripen,
came upon him so suddenly with a mighty Army, that he drew him to a battle
before he was half ready to fight. Yet desire of revenge so animated the Duke,
and the Duke his Soldiers, that never battle was more fiercely fought, and
the Normans seemed at first to have the better, till King Henry showing
himself in the Army, put such courage into his Soldiers, that they quickly
made good the advantage they had in number, and King Henry obtained a complete
victory, both in slaughter of men, (of whom there were slain above ten
thousand) and in taking of prisoners, (to the number of four hundred) amongst
whom, besides diverse other Great ones, as the Earl of Mortaigne, William
Crispine, and William Ferreis, was Duke Robert himself, whom the King, (having
first taken order for all things, in his new State of Normandy) brought over
with him into England, and committed him to the Castle of Cardyffe in Wales,
where he remained a prisoner till he dyed, used for a time with reasonable
liberty for Recreation, till attempting to make an esc^pe, it was thought fit
to put out his eyes; which though it increased his misery, yet it shortened not
his life, for he lived many years after, in all, from the time of his first
imprisonment, six and twenty. And thus this great Duke, who in his birth was
the joy of Nature, in his life was the scorn of Fortune; and it is not
unworthy the observing, that the English won Normandy, the very same day
forty year, the Normans had won England. Such Revolutions of fortune there
are in kingdoms, and so unstable is the state of all worldly Greatness.

And now is King Henry as great as ever his Father was, and as Greatness draws
envy, as much envyed as ever his Father was; and as Envy makes Enemies, as much
opposed as ever his Father was: for now Fulke Earl of Angio^, and Baldwyne
Earl of Flanders, upon small occasions, and Lewis the gross King of France,
upon none, but such as envy suggested, seeking to place William, Son to Duke
Robert, in his Right to Normandy, assaulted the Kings Dominions, perhaps to try
whether Greatness had not made him unwieldy; but King Henry, to show that
Greatness had made him more Active, went over into Normandy with a mighty
Army, and at Nice encountered the French King, where a bloody Battle was
fought, with exceeding valor on both sides, but at last King Henry repelled
the French King, and recovered Nice, and after many other conflicts between
them, with variety of Fortune, at l^st the King made peace with the Earl of
Angiou; confirmed by a marriage of the Earls Daughter with his Son William^
and upon this also the two Kings grow to a peace, in which William, Son to King
Henry, being about seventeene years of age, was invested into the Duchy of
Normandy, doing homage for the same to the King of France: From whence it was
afterward a Custom, that the King of Englands eldest Son (as long as
Normandy remained in their hands) was made always Duke of Normandy. After
this, Charles Earl of Flanders, being slain at Bruxels by a conspiracy of his
own people, and leaving no issue behind him, Lewis King of France invested
William, Son to Duke Robert, in the Earldom of Flanders, as descended from
Ea^le Baldwyn, whose Daughter Maude was wife to King William the first, and
Grandmother to this William: so as William now having gotten this step of
advanc^ment, seeks to go on, and to recover Normandy, and was thereof, by
assist^^ce of the King of France, in a fair possibility, when in a certain
light con^l^ct, receiving a wound in his hand, the thread of his fair
possibility was upon a sudden cut off, and of that light wound, he shortly
after dyed.

King Henry now in perfect peace abroad, was not without some little
disquietings at home, and marching through Powis-land in South Wales, to
repress some Insurrections of the Welsh, he came to certain Straights, where
his maine Army could not pass, in which place the King was smitten with an
Arrow full upon the breast, whereat he swore by our Lords death (his usual
Oath) that it was no Welsh arm, had shot that Arrow, yet in this dist^esse,
for a thousand head of Cattle, he had the passage left open, and came safely
off. And these were his troubles of Arms, both at home and abroad, during all
his Reign.

His Taxations and ways for raising of money.
Toward the marriage of his Daughter Maude with the Emperor, he obtained at
his first Parliament at Salisbury, three shillings upon every Hide of Land,
throughout the kingdom; which was afterward drawn to a custom, to receive
aid from the Subjects, whenever the King gave his eldest Daughter in
marriage. Besides this he had no more in all his Reign, but only one supply
for his Wars in France; but he kept Bishoprics and Abbeyes void in his
hands, and that of Canterbury five years together. By an Act of Parliament, or
rather by a Synod of Bishops holden at London, he was authorized to punish
marriage, and incontinency of Priests; which the Bishops afterward repented,
for he suffered Priests to have Wives for Fines, or rather took Fines of them
whether they had wives or no, because they might have them if they would.
Punishments which before his time were mutilation of Member, he made Pecuniary.
And the Provisions of his house, which were used to be paid in kind, were in
his time rated at certain prizes, and received in money. By this Chapter and
the next before, it appears there were in this Kings days, but few troubles
at home, nor but few Taxations; whereo^ the one may be thought to be cause of
the other, the first perhaps of the second, but certainly the second of the
first.

Laws first instituted in his t^me.
HE first instituted the form of the High Court of Parliament: for before his
time, only certain of the Nobility, and Prelates of the Realm were called to
consultation, about the most important affairs of State, but he caused the
Commons also to be assembled, by Knights and Burgesses of their own
appointment, and made the Court to consist of three parts, the Nobility, the
Clergy, and the Common people, representing the whole body of the Realm, and
appointed them to sit in several Chambers, the King, the Bishops, and Lords of
the Realm in one Chamber, and the Commons in another, to confer together by
themselves. Other Orders of that Court he Ordained, as they are in use at this
day. The first Council of this sort was held at Salisbury, on the 19. day of
April, in the 16. year of his Reign. He forbad the wearing of long hair;
which at that time was frequent, after the manner of the French. He commanded
Robbers upon the High way, to be hanged without redemption: of whom a famous
one at that time was one Dunne, and of him, the place where he most used, by
reason of the great Woods thereabouts, is to this day called Dunstable, where
the King built the Borough as now it stands. Counterfeiters of money he
punished with pulling out their eyes, or cutting off their privy members, a
punishment both less then death, and greater.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
AT his first coming to the Crown, he fo^bore his claim to the Investit^res
of Bishops, but after he had been King some time, he claimed that both to
invest Bishops, and to allow, or hinder appeals to Rome, belonged to him. In
these, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury opposed him, affirming that both of
them belonged to the Pope. The contention at last was brought to the Pope, to
whom King Henry sent William Warlewast, elect Bishop of Exceter, who saying to
the Pope, that his Master would not, for the Crown of his Realm, lose the
Authority of Investing his Prelates, the Pope started up and answered, Neither
will I lose the disposing of Spiritual Promotions in England, for the Kings
head that wears the Crown; before God (said he) I avow it. So the contention
grew long and hot, and many messengers were sent to and fro about it, the
conclusion was (which proved no conclusion) that the King should receive homage
of Bishops elect; but should not Invest them by Staff and Ring: to which the
King said nothing for the present, but forbore not to do it ever the less:
for five years after the death of Anselme, Ralph Bishop of Rochester, was by
the King made Archbishop of Canterbury, and notwithstanding all former
Decrees, and Threatenings of the Pope, he received his Investiture of the King.
About this time a Canon was made against the Marriage of Priests, to which
purpose Johannes Cremensis, a Priest Car^dinall, by the Kings license came into
England, and held a solemn Synod at London, where inveighing sharply against
it, affirming it to be no better then professed Adultery, he was himself the
night following, taken in bed with a common harlot. Even Anselme himself, the
most earnest enforcer of single life, dyed not, it seems, a Virgin, for else
he would never in his Writings make such lamentation for the loss thereof.
Anselme about this time dying, Rodulph succeeded in the Sea of Canterbury, and
Thomas dying, Thurstine succeeded in the Arch-bishopricke of York: between
which two Prelates, there arose great contention; Rodulph would not consecrate
Thurstine, unless he would profess obedience; Thurstine was content to
embrace his benediction, but profess obedience he would not: In this
contention the King takes part with Rodulph, the Pope with Thurstine: after
many passages in the business, upon the Popes threatening to Excommunicate the
King, Thurstine entered upon his Bishopric, and the King connived. In the
tenth year of his Reign, the Abbey of Ely was made a Bishops See, and
Cambridgeshire was appointed for the Diocese thereof, which because it
belonged before to the Jurisdiction of Lincoln, the King gave the Bishop of
Lincoln, in recompense thereof, the Manor of Spalding. This King also created
a Bishopric at Carlisle, and endowed it with many Honors. In his time, the
Order of the Templars began, and in the 27. year of his Reign, the Gray
Friars, by procurement of the King, came first into England, and had their
first house builded at Canterbury. I may here have leave to tell two stories of
Churchmen, for refreshing of the Reader: Guymond the Kings Chaplain,
observing that unworthy men for the most part were advanced to the best
dignities of the Church, as he celebrated Divine Service before him, and was to
read the^e words out of Saint James, [It rained not upon the Earth, III years
and VI moneths] he read it thus; It rained not upon the Earth, one, one, one
years, and five one months. The King observed his reading, and afterward
blamed him for it, but Guymond answered, that he did it of purpose, for that
such Readers were soonest preferred by his Majesty. The King smiled, and in
short time after, pre^erred him to the Government of Saint Frideswids in
Oxford. The other is this, Thomas Archbishop of York falling sick, his
Physicians told him, that nothing would do him good, but to company with a
woman; to whom he answered that the Remedy was worse then the disea^e, and so
dyed a Virgin. This King granted to the Church of Canterbury, and to William
and his successors, the Custody, and Constable-ship of the Castle of Rochester
for ever.

Works of Piety done by this King, or by others in his time.
THis King Founded and erected the Priory of Dunstable, the Abbey of Circester,
the Abbey of Reading, and the Abbey of Shirborne. He also new builded the
Castle of Windsor, with a College there: He made also the Navigable River,
between Torkesay and Lincoln, a work of great charge, but greater use. His
Wife Queen Maude, passing over the River of Lue, was somewhat endangered,
whereupon she caused two stone-Bridges to be built, one at the head of the
Town of Stratford, the other over another Stream there, called
Channel-bridge, and paved the way between them with Gravel. She gave also
certain Manors, and a Mill called Wyggon Mill, for repairing the same Bridges
and Way. These were the first stone-Bridges that were made in England, and
because they were Arched over like a bow, the Town of Stratford was afterward
called Bow. This Queen also founded the Priory of the Holy Trinity, now called
Christ's Church, within the East Gate of London called Aldgate; and an Hospital
of Saint Giles in the Field, without the West part of the City. In this Kings
time Jordan Brifet Baron, Founded the House of Saint John of Jerusalem, near
to Smithfield, in London, and gave 14. Acres of ground, lying in the field next
to Clerkenwell, to build thereupon a House of Nuns, wherein he with Myrioll
his Wife were buried in the Chapter house. Robert Fitsham, who came out of
Normandy with the Conqueror, Founded anew the Church of Teukesbury, and was
there buried. Herbert Bishop of Norwich, Founded the Cathedral Church there.
The Priory and Hospital of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, was Founded by a
Minstrell of the Kings, named Reior who became first Prior there. Before this
time Smithfield was a Laystall of all ordure and filth, and the place where
Felons were put to Execution. Hugh Lacy Founded the Monastery of Saint John at
Lanthony, near to Gloucester. Iuga Baynard, Lady of little Dunmow, Founded the
Church there, and gave to maintain it, half a Hide of Land. This Lady Iuga
was late Wife to Baynard, that first built Baynards Castle in London. Eud^ the
Kings Sewer, Founded the Monastery of Saint John at Colchester, of black
Chanons, and those were the first of that Order in England. Simon Earl of
Northampton, and Mande his Wife, Founded the Monastery of Saint Andrew in
Northhampton. In the seventh year of this Kings Reign, the first Chanons
entered into the Church of our Lady in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Overey;
Founded by William Pountlarge knight, and William Dancyes, Normans. Robert the
first Earl of Gloucester, the Kings base Son, builded the Castles of Bristow
and Cardyffe, with the Priory of Saint James in Bristow: And his Son Earl
William began the Abbey of Kensham. Geoffrey Clinton, Treasurer, and
Chamberlain to the King, Founded the Priory at Kenelworth, of Regular Chanons.
Henry Earl of Warwick, and Margaret his Wife, Founded the College of Saint
Mar^, in the Town of Warwick; and Roger de Belemond his Son, and Ellyne his
wife, translated the same College into the Castle of Warwick, in the year
1123. Roger Bishop of Salisbury built the Devises in Wiltshire; the Castles
also of Mamesbury and Shirborne. He repaired the Castle of Salisbury, and
environed it with a wall; he also built the stately Church of Salisbury:
destined to a longer life then any of his other works. Ralph, Bishop of
Durham, began to build the Castle of Norham, upon the bank of the River of
Tweed. In the 32. year of this Kings Reign, the Priory of Norton in Cheshire,
was founded by one William, the son of Nychel, and the Abbey of Cumbermere in
the same Shire. The College of Secular Chanons also in the Castle of
Leycester, and the Abbey without the North gate of the same Town, called Saint
Mary de Prato. Also in this Kings Reign, was Founded the Monastery of Plimpton
in Devonshire, with the Cathedral Church of Exet^r; the Priory of Merton, the
Hospital of Kepar, the Priory of Oseney near Oxford by Robert de Oylye
Knight: and the Hospital of Saint Cross near Winchester by Henry Blois
Bishop there: also Robert Earl of Ferrers Founded the Abbey of Merivall: and
indeed so many in his time were built, that one would think the Inhabitants of
England to be all Carpenters and Masons, that were able to finish so many great
buildings in so short a time as this Kings Reign.^

Casualties happening in his time.
IN this Kings days all the four Elements were guilty of doing much
mischief, but chiefly the water: For King Henry returning into England after
his conquest of Normandy, left his son William with his sister Mary Countess
of Perch; Richard his son by a Concubine; the Earl of Chester with his wife
Lucie, the Kings Niece by his sister Adela, and other Lords and Ladies, and
passengers to the number of 180. to follow after him: who taking Shipping (and
^he best Ship the King had) whether by carelessness, or drunkenness of the
Saylours, were all drowned. The Prince indeed was got into the Ship-boate, and
out of danger; but hearing the lamentable cries of his sister, compassion
wrought so in him, that he turned about his boat to take her in, which
overcharged with the multitude, over-turned, and they all perished: none
escaped but only one Saylour, who had been a Butcher, who by swimming all
night upon the Mast, came safe to Land. An accident not more grievous then
exemplary; for amongst other conclusions, from hence we may gather, that no
state is so uncertain as prosperity; no fall so sudden as into adversity; and
that the rule [He that stands, let him take heed he fall not] cannot always be
observed, because a man happens sometimes to fall before it is possible for him
to take heed. Another great mischief was in this Kings days wrought by the
water; for by the breaking in of the Sea, a great part of Flanders was drowned:
whereupon a great number of Flemmings being Suitors to King Henry for some
place to inhabit; he assigned them a part in Wal^^ near the Sea, called
Pembrokeshire, where they have inhabited to this day: the King by this one
action, working two good effects, both showing compassion to distressed
strangers, and putting a bridle upon unquiet Natives. But the water had another
way to do mischief as much by defect, as this was by excess; for upon the
tenth of October, the River of Medway many miles together did so fail of
water, that in the midst of the Channel, the smallest vessels could not pass:
and the same day also in the Thames, between the Tower of London and the
Bridge, men waded over on foot for the space of two days: also at another
time the River of Trent at Notingham was dried up a whole day. Now for the
Earth, though naturally it be without motion, yet it moves sometimes when it is
to do mischief, specially being assisted by the Air; as in this Kings days,
it moved with so great a violence that many buildings were shaken down, and
Malmesbery says, that the house wherein he sat, was lifted up with a double
remove, and at the third time settled again in the proper place. Also in diverse
places it yielded forth a hideous noise, and cast forth flames at certain
rifts many days together, which neither by water, nor by any other means
could be suppressed. But yet the active Element of Fire was busiest of all, for
first Chichester with the principal Monastery was burnt down to the ground:
From West-cheape in London to Aldgate, a long tract of buildings was consumed
with fire: Worcester also and Rochester, even in the Kings presence; then
Winchester, Bathe, Gloucester, Lincoln, Peterborough, and other places, did
also partake of this calamity, that there could be n^ charging the fire with
any partiality: and to speak of one foreign casualty, because a strange one.
In Lombardy this year was an Earthquake that continued forty days, and
removed a Town from the place where it stood, a great way off.

Of his Wives and Children.
AT his first coming to the Crown, he married Matild or Maude, sister to
Edgar then King of Scotland, and daughter to Malcolme by Margaret the sister of
Edgar Etheling. This Matild, if she were not a veyled Nun, she was at least
brought up in a Nunnery, and thereby grown so averse from marriage, that when
the motion was first made her to marry with King Henry, she utterly refused it,
as resolved though perhaps not vowed, to die a Virgin; till at last importuned,
and even forced by the authority of her brother, she rather yielded then
consented; for she did it with so ill a will, that it is said she prayed, if
ever she had issue by the marriage, that it might not prosper: and indeed it
prospered but untowardly, as will be seen in the sequel. But though she made
this imprecation before she knew what it was to be a Mother, yet when she came
to be a Mother, she showed her self no less loving and tender of her
children, then loyal and obsequious to her husband. And to make amends for
this seeming impiety toward her children, there is a story related of her
real piety toward the poor: for a brother of hers coming one morning to
visit her in her chamber, found her sitting amongst a company of Lazar people,
washing and dressing their ulcers and sores; and then kissing them afterward
when she had done: who wondering at it, and saying to her, How could she think
the King should like to kiss that mouth, which had kissed such filthy ulcerous
people? she answered; she had a greater King to kiss, who she knew would like
her never the worse for it. By this Queen Matild, King Henry, according to some
Writers, had four children; but as the received opin^on is, only two, a son
named William, and a daughter called Mawde; of whom the son at fourteen
years old had fealty sworn to him by the Nobility of Shrewsbury: at
seventeene married the daughter of F^lke Earl of Anjou: and at eighteen was
unfortunately drowned, as has been showed. The daughter lived to be an
Empress, and afterward a Duchess; but could never come to be a Queen,
though borne to a Kingdom; as shall be showed hereafter. She survived her
second husband seventeene years, living a Widow, and at R^an in Normandy died,
and was buried there in the Abbey of Bec; though there be ^ Tradition that she
was buried at Reading, in the Abbey there beside her Father: but ^t appears to
have been a custom in those days, for great personages to have their
Monuments erected in diverse places. After the death of this Queen Matild, who
died at Westminster, in the eighteenth year of his Reign, King Henry married
Ade^za, the daughter of Godfry Duke of Lorraine; who though she were a
beautiful and accomplished Lady, yet had he never any iss^e by her. When she was
to be Crowned, Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, who was to do the office, came
to King Henry, sitting Crowned in his chair of State, asking him who had set
the Crown upon his head? the King answering, he had now forgotten, it was so
long since. Well (said the Archbishop) whosoever did it, did me wrong, to whom
it belonged; and as long as you hold it thus, I will do no office at this
Coronation. Then (says the King) do what you think good: whereupon the
Archbishop took the Crown off from the Kings head; and after, at the peoples
entreaty, set it on again, and then proceeded to Crown the Queen. By
Concubines King Henry had many children; it is said seven sons, and as many
daughters: of whom, some perished in the great Shipwreck; of the rest, two of
the sons, Reynold and Robert, were made Earls: Reynold of Cornwall, Robert
of Gloucester, and was a great assister of his sister Mawde, in her troubles
with King Stephen, who after many acts of valor performed by him, in the
twelfth year of King Stephen, died, and was buried at Bristow. The daughters
were all married to Princes and Noble men of England and France, from whom are
descended many worthy Families: particularly one of those daughters by An^e
C^^bet, was married to Fits-herbert, Lord Chamberlain to the King^ from which
Fits-^erbert, our Family (absit i^vidia verbo) is by Females descended; passing
by the na^es of Cummin, Chenduit, Brimpton, Stokes, Foxcote, Dyneley, and so to
B^ker.

Of his Incontinency.
OF this enough has been said, in saying he had so many children basely^
begotten: but if comparison be mad^ between his brother ^ufus and him, it may
be said, that howsoever they might be equal in looseness of life; yet in that
looseness, William Rufus was the baser, and King Henry the more Noble; for
King Henry had certain selected Concubines, to whom he kept h^mselfe constant;
where King William took only such as he found: constant to the pleasure, but
not to the persons.

His course for establishing the succession in Mawde and her issue.
HE married his only daughter Mawde, being but six years old, to the
Emperor Hen^y the fourth; but he leaving her a Widow without issue^ he married
her again to G^^ffrey Plantagenet, son to Fulke Duke of Anjo^: not the
greatest Prince that was a Suitour for her; but the fittest Prince for King
Henry's turn: for Anjou was neighboring upon Normandy, a great security to
it, if a friend; and as great a danger, if an enemy. And having thus placed her
in marri^^^, h^ now considers how to establish her succession in the Crown of
England^ whereu^on he calls his Nobility together, and amongst them D^vid King
o^ Scots, and causes them to give their Oaths of Allegiance to her and her
issue: and a^ thinking ^e could never ma^e her succession ^ure enough, he
causes his Lords the year ^^ter again to tak^ the like Oath, and after that
a third time also; as conceiving that being doubled and trebled, it would make
the tie of Allegiance the stronger: wherein nothing pleased him so much, as
that Stephen, Earl of ^loi^, was the first man that took the Oath, because he
was known to be, at least known^ he might be, a Pretender. But the King should
have considered that N^ll^ fides Reg^i^ and therefore no Oath, though never so
often iterated, sufficient to warrant loyalty in persons so deeply interessed,
as Stephen was: yet providence could do no more, and the King was well
satisfied with it; especially when he saw his daughter a mother of two sons:
for this, though it gave him not assu^ance, yet it ga^e him assured hope to
have the Crown perpetuated in his Poste^ity.

Of Ireland in his time.
THe King of England as yet had nothing to do with Ireland, the (...) was
governed by its own Kings: and the people of both Nations^ (...) they were
ne^ghbours, yet divided by a rough Sea, but little ^^quai^ted; but now began
intercourse to be more frequented: and Murc^^^d^^h, ch^^fe King of the Irish,
bore such awful respect to King Henry, that he would do nothing but by his
counsel, and with his good liking.

Whom King Henry used as his Vicegerent in his absence.
HE was absent sometimes in Normandy, three or four years together; during
which times, he committed commonly the care of the Realm to Roger Bishop of
^alisbury, a politic Prelate; and one as fit to be the second in government,
as King Henry to be the first.

His pers^^^ge and conditions.
HE was a person tall and strong, ^^^ad breasted, his limbs well kni^, and
fully furnished with ^lesh; his face well f^shioned, his color clear, his
eyes large and fair, his eyebrows large and thick, his hair^ black, and
^omewhat thin^^ toward his forehead; his countenance pleasan^, specially when
h^ was disposed to mirth. A private man, vilified, and thought to have but
little in him: but come to the Crown, never any man showed more excellent
abilities: so true is the saying, Magistratus indicat virum. His natural
affection in a direct line was strong; in an oblique, but weak; for no man
ever loved children more, no^ a brother l^^^e. Though a King in act, yet he
always ac^ed not a King; but in ba^^^ls some^^m^s the part of a common
Soldier, though with more then common valou^ ^s at a ba^tell in France, where
he so far hazarded himself, that though he lost not his life, yet he lost
his blood.

Of his death and burial.
A Discontent of mind upon some differences between him and his son in law,
the Earl of Anjo^, brought upon him a distemper, which increased by eating,
against his Physiti^ns advise, of a L^mprey; a meat always pl^^s^ng (...)
him^ but never agreeing with him; cast him into a ^^aver, which in few ^aye^
put a p^^i^d to his life: So cer^aine it is, that one intemperate action is
eno^^h to overthrow the temperance of a whole life; as of this King Henry it is
said^ th^^ he seldom did ea^ but when he was hungry, never did drink but when
he was ^thirst^ yet this but on^e yielding to his sensual appetite, made him
forfe^^ all benefit of his former abstinence: though some write he too^^ his
d^^th by the f^ll off his h^rs^. He died upon the first of D^^ember at night,
in ^he ye^re 1135. when he had Reigned five and thirty years, lived threescore
and seven. His bowels, brains, and eyes, were bu^ied at Roan in No^mandy where
he died: the rest of ^i^ body was stuffed with Salt, wrapped in Ox hides, and
brought over in^^ England, and with hono^rable Exequies, buried in the
Monastery of ^e^ding^ which himself had Founded. His Physiti^n that ^ooke out
his brains, with the intolerable stinch shortly after died. In this King Henry
ended the line of the N^rmans, as touching the Hei^es Males; and then come in
the French, by the title of Heirs general.

Men of n^te in his time.
MEn of learning in his time were many^ first, Stephen Harding a Benedictine
Monk, who was Founder of the Cistercian Orde^^ Then Anselme, Archbishop of
C^^terbury, who be^ides his activenesse in matters of State, writ many great
and learned books. Then Walt^r C^l^^^, Archdeacon of Oxford, who delivered a
History written in the British tongue, from Brute to Cadwallader, to Geoffry of
Mon^^^^^h to translat^, and added forty years of his own ^ime. Also (...) a
Mon^ of W^^c^ster, who writ D^ reb^s Gestis Anglorum. Also E^dm^r^s, a M^^k of
C^^terbury, who ^^sides other w^^ks, writ the History of his own t^me, under
the two Willi^^s and H^^^y the first.

THE REIGN OF KING STEPHEN.
AFter the decease of King Henry, presently steps upon the Stage of Royalty,
Stephen Earl of Boleyne, Son to Stephen Earl of ^loys, by Adela, Daughter
of King William the Conq^^^our; and though there were two other before him,
Ma^de the Empress, and Theobald his elder Brother, She in a substantial
right, He in a colorable, yet taking advantage of being Pri^^^ Occ^pans, the
first Invader, (as being quickly here after King Henry's death, where the other
stayed lingering about other Aff^ires) he solicits all the Orders o^ the Realm,
Bishops, and Lords, and People, to receive him for their Sover^ine: wherein
besides his own large promises, what great matters he would do for them all,
he had the assistance also of Henry his Brother, Bishop of Winchest^r and the
Popes Legate, and of Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, his great friend: ((...) the
most powerful men at that time in the State) who partly by force of Reasons,
but more indeed by force then Reasons, procure the State to accept him for
their King; and so upon Saint Steph^ns day, in Anno 1135. he was Crowned at
Westminster, in presence of but three Bishops, few of the Nobility, and not one
Abbot, by William Archbishop of Canterbury, with great solemnity. That which
put ^ scruple in men's minds, and made them averse at first, from consenting to
Stephen, was the Oath they had taken to receive King Henry's Daugh^^r Maude to
be their Queen, after his decease; but the weight of this scruple was something
abated, when it was urged, that no Precedent could be showed, that ever the
Crown had been set upon a Woman's head. And Roger, Bishop of Salisbury,
brought another Reason, because they had taken that Oath but upon condition,
that the King should not marry he^ out of the Realm without their consents,
and the King having brok^n the condition, was just cause to nullify their
Obligation: to which was added, th^^ the Oath having been exacted by
Authority, which is a ^ind of forcing, it might have the Plea of Per min^s, and
therefore void. And yet more then all these, H^gh Big^t, sometime Stew^^d to
King Henry, immediately after his decease, came ove^ into England, and took a
voluntary Oath before diverse Lords of the Land, that he was present a little
before King Henry's death, when he adopted and chose his Nephew Stephen to be
his Successor, because his Daughter M^^d^ had gr^evously at that tim^
displeased him. But howsoever their breach of Oath was thus pallia^ed; it is
certain that many of them, as well Bishops as other Lords, came afterward to
an evil end at least ^o many calamities before their end.

What course he took to establish himself in the Kingdom.
IT is a true saying, (...) reb^s opti^^ servat^^ Imperium, quibu^ p^^atur; and
this was Stephens course, he got the kingdom by Pro^ises, and he established it
by Performances; he pleased the People with easing them of Taxes and
Impositions; He pleased the Clergy with forbearing to keep Bishoprics and
Abbeyes Vacant, and with exempting them from the Authority of the Temporal
Magistrate; He pleased the Nobility with allowing them to build Castle^ upon
their own Lands; He pleased the Gen^^y with giving them liberty to hunt the
Kings Dear in their own Woods; and besides with advancing many of them in
Honors: and for his Brother Theobald, who being the elder, was before him in
pretense to the Crown, he pleased him with a grant to pay him two thousand
Marks a year; and then to strengthen himself abroad no less then at home,
he married his Son E^stace to Constance a Daughter of Lewis King of France,
which alliance alone might be thought a sufficient security against all
Opposition. And yet one thing more, which established him more then these, at
least these the more for this, that he had seise^ upon King ^enries tre^sure,
which amounted to a hundred thousand pound, beside^ Plate and ^ewels of
inestimable value, which he spent no^ (...) vain riot, but employed to his
best advantage, both in procuring of Friends, and in levying of Soldiers out
of Britany and Flanders.

Of his Troubles in his Reign.
THere may well be made a Chapter of the troubles of his Reign, seeing his whole
Reign was in a manner but one continued trouble, at lea^t no longer
intermissio^, then as to give him breath against new encounters; til at last,
when he grew toward his l^st, he rather left to be in trouble, then was at
quiet, being forced to make his adversary his He^re; and to leave his Crown to
him that had sought his life. For he was no sooner set in his Chair of State,
but he was presently disquieted and made to rise, by the provocation of David
King of Scots, who solicited by some Lords of England, but chiefly by Ma^de the
Empress (whose Right he had sworn to defend) with a mighty Army entered
N^rthumberland, took Carlisle, and Newcastle, and was proceeding further, till
King Stephen with a greater Army coming against him, yet rather bought his
Peace then won it; for to recover Newcastle out of his hands, he was feign to
let King David hold Cumberland, and his Son Henry the Earldom of
Huntington, as their Inheritance; for which, the Father would not for his, as
being engaged, but the Son for his, as being free, did Homage to King Stephen.

No sooner was this trouble over, but he was presently under another; for being
feign somewhat ill at ease^ it was bruited abroad that he was dead; which ^o
distracted men's minds, that every one thought it wisdom to shift for
himself; and the Great Lords made a contrary use of Castles, to that which
King Stephen intended, when he gave liberty to build them; for the King
intended them for his own defense against his Enemies, and they made use of
them in their own defense against the King; for now Hugh Big^t Earl of
Norfolk possesses himself of N^rwich, Baldwyn Rivers of Oxford, and Robert
Quesqu^rius of other Castles. In these difficulties King Stephen, though he
could not in person be in all places at onc^, yet in care he was^ and there
most, where was most danger; employing others against the rest: Against Baldwyn
he went himself, whom, driven before out of Oxford, and gotten to the Isle of
Wight, the King fo^^owed and drove him also from thence, and at last into Exile.

And now England afforded him once again to take a little breath, but then
Normandy presently begins with him afresh: For now G^offrey Pl^^tagenet Duke of
Anjou, in right of Maude his Wife, enters upon his Towns there, and ^ee^es to
get possession of the Country; when King Stephen passes over with an Army, and
ar^ests his proceeding: and after some small defeates of his Enemies, brings
the matter at last to a pecuniary Composition: He to pay the Duke five thousand
Marks a year, and the Duke to relinquish his claim to Normandy. This done,
he returns into England, where new Commotions are attending him^ For the Lords
in his absence, resenting his breach of Promises, upon which they had a^mitted
him to the Crown, make use every one of their Castles, and stand upon their
Guard: The Lord Talbot held Hereford; Earl Robert Ma^ds Brother, Bristow;
William Lovell, the Castle of Carry; Paganell, the Castle of Ludl^w; William
Moun^, the Castle of Dunster; Robert Nicholor of Lincoln, the Castle of
Warham; Eustace the Son of John, the Castle of Melton; William the Son of
Alan, the Castle of Shrewsbury; and withal David King of Scots, never
regarding his former agreement, enters Northumberland with an Army, committing
so great cruelty, in ravishing of Maids, murdering of Infants, slaughtering
of Priests, even at the Altar, that never any barbarous Nation committed
greater. Thus the kingdom from the one end to the other was in Combustion,
that if the King had had as many hands as Briareus, there would have been
work enough for them all. Yet all this dismayed not the King, but as having
learned this Lesson, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, grows the
more in confidence, the less he was in assurance; and as if danger were the
fuel of Courage, the more erected in himself, the less he was upheld by
others; and so, venturing what his Rebels at home would do in his absence, he
passes himself in person against David King of Scots; as being the most
dangerous, and therefore the first to be repressed: but finding it hard to draw
him to a Battle, and impossible without a battle to do any good upon him; he
leaves the care of that quarrel to Thurstine Archbishop of York, and
returns himself home, if it may be called home, where he scarce had a safe
place to put his head in. But though many Lords were Rebellious against him,
yet some there were stuck firmly to him, by whose Assistance and his own
industry, partly by inticements, partly by inforcements, he reduced most of
them to Obedience, and all of them to Submission; when in the mean time
Thurstine Archbishop of York; and in his sickness, Ralph Bishop of Durham,
assisted with William Earl of Aumerle, William Piperell of Nottingham, and
Hubert de Lacy, fought a memorable Battle against David King of Scots; wherein
though King David himself, and his Son Henry performed wonderful Acts of
Prowess, yet the English got the Victory, with the slaughter of eleven
thousand Scots in the Fight, besides many other slain in the flight; where of
the English none of account were slain, but only a Brother of Hubert Lacyes,
and some small number of Common Soldiers. This Victory infinitely pleased and
comforted King Stephen, who not long after to make an absolute suppression of
the Scots, passes again with an Army, and inforceth King David to demand a
Peace, delivering his Son Henry into King Stephens hands for a pledge; and
coming homeward, by the way he besieged Ludlow, one of Rebels nests, where
Prince Henry of Scotland had been taken Prisoner, if King Stephen in his own
person had not rescued him.

After this, once again the King got a little breathing time, but it was but
to prepare him for greater Encounters: For now Maud the Empress her self in
person comes into play; in whom the Oath before taken was to have its trial;
for till now, though never so really intended, yet it could not actually be
performed; for how could they receive her for Queen, who came not in place to
be received? but now that she came in person, now was the time of trial, how
the Oath would work; and work it did indeed with many, and that strongly; For
Maude coming into England, with Robert Earl of Gloucester her Brother; was
most joyfully received at Arundell Castle, by William de Aubigny, who had
married Adeliza the Queen Dowager of the late King Henry, and had the said
Castle and County assigned her for her Dower. King Stephen having intelligence
hereof, comes to Arundell Castle wi^h an Army, and besieges it; but either
diverted by ill counsel, or else finding the Castle to be inexpugnable, he
left the siege, and suffered the Empress to pass to Bristow. The King
hearing, that Ra^ulph Earl of Chester, Son in law to Robert Earl of
Gloucester, had possessed himself of the City of Lincoln, thither he goes with
an Army and besieges it: thither also came the said Earl of Chester, and
Robert Earl of Gloucester to raise his siege; at which time, a most fierce
battle was fought between them, upon Candlemas day; wherein it is memorable
what wonders of valor King Stephen performed; For, when all his men about him
were either fled or slain; yet he kept the field himself alone: no man daring
to come near him: Horrentibus inimicis incomparabilem ictuum ejus immanitatem,
says Hoveden: yet over-mastered at last by multitude, he was taken prisoner,
and brought to Maude the Empress; who sent him to be kept in safe custody in
the Castle of Bris^ow, where he remained till All-hollantide after. And now the
Empress having gotten King Stephen into her hands, she takes her journey to
London; received in all places, as she went, peaceably, and at London joyfully;
where Queen Matild made humble suite un^o her, for the liberty of King Stephen
her husband; and that he might but be allowed to live a private life: the
Londoners also made suite to have the Laws of King Edward restored; but the
Empress not only rejected both their suites, but returned them answers in
harsh and insulting language; Indeed most unseasonably; and which gave a stop
to the current of all her fortunes: for Queen Matild finding thereby, how high
the Empress pulses did beat; sent presently to her Son Eustace, being then
in Kent, to raise Forces with all speed, with whom, the Londoners, as much
discontented as she, do afterward join; and Hen^y Bishop of Winchester, as
much discontented as either of them, fortifies his Castles at Waltham and
Farnham; and specially Winchester, where he stays himsel^e, attending upon
what Coast the next wind of the Empress would blow. Of all these things the
Empress had intelligence, and thereupon secretly in the night she fled to
Oxford, sending straight charge, to have King Stephen more narrowly watched,
more hardly used; put (as some write) into fetters; and fed with very bare and
poor Commons; withal she sends to her Uncle David Kings of Scots, to come
unto her with all speed possible, who coming accordingly, they fall into
consultation what is first to be done; the lot falls upon Winchester, as being
their greatest adversary, now, no less in appearance then in power: so
Winchester they besiege; which Queen Matild hearing, she with her Son
Eustace and the Londoners, come presently to the succor, where a fierce
battle being fought, the end was, that the party of Queen Matild prevailed,
and the Empress to make her escape, was feign to be laid upon a Horse back in
manner of a dead Corpse, and so conveyed to Gloucester; while Earl Robert her
brother disdaining to fly, was taken Prisoner, whom Queen Matild caused to be
used the more hardly, in retaliation of the hard usage which the Empress
before had showed to King Stephen. Things standing in these terms,
propositions were made by the Lords for pacification, but such were the high
spirits of the Empress, and her brother Robert, that no conditions would
please them, unless the Empress might enjoy the Crown. But after long
debate, whether by agreement between themselves, or by connivence of the
keepers, both King Stephen and Earl Robert got to be at liberty. When the
first thing King Stephen did, was to look out the Empress, to requite the
kindness she had showed him in prison; and hearing her to be at Oxford, he
lays siege to the Town, and brings the Empress to such distress, that she
had no way to free her self but by flight; and no way to flee but with
manifest danger, yet she effected it by this devise: It was in the Winter
season, when frost and snow covered all the ground over; she therefore clad her
self, and her four servants that were with her in white clothes, which being
of the color of Snow, made her pass the Watches without being discerned, and
by this means came safe to her friends at Wallingford. Yet Mamesbury who lived
at that time, confesses he could never learn certainly by what means she
made her escape. But howsoever she escaped this present danger; yet it left
such an impression of fear upon her, that she never after had any mind to
appear upon this stage of War, but left the prosecution of it to her Son
Henry, who was now about sixteen years of age, and being forward of his age,
and able to bear Armes^ was by his great Uncle David King of Scots, Knighted,
to make him more forward.

It was now the ninth year of King Stephens Reign, when Ralph Earl of
Chester, keeping possession of the City of Lincoln, was in the night time
assaulted by the King; but the Earl perceiving the Kings Forces to be but
small, suddenly issued forth, and repelled the King with the slaughter of
fourscore of his men. Yet two years after this, the Earl was reconciled to
the King, and came of his own accord to wait upon him, when perfidiously he
was detained by the King; and not set at liberty, till he had surrendered into
the Kings hands all the Castles that were in his possession; which though it
brought the King some present benefit, yet it wrought him a greater future
loss; for it lost him his credit with all men, and no man afterward would
trust his word.

Now was Duke Henry come to the age of nineteen years, and was in possession
of the Dukedom of Anjou, by the death of his Father Geoffrey Plantagenet; and
not long after this, he married Eleanor the Daughter and Heir of William Duke
of Guyen, by whom he had that Duchy, and also the Earldom of Poicton:
Normandy he had by his Mother; but more by the peoples inclination. So as being
possessed now of four great Principalities, this greatness of Estate added to
the greatness of his spirit, made him aspiring to recover his Right in
England; and over he comes, bringing with him but small Forces, but promising
himself great, from the people of this kingdom: and many indeed resorted to
him; with whom he fell presently, and besieged Marleborough; but by the Kings
greater Forces was repelled.

After this, their Armies continued in the field still; rather watching
advantages to be doing, then doing any thing; sometimes advancing when no Enemy
was near, and then retiring when the Enemy came; till at last it was like to
come to a set Battle, when suddenly Eustace King Stephens only Son
unfortunately dyed: Unfortunately for himself, but fortunately for the
kingdom; For now King Stephen being left destitute of issue to succeed, was
the more easily drawn to conditions of Peace, as likewise the Empress Maude,
having lately lost her Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, and Miles Earl of
Hereford, (her two best Champions) was no less willing of Peace then he; which
being furthered by the Lords of both sides, was at last concluded upon these
conditions, that Stephen should hold the kingdom of England during his life,
and adopt Duke Henry as his Heir to succeed him. And this agreement thus made,
and in a Parliament at Winchester confirmed, Duke Henry ever after accounted
King Stephen no less then a Father, and King Stephen, Duke Henry no less then
a Son: and well he might, if it be true which some write, that the Empress,
when a Battle was to be fought between King Stephen and her Son, went
privily to him, asking him how he could find in his heart to fight against him
that was his own Son? could he forget the familiarity he had with her in her
firt Widow-hood? But this was no matter for the Writers of that time to
deliver: It touched too near the interest of Princes then in being: and
Princes must not be touched while they live, nor when they are dead neither
with uncertainties, as this could be no other: But howsoever it was, certain
it is, that after this Agreement between King Stephen and Duke Henry, they
continued in mutual love and concord, as long after as they lived.

But what became of Maude the Empress at this time? For, that she was alive,
and lived many years after this agreement between King Stephen and her Son
Henry, all Writers agree; and to say that she consented to the Agreement,
without any provision made for her self, is to make her too much a Woman; a
very weak vessel: and to say there might be provision made, though it be not
Recorded, is to make all Writers defective in a great excess. And besides,
being so stirring a woman as she was, that upon a sudden she should be so
quiet, as not to deserve to have one word spoken of her, in all the long time
she lived after, (being no less then twelve or thirteen years) is as strange
as the rest. And if she placed her contentment so wholly in her Son, that in
regard of him, she regarded not her self at all; It deserves at least the
Encomium of such a motherly love as is very unusual, and not always safe.
Whatsoever it was, I must be feign to leave it as a Gordian knot, which no
Writer helps me to unty.

Of his Taxations, and ways for raising of money.
OF Taxations in his time, there is no mention made; for Taxations indeed, are
properly drawn from a body of State when it is entire, where the State all
this Kings time was altogether in Fractions. But what he wanted in Taxations,
he supplied with Confiscations, which by reason of the many revoltings of men
of all sorts, could not choose but fill his Coffers; every Rebellion being in
nature of a Purchase to him, for whatsoever became of the Persons, their Lands
and Goods were sure to be his. And if it happened at any time, that
Confiscations came in but slowly, he had then devises to hasten their pace, for
upon light suggestions (not so much oftentimes as just suspicions) he would
call men into question, and seize upon their good, as in the case particularly
of Ralph Bishop of Salisbury; and it may not be unpleasing to hear from what
beginning this Bishop grew to such a height of greatness; which was thus; In
the time of King William Rufus, he was a poor Priest, serving a Cure in a
village near to Ca^n in Normandy, when the Kings younger Brother Henry chanced
to pass that way, and to make some stay in the said Village; who being
desirous to hear a Mass, this Roger being Curate, was the man to say it;
which he dispatched with such celerity, that the Soldiers (who commonly love
not long Masses) commended him for it, telling their Lord, that there could not
a fitter Priest be found for men of war then he. Whereupon Henry appointed
him to follow him, and when he came to be King, preferred him to many great
places, and at last to be Chancellor of England, and Bishop of Salisbury. You
have heard his rising, now hear his fall; When King Stephen came to the
Crown, he held this man in as great account as his Predecessor King Henry had
done, and perhaps in greater; For being a great beggar of Suites, the King
would say of him, If this man will never give over asking, neither shall I ever
give over giving. Yet this great Prelate fell first through Pride into Envy,
and then through Envy into Ruin. For King Stephen having given liberty to
build Castles, this man did so f^rre exceed all others in magnificence (for he
builded the Castles of Salisbury, the Vyes, Sherburne, Mamesbury and Newarke,
to which there were no Structures comparable in the kingdom) that the Lords
out of envy put it into the Kings head, that these Castles of his were built
thus magnificently for entertainment of Ma^de the Empress: which so possessed
the King, or he would be thought to be so possessed, that taking this for a
just cause, he seized them all into his hands, and forty thousand Marks
besides, which he had in money: and not contented with this, he took the like
course also with Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, only because he was his Nephew
and of his near kindred. Another way he had for gaining of money: For in the
first year of his Reign, having given liberty to hunt in his Forests, be
afterward at Oxford caused many to be impleaded for using that liberty; a
trick which perhaps he learned from hunting, First to give men leave to do a
thing, and then to Fine them for having done it. But this is the privilege of
Princes, that their leave must be interpreted by him that gives it, and not by
him that takes it.

Laws and Ordinances in his time.
HE gave license to the City of Norwich to have Coroners and Bayliffes, before
which time, they had only a Sergeant for the King to keep Courts; and after
this, in the 37. year of King Henry the third, they had license to enclose the
Town with Ditches.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
Upon the Kings seizing into his hands, the Bishop of Salisburies Castles, and
Goods, complaint was made, and a Synod called by the Bishop of Winchester the
Popes Legate, to right the Bishop, where the King was cited to appear; who
sending to know the cause, Answer was made, that it was to answer for his
imprisoning of Bishops, and depriving them of their Goods, which being a
Christian King he ought not to do. The King replies by his Lawyer, Alveric de
Ver, that he had not arrested the Bishop of Salisbury as a Bishop, but as his
Servant, that was to make him account of his employment. To this the Bishop
answers, that he was never Servant or Accomptant to the King: and many
Allegations and Probations were urged to and fro, but in conclusion the Synod
brake up, and nothing was done. The Bishops durst not Excommunicate the King
without the Popes privity; so in the end they fell from Authority to
Submission; and in the Kings Chamber fell down at his Feet, beseeching him he
would pity the Church; and not suffer dissension to be between the Kingdom
and the Priesthood. And this was no small magnanimity in the King, that he was
able to pull down the high stomachs of the Prelates in that time. In the
eighth year of his Reign a Synod was held in London by Henry Bishop of
Winchester, where it was decreed, that whosoever should lay violent hands upon
any Clergy man, should not be absolved but by the Pope himself: and from this
time forward, Clergy men were exempt from the secular power. In the tenth year
of his Reign, by the soliciting of Saint Bernard, many took upon them the
Cross, for a supply to the Holy Land; amongst whom, some English Lords also.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
HE Founded the Abbeys of Cogshall in Essex; of Furneys in Lancashire; of
Hurguilers and Feversham in Kent; at Heigham in Kent, a House of black Nuns;
also an house for Nuns at Carew: His Queen Matild builded the Hospital of
Saint Katherines by the Tower of London: A knight called Sir William of Mount
Fitchet, Founded the Abbey of Stratford Langthorne, within four miles of
London; William of Ypre Founded Boxeley Abbey in Kent; Robert Earl of Ferrers,
Founded the Abbey of Merivall in Warwickshire; and in the same Shire, Robert
Earl of Gloucester, the Abbey of Nonne Eaten. Also by others were Founded the
Abbeys of Tiltey; of Rievall; of Newborough and Beeland; of Garedon in
L^ycestershire; of Kirkstead in Yorkshire: and diverse others in other places,
so that more Abbeys were erected in his days, then had been within the space
of a hundred years before.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married, by his Uncle King Henry's means, Matild, Daughter and Heir of
Eustace Earl of Boleyne, a Woman made for the proportion of both Fortunes: In
adversity not dejected; in prosperity not elated: while her Husband was at
liberty, a Woman; during his durance, as it were a Man; Acting his part for him
when he was restrained from acting it himself; not looking that Fortune should
fall into her lap, but industrious to procure it. By this Queen, he had
only one Son named Eustace, a Prince more then of hope, for he lived to the
blossoming of much Valor, though it came not to maturity, as being cut off at
eighteen years of age, some say, by drowning, and some by a stranger
accident. But strange Relations must not always be rejected, for though many
of them be forged, yet some no doubt are true; and who knows but it may be of
this kind, which some Writers relate of the death of this Prince: that being at
the Abbey of Bury in Norfolk, and denied some money he required to have had;
he presently in a rage went forth, and set fire on the Cornefields belonging to
the Abbey, but afterward sitting down to dinner, at the first morsel of
bread he put into his mouth, he fell into a fit of madness, and in that fit
dyed? Certainly, the Persons of Princes are for more observation then ordinary
people; and as they make Examples, so they are sometimes made Examples. This
Prince Eustace was so beloved of his father, that he had a purpose to have
joined him King with himself, but that the Pope upon the Bishops complaining
to him of it, diverted him from it. Howsoever being dead, he was buried in
Feversham Abbey, where his mother was buried a little before. Other legitimate
issue King Stephen had none, but by a Concubine he had a son named William,
whom he made Earl of Norfolk, which honor was confirmed upon him, by a
special Article, in the agreement made between King Stephen and Duke Henry:
Only a French Chronicle speaks of another son of his, named Gervase, made
Abbot of Westminster, and that he died in the year 1160. and was there buried.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was tall of stature, of great strength, and of an excellent good
complexion. Concerning the qualities of his mind, there was apparent in him a
just mixture of valor and prudence; for if he had not had both, he could
never have held out with such weak friends as he did, against such potent
adversaries as he had. And specially it must be confessed, he was of an excellent
temper for a soldier, seeing he never killed any enemy in cold blood, as
Anthony did Cicero; nor any friend in hot blood, as Alexander did Clitus. What
he would have been in Peace, we are left to Judge by only a Pattern, the
short time between his agreement with Duke Henry and his death: which seeing
he spent in traveling to all parts of the Realm, and seeking to sti^ch up the
breaches which the violence of War had made; we may well think, that if his
life had been continued, he would have given as good Proofs of his Justice in
Peace, as he had done of his Valor in War. For of his extraordinary good
nature we have a sufficient example in one Action of his, which was this: Duke
Henry being on a time, in some straights for money, sent to his Mother Maude
the Empress, desiring her to furnish him, but she answered, that she was in as
great straights her self, and therefore could not do it; then he sent to his
Uncle Earl Robert to furnish him, and he answered, he had little enough to
serve his own turn, and therefore could not do it; at last he sent to King
S^ephen, and he though an Adversary, and standing in terms of opposition, yet
sent presently and supplied him with it. He was withal a great oppugner of
Superstition, which made him on a time to ride into Lincoln with his Crown
upon his head, only to break the people of a superstitious opinion they held,
that no King could enter into that City in such manner, but that some great
dysaster would fall upon him. One special Virtue may be noted in him, that he
was not noted for any special vice, whereof if there had been any in him,
Writers certainly would not have been silent.

Of his death and burial.
AS a Fish cannot live out of Water, no more was it in the Destiny of this
King, to live out of trouble; as ^oone as he came to enjoy quietness, he left
to enjoy life, no more time left him between his Agreement with Duke Henry and
his Death, but only so much as might reasonably serve him to take his last
leave of all his Friends; For it was but from January to October; and the last
Friend he took leave of, was Theodoricke Earl of Flanders, whom he met at
Dover, and as soon as he had dismissed him, he was suddenly taken with the
Iliake Passion, and with an old disease of the Emeraulds: and dyed in the
Monastery there, the five and twentyeth of October, in the year 1154. when he
had Reigned almost nineteen years, Lived nine and forty; and was Buried in
the Abbey of Feversham, which he had Founded.

Men of note in his time.
OF Clergy men, there was Thurstine Archbishop of York, and Henry Bishop of
Winchester the Kings Brother, also William, another Archbishop of York, whom
we may find in the Calender of Saints, as likewise Saint Bernard who lived in
this time, though not of this Country, and if we may reckon strangers, there
lived at this time, Peter Lombard, Master of the Sentences; Peter Comester,
writer of the Ecclesiastical Story; and Gratian, Compiler of the Canon Law,
all three Brothers, and all three Bastards; also Avicen, Averroes, Mesues, and
Rabbi Solomon were in this time famous. Of military men, there was Ranulph
Earl of Chester; Reynold Earl of Cornwall; Robert Earl of Leycester; Hugh
Bigot, Earl of Norfolk, but specially Robert Earl of Gloucester, the Kings
base Son, whose praises, if any desire to hear sounded out to the full, let
him read William of Malmesbury, who writ the History of those times, of purpose
to be his Trumpet. Of the Writers of our Nation, there was this William of
Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Simon Dunelmensis, William Revellensis, and
Geoffrey of Monmouth, Bishop of Saint Asaph in Wales. Also Hugo Carthusianus, a
Burgundian, but made Bishop of Lincoln here in England.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SECOND.
KING Stephen being dead, Henry Duke of Anjou, by his Father Geoffry
Plantagenet, succeeded him in the Kingdom of England by agreement; whom he
preceded by right, as being Son and Heir of Mawde, sole daughter and Heir
of King Henry the first; and was crowned at Westminster, by The^bald
Archbishop of Canterbury, on the seventeenth of December, in the year 1155.
and was now a greater Prince then any of his Ancestors had been before: and
indeed, the Kingdom of England, the Dukedom of Normandy, and the Dukedom of
Anjou in his own right; and in the right of his wife Queen Eleanor, the Duchy
of ^uyen, and the Earldome of Poictou b^ing all united in his person, made him
a Dominion of a larger extent then any King Christian had at that time.

He was borne at Ments in Normandy, in the year 1132. a great joy to his
Father Geoffry, Duke of Anjou; a greater to his Mother Mawde the Empress; but
so great to his Grandfather King Henry the first, that it seemed to make amends
for his son William, whom unfortunately he had lost before by Shipwreck. The
years of his childhood were spent at home under the care of his Parents: at
nine years old or there abouts, he was brought by his Uncle Robert Earl of
Gloucester into England, and placed at Bristow, where under the tuition of one
Matthew his Schoolmaster, to instruct him in learning, he remained four
years, after which time he was sent into Scotland, to his great Uncle David
King of Scots, with whom he remained about two years, initiated by him in the
Principles of State, but chiefly of his own estate: and being now about
fifteen years of age, was by him Knighted, and though scarce yet ripe for
Arms, yet as a fruit gathered before its time, was mellowed under the
discipline of his Uncle Robert, one of the best Soldiers of that time. And now
the Duke his Father not able any longer to endure his absence, sent with great
instance to have him sent over to him; for satisfying of whose longing, Earl
Robert provided him of passage, and conducted him himself to the Sea side,
where he took his last farewell of him. Being come into Anjou, his Father,
perhaps over-joyed with his presence, not long after died, leaving him in
present possession of that Dukedom, being now about nineteen years of age:
when shortly after he married Eleanor, late the wife of Lewis King of France,
but now divorced. A year or two after he came again into England, where after
some velitations with King Stephen, they were at last reconciled, and his
succession to the Crown of England, ratified by Act of Parliament. Not long
after he went again into France, and presently fell to besiege a Castle which
was detained from him by the French King: in the time of which siege, news was
brought him of King Stephens death; which one would have thought should have
made him hasten his journey into England; yet he resolved not to stir till he
had won the Cast: which resolution of his being known to the Defendants,
they surrendered the Castle; but yet no sooner, but that it was six weeks
after before he came into England, when he was now about the age of three and
twenty years.

His first Acts after he came to the Crown.
He began his Reign as Solomon would have begun it, if he had been in his
place: for, first he made choice of wise and discreet men to be his
Consellours: then he banished out of the Realm all strangers, and especially
Flemmings, with whom the Kingdom swarmed; as of whom King Stephen had made use
in his wars, amongst whom was William of Ypres, lately before made Earl of
Kent. Castles which by King Stephens allowance had been built, he caused to be
demolished, (of which there were said to be eleven hundred and fifteen) as
being rather Nurseries of rebellion to the subject, then of any safety to the
Prince. He appointed the most able men of that profession, to reform abuses of
the Laws, which disorder of the wars had brought in: He banished many Lords,
who against their Oath had assisted King Stephen against him; as thinking that
men onc^ perjured, would never be faithful: and to the end he might be the
less pressing upon the people with Taxations, he resumed all such Lands
belonging to the Crown, which had any way been aliened or usurped; as thinking
it better to displease a few then many: and many other things he did, which in
a disjoynted State were no less profitable and expedient, then requisite and
necessary.

His Troubles during his Reign.
HE had no Competitors, nor Pretenders with him for the Crown; and therefore
his troubles at first were not in Capite, struck not at the root, as K.
Stephens did: but were only some certain niblings at inferior parts; till at
last he brought them himself into his own bowels. For what was the trouble in
his first year with the Welsh, but as an exercise rather to keep him in
motion, then that it needed to disquiet his rest? for though they were mutinous
for a time, while they looked upon their own Bucklers; their Woods and
Mountainous passages: yet as soon as K. Henry did but show his sword amongst
them, they were soon reduced to obedience for the present, and to a greater
awfulnesse for the future. It is true, Henry Earl of Essex that bore the Kings
Standard, was so assaulted by the Welsh, that he let the Standard fall to the
ground, which encouraged the Welsh, and put the English in some fear, as
supposing the King had been slain; but this was soon frustrated to the
Welsh, and punished afterward in the Ea^le, by condemning him to be shorn a
Monk, and put into the Abbey of Reading, and had his lands seized into the
Kings hands. And what was his trouble with Malcolme King of Scots, but a work
of his own beginning? for if he would have suffered him to enjoy that which
was justly his own, Cumberland and Huntingtonshire, by the grant of King
Stephen, and Northumberland, by the gift of his Mother Maude the Empress; he
might have stayed quietly at home, and needed not at all to have stir^ed his
foot; but he could not endure there should be such parings off from the body
of his Kingdom: and therefore went with an Army into the North, where he won
not, but took Northumberland from him, with the City of Carl^ill, and the
Castles of Newcastle and Bamberg: and merely out of gratefulness, in
remembrance of the many co^rtesies done him before, by David King of Scots; he
left him the County of Hunting^on, but yet with condition to owe feal^y, and to
do homage to him for it. And what was his trouble with his brother Geoffrey,
but a Bird of his own hatching? For his Father Geoffrey, Duke of Anjou, had
three sons, Henry, Geoffrey, and William; and dying he left his Dukedom of
Anjou to his eldest son Henry, but to hold no longer then till he should come
to be King of England, and then to deliver it up to his second son Geoffrey:
and he made his Lords to swear, not to suffer his body to be buried, until
his son Henry had taken his Oath to do it; which Oath Henry afterward, in
reverence to his Fathers body, did take: but as he took it unwillingly, so he
willingly brake it, and sent presently to Adrian the then Pope, for a
Dispensation of his Oath: which granted, he enters Anjou with an Army, and
takes from his brother Geoffrey, being little able to make resistance, not
only the Dukedom of Anjou, but some other Cities also, which his Father had
absolutely given him for his maintenance: yet out of brotherly kindness was
content to allow him a Pension of a thousand pounds a year: which brotherly
kindness was so unkindly taken by his brother Geoffrey, that it brake his
heart; and within a short time after died.

And thus these troubles begun by Henry himself, were soon ended; but now a
trouble is coming on, begun by Lewis King of France, and this is like to stick
longer by him. For King Lewis not having yet digested King Henry's marriage
with his divorced wife Eleanor, seeks all opportunities to express his
spleen, by doing him displeasure; and a fit opportunity was now offered: for
there fell out a difference between Raymond Earl of Saint Giles, and Henry
King of England, about the Earldom of Toulouse, which Raymond possessed, and
Henry claimed: in this difference, King Lewis takes part with Raymond, as
pretending it to be the juster side. Hereupon are great forces provided on both
sides, and it was like to have come to a dangerous battle; but that by
mediation of friends, a Peace was made; and to make the Peace the firmer, a
marriage was concluded between Henry, King Henry's eldest son, scarce yet
seven years of age; and Margaret, daughter of King Lewis, not past three: who
was delivered to King Henry to bring up till fit years for consummation. This
was then thought a strong link to hold them in friendship, but it proved
afterward a cause to make the greater breach: and indeed when a son is once
matched into a Family, the Father must never look from thence afterward to
have a good wish; seeing the daughter thus matched can have no advancement, but
by the advancement of her husband; and he none, at least, none so w^ll, as by
the ruin of his Father: yet this brake not out till some years after. It was
now about the eighteenth year of King Henry's Reign, and his son Henry
grown to be seventeene years of age^ when it came into the Kings mind to
have his son Henry crowned King, and Reign with himself in his own time;
partly out of indulgence to his son, but chiefly, as having found by his
own experience, that Oaths for succession are commonly eluded: but Oaths for
present Allegiance, as being Verba de Praesenti, can have no evasion: and
pleasing himself with this conceit, he acquaints his Lords with his purpose,
and causes his son Henry to be crowned King by the hands of Roger
Archbishop of York; and all the Lords to swear Allegiance to him: at the
Feast of which solemnity, King Henry to honor his son, would needs carry up
the first dish to his Table; whereupon the Archbishop Roger standing by, and
saying merrily to the new King: What an honor is this to you, to have such a
waiter at your Table? Why (says he) what great matter is it for him that was
but the son of a Duke, to do service to me, that am the son of a King and
Queen? Which the old King hearing, began to repent him, now it was too late
of that he had done. For indeed the honor which by Gods commandment, children
are to do to their Parents; is by such making them their equals, in a manner
abolished; at least it gives them stomachs to take more upon them then is fit.
But King Henry passed it over, and meant to set the best side outward.

And now King Lewis took displeasure that his daughter was not crowned as well
as her husband, and therefore to satisfy him in that point, King Henry sends
his son Henry and his wife Margaret into England^ and causes them both to be
crowned by Walter Archbishop of Roan: and shortly after, the young King Henry
and his wife go back to King Lewis her Father, and by him with great joy, and
variety of sports were entertained. In the time of their being there, King
Lewis partly out of his old spleen to King Henry, and partly to make his son
in law more absolure; falls oftentimes into conference with him, and finding his
hot spirit to be fit tinder for such fire, tells him, it was a shame he should
suffer himself to be made a stale; have the title of a King, and not the
authority: and that as long as he stood in such terms, that which seemed an
honor, was indeed a disgrace. With which words of King Lewis, the young King
Henry was set afloate, and from that time forward, stuck not openly to oppose
his Father: whereof his Father having intelligence, sent messengers to King
Lewis, desiring him from the King their Master, to be a means to bring his
son to more moderation. But King Lewis hearing the Ambassadors name their
Master King, with an angry countenance said unto them; What mean you by this to
call him King, who has passed his Kingdom over to his son? and with this
answer sent them away. To this evil, another worse was added: that Queen
Eleanor his wife enraged with jealousy of her husbands Concubines, both
incenseth her son Henry, and persuades also two other of her sons, Richard
and Geoffrey, to join against their Father; telling them, it would be better
for them that their brother should prevail, who could not choose but allow them
better maintenance, then their Father did. With these persuasions they pass
over into Normandy, and join with their brother Henry; who emboldned by their
assistance, grows now more insolent then he was before; that when messengers
were sent to him from his Father, requiring him to lay down his Arms, and to
come lovingly to him: he proudly made answer, that his Father must not look he
would lay down his Arms, unless himself first would lay down his
authority, and resign the Kingdom. And now Lewis King of France, calling
together the great Lords of his Kingdom, and with them William King of Scots,
Hugh Earl of Chester, Roger Mowbray, Hugh Pigot, and other of his sons
party; they all take their Oaths to assist the young King Henry with all their
power; and thereupon all in one day, the French invade Normandy, Aquitaine and
Britain; the King of Scots Northumberland; and King Lewis the City of
Vernoill, which he brought to that distress, that it was agreed by the
Inhabitants, if it were not succored within three days, then to surrender it.
King Henry hearing of this agreement, promises to succor them by that day.
But here King Lewis uses a trick, gets that by fraud, which he could not do
by force; for he sends to King Henry, that if he were willing to have peace
with his sons, he should meet him at a place appointed, at such a time, and
he doubted not to effect it. King Henry glad of such an offer, and with that
gladness perhaps blinded, and not suspecting any deceit, promises to meet;
and coming to the place at the day, which was the day he should have succored
Vernoill, he stayed there all day looking for King Lewis coming; who instead
of coming, sent word to Vernoill, that King Henry was defeated; and therefore
their hope of succor was in vain: whereupon the Citizens thinking it to be so
indeed, because he came not according to his promise, surrendered the Town:
which King Lewis finding himself unable to hold, set it on fire, and so
departed. But King Henry when he perceived the fraud, followed him with his
Army, and took a bloody revenge of his fraud, with the slaughter of many of
his men. At the same time also King Henry's forces encountered Hugh Earl of
Chester, and Robert Fulger, who had taken Dole in Britain, took them
prisoners, and brought them to King Henry: and about the same time likewise in
England, Robert Earl of Leycester thinking to surprise Raynold Earl of
Cornwall, and Richard Lacy, King Henry's Generals, at unawares, was himself by
them overthrown, and the Town of Leycester taken; which only the site of the
place defended from being battered to the ground. Robert Earl of Leycester
being thus defeated^ passes over into France, and being supplied by King Lewis
with greater forces then before, is together with Hugh Bigot sent back into
England, to draw the Country to Henry the sons party; who at first assault
take Norwich: and then setting down before Bury, they are in a great battle,
by Richard Lacy, and other of King Henry's Captains, overthrown with the
slaughter of ten thousand men, and as many taken prisoners; amongst whom
Earl Robert himself. Yet were not Roger Mawbray and Hugh Bigot so daunted
with this overthrow, but that together with David the King of Sco^s brother,
they gather new forces, and invade Northumberland and Yorkshire, when Robert
Scoccee, Ralph Granula, William Vesci, and Barnard Bayliol (of whom Baynards
Castle in London, first took the name) Knights of those parts, as^emble
together, and fighting a great battle with them, overthrew them, and took the
King of Sco^s prisoner, with many others. Yet is not Hugh Bigot daunted with
this neither, but gathers new forces, and takes Norwich; and Robert Ferris,
Nottingham: the news whereof, when King Henry the son heard, he recovered
new spirits, and obtaining new assistance from King Lewis, prepares himself
afresh for war: which King Henry the Father hearing, returns speedily into
England; and to appease Saint Thomas Beckets Ghost, goes to visit his Tomb,
and there asks him forgiveness. This done, he goes into Suffolk, and at
Framingham Castle, which belonged to Hugh Bigot, stays with his Army, when
suddenly moved, by what instinct, no man knows (unless the appeasing of Saint
Thomas Ghost did work it) both Hugh Bigot delivers up his Castle into King
Henry's hands, and likewise Roger Mawbray, Robert Ferris, and many others of
that party, come voluntarily in, and submit themselves to the Kings mercy.
Hereupon King Henry returns to London, about which time he committed his wife
Queen Eleanor to prison, for her practices against him. In the mean time,
King Lewis understanding that Normandy was but weakly guarded, together with
his son the young King Henry, and Philip Earl of Flaunders; he besieges
Roan, which the Kings forces valiantly defended, till he came himself in
person; and thereupon King Lewis despairing of any good to be do^e, sends
messengers to King Henry for a truce, and appointed a day to meet at Gysors,
where he doubted not to make a reconcilement between his sons and him; K.
Henry agreed willingly, but of the meeting nothing was done: It seems it was
but one of King Lewis his old tricks to come fairly off.

After this truce made with King Lewis, King Henry hearing that his son Richard
had in the mean time possessed himself of a great part of the Province of
Poicto^; goes thither with an Army, where Richard at last, after some
hesitation, as doubting his forces, submits himself to his Father, and asks
his pardon; which his Father as freely grants, as if he had never committed any
fault; and thereupon King Henry imployes him to King Lewis and his brother
Henry, to persuade them to peace: who wearied now with the wars, were easily
drawn, and so reconciliation on all parts is made; and to confirm the
reconciliation between the two Kings, Henry and Lewis, his daughter Adela is
affianced to King Henry's son Richard, as Earl of Aquitaine, and because the
Lady was but young, she was committed to the care of King Henry, till she
should be fit for marriage. Upon this King Henry sets Robert Earl of
Leycester, and Hugh Earl of Chester, giving hostages and oath for their
Allegiance, at liberty; and William also King of Scots, paying a certain
mulct; for which he delivered in pawn the strong Castles of Berwick,
Roxborough, and Sterling to King Henry, and was fined also to lose the County
of Huntington, and never to receive any Rebels into his protection. These
things done, the King with his sons returns into England, where with all
joyfulnesse they were received. It was now the year 1179. when King Lewis
began again to grow discontented with King Henry, because his daughter was
not yet married to his son Richard, as was agreed: but King Henry making him
promise to have them married within a few days, gave him satisfaction; though
indeed he meant nothing less, for it was thought he kept her for himself, as
with whom he had before that time, had unlawful familiarity. The year after
was memorable for nothing, or for nothing so much as the death of the young
King Henry, who died then; whose Widow Margaret returning into France, was
afterward married to Bela King of Hungary. Now King Henry's son Richard, no
longer enduring to have his marriage delayed, which his Father often promised,
but would never suffer to be performed; falls into his old fit of
coffeehouse: wherein though he cannot perhaps be justified, yet he may
justly be excused, for to be kept from a wife at that time of his age, for
which a wife was most proper; and especially having been affianced so long
before, which could not choose but make his appetite the sharper: must needs be,
if not a just cause, at least a strong provocation to make him do as he did:
Howsoever, from this fit of coffeehouse, he falls into a relaps of Rebellion,
and infecting with it his brother John, and a great part of his Fathers
Adherents; they all take part with Philip (now after the decease of Lewis) King
of France, who willing to make use of their assistance, before the stream of
filial awfulnesse should return into the natural Channel, takes them along
with him, and besieges the City of Ments, in which King Henry at that time was
himself in person; who apprehending the danger, and then resenting the
mischief of falling into his enemies hands, gets him secretly out of the City,
leaving it to defend it self, till he should return with greater forces: but
hearing afterward that the Town was taken, he fell into so great a distraction
of mind, that it made him break out into these blasphemous words; I shall
never hereafter love God any more, that has suffered a City so dear unto me,
to be taken from me: but he quickly recollected himself, and repented him that
he had spoken the words. Indeed Ments was the City in which he was borne, that
to have this City taken from him, was as much as to have his Birthright taken
from him; and to say the truth, after he had lost this City, he scarce seemed
to be alive; not only because he shortly after died, but because the state of
Majesty which had all his life accompanied him, after this forsook him: for
now he was feign to beg peace of his enemies, who often before had begged it
of him: now he was glad to yield to conditions, which no force before could
have wrested from him. It is memorable and worth observing, that when these two
Kings had meeting between Turwyn and Arras, for reconcilement of differences;
there suddenly happened a Thunderbolt to light just between them, with so
terrible a crack, that it forced them for that time to break off their
conference: and afterward at another meeting, the like accident of Thunder
happened again, which so amazed King Henry, that he had fallen off his horse,
if he had not been supported by those about him; which could be nothing but
drops let fall of the Divine anger, and manifest presages of his future
dysasters. And thus this great Princes troubles, which began in little ones,
and were continued in great ones, ended at last in so great a trouble, that it
ended his life, and left him an example of desolation, notwithstanding all his
greatness; forsaken of his friends, forsaken of his wife, forsaken of his
children; and (if he were not himself when he blasphemed for the loss of
Ments) forsaken of himself; which might be exemplar in this King, if it were
not the common Epilogue of all greatness.

Of his Acquest of Ireland.
RObert Fits-stephen was the first of all Englishmen, after the Conquest, that
entered Ireland, the first day of May, in the year 1170. with 390. men: and
there took Werford, in the behalf of Deruntius, son of Marcherdach, called
Mac Murg, King of Leymster. In September following, Richard Earl of Chepstow,
surnamed Strong-bow, sailed into Ireland with twelve hundred men, where he
took Waterford and Dublin; and married Eeve, the daughter of Deruntius, as he
was promised. From these beginnings, King Henry being then at rest from all
Hostile Arms, both at home and abroad, takes into his consideration the
Kingdom of Ireland, as a Kingdom which oftentimes afforded assistance to the
French; and therefore purposing with himself by all means to subdue it: he
provides a mighty Army, and in the Winter season saileth thither, taking
Shipping at Pembroke, and landing near to Waterford: where entering into
consultation what course was fittest to be taken in the enterprise, suddenly of
their own accord, the Princes of the Country came in, and submitted
themselves unto him, only R^d^rick King of Connacht stood out; who being the
greatest, thought to make himself the only King of that Nation: but King
Henry forbearing him for the present, who kept himself in his fastnesses of
Bogges and Woods, and was not to be followed in the Winter season: takes his
journey to Dublin, the chief City of the Country; and there calling the
Princes and Bishops of the Nation together, requires their consent to have him
and his heirs to be their King: which they affirming they could not do
without the Popes authority; to whom, at their first conversion to the
Christian Religion, they had submitted themselves; the King sent presently to
Adrian the then Pope an English man, requiring his assent; which upon diverse
good considerations he granted: and hereupon the King built him a stately
Palace in the City of Dublin; and having thus without blood possessed himself of
the Kingdom, the Spring following he returns joyfully into England. About
four years after Rodorick also sends his Chancellor to King Henry, to offer
his submission, with a tribute to be paid of every ten beasts, one
sufficient. After this, in the one and thirtieth year of his Reign, he sent
his son John to be the Governor there.

His Taxations, and ways for raising of money.
TAxations in his time, was chiefly once; when he took Escuage of Englishmen,
toward his wars in France, which amounted to 12400. pounds: but
confiscations were many, because many Rebellions, and every Rebellion was as
good as a Mine. Also vacancies of Bishoprics and Abbeys, kept in his hands,
sometimes many at once; no time without some. He resumed also all Lands which
had either been sold or given from the Crown by his Predecessors: but a
principal cause that made him plentiful in money, was his Parcimony; as when
he was enjoined for a Penance, to build three Abbeys, he performed it, by
changing Secular Priests into Regular Chanons, only to spare cost. And it was
not the least cause of alienating his sons from him; that he allowed them not
maintenance answerable to their calling. And it could be nothing but Parcimony
while he lived, which brought it to pass, that when he died, there were found
in his Coffers, nine hundred thousand pounds besides Plate and Jewels.

Laws and Ordinances in his time.
IN the beginning of his Reign, he refined and reformed the Laws of the Realm;
making them more tolerable and more profitable to his people then they were
before. In the one and twentieth year of his Reign, he divided his whole
kingdom into six several Circuits; appointing in every Circuit three Judges,
who twice every year should ride together, to hear and determine Causes
between man and man: as it is at this day, though altered in the number of the
Judges, and in the Shires of Circuit. In this Kings days the number of Jews
all England over was great: yet, wheresoever they dwelt, they might not bury
any of their dead any where but in London; which being a great inconvenience to
bring dead bodies oftentimes from far remote places, the King gave them
liberty of burial in the several places where they lived. It was in this
Kings days also ordained that Clergymen offending in hunting the Kings Dear,
should be punishable by the Civil Magistrate, according to the Laws of the
Land; which order was afterward taken with them for any offense whatsoever they
committed. Though it be not a Law, yet it is an Ordinance which was first
brought in by this King, that the Lions should be kept in the Tower of London.

Affairs of the Church in his tim^.
THis Kings Reign is famous for the contention of a Subject with the Prince,
and though it may be thought no equal match, yet in this Example we shall find
it hard to judge which of them had the victory. But before we come to speak of
the Contention, it is fit to say something of the Man, and of the Quarrel. The
man was Thomas Becket, borne in London, his Father, one Gilbert Becket, his
Mother an outlandish Woman, of the Country of Syria. His first rising was under
Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, who taking a liking to him, (as one says,
no man knew for what) made him first Archdeacon of Canterbury, and then used
means to have him be the Princes Tutor, after that to be Chancellor of
England, and after the decease of the said Theobald, was himself made
Archbishop of Canterbury in his place. One memorable thing he did at his
coming to be Archbishop, he surrendered his place of being Chancellor, as not
thinking it fit to sit at the Helm of the Commonwealth, and of the Church,
both at once. But now began the Contention between the King and him: the
difference was, the King would have it ordained that Clergy men who were
malefactors, should be tried before the Secular Magistrate as Lay men were:
This Becket opposed, saying, it was against the liberty of the Church, and
therefore against the honor of God. Many Bishops stood with the King, some few
with Becket the Contention grew long, and with the length still hotter, till at
last Becket was content to assent to the Ordinance with this clause, Salvo
Ordine suo: the King liked not the Clause, as being a deluding of the
Ordinance: He required an absolute assent, without any clause of Reservation.
At last, after many debatings and demurres, the Archbishop yields to this
also, and subscribes the Ordinance, and sets his hand unto it. But going
homewards, it is said, his Crosse-bearer and some other about him, blamed him
for that he had done, but whether moved with their words, or otherwise upon
second thoughts, the next day when they met again, he openly repented his
former deed, retracts his subscription, and sends to the Pope for absolution of
his fault: which the Pope not only granted, but encouraged him to persist in
the course he had begun. It may be thought a Fable, yet is related by diverse
good Authors, that one time during this Contention, certain fellows cut off
the Archbishops horses tail; after which fact, all their Children were borne
with tails like horses; and that this continued long in their Posterity,
though now long since ceased, and perhaps their Families too. But King Henry
finding there was no prevailing with Becket by fair means, begins to deal
more roughly with him, and first makes use of Authority upon his Temporalties;
and withal a censure was spoken of to be intended against his person; which
Becket understanding, thought it his best course to flee the Realm, and
thereupon passing under the name of Dereman, he passes over Sea, and there,
two years by the Pope, and five by the King of France, was maintained as it
were of Alms: in which misery, nothing vexed him so much, as that King Henry
sent all his kindred, Men and Women, old and young into Banishment after him.
And now King Henry finding that Becket stood much upon his Legatine Power, sent
messengers to the Pope, desiring him to take that power from him, and to
confer it upon his Archbishop of York, but the Pope answered, he would not
do so, but was content the King himself should be his Legate, and sent him
Letters to that purpose, which King Henry took in such scorn, that he threw
away the Letters, and sent them presently back to him again.

In this mean time, the King of France prevailed with King Henry to afford
Becket a conference, hoping to bring them to some Agreement, where being
together, King Henry alleged before the King of France, that he required
nothing of Becket, but his assent to an Ordinance, to which in his Grandfather
King Henry's the first time, all the Bishops of the Realm, and the Archbishop
of Canterbury that then was did give their Assent; yet this moved not Becket at
all, but he continued his former Tenet, it was against the honor of God, and
therefore desired to be excused. See now (says King Henry) the perverseness
of this man, all that agrees not with his own humor, is presently against the
honor of God. While these things were thus a working, Becket had gotten him
more friends at Rome, and by their means prevailed with the Pope, to give him
power to interdict some Bishops in England that had done him wrong, and the
Pope spared no^ to threaten Excommunication to King Henry himself, if he
restored not Becket to his Dignity. But whether awed with his threatening, or
won by the King of Frances importunity, or else perhaps relenting in
himself, he was contented at last that Becket should return home, and enjoy
his Bishopric; who being come to Canterbury, the Bishops whom he had
indicted, for Crowning the young King Henry, (which he said, was his right to
have done) made humble suite unto him, to be released of the censure. Which,
when the Archbishop would not grant, but with certain cautions and
exceptions, the Bishops discontented went over to the King, complaining of the
hard measure that was offered them by the Archbishop: whereat the King being
much moved, Shall I never (says he) be at quiet for this Priest? If I had any
about me that loved me, they would find some way or other to rid me of this
trouble. Whereupon four knights standing by that heard the King make this
complaint, namely Reynold Fits-urse, or Bereson, Hugh Morvyll, William Tracy,
and Richard Britton, thinking they should do an acceptable service to the
King, went shortly after into England, and going to Canterbury, found the
Archbishop then at Church, when upon the steps there, they struck him upon
the head with their swords and slew him the thirtieth day of December, in the
year 1172. Afterward, with much ado, by King Henry's means they were
pardoned by the Pope, only enjoined Penance, to go on P^lgrimage to
Jerusalem, as some write; but others more probably, that the King abhorred them
ever after; and that within three years they all dyed miserably. You have
heard his persecution, and (as some would have it called) his Martyrdom: now
hear the honors that have been done him, and the visitations to his Tomb.
And first King Henry himself coming to Canterbury, as soon as he came within
sight of Beckets Church, lighting off his horse, and putting off his hose and
shoes he went barefoot to his Tomb, and for a further penance suffered
himself to be beaten with rods, by every Monk of the Cloister. A few years
after, King Lewis of France comes into England of purpose to visit the Shrine
of Saint Thomas, where having paid his Vows, he makes Oblations with many rich
Presents. The like many Princes since that time have done; and many Miracles
are reported to have been done at his Tomb, which yet may be unbeleeved
without unbelief, and with Faith enough. Another difference in this Kings
days, was between the two Archbishops of England, about the jurisdiction of
Canterbury over York, which being referred to the Pope, he gave judgment on
Canterburies side. Also in this Kings days there was a Schism in the Church
of Rome, two Popes up at once, of whom Alexander the third was one; which
Schism continued the space of almost twenty years. Also in this Kings days,
one Nicholas Breakespeare, borne at Saint Albans, or as others write, at
Langley in Hartfordshire, being a bondsman of that Abbey, and therefore not
allowed to be a Monk there, went beyond Sea, where he so profited in Learning,
that the Pope made him first Bishop of Alba, and afterward Cardinal, and sent
Legate to the Norwayes, where he reduced that nation from Paganism to
Christianity, and returning back to Rome, was chosen Pope, by the Name of
Adrian the fourth, and dyed being choked with a Fly in his drink. In his
days also, Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, came to King Henry, desiring
aid for the Holy Land, but not so much of money as of men; and not so much of
men neither, as of a good General, as himself was; to whom King Henry
answered, that though he were willing to undertake it, yet his unquiet State at
home would not suffer him; with which answer the Patriarch moved, said, Think
not Great King, that Pretenses will excuse you before God, but take this from
me, that as you forsake Gods cause now, so he hereafter will forsake you in
your greatest need. But (says the King) if I should be absent out of my
kingdom, my own Sons would be ready to rise up against me in my absence; to
which the Patriarch replied, No marvel, for from the Devil they came, and to
the Devil they shall^ and so departed. Also in this Kings days there came
into England, thirty Germans, Men and Women, calling themselves Publicans, who
denied Matrimony, and the Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, with
other Articles, who being obstinate, and not to be reclaimed, the King
commanded they should be marked with a hot iron in the forehead, and be
whipped, which punishment they took patiently, their Captain (called Gerard)
going before them singing, Blessed are ye when men hate you. After they were
whipped, they were thrust out of doors in the Winter, where they dyed with
cold and hunger, no man da^ing to relieve them. This King after his conquest of
Ireland, imposed the tribute of Peter pence upon that kingdom, namely, that
every house in Ireland should yearly pay a penny to Saint Peter.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
THis King Founded the Church of Bristow, which King Henry the eighth afterward
erected into a Cathedral: He also Founded the Priories of D^ver; of Stoneley;
and of Basinwerke; and the Castle of Rudlan: and began the Stone Bridge over
the Thames at London. He caused also the Castle of Warwick to be builded.
Maude the Empress his Mother, Founded the Abbey of Bordesly. In his time also
Hugh Mortimer Founded Wigmore Abbey, Richard Lucye the Kings Chief Justice
laid the Foundation of the Coventuall Church, in the honor of Saint Thomas, in
a place which is called Westwood, otherwise Les^es, in the Territory of
Rochester, in the new Parish of Southfleete. He also builded the Castle of
Anger in Essex. Robert Harding a Burgess of Bristow, to whom King Henry gave
the Barony of Barkeley; builded the Monastery of Saint Augustines in Bristow.
In the tenth year of his Reign, London Bridge was new made of Timber, by
Peter of Cole-church a Priest. Robert de Boscue Earl of Leycester, Founded the
monastery of Gerendon, of Monks; and of Leycester, called Saint Mary de Prate,
of Chanons Regular, and his Wife Amicia, Daughter of Ralph Montford, Founded
Eaton, of Nuns. In the two and twentyeth year of his Reign, after the
Foundation of Saint Mary Overeyes Church in Southwarke, the Stone bridge over
the Thames at London, began to be Founded, toward which a Cardinal, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury gave a thousand Marks. Aldred Bishop of Worcester
Founded a Monastery at Gloucester of Benedictine Monks.

Casualties that happened in his time.
IN the Eleventh year of this Kings Reign, on the six and twentyeth day of
January, was so great an Earthquake in Ely, Norfolk, and Suffolk, that it
overthrew them that stood upon their feet, and made the Bells to ring in the
Steeples. In the seventeenth year of his Reign, there was seen at Saint
Osythes in Essex, a Dragon of marveilous bigness, which by moving, burned
houses, and the whole City of Canterbury was the same year almost burnt. In
the eighteenth year of his Reign, the Church of Norwich with the houses
thereto belonging was burnt, and the Monks dispersed. At Andover, a Priest
praying before the Altar, was slain with Thunder. Likewise one Clerk and his
Brother was burnt to death with Lightning. In the three and twentyeth year, a
shower of Blood Rained in the Isle of Wight two hours together. In the four
and twentyeth year, the City of York was burnt, and on Christmas day, in the
Territory of Derlington, in the Bishopric of Durham the Earth lifted up it
self in the manner of an high Tower, and so remained unmovable from morning
till evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise that it frighted the
Inhabitants thereabouts, and the earth swallowing it up, made there a deep
pit, which is seen at this day: for a Testimony whereof Leyland says, he saw
the Pits there, commonly called Hell-kettles. Also in the same year, on the
tenth day of April, the Church of Saint Andrews in Rochester was consumed
with fire. In the eight and twentyeth year of his Reign, Barnewell, with the
Priory, near unto Cambridge was burnt. In the thirtyeth year, the Abbey of
Glastenbury was burnt with the Church of Saint Julian. In the year 1180. a
great Earthquake threw down many buildings, amongst which the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln was rent in pieces the five and twentieth of April: And on
the twentieth of October, the Cathedral Church of Chichester, and all the
whole City was burnt. This year also, near unto Orford in Suffolk, certain
Fishers took in their Nets a Fish, having the shape of a Man in all points,
which Fish was kept by Bartholomew de Glanvile in the Castle of Orford six
months and more; he spoke not a word; all manner of meats he did gladly eat,
but most greedily raw Fish, when he had pressed out the juice; oftentimes he
was brought to Church, but never showed any sign of adoration: at length,
being not well looked to, he stole to the Sea, and never was seen after. In
the year 1188. on the twentieth of September, the Town of Beverley with the
Church of Saint John there was burnt. And in this Kings time the bones of King
Arthur, and his Wife Guynevour, were found in the Vale of Avalon, under an
hollow Oak, fifteen foot under ground; the hair of the said Guynevour being
then whole and of fresh color; but as soon as it was touched, it fell to
powder, as Fabian relates.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married Eleanor Daughter and heir of William Duke of Guien, late Wife of
Lewis the seventh, King of France, but then divorced, but for what cause
divorced is diversely related; some say King Lewis carried her with him into the
Holy Land, where she carried her self not very holily, but led a licentious
life, and which is the worst kind of licentiousness, in carnal familiarity
with a Turk; which King Lewis though knowing, yet dissembled, till coming
home, he then waived that cause, as which he could not bring without disgrace
to himself, and made use of their nearenesse in blood, as being Cousins in the
fourth degree, which was allowed by the Pope, as a cause sufficient to divorce
them, though he had at that time two Daughters by her. Being thus divorced,
Duke Henry marries her, with whom it was never known, but she led a modest and
sober life, a sufficient proof, that the former Report was but a slander. By
this Queen Eleanor he had five Sons, William, Henry, Richard, Geoffry, and
John; and three Daughters, Maude, married to Henry Duke of Saxony; Eleanor,
married to Alphonso the Eighth of that name, King of Castile; and Jane or
Ioane, married to William King of Sicilie. Of his Sons, William dyed young.
Henry borne the second year of his Reign, was Crowned King with his Father,
in the eighteenth year, and dyed the nine and twentyeth year, and was buried
at Roan; married to Margaret, Daughter of Lewis King of France, but left no
issue. Richard, borne at Oxford, in the fourth year of his Fathers Reign, and
succeeded him in the kingdom. Geoffrey, borne the fifth year of his Fathers
Reign, married Constance, Daughter and Heir of Conan, Earl of Little
Britain, in the foureteenth year, and in the two and thirtieth year dyed;
leaving by his Wife Constance, two Daughters, and a Posthumus Son named
Arthur. John, his youngest, called John without Land, because he had no Land
assigned him in his Fathers time; borne the twelfth year of his Fathers
Reign, and succeeded his Brother Richard in the kingdom. And this may be
reckoned a peculiar honor to this King, that of his five Sons, three of them
lived to be Kings; and of his three Daughters, two of them to be Queens.
Concubines he had many, but two more famous then the rest; and one of these
two, more famous then the other: and this was Rosamond, Daughter of Walter Lord
Clifford; whom he kept at Woodstocke, in lodgings so cunningly contrived that
no stranger could find the way in, yet Queen Eleanor did, being guided by a
thread: so much is the eye of jealousy quicker in finding out, then the eye of
care is in hiding. What the Queen did to Rosamond when she came in to her, is
uncertain, but this is certain, that Rosamond lived but a short time after,
and lies buried at the Nunnery of Godst^w near to Oxford. By this Rosamond
King Henry had two Sons, William called Long-Sword; who was Earl of
Salisbury in right of his Wife Ela, Daughter and Heir of William Earl of that
Country, and had by her much issue, whose posterity continued a long time: And
a second Son named Geoffrey, who was first Bishop of Lincoln, and afterward
Archbishop of York, and after five years banishment in his Brother King
John's time, dyed in the year 1213. The other famous Concubine of this King
Henry, was the Wife of Ralph Blewet a knight; by whom he had a Son named
Morgan, who was Provost of Beverley, and being to be elected Bishop of Durham,
went to Rome for a dispensation, because being a Bastard, he was else
incapable: But the Pope refu^ing to grant it, unless he would pass as the
Son of Blewet, he absolutely answered, he would for no cause in the world
deny his Father; and chose rather to lose the Dignity of the Place, then of his
Blood, as being the Son, though but the base Son, of a King.

Of his personage and conditions.
HE was somewhat red of face, and broad breasted; short of body, and
therewithal fat, which made him use much Exercise, and little Meat. He was
commonly called Henry Shortmantell, because he was the first that brought the
use of short Cloakes out of Anjou into England. Concerning endowments of mind,
he was of a Spirit in the highest degree Generous; which made him often say,
that all the World sufficed not to a Courageous heart. He had the Reputation of
a wise Prince all the Christian World over; which made him often say, that all
the World sufficed not to a Courageous heart. He had the Reputation of a wise
Prince all the Christian World over; which made Alphonsus King of Castile, and
Garsyas King of Navarre, refer a difference that was between them, to his
Arbitrament: who so judicious^y determined the Cause, that he gave contentment
to both Parties; a harder matter then to cut Cloth even by a thread. His
Custom was to be always in Action; for which cause, if he had no Real
Wars, he would have Feigned: and would transport Forces either into Normandy
or Britain, and go with them himself, whereby he was always prepared of an
Army: and made it a Schooling to his Soldiers, and to himself an Exercise. To
his Children he was both indulgent and hard: for out of indulgence he caused
his Son Henry to be Crowned King in his own time; and out of hardness he
caused his younger Sons to Rebel against him. He was rather Superstitious,
then not Religious; which he showed more by his carriage toward Becket being
dead then while he lived. His Incontinency was not so much that he used other
Women besides his Wife, but that he used the affianced Wife of his own Son:
And it was commonly thought, he had a meaning to be divorced from his Wife
Queen Eleanor, and to take the said Adela to be his Wife. Yet generally to
speak of him, he was an excellent Prince; and if in some particulars he were
defective, it must be considered he was a Man.

Of his death and burial.
HE was not well at ease before, but when the King of France sent him a List of
those that had conspired against him, and that he found the first man in the
List to be his Son John, he then fell suddenly into a fit of Fainting, which so
increased upon him, that within four days after he ended his life: So strong
a Corrosive is Grief of mind, when it meets with a Body weakened before with
sickness. He dyed in Normandy, in the year 1189. when he had lived threescore
and one years; Reigned near five and thirty: and was buried at Founteverard
in France. the manner of whose burial was thus: He was Clothed in his Royal
Robes, his Crown upon his head, white Gloves upon his hands, Boots of Gold
upon his legs, Gilt Spurs at his heels, a great rich Ring upon his finger,
his Scepter in his hand, his Sword by his side, and his face uncovered and all
bare. As he was carrying to be Buried, his Son Richard in great haste ran
to see him, who no sooner was come near the Body, but suddenly at his Nostrils
he fell a bleeding afresh; which though it were in Prince Richard no good sign
of Innocence, yet his breaking presently into bitter tears upon the seeing it,
was a good sign of Repentance. It may not be unseasonable to speak in this
place of a thing which all Writers speak of, that in the Family of the Earls
of Anjou, of whom this King Henry came, there was once a Princess a great
Enchantresse, who being on a time enforced to take the blessed Eucharist, she
suddenly flew out at the Church window, and was never seen after: From this
Woman these latter Earls of Anjou were descended, which perhaps made the
Patriarch Heraclius say, of this King Henry's Children, that from the Devil
they came, and to the Devil they would. But Writers perhaps had been more
complete, if they had left this Story out of their Writings.

Men of note in his time.
OF Clergy men, there was Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, Hugh Bishop of
Lincoln; Richard Bishop of Winchester; Geoffrey of Ely; Robert of Bathe;
Aldred of Worcester; all Learned Men, and of great integrity of life. Of
Military Men, there was Robert Earl of Leycester; Reynold Earl of Cornwall;
Hugh Bigot, Robert Ferrys, Richard Lacy, Roger Mowbray, Ralph Fulger, Ranulph
Granula, William V^sei, and Baynard Baylioll; Men of great achievements in
War, and of no less abilities in Peace.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING RICHARD THE FIRST.
Of his coming to the Crown, and of his Coronation.
KING Richard, the first of that name, after his Fathers Funeral, went to
Roan, where he settled the state of that Province; and from thence came into
England, where he was Crowned King at Westminster, by the hands of Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury, the third day of September, in the year 1189. And
herein this Prince is more beholding to Writers then any of his Predecessors:
for in speaking of their Crowning, they content themselves with telling where,
and by whom they were Crowned: but of this Prince, they deliver the manner of
his Crowning, in the full amplitude of all circumstances; which perhaps is not
unfit to do, for satisfaction of such as are never like to see a Coronation;
and it was in this manner. First, the Archbishops of Canterbury, Roan, Tryer,
and Dublin, with all the other Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy, apparelled in rich
Copes, and having the Cross, holy Water, and Censers carried before them; came
to fetch him at the door of his Privie-Chamber; and there receiving him, they
led him to the Church of Westminster, till they came before the high Altar,
with a solemn Procession. In the middle of the Bishops and Clergy, went four
Barons, bearing Candlesticks with Tapers; after whom came Geoffrey de Lucie,
bearing the Cap of Maintenance, and John Marshall next to him, bearing a
massive pair of Spurs of Gold; then followed William Marshall Earl of
Striguill, alias Pembroke, who bare the Royal Scepter, in the top whereof
was set a Cross of Gold; and William de Patricke Earl of Salisbury going next
him, bare the Warder or Rod, having on the top thereof a Dove. Then came
three other Earls, David, brother to the King of Scots, the Earl of
Huntington, John the Kings brother, Earl of Mortaigne, and Robert Earl of
Leycester, each of them bearing a Sword upright in his hand, with the scabberds
righly adorned with Gold. The Earl of Mortaigne went in the midst betwixt the
other two; after them followed six Earls and Barons, bearing a Checker Table,
upon the which were set the Kings Scotchens of Armes^ and then followed William
Mandevill Earl of Albemarle, bearing a Crown of Gold a great height before
the King, who followed having the Bishop of Durham on the right hand, and
Reynold Bishop of Bathe on the left; over whom a Canopy was borne: and in this
order he came into the Church at Westminster, where before the high Altar, in
the presence of the Clergy and the people, laying his hand upon the holy
Evangelists, and the relics of certain Saints, he took a solemn Oath that
he should observe peace, honor and reverence to Almighty God, to his Church,
and to his Ministers, all the days of his life: also that he should exercise
upright justice to the people committed to his charge, and that he should
abrogate and disanull all evil Laws and wrongful customs, if any were to be
found in the precinct of his Realm; and maintain those that were good and
laudable. This done, he put off all his garments from his middle upwards, but
only his shirt, which was open on the should^rs, that he might be anointed.
Then the Archbishop of Canterbury anointed him in three places; on the head,
on the shoulders, and on the right arm; with Prayers in such case accustomed.
After this, he covered his head with a linen cloth hallowed, and set his Cap
thereon; and then after he had put on his Royal Garments, and his uppermost
Robe, the Archbishop delivered him the Sword, with which he should beat down
the enemies of the Church: which done, two Earls put his Shoes upon his
feet, and having his Mantle put on him, the Archbishop forbad him on the
behalf of Almighty God, not to presume to take upon him this Dignity, except
he faithfully meant to perform those things which he had there sworn to
perform; whereunto the King made answer, that by Gods grace he would p^rforme
them. Then the King took the Crown beside the Altar, and delivered it to the
Archbishop, which he set upon the Kings head, delivering to him the Scepter to
hold in his right hand, and the Rod Royal in his left hand: and thus being
Crowned, he was brought back by the Bishops and Barons, with the Cross and
Candlesticks, and three Swords, passing forth before him unto his Seat. When
the Bishop that sang the Mass, came to the Offertory, the two Bishops that
brought him to the Church, led him to the Altar, and brought him back again.
The Mass ended, he was brought with solemn Procession into his Chamber: and
this was the manner of this Kings Coronation. But at this solemnity there fell
out a very dysastrous accident: For this Prince not favoring the Jews, as his
Father had done; had given a strict charge, that no Jew should be admitted to
be a spectator of the solemnity: yet certain Jews, as though it had been the
Crowning of their King Herod, would needs be pressing in; and being put back
by Officers set of purpose, it grew to a brabble, and from words to blows, so
as many Ie^es were hurt, and some slain: and thereupon a rumor was suddenly
spread abroad, that the King had commanded to have all the Jews destroyed.
Whereupon it is incredible what rifling there was of Jews houses, and what
cutting of their throats: and though the King signified by public Declaration,
that he was highly displeased with that which was done, yet there was no
staying the fury of the multitude till the next day; so often it falls out, that
great solemnities are waited on with great dysasters; or rather indeed, as
being connaturall, they can hardly be asunder.

Of his first Acts after he was Crowned.
HE began with his Mother Queen Eleanor, whom upon her Husbands displeasure,
having been kept in Prison sixteen years; he not only set at liberty, but set
in as great authority, as if she had been left the Regent of the kingdom. The
next he gratifies, was his brother John; to whom he made appear, how much the
bounty of a Brother was better then the handnesse of a Father. For he conferred
upon him, in England, the Earledomes of Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset, Nottingham,
Darby, and Leycester; and by the marriage of Isabel, daughter and heir to the
Earl of Gloucester, he had that Earldom also; as likewise the Castles of
Marleborough, and Lutgarsall, the Honors of Wallingford, Tichill, and Eye, to
the value of 4000. Marks a year: an estate so great, as were able to put a
very moderate mind into the humor of aspiring, of which Princes should have
care. Concerning his affianced Lady Adela, it may be thought strange, that
having desired her so infinitely when he could not have her, now that he might
have her, he cared not for her: but the cause was known, and in every man's
mouth; that she was now but his Fathers leavings: yet he would not send her
home but very rich in Jewels, to make amends, if it might be, for the loss of
her Virginity: though this was something hard on his part, when the Father had
taken all the pleasure, that the son should afterward pay all the charges.
But by this at least he made a quiet way for his marriage now concluded; and
shortly after to be consummated in Sicilie with Berengaria the daughter of
Garsyas King of Navarre. And now his mind is wholly set upon his long intended
voyage to the Holy Land, for which he thinks not the treasure left by his
Father, to be sufficient, which yet amounted to nine hundred thousand pounds:
but forecasting with himself the great charge it must needs be, to carry an
Army so long a journey, he seeks to enlarge his provision of money by all the
means he can devise. Not long before, Hugh Pudsey had been advanced to the
Bishopric of Durham; and now for a great sum of money he sold him the
Earldom: and then said merrily amongst his Lords, Do ye not think me a
cunning man, that of an old Bishop can make a young Earl? From the Londoners
also he drained great sums of money, and made them recompense in Franchises
and Liberties, which they had not before. He made also greatsales: to the the
King of Scots, he sold the Castles of Berwick and Roxborough, for ten thousand
pounds: to Godfryde Lucie, Bishop of Winchester, the Manors of Weregrave and
Ments: to the Abbot of Saint Edmundsbery, the Manor of Mildhall, for one
thousand Marks of silver: to the Bishop of Durham, the Manor of Sadborough;
and when it was marvelled that he would part with such things, he answered,
that in this case he would sell his City of London, if he could find a
Chapman. But the worst way of all was, that pretending to have lost his Signet,
he made a new; and made Proclamation, that whosoever would safely enjoy what
under the former Signet was granted, should come to have it confirmed by the
new; whereby he raised great sums of money to himself, but greater of
coffeehouse in his subjects. By these, and such like means he quickly
furnished himself with money: and now it remained only to consider, to whose
care he should commit the government of the Kingdom in his absence; and after
deliberation, he made choice for the North parts, of Hugh Bishop of Durham;
joining in Commission with him, Hugh Baldulph, and William Brunell: and for the
South parts, he appoints William Longshampe Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of
England, and for his greater strength, causes the Pope to make a Legate of all
England and Scotland: and for Normandy, and Aquitaine, Robert Earl of
Leycester; all men eminent for prudence and uprightness, and which is most of
all, for loyalty: and indeed to make a man fit for such employment, all these
virtues must concur. As for his brother John, he knew very well his aspiring
mind, and therefore would have tied him to live in Normandy, and not to come
into England till his return; but that their Mother Queen Eleanor interceded,
and passed her word for him: and that nothing might be left unprovided for, he
appointed his Nephew Arthur, the son of his brother Geoffrey Duke of Britain
to be his Successor, if himself should fail. And now, Undique convenere,
vocat jam carbasus auras: every man is ready to take Shipping, and no stay now
but for a Wind; only some say that King Richard before his departing, calling
his Lords and Knights unto him, and swearing them to be true; gave to overy of
them a blew riband to be known by; from whence the first occasion of the Order
of the Garter is thought to begin.

Of his journey into the Holy Land.
KING Richard having prepared an Army of thirty thousand foot, and five
thousand horse, and having appointed to meet Philip King of France in Sicilie,
at the latter end of June, in the year 1190. sets forward himself by Land to
Marseillis, and there stays till his Ships should come about; but his Navy
being driven by tempest to other parts, and the King weary of long staying,
after six weeks, he hireth shipping for himself and his company, and passes
forward to Messana in Sicilie, where arrived also the King of France; and not
long after, his own Navy. In this Island the King William now lately dead, had
married Jane, King Richards sister; from whom Tancred the present King
withheld her Dower: and therefore though he showed King Richard fair
countenance, yet he dealt secretly with the Messanians to use all means to get
him gone; whereupon the Messanians taking a small occasion, set suddenly upon
the English, and thrust them out of their Town: with which King Richard justly
offended, who had his Camp without the Town, prepares himself to revenge the
affront; when Tancred sending to him, to signify that the affront was offered
without his knowledge, and much against his liking, so pacified him, that for
the present he remained satisfied; but understanding afterward, that the
Messanians did but wait their opportunity till the Spring, when King Richard
should be going: he resenting their intention, stays ^ot their leisure, but
assaulting the Town with fire and sword, in one days labor takes it, and had
made great slaughter in it, if King Richard had not been moved to compassion
with the Messanians tears, but chiefly with King Tancreds offers; both to pay
his sister Jane her Dower, and to marry his daughter to King Richards Nephew
Arthur, Duke of Britain, and to give a good part of the Portion in hand. But
King Philip was not well pleased with these conditions, yet he breaks not out
into open dissension, till more fuel was afterward cast upon the fire of his
anger. In the Spring King Philip sails with his Army to Ptolemais otherwise
called Acon) which the Christians had long besieged, and with them he joins:
while King Richard taking his sister Jane, and Berengaria the young daughter of
the King of Navarre with him in 190. Ships, and 50. Galleys, puts to Sea for
the Holy Land, but is by tempest cast upon the Coast of Cyprus; where the
Ilanders seeking to hinder his landing, he sets upon them with his forces; and
invading the Island, easily subdues, and brings it under his subjection; and the
King of the Country being taken prisoner, and entreating King Richard not to
put him in bonds of Iron, King Richard gives him his word, and keeps it, but
puts him in bonds of Silver. In this Island he solemnizeth his marriage with
Berengaria, and then leaving Richard de Canvile, and Robert de Turnham, his
Lieutenants in Cyprus; he passes on to Ptolemais, which City was defended by
Saladine, and had been besieged now two years: when the enemy seeing and
fearing the increase of the Christian forces, propounds conditions, upon which
accepted, they deliver it up in August, the year 1192.

At the taking of this Town there fell out an accident, seeming an honor to
King Richard for the present, but proving a disgrace, at least a great trouble
and charge to him afterward. For Leopold Duke of Austria had first set up his
Colors upon the wall, which King Richard caused to be thrown down, and his
own to be set up; but this was no place to stand a quarrelling, it came not to
the reckoning till some time after. When Ptolemais was taken, Saladine fearing
the Christians further proceeding, dismantles all the best Towns that were
near it: as Porphyria, Caesarea, Ascalon, Gaza; but of Ioppa King Richard
takes a care, and places in it a Colony of Christians. For Ioppa is a City of
Palestine, that was built before the Flood; and has belonging to it a Haven of
great convenience. And now the King of France, though valiant enough himself,
yet thinking his own great acts to be obscured by greater of King Richards; he
began, besides his old hating him, now to envy him. For indeed emulation
when it is in Virtue, makes the stronger knot of love and affection: but when
it is in Glory, it makes a separation, and turns into the passion of envy and
malice; and so did it with King Philip, who pretending the air of the Country
did not agree with his body; but was indeed because the air of King Richards
Glory did not agree with his mind; obtained King Richards consent to return
home, swearing first solemnly, not to molest his Territories in his absence.
But this fell out for the present enterprise most uns^asonably: For the
departure of the King of France, though it diminished not much the strength;
(for he left Od^, Duke of Burgundy in his place) yet it diminished much the
show of assistance: and indeed Saladine, who was at this time in terms of
surrendering Jerusalem; when he saw the King of France departed; as knowing
there must needs be a conclusion, where there was a beginning, doubted not but
the rest would follow soon after, and thereupon st^ied his hands; and grew
more confident then he was before. At this time Guy of Lu^ignan was possessed of
the City of Tire, and with it, of the right of the Kingdom of Jerusalem: with
him King Richard makes an exchange, that G^y should have the Island of Cyprus
which King Richard had won, and King Richard should have the kingdom of
Jerusalem, to which Guy had a right: and upon this Title the Kings of England,
were styled Kings of Jerusalem a long time after: as likewise the posterity of
the said Guy has by this exchange held the kingdom of Cyprus to this day. Now
was King Richard more hot upon taking Jerusalem then ever before, and had
cert^^nely taken it, but that by ill counsel diverted, because the Winter drew
on: and indeed by the drawing back of Odo Duke of Burgundy, who envied that
King Richard should have the honor of taking it, he removed for that season to
Askalon; after which time, the Enemy growing stronger, and the Christians
weaker; all opportunity of taking it was utterly lost, and they could never
come to the like again. And shortly after King Richard was advertised of the
King of France his invading Normandy, contrary to his oath at his departure;
which forced King Richard, much to his grief, to conclude a peace with
Saladine, and that upon conditions not very honorable for the Christians; and
himself presently to retu^ne home: and so sending his wife Berengaria, and his
sister Jane, with a great part of his Army into Sicilie, and from thence into
England: he passes himself with some few in his company, by the way of
Thrace, and was by tempest brought into Dalma^iae; from whence being to pass
through Germany, and particularly through Duke Leopolds Country of Austria: he
remembering the old grudge, changed his apparel, and traveling sometimes
afoote, and sometimes on horseback, he used all means possible to keep
himself from being known: but destiny is not to be avoided, for as soon as
he came to Vienna, partly by his tongue, and partly by his expenses, it was
presently found he was an Englishman, and withal some great man; and by and by
a rumor was spread, that it was Richard King of England: who finding himself
to be discovered, and no means possible to escape, he puts off his disguise,
putting on his Princely apparel, and avowes himself: which Duke Leopold
understanding, sent presently to have him apprehended; but King Richard
refusing to yield himself to any, but to the Duke himself; the Duke himself
came and led hi^ to his own Palace honorably enough, but yet strongly
guarded: whereof as soon as Henry the Emperor heard, he sent with great
instance to Duke Leopold to send King Richard over to him, under pretense of
safer custody, but with a purpose indeed to be a sharer in his Ransom. And the
Duke though well knowing his meaning, yet knowing withal that it was not safe
for him to deny the Emperor, he sent him over to him; who soon after put him
into a prison he had, called Trivallis, into which no man was ever known to be
put that escaped with life, though done perhaps to him, but in terrorem, to
draw the better Ransom from him. That with which King Richard was charged,
beside the wrong done to Leopold, in throwing down his Colors at Ptolemais,
was the death of Conrade Duke of Tire, whom they pretended King Richard had
murdered; wherein though King Richard made his innocence appear by the
testimony of Limbeldus, who confessed himself to have been the author of the
Marquesses death; yet the pretense served to detain him in prison; and in
prison indeed they kept him, till his Ransom was agreed upon and paid: which
being a hundred thousand pounds, fourscore thousand was paid in hand: whereof
two parts to the Emperor, a third part to Duke Leopold: and for the rest,
hostages given to the number of fifty; of whom the Bishop of Roan was one:
though the hostages afterward were delivered without paying the rest: for Henry
the Emperor dying shortly after, his Successor had the conscience not to take
it, as knowing it had been unjustly exacted: and indeed the accidents that
befell both the Emperor and the Duke Leop^ld, were evident demonstrations of
the injustice they had done; for the Emperor shortly after died; and the Duke
Leopold, in a Tilting for solemnity of his Birthday, fell off his horse, and
so broke his leg, that to save his life, he was feign to have his leg cut off.
And now after fifteen months imprisonment, King Richard is released, and
returns into England four years elder then he went out; and thus ended his
journey to the Holy Land. Yet one memorable accident happening to him in the
Holy Land, may not be omitted; that going one day a Hawking about Ioppa,
finding himself weary, he laid him down upon the ground to sleep; when
suddenly certain Turks came upon him to take him; but he awakened with their
noise, ri^eth up, gets a horseback, and drawing out his sword, assaults the
Turks, who faigning to fly, drew the King into an Ambush where many Turks
lay; who had certain^ly taken him if they had known his person: but one of the
Kings servan^, called William de Patrellis, crying out in the Saracene tongue,
that he was the King; they presently lay hold upon him, and let the King escape.

Troubles in his Dominions in his absence.
KING Richard at his going out of England, had so well settled the Government of
the Kingdom, that might well have kept it in good order during all the time of
his absence; but disorders are weeds which no foresight can hinder from
growing, having so many hands to water them: where occasions of distaste are no
sooner offered, then taken; and o^tentimes taken before they be offered, as was
here to be seen. For King Richard had left in chief place of authority,
William Longshampe, Bishop of Ely; a man who so carried himself, that although
the things he did, were justifiable; yet the pride with which he did them was
unsuffer^ble: seldom riding abroad without five hundred, some say a thousand
in his train; not for safety, but for state: and though there were other left
in authority besides himself, yet his power was so predominant, that he made
of them but Ciphers, and ruled all as he list himself. This insolency of
governing was soon distasted by many, and specially by John the Kings brother,
who counting the greatness of his Birth an equal match at least with any
substitute greatness, affronted the Bishop in the managing of affairs, in such
sort, that while some adhered to the one, and some to the other; the Kingdom
in the mean time was in danger to be rent asunder, till at last the Bishop
finding himself too weak, or at least fearing that he was so; but rather
indeed deposed from his authority by the Kings Letters, and the Archbishop of
Roan put in his place, thought it best for him to fly the Real^e: whereupon for
his greater safety, disguising himself in woman's apparel, and carrying a
Web of Cloth under his arm, he sought in this manner to take Shipping and
pass the Sea. But being discovered and known, the women in revenge of the
abuse done to their clothes, in making them his instruments of fraud; fell
upon him, and so beat him, that it might have beaten humility into him for ever
after. This disgrace made him glad to get him into Normandy, his native
Country, where to little purpose he wooed King Richard and Queen Eleanor for
reparation. But this was but a sport in comparison of the mischiefs done in
Normandy by Philip King of France: for first he invades Normandy, where he
takes many Towns, and amongst others Gysorts, and draws the Kings brother John
to combine with him, promising to assist him in winning the Kingdom of
England, and to have his sister Adela, whom King Richard had repudiated to be
his wife; with which promise Duke John had been ensnared, if his Mother Queen
Eleanor had not dissuaded him. But in England Duke John took upon him as King,
persuading the people that his brother King Richard was not living; and indeed
it was easy to remove, the knowing him to be a prisoner, to the affirming him
to be dead; but such was the faithfulness of the Archbishop of Roan, and
other the Princes of the Realm to King Richard, that they opposed Duke John,
and frustrated all his practices: and the Bishop of Ely had told him plainly,
that though King Richard were dead, yet the succession in the kingdom belonged
not to him, but to Arthur Duke of Britain, son of Geoffrey his elder
brother. And in these terms King Richard found his State when he returned from
the Holy Land.

His Acts and Troubles after his returning from the Holy Land.
AT his coming home from the Holy Land, the first thing he did; was to give
his Lords and people thanks for their faithfulness to him in his absence, and
then for their readiness in supplying him for his Ransom. But as for his
brother John in whom ungratefulness seemed to strive with ambition, which
should be the greater in him; he depriveth him of all those great possessions
he had given him: some ado he had to make sound certain pieces which he had
corrupted, as the Castles of Marleborough, Lancaster, and a Fortress at Saint
Michaels Mount in Cornwall; but chiefly the Castles of Nottingham and Tichill,
which stood so firmly for Duke John, that they were not reduced to obedience
without some blood, and much expense. But h^s greatest trouble was with Philip
King of France, in whom was so ingraffed a spleen against King Richard, that
he seemed to be never well but when he was working him some ill. Now therefore
King Richard to make it appear he had not left the Holy War for nothing
(having first obtained in Parliament a Subsidy toward his charges, and caused
himself to be new Crowned at Winchester, lest the people through his long
absence might have forgotten they had a King) he departs with a hundred Ships
into Normandy; but it was withal, upon this occasion: sitting one day at
dinner, in his little Hal (as it was called) news was brought him, that King
Philip had besieged Vernoull, with which he was somoved, that he swore a great
oath, he would not turn his face till he were revenged: whereupon he caused
the wall right before him to be presently beaten down, that so he might pass
forward without turning his face; and thus in haste he goes to Vernoull,
whither he was no sooner come, but the King of France made as great haste to be
gone, not without some loss, and more disgrace. Here his brother John submits
himself to him, and with great show of penitence entreats his pardon, which he
readily granted; saying only, I wish you may as well remember your fault, as I
shall forget it. The King of France having left Vernoull, enters Turonia, and
near to Vindocinum pitcheth his Tents; thither King Richard follows him, and
with his coming so affrighted him, that leaving bag and baggage, Munition,
Tents, and Treasure to a mavelous value, he gets him gone, and glad he was
so rid of King Richard. After this a Truce was agreed upon for a year, which
each of them longed till it were expired, as having no pleasure but in
troubling one another. In this time there was a trouble at home, though not to
the King, yet to the kingdom: for Robin Hood accompanied with one little John,
and a hundred stout fellows more, molested all passengers upon the Highway;
of whom it is said, that he was of Noble blood, at least made Noble, no less
then an Earl, for some deserving services: but having wasted his estate in
riotous courses, very penury forced him to take this course; in which yet it
may be said he was honestly dishonest, for he seldom hurt any man, never any
woman, spared the poor, and only made prey of the rich: till the King setting
forth a Proclamation to have him apprehended, it happened he fell sick at a
certain Nunnery in Yorkshire, called Birckleys; and desiring there to be let
blood, was betrayed, and made bleed to death. Such another trouble, though not
to the King, yet to the kingdom, fell out by reason of the Jews: and first at
the Town of Linne in Norfolk, upon this occasion: A Jew being turned
Christian, was persecuted by those of his Nation, and assaulted in the street;
who thereupon flying to a Church hard by, was thither also followed, and the
Church assaulted; which the people of the Town seeing, in succor of the new
Christian they fell upon the Jews, of whom they slew a great number, and after
pillaged their houses. By this example the like assaults were made upon the
Jews at Stamford; and after that at Lincoln; and lastly at York, where
infinite numbers of Jews were massacred; and some of them blocked up in the
Castle, cut the throats of their wives and children, and cast them over the
walls upon the Christians heads, and then burnt both the Castle and themselves:
neither could this sedition be stayed, till the King sent his Chancellor, the
Bishop of Ely, with force of Arms, to punish the offenders. His last trouble
was a punishment of covetousness, for one Guydomer having found a great
treasure in the Kings Dominions, and ^or fear of King Richard, flying to a
Town of the King of France for his safeguard; was pursued by the King, but the
Town denying him entrance, and he thereupon going about the walls to find the
fittest place for assaulting it, one Bertram de Gurdon, or as others call him,
Peter Basile, shot at him with a Crossebow, and hit him on the arm, of which
wound he died within fo^re days after, and so ended all his troubles.

Of his Taxations, and ways for raising of money.
OF Taxations properly so called, there were never fewer in any Kings Reign:
but of ways to draw money from the subject, never more. It is true, the first
money raised for his journey, was all out of his own estate, by selling or
pawning of Lands; but when at his coming back, he resumed the Lands into his
hands aga^ne, without paying back the money he had received; this if it may
not have the name, yet certainly it had the venom of a bitter Taxation.
Likewise the feigning to have lost his Seal, and then enjoining them to have
their Grants confirmed by a new; though it went not in the number, yet it had
the weight of a heavy Taxation where it lighted. Afterward, the money raised
for his Ransom, was not so properly a Taxation, as a Contribution: or if a
Taxation for him, yet not by him; which was done in his absence, by the
subjects themselves: and indeed no Taxations are commonly so pinching, as those
which are imposed upon the subject by the subject, and such was this; for to
raise money for his Ransom, ther^ was imposed upon every Knights Fee, 20. s.
of all Laymens Revenues, the fourth part; and the fourth part of all the
Revenues of the Clergy, with a tenth of their goods. Also the Chalices and
Treasure of all Churches were taken to make up the sum. Afterward, this only
was a plain Taxation, and granted in Parliament; that of every Plough-land
through England, he should have two shillings, and of the Monks Ci^teaux, all
their Wool of that year: And one more greater then this; and was this year
imposed toward his wars in Normandy; that every Hide of Land, as much as to
say, every hundred Acres of Land, should pay five shillings; which computed
without deductions, will rise to a sum that will seem incredible.

Laws and Ordinances in his time.
HIs Ordinances were chiefly for the Meridian of London: for where before his
time the City was governed by Portgraves, this King granted them to be governed
by two Sheriffs and a Major, as now it is; and to give the first of these
Magistrates the honor to be remembered, the names of the Sheriffs were Henry
Cornhill, and Richard Reyner; and the name of the first Lord Major, was Henry
Fits-Allwyn, who continued Major during his life, which was four and twenty
years. And now began the City first to receive the form and state of a
Commonwealth, and to be divided into Fellowships and Corporations, as at this
day they are: and this Franchise was granted in the year 1189. the first year
of King Richard the first.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
THe Church within his own Dominions was quiet all his time, no contestation
with the Pope, no alterations amongst the Bishops, no difference between the
Clergy and the Laity, or the Clergy amongst themselves; they all seemed to lie
asleep, till they were afterward awakened, in the time of the succeeding
King. But abroad, in his time, there was an addition of three Orders of
Devotion; the Order of the Augustine Friars, called Friars Mendicants, begun
by William of Paris; then the Order of Friars Minors begun by Saint Francis;
and lastly the Orders of Friars Preachers begun by Saint Dominick, though not
confirmed till the first year of Pope Honorius.

Works of Piety in his time.
Works of Piety are for the most part works of plenty; penury may inwardly
have good wishes, but outwardly it can express but little: and indeed all
parts of the kingdom, all sorts of people were drawn so dry; by the two great
occasions of his Journey and his Ransom, and afterward by other Taxations,
that the richest men had enough to do to maintain themselves, without being
at the charge to make provision for others. All works of Piety were now for
the service of the Holy Land, and therefore it may well pass, if not for a
work of Devotion, at least worthy to be remembered; that William Bishop of Ely
builded the outer wall of the Tower of London, and caused a deep ditch to be
made about it, with an intention the River of Thames should have surrounded it,
though it could not be effected. Only Hubert Walter, who at one time was
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Popes Legate, Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice, and the immediate Governor under the King, both in Wales and England,
Founded a Monastery at West Derham in Norfolk, where he was borne: begun
another at Wolverhampton, and finished a Collegiate Church at Lambeth.

Of his Wif^ and Children.
IN his Infancy he was contracted to a daughter of Raymond Earl of Barcelone,
after that affianced to Adela, or Alice, daughter of Lewis King of France, yet
married to neither of them; but he married Berengaria daughter of Garsias King
of Navarre, whom his Mother Queen Eleanor brought unto him into Sicilie, from
whence passing into Cyprus, their marriage was there solemnised: afterward,
going forward to the Holy Land, he carried her and his sister Jane Queen of
Sicilie along with him, where they remained till his return home; and then
sent them to pass to Sicilie, and from thence into England: but that ever she
came into England, no mention is made, neither what became of her after she
parted from King Richard at the Holy Land. But children certainly he had none,
either by his wife, or by any Concubine, unless we reckon as a Priest in
Normandy did; who told King Richard, he had three daughters: and the King
marvelling who they should be, seeing he knew of none he had; yes (says the
Priest) you have three daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery; which the
King taking merrily, called to the company about him, and said; I am told by a
Priest here, that I have three daughters, and I desire you to be witnesses how
I would have them bestowed: my daughter Pride, upon the Templars and
Hospitallers: my daughter Covetousness, upon the Monks of the Cistercian
Order: and my daughter Lechery, upon the Clergy.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN his time the Town of Mawling in Kent, with the Nunnery, was consumed with
fire, and in his time the bones of Arthur the famous King of Britain were
found at Glastenbury in an old Sepulcher, about which stood two Pillars, in
which letters were written but could not be read; Upon the Sepulcher was a
cross of Lead, whereon was written, Here ly^th the Noble King of Britain
Arthur. Also in this Kings days for three or four years together, there
reigned so great a dearth, that a Quarter of Wheat was sold for 18. shillings
8. pence, and then followed so great a mortality of men, that scarce the living
sufficed to bury the dead.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was tall of stature, and well proportioned, fair and comely of face, of
hair bright abourne, of long arms, and nimble in all his joints, his thighs
and legs of due proportion, and answerable to the other parts of his body. To
speak of his moral parts, his Vices for the most part, were but only upon
suspicion: Incontinency in him much spoken of, nothing proved; but his Virtues
were apparent, for in all his actions he showed himself Valiant, (from whence
he had the appellation or surname of Cae^r de Lion) wise, liberal, merciful,
just, and which is most of all, Religious; a Prince borne for the good of
Christendom; if a Bar in his Nativity had not hindered it. The remorse for
his undutifulneesse toward his Father, was living in him till he dyed: for at
his death he remembered it with bewailing, and desired to be Buried as near him
as might be, perhaps as thinking they should meet the sooner, that he might
ask him forgiveness in another world.

Of his Death and Burial.
HE dyed of a wound with an Arrow in his Arm, which neglected at first, and
suffered to wrankle, or as others say, ill handled by an unskilful Surgeon,
in four days brought him to his End. But his Charity deserves to have it
remembered, that finding himself past hope of Recovery, he caused the Party
that had wounded him to be brought before him, who being asked what moved him
to do this Fact? answered, that King Richard had killed his Father and two of
his Brothers with his own hand, and therefore would do it, if it were to do
again. Upon this Insolent answer, every one looked the King should have
censured him to some terrible punishment, when contrary to all their
expectations in a high degree of Charity, he not only freely forgave him, but
gave a special charge he should be set at liberty, and that no man should dare
to do him the least hurt: commanding besides to give him a hundred shillings
for his pains. An Act that well showed he had been at the Holy Land, or
rather indeed that he was going to it. He dyed the sixth day of April in the
year 1199. when he had lived 44. years, Reigned nine, and about nine months,
and had his Body Buried at Founteverard, by his Father; his heart at Roan, in
remembrance of the hearty love that City had always borne him; and his bowels
at Chalons, for a disgrace of their unfaithfulness; others say at Carlisle in
England.

Of Men of Note in his time.
IN his time were famous Baldwyn Archbishop of C^nterbury, who followed King
Richard into the Holy Land, and dyed there; Hubert that succeeded him; Hugh
Bishop of Lincoln; William Bishop of Ely, a man equally famous and infamous;
also Baldwyn Archbishop of Canterbury, a learned Writer in Divinity; Daniel
Morley a great Mathematician, John de Herham, and Richard de Herham, two
notable Historians; Guilielmus Stephonides a Monk of Canterbury, who wrote
much in the praise of Archbishop Becket; also one Richard Divisiensis,
Nicholas Walkington, and Robert de Bello Foco, an excellent Philosopher. Of
Martial men, Robert Earl of Leycester; Ranulph de Fulgers; two of the
B^^dolphs, Hugh and Henry; three Williams, Marshall, Brun^ll and Mandevill,
with two Roberts, Rosse, and S^vevile.

THE REIGN OF KING JOHN.
KING Richard being dead, the right of Succession remained in Arthur, Son of
Geoffrey Plantagen^t elder Brother to Earl John, but John as thinking the
title of Arthur but a Criticisme in State, and not for every ones capacity, at
least in common sense not so plain as his own, who was the son of a King,
and the Brother to a King, ascends into the Throne as confidently as if he had
no competitor: Only Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury went before, and made an
Oration in his behalf, wherein seeking to do him a courtesy, he did him
indeed a wrong; for waiving his Right of Succession, he insisted wholly upon
their Right of Election; whereof would follow, that as they brought him in, so
they might cast him out; of which error when he was told, he said, he did it
of purpose to make King John the more careful of his Government, by making him
sensible upon what an unsure ground his Regality stood: King John resented it,
but seeing it to serve his turn for the present, he took it not ill, as
knowing that his turn once served, he could afterward be his own carver of
what title he pleased; and so upon Ascension day in the year 1199. he was
Crowned King at Westminster, with more solemnity then joy; many presaging by
their countenances, and more in their minds, that all would not long be well.
It cannot be denied, but that in moral circumstances Earl John had the
advantage of his Nephew Arthur; for he was a Man of years fit to Govern,
Arthur but a Child, not above thirteen years old; he a Native, at least
always bred up in the Kingdom, Arthur a Forrainer, and had never been here;
He well known both to the Nobility and the People, Arthur a stranger to both,
as one they had never ^eene; and besides to these moral advantages, he had now
added one from the Politickes, that he had gotten Possession; (of more force in
the practical part then all the former) and withal a greater then all these,
if it be true which some write, that his Brother King Richard had assigned him
his Successor after his decease. But yet knowing the Title at last would come
to be tried in a Court, where the Sword must be Judge; he imployeth all his
endeavors to get this Judge to be his friend, and by all means possible to
strengthen himself with Arms; and thereupon going to Chinon and Roan, he
seiseth upon the Treasure which his Brother had left in those parts, and with
it, gets Friends and Soldiers, the Armor of Arms. And indeed all he could
have done himself would have done him no good, if he had not had the help of
able Assistants, who yet assisted him no less for their own ends then for
his; and these were chiefly his Mother Queen Eleanor, who knew if her
Grand-sonne Arthur should be King, that then his Mother Constantia would rule
all; at least during his Minority, and thereby her self put from the Stage of
all Authority; and the Archbishop Hubert, who also knew that if Arthur should
come to Reign, that then the Anjouyn and French should have all the best
Offices, and the English wholly be neglected, as it was in the time of King
William the Conqueror. And yet a greater Friend then both these, for coming
to Roan, he used means that Walter the Archbishop in the Cathedral Church
with great pomp girt him with the Ducall sword of Normandy, and Crowned him
with a Coronet of Golden Roses, he taking his Oath for Faithful Administration
in that Dukedom, and they their Oath for being his Loyal Subjects.

Of his troubles in contestation with his Nephew Arthur.
THough King John had entered upon Normandy, and made that Province sure unto
him, yet the Province of Anjou stood firm for Arthur, in observance of their
love to his Father their former Prince: which also King John soon after
invading, reduces by Force of Arms to his Obedience. And now Constantia the
Mother of Prince Arthur, finding King John too powerful an adversary, and no
likelihood for her party, to be able long to stand out against him without
further assistance, conceives it her best way to have recourse to the King of
France, and thereupon commits her Son Arthur to his Tuition: who seemed to
receive him with the tenderness of a Father, and promises to assist him with
his uttermost Forces, in the recovery of his Right both in France and England.
Here we may observe upon what hinge the affection of the Kings of France was
used to turn. For in King Henry the seconds time, King Lewis of France was so
great a Friend to his Son Richard, that by all means he would help him to
get the kingdom from his Father; Afterward when Richard was King, then Philip
King of France, was so great a Friend to John, that by all means he would
help him to get the kingdom from his Brother; and now that John is come to be
King, he is presently grown so great a Friend of Arthur, that by all means he
will help him to get the kingdom from his Uncle; and no doubt, if Arthur
should ever have come to be King, he would have been as ready to help any
other to get the kingdom from him: by which it appears, that it was not the
Persons of the Men they either hated or loved, but that they were always
jealous of their growing too great; and indeed this ballancing of States keeps
Princes affections always in suspense, and never suffers the Glass of their
Love or Hate, to make a true Reflection. About this time William King of Scots
came to London to visit King John, and there did homage to him for his kingdom
of Scotland, though some say, but only for the Counties of Northumberland and
Cumberland, but being required aid against the French, he excused himself,
saying, he could not do it without consent of his kingdom, and so returned
home.

And now Philip King of France having undertaken the protection of the young
Prince Arthur, with a mighty Army enters Normandy, takes many of the best
Towns, and pursuing his Victories, enters the Province of Anjou also, and
recovers it from King John, which he the year before had gotten from Prince
Arthur. Upon this King John makes a Journey into Normandy, accusing King Philip
for breaking the Truce, which formerly he had made with King Richard for five
years; but when he should come to make his Accusation good by Arms, he
falls to Treaties, and obtains a new Truce for fifty days: with which new
Truce, Baldwyn Earl of Flanders, who had professed himself of that side, was
not well pleased; and thereupon comes to King John to Roan, and entering a new
League with him, they there consult how to proceed, when the fifty days should
be expired. This consultation the King of France understood; and thereupon both
sides prepare for war, but at the end of the Truce, both sides seemed to
relent, and diverse meetings were had for Treaties of Peace, and in conclusion,
King John more desirous of Peace then was for his Honor, agreed to these
Conditions; that his Ni^ce Blanch, Daughter of Alphonsus King of Castile by his
Sister Eleanor, should marry with Lewis King Philips Son, who should have
with her in Dower, besides thirty thousand Marks in money, all those Cities,
except only Angiers, which the French before that time had taken, which were
many and very great: and his Peace thus made, he returns into England with
great joy, but was not with like joy received of the English Lords, who counted
themselves dishonored, in the dishonorable Conditions he had made; and
Baldwyn Earl of Flanders also, when he saw the poor spi^its of King John, to
descend to such base Conditions; left his Party, and entering League with the
King of France, disposed himself for the Holy War.

But King John having now gotten a Vacation, and a time of ease, which agreed
much better with his nature then War, sets his mind wholly upon pleasures;
and for maintaining his pleasures, upon seeking after profit, which he pursues
by all manner of injustice, under the name of Prerogative; and with such
violence, that when his Brother Geoffrey Archbishop of York, in the
dutifulness of a Counselor, advised him not to take such unlawful courses,
he most unworthily took from him all he had, and it was a years work for all
the Archbishops friends to pacify his anger. In the neck of this injustice,
he commits another, he procures a divorce from his Wife Avis, the Daughter of
Robert Earl of Gloucester, only for being of kin to him in the third degree,
and by advice of the King of France, marries Isabell Daughter and Heir of the
Earl of Angoulesme, Affianced before to Hugh le Brun Earl of March; and
shortly after brings her with him into England, where he and she together, are
both Crowned at Canterbury. And here the Earls and Barons of the Realm, being
all summoned to attend the King into France at Whitsontide following; they all
by a general consent send him word, that unless he would restore them their
Rights and Liberties, they would do him no service out of the kingdom. But
what it was that made the Lords more violent in pressing their Demands at this
time then before, no Writers of these times do sufficiently deliver: Only
some of them speak scatteringly of certain oppressions (besides the general
Grievance for Exactions) lately offered to some of the Lords, one to the Earl
of Chester, whom he would have banished, only for advising him to leave his
cruelty and incontinency: Another, a pursuit in Love to a Daughter of Robert
Fits-Water, called Maude the Fair, who not consenting to the Kings lust, a
messenger was sent to give her poison in a potched Egg, whereof she dyed: And
a third, offered to William de Brawse and his Lady, for a rash word spoken; for
when the King sent to have de Brawses Son delivered him for a pledge, the
Lady answered, We shall do well indeed to commit our Son to his keeping, who
kept so well his own Nephew Prince Arthur. This rash word cost de Brawse his
Country, and his Lady and their Son their lives, both of them being famished to
death in Prison. For, though these directly were but particular Grievances, yet
reflectingly they were general, what one suffered all might; but whether any
of these, or all of these together, were Ingredients to make a Compound of
violence in the Lords at this time, or whatsoever was the true cause, this was
plainly the effect, that unless the King would restore their liberties, they
would not follow him out of the kingdom. But notwithstanding this refusal of
his Lords, he passes over with his Queen into Normandy, and from thence to
Paris, where the King of France receives them with all complements of Love and
amity. But now Hugh Earl of March, resenting the injury done him by King John;
in taking away his affianced Wife, joins with Prince Arthur, and the King of
France also, for all his fair show of amity lately made, joins with them, as
having sometime before married his youngest Daughter to Prince Arthur, and
these with their Forces joined, invade first the Turones, and then the
Anjovins: of which Province Queen Eleanor the Kings Mother was left Regent,
who thereupon betakes her self to Mirabell the strongest Town of those parts,
and sends to her Son King John, acquainting him with the danger she was in,
and requiring his speedy succor. When in the mean time Prince Arthur takes
the City, and in it his Grandmother Queen Elea^or, whom he used with greater
reverence and respect then she expected. But King John at the hearing hereof,
was so moved, calling the French King ungrateful and perfidious for succouring
Prince Arthur, contrary to his League, that study^ng presently the Art of
Revenge, he fell upon a stratagem, of all other the most prudent against an
Enemy: For a Surprise in War is like to an Apoplexy in the Body, which
strikes without giving warning for defense: And this Stratagemme at this time
King John put in practice, for traveling night and day with indefatigable
labor, he came upon his enemies before they were aware, and setting upon them
unprovided, it was rather an execution then a battle; and they who remained
unslaine were taken prisoners, amongst whom Prince Arthur himself, who
committed presently to the custody of Robert de Veypont in Roan, lived not long
after whether it were that attempting to make escape, he fell down from the
walls of his Prison, and was drowned in the River Seyne, as some say; or whether
it were, that through anguish of mind he fell sick and dyed, as others say;
or whether indeed he were made away by King John, as the common fame went;
Certain it is, that he survived his imprisonment but a very few days. But
though he were gone, yet his sister Eleanor, a preceding Competitor to King
John, was still remaining: Her therefore, at this time also King John seiseth
upon, and commits her in safe custody to Bristow Castle, where, after she had
lived long, she dyed.

Of his Troubles after the death of his Nephew Arthur.
KIng John being now freed from his Competitor, one would think he should have
ended all his troubles, but like a Hydraes head, they rather multiplied upon
him: For they who had been so ready to assist Prince Arthur in his life, were
now as ready to revenge his death. And first, Constance his Mother comes to
King Philip, with open exclamations against King John, accusing him with the
murder of her Son, and with all the instance of Tears and Entreaties,
solicites him to revenge it. Hereupon King Philip summons King John to appear
at a day, and because he appeared not according to the tenure of his Homage, it
was decreed against him, that he had forfeited all the property of his Estate
in France, and thereupon King Philip with mighty Forces invades his
Territories, takes many Towns of principal consequence, while King John lived
idle at R^an, no more regarding it then if it had not at all concerned him; and
when some of his Lords seemed to marvel what he meant to suffer the French to
rob him of such goodly Cities: You say true indeed, (says he) for it is but
Robbery, and within a few days you shall see, I will make him to restore them
back with usu^y. In this slighting humor he returns into England, where he
looks not after the levying of Soldiers, or the raising of an Army, as this
case required, but continues his old course for raising of money, accusing
sometimes one of his Lords, sometimes another, as (...) it were their fault
that he had lost these Towns in France^ and upon (...) made many of them pay
great sums of money, which brought (...) into hatred at home, but into
contempt abroad; for the King of (...) ^n^^^standing his unworthy courses,
proceeds more violently in his Invasi^ns (...), getting Falai^, Damfr^nt, and
all the good Towns of Normandy, but only Roan, and at last, though R^an was a
Town strongly fortifyed with Walls, and more strongly with the faithful
hearts of the Inhabi^ants, yet finding no hope of succor from King John, it
was forced for want of Victuals to submit it self to the King of France, whose
example all the other Cities followed; and so all Normandy returned to the
subjection of the French, after three hundred and sixteen years that Roll^
the Dane had first possessed it. It was now the year 1205. and the fourth of
King John's Reign, about which time, the two props of his Estate, or rather
indeed, the two Bridles of his intemperancy, dyed, his Mother Queen Eleanor,
whose virtues had oftentimes qualifyed the vices of her Son; and Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, who repented him at his death of nothing more, then
that he had been an Instrument of bringing him to the Crown.

And now King John being a Substantive of himself, has a devise in his head
to make his subjects as willing to give him money as he was to have it: for
knowing the great coffeehouse they all had for his losses in France; he
gives it out, that he would presently rais^ an Army, for recovery of those
losses, if he might have money to go about it: whereupon, never was money
given with more alacrity; and as soon as he had it, he instantly went to
Portesmouth, and there took Shipping before it was possible for his Lords and
others to be in readiness to accompany him; and sailing forward some certain
Leagues into the Sea, upon a sudden he returns back again, and then lays
the fault upon his Lords, that had not followed him; and for this backwardness
of theirs, imposed afterward great Fines upon them; by which means he got
money no less by pretense of his not going, then he had done before by
pretense of his going. About this time died Geoffrey Fits-Peter Justitiar of
England, who while he lived kept the King in some awe, in so much, as hearing
he was dead, he swore by the feet of God, that now at length he was King of
England; and with great rejoicing said to some Lords about him: Now when this
man comes into Hell, let him salute the Archbishop Hubert, whom certainly he
shall find there. But Philip, King of France, intending to leave the English
nothing on that side the Sea, invadeth Chinon, and takes it; and in it the
valiant Captain Roger Lacie, which had given a period to King Philips
victories, had not Guido the husband of Constantia Prince Arthurs Mother
revolted to King John; who with his assistance once again leavies an Army,
besieges Mount Auban, a Castle thought impregnable, and within fifteen days
takes it, which Charles the Great could not get with his seven years siege:
where so great a number of French Lords were taken prisoners, that King John
sent a Catalogue of their names into England, for a memorial of so great a
victory. After this, he takes the strong Town of Angiers, and utterly
defaceth it; for which afterward he was sorry, as being the Town where he was
borne. But now when the two Kings were ready to meet, and to give battle,
intercession was made by friends of both sides, and thereupon a Peace concluded
for two years: and King John returned into England.

King John being returned, performs no less worthy acts at home, then he had
done in France: for first he invades the Borders of Scotland, and brings
Alexander King of Scots to do him homage; and then understanding many of the
Irish to be revolted, he passes over to Dublin, and reduces them to his
obedience; and then placing John Bishop of Norwich Governor there, he returns
into England; where passing through Wales, he subdueth certain Rebels there,
and takes eight and twenty children of the best Families, for pledges of their
future loyalty; but not long after, hearing they grew mutinous and rebelled
again, he was so incensed, that he would not go to dinner till he had seen
those twenty eight children to be all hanged before his face: so inconsiderate
a thing is the desire of revenge, that it makes no difference between
innocence and guiltiness; though indeed a thing oftentimes must be done for
example, which considered in it self, would be forborne.

And it was the year 1214. and the fourteenth of K. John's Reign, when he going
to Angiers, strongly repaires it; and the Province of Poictou revolted to him;
which Lewis King Philips son understanding, comes upon them with a mighty
Army, and using much severity upon the Authors of the revolt, takes prisoners,
Reynold Earl of Boleigne, and William Earl of Salisbury, with many others of
King John's Captains, and defeateth his whole Army: whereof when King John was
certified, he grew in a manner desperate, and as a man dejected, makes a new
Truce upon any conditions with the King of France, and returns into England;
where he finds a worse business ready to entertain him: for the Lords of the
Realm having often required their ancient Rights and Liberties; and finding
nothing but delusions, endure no longer to be abused; but meeting at Saint
Edmundsbery, they there confer how they may find a remedy to redress this
evil; and at la^t concluded to go to the King themselves in person, and make
their Demands; whereof a Charter was produced, that had been formerly granted
in King Henry the firsts time: whereupon coming to the King after Christmas,
lying then in the New Temple, and acquainting him with their Demands; he gives
them this fair Answer, that within a few days he would give them
satisfaction; and causes the Bishops of Canterbury and Ely, with William
Marshall, Earl of Gloucester, to pass their words for him, that it should be
performed. But the King meaning nothing less then to do as he said, falls
presently a leavying of Soldiers; which the Lords understanding, they also do
the like; and going to the Bishop of Canterbury, deliver him a Copy of their
Demands, and require the Kings Answer. But the Bishop showing it to the King,
and humbly entreating him to give the Lords a satisfactory Answer: he swore a
great Oath, they might as well demand the Kingdom, and that he would die
before he would yield to any such demands. Whereupon the Lords (knowing now
what they were to trust to) fall to besiege Northampton, and after that,
Redford, which is yielded to them; and withal they are sent to by the
Londoners, to signify their readiness to join with them. At this time the
King was at Windsor providing an Army, but hearing the Londoners were joined
with the Lords, he thought it no good way to proceed by force, but rather by
fraud; and thereupon sends to the Lords, that if they would come to him to
Windsor, he would grant their demands. The Lords coming thither, but in a
Military manner, (for they durst not trust his word) the King saluted them all
kindly, and promised to give them satisfaction in all they demanded; and so in
a Meadow between Windsor and Stanes, called Running-meade, he freely consented
to confirm their former Liberties; and was content some grave Personages
should be chosen to see it performed. But the next day, when it should be done,
he gets him gone to South-hampton, and from thence to the I Will of Wight; where
advising with his Council, what in this case was fittest to be done: It was
concluded he should send to the Pope, to acquaint him with this mutiny of the
Lords, and to require his help: while the King in the mean time lived skulking
up and down in corners, that no man might know where to find him; or which is
worse (as some write) roving about and practicing Piracy. And now the Lords
begin to suspect fraud, when shortly after the Kings Messengers, who were
Walter and John, Bishops of Worcester and Norwich, return with the Popes
Decree; which was, that the Kings Grant to the Lords should be void: with this
Decree, the King after three months that he had stayed in the I Will of Wight,
coming back to Windsor, acquaints the Lords; but they accusing the Messengers
for false informing the Pope, and the Pope also for making a Decree without
hearing both sides, betake them to Arms, and swear by the holy Altar to be
revenged for this Iudification and injurious dealing. The King finding the
Lords nothing moved with the Popes Decree, sends again unto him, to acquaint
him with it: who mightily incensed to have his Decree so slighted, adjudgeth
them all to be held as enemies of Religion; and gives power to Peter Bishop of
Winchester, and to the Abbot of Reading to Excommunicate them. In the mean
time the King had sent the Bishop of Worcester, Chancellor of England, and
others with his Seal, to hire Soldiers from the parts beyond the Seas; who
returned shortly after, bringing along with him out of Poicto^ and Glasconie,
Savery de Malcon, Geoffrey and Oliver B^t^vile, brothers; and under their
conduct so great a rabble, that with these Forces, within half a year the
King had gotten all the Castles of the Barons, to the borders of Scotland. And
now he divides his Army, committing part of it to his brother William, Earl of
Salisbury, and others, to set upon London; and with the other part he goes
himself into Yorkshire, where most of the Lords had Possessions, which in most
cruel manner he destroys with fire and sword. The Lords being thus on all
sides distressed, resolve upon a course, neither honorable nor safe; yet such
as necessity made seem both: they send to Philip King of France, requiring him
to send over his son Lewis to their aid, and promising they would submit
themselves to be governed by him, and take him for their Sovereign. To this
motion of the Lords, King Philip was as forward as themselves; which King John
understanding, sends again to the Pope, requiring him to use his authority to
stay the King of France from coming. But King Philip, though much regarding
the request of the Pope, yet nothing so much as the acquest of England; with
all speed provides an Army, and with a fleet of six hundred sayle^ sends over
his son Lewis; who passing into England, landeth at Sandwich, whither many of
the Lords and others resort unto him; and giving Oaths of Allegiance, join
themselves with him. King John at this time was at Dover, but not daring to
stay there for fear of the enemy, he commits the Castle to Hubert Burgh; and
goes himself to Canterbury, and from thence to Winchester in manner of a
flight; which Prince Lewis understanding, goes straight to London, and by a
plausible Oration makes that City sure unto him: and thither come to him the
King of Scots with an Army of choice Soldiers, as also the Earls, Warren,
Arundel, Salisbury, with many others. And now Prince Lewis passes all the
Country over without resistance, but not without infinite outrages committed
by his Soldiers, which it was not in him to hinder: and then coming to
Norwich, he takes that City easily, but Dover cost him a longer siege, as being
defended by the valiant and loyal Captain Hubert Burgh. In this mean while
King John finding his enemies employed in these difficult sieges; sends about
and gathers a rabble of all rascal people to him, and with them runs over
all the Country, spoiling and killing in most barbarous manner; and now was
the kingdom made the Stage of all miseries of rapine and cruelty: two Armies
in it on foot at once, each of them seeking to prey upon the other, and both
of them upon the Country. But the King coming to Wallpoole in Norfolk, where
the Washes were to be passed over, he sends one to search where the Foord was
passable, and there himself with some few passed over, but the multitude, with
all the cariages, passing without orde^, they cared not where, were all
drowned; with which dysaster, the King through anguish of mind fell into a
Fever, whereof within a few days he died. And here was an end of all the
troubles of this King: In whom it is observable, that loving his case^ so well
as he did, he should run voluntarily into such troubles, especially at home,
upon so small occasions as he did; but it should seem there is no greater
hinderance to men for accomplishing their will, then their own wilfulness.

Of his Taxations.
TO speak of his Taxations, it may not unproperly be said that it was but one
continued Taxation all his Reign through; yet to divide it into parts: his
first was the Taxation of three shillings upon every Plough-land through the
kingdom^, to pay the thirty thousand Marks, for his Niece Blanches Portion;
and to mend this Taxation, he seiseth upon all the Temporalties of his brother
Geoffrey Archbishop of York, for opposing it; and for a continuation, he
makes a progress shortly after into all the North parts, where he exacts great
Fines of offenders in his Forests. Very shortly after solicited by the Popes
Legate, he grants a Subsidy of the fortieth part of al his subjects Revenues
for one year, to succor the Holy Land. Shortly after this, he charge his
Earls and Barons with the losses he sustained in France; and thereupon Fines
them to pay the seventh part of all their goods: neither spared he the Church,
or the Commons in this Imposition. Before this year is ended another Lea^y is
made at a Parliament in Oxford, wherein is granted two Marks and a half of
every knights Fee, for Military aid; neither are the Clergy exempted from
paying their part: and before another year is out, another Imposition is laid
of the thirteenth part of all movables and other goods, both of the Clergy and
Laity. It may be reckoned amongst his Taxations, that when the Monks of
Canterbury had displeased him about the election of their Archbishop, he
seized upon all their goods, and converted them to his own use: and presently
after this, upon the like displeasure, he deputes many Bishoprics, Abbeys, and
Priories into the hands of Laymen, and confiscates all their Revenues. To
these may be added that he took eleven thousand Marks of Silver of the King
of Scots for granting him Peace. Add to these also great sums of money
exacted and gathered from the Jews, among whom there was one that would not be
ransomed, till the King caused every day one of his great teeth to be pulled
out by the space of seven days, and then he was content to give the King ten
thousand Marks of Silver, that no more might be pulled out. Add to these,
that at his return out of Ireland, he summoned all the Prelates of the
kingdom to appear before him; of whom he extorted for their redemption, the
sum of an hundred thousand pounds Sterling. Add lastly to these, that at his
return out of Wales, he exacts of every knight that attended him not in that
expedition, two Marks.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
HE was the first that appointed the Forms of Civil Government in London and
other Cities, endowing them also with their greatest Franchises. The first that
caused Sterling money to be here Coined; The first that ordained the Honorable
Ceremonies in Creation of Earls; The first that settled the Rates and Measures
for Wine, Bread, Cloth, and such other necessaries of Commerce^ The first that
planted English Laws and Officers in Ireland; The first that enlarged the
Royal style with Lord of Ireland, and both annexed that kingdom, and fastened
Wales to the Crown of England.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
AFter the death of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, the Monks of th^^ Covent
secretly in the night Elected one Reginold their sub-prior to succeed him; and
caused him to go to Rome for confirmation: but afterward doubting how the King
would take it, being done without his knowledge, they crave leave of the King
to choose a fit man, the King is content to allow them the Election, but
requires himself to have the Nomination, and thereupon commends unto them John
Gray Bishop of Norwich, whom he specially favored, and accordingly the Monks
Elect him. But the matter being afterward referred to the Pope, which of these
two Elections should stand good, after many Allegations of both sides, the Pope
to show himself indifferent to both, disallowes them both, and nominates a
third man, one Stephen Lancthon, Cardinal of Saint Chrysogone, an Englishman
borne, and a man of great learning. The Monks admit him, but the King opposes
it: and now, as it were, a Prize began to be played between the two Swords, the
Spiritual and the Temporal: but he that used the Spiritual Sword, proved so
much the better Fencer, that he disarmed the other, and took away his
temporal Sword from him. It is true, in the first Venue, the King gave the
Pope as good as he brought; for as the Pope threatened the King to excommunicate
him, and to interdict the kingdom; So the King threatened the Pope to nullify
his Authority, and to banish Clergy men out of the Realm. In the second Venue,
as the Pope acted as much as he had threatened; (for he interdicted the
^ingdome) So the King performed as much as he had spoken; (for he drove the
Monks ou^ of their Cloister) yet at last when Pand^lphus the Popes Legate came
into England, and made appear to the King in what great d^ngers he stood;
First^ of the King of France, by Invasion; and then of his own Subjects, by
Rebellion; for both which, there was no other help but Reconcilement with the
Pope; he so touched him to the quick, that he made him leave his great words,
and fall to asking forgiveness. So as taking off the Crown from his head, he
laid it down at Pand^lphus fe^te, to be disposed of, as the Pope should
please. And Pandulphus stuck not to ^^ke up his Crown, and to keep it three
or four days in his hands before he restored it; and did not then neither,
but upon condition that he and his Successors should hold the kingdom of the Sea of Rome, at the annual tribute of ^ thousand Marks. And all those three
or four days, in which Pandulphus kept the Crown, it might be truly said,
the kingdom was without a King. And upon this, no doubt it was that Peter an
Her^^te in a Prophetical Rapture had given out some time before, that by
Asc^^sion day, there should be no King of England. Which though in some sort it
was true, yet in some sort it was not true, and it was in the Prerogative of
the King to make his own interpretation: And so it cost the poor Hermit and
his Son their lives, and they remain as a pillar of Salt, to make men take
heed of Ludere cum Sanctis; and of playing the Critickes in matters of State.

But by this means the kingdom was released of the Interdiction, which had
continued six years, three months, and fourteen days: During all which
time, there was no public Exercise of Religion; no Churches open; no
Ecclesiastical Sacraments administred^ but only to them that were in danger
of death, and baptism to children; all that dyed were buried like dogs, in
ditches and corners, but only such as had purchased or procured license from
the Pope.

In this Kings Reign, Saint Dominicke continued his Preaching ten years
together, against the Albigenses. Also in his time Saint Francis renounced the
world; and when a Priest to whom he offered it, would not take his money, he
cast it away^ and entered into a Vow of perpetual Poverty. Also in this Kings
time, was held the L^teran Council, under Pope Innocent the Third, in which
was established the Popes power over Princes, and in matters of Faith,
Auricular confession, and Transubstantiation.

Of his Irreligion.
I Need not relate a Speech of his, though very unchristian, that having been
a little before reconciled to the Pope, and then taking an overthrow in France,
in great anger he cried out, that nothing had prospered with him since the time
he was reconciled to God and the Pope. Nor another speech of his, which though
spoken merrily, was in good earnest very irreligious, that being on a time a
hunting at the opening of a fat Bucke, he said: See how this Dear has
prospered, and how fat he is, and yet I dare swear he never heard Mass. It is
sufficient to relate one act of his, (if it be true which some write) that
being in some distress, he ^ent Thomas Hardington, and Ralph Fits Nichols,
knights, in Embassage to Mir^^m^malim King of Afric and M^r^cco, with offer
of his kingdom to him, upon condition he would come and aid him; and that if
he prevailed, he would himself become a Mahometan^ and renounce the Christian
Faith. Though some there be that ^ay, All the^e were but false Criminations
charged upon him by Monks that did not love him. But though we believe not
these things of him; yet to suffer his kingdom to stand Interdicted so many
years together, upon so small occasion as he did, was certainly no good sign
of Religion in him. Yet one Act he did, wherein he showed a respect to
Religion, by the honor he did to a Religious man: For Hugh Bishop of Lincoln
lying very sick, he not only went to visit him, but being dead, was one of
the three Kings, (the other two were, William King of Scotland^ and the King of
Southwales) that carried his Hearse upon their shoulders, till they delivered it
to the Peers, and the Peers afterward to the Archbishops and Bishops to
carry it in^o the Quire.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
YEt did this King leave more Works of Piety behind him, then all his
Subjects that were in his time. For he Founded the Abbey of Bowley in the New
Forest in Hampshire: also an Abbey of black Monks in the City of Winchester,
and the Monastery of Farend^n, and the Monastery of Hales Owen in Shropshire:
he reedified ^odsto^ and Wr^xell, and enlarged the Chapel of Knarisborough.
Now for his Subjects, only Richard Prior of Ber^mon^sey builded an House
against the wall of the said house of Ber^on^sey, called the Almary or
Hospital of Converts and Children, in honor of Saint Thomas. In this Kings
time Saint Mary Overeyes in Southw^^ke was begun to be builded, and the Stone
Bridge over the Thames, was by the Merchants of London finished. Also Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, Founded a Monastery at West Derham in Norfolk,
which upon the dissolution came to the family of the Derhams, who hold it to
this day.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
IN this Kings time, five and thirty of the most substantial Citizens of
London, were chosen out, and called the Counsel of the City, and the King gave
the City liberty to alter their Major and Sheriffs every year, which before
continued during life. He caused the Laws of England to be executed in
Ireland, and money to be Coined there, according to the weight of English money.

Of his Wives and Children.
KING John lived to have three Wives: His first was Alice Daughter of Hubert
Earl of Morton, who left him a Widower without issue. His second was Isabell
Daughter and Heir of Robert Earl of Gl^c^ster, by whom no issue neither,
divorced from her by reason of Consanguini^y in the third degree. His third
Wife was Isabel Daughter and Heir of Aymer Earl of Angoules^e, Affianced
before to Hugh le Brun, Earl of March: By this Wife he had two Sons, Henry
and Richard, and three Daughters, Ioane, Eleanor, and Isabell: Henry succeeded
him in the kingdom; Richard was Earl of Cornwall, and Crowned King of the
Romans, and had issue Henry and John, that dyed without issue: also Edward
Earl of Cornwall, and others. Ioane his eldest Daughter married to Alexander
the second King of Scots, dyed without issue: Eleanor the second Daughter
(married to Simon Earl of Leycester) had issue Henry, Simon, Almaricke, Guy,
Richard, and Eleanor. Henry slain without issue. Simon Earl of Bigorre, and
ancestour to a Family of the Mountfords in France. Almaricke, first a Priest,
after a knight. Guy Earl of Angleria in Italy, and Progenitour of the
Mountfords in Thuscany, and of the Earls of the Campo Bacchi in the kingdom
of Naples. Richard^ remaining privily in England, and changing his name from
Mountford to Wellesborne, was ancestour of the Wellesburnes in England. Eleanor
borne in England, brought up in France, married into Wales, to Prince Lewin a^
Griffith. Isabel his youngest Daughter, married to the Emperor Frederick the
second, had issue, Henry appointed to be King of Sicilie, and Margaret Wife of
Albret Lantgrave of Thurine. She dyed in Childbed, after she had been Empress
six years. He had also two natural Sons, Geoffrey Fits Roy, and Richard,
that married the Daughter and Heir of Fulbert de Dover, (who built Childham
Castle) had issue by her, of whom some Families of good account are descended.
Also one base Daughter named Ioane, married to Lewin Prince of Wales.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was of Stature indifferent tall, and something fat, of a sour and angry
countenance, and concerning his conditions, it may be said, that his Nature and
his Fortune did not well agree: For naturally h^ loved his e^se, yet his
Fortune was to be ever in Action. He won more of his Enemies by surprises then
by Battles, which shows he had more of Lightning in him then of Thunder. He
was never so true of his word as when he threatened, because he meant always as
cruelly as he spoke, not always as graciously; and he that would have known
what it was he never meant to perform, must have looked upon his promises. He
was neither fit for Prosperity nor Adversity: For Prosperity made him insolent,
and Adversity dejected; a mean Fortune would have suited best with him. He was
all that he was by Fits: Sometimes doing nothing without deliberation^ and
sometimes doing all upon a sudden; Sometimes very Religious, and sometimes
scarce a Christian. His insatiablenesse of money was not so much as that no man
knew what he did with it, gotten with much noise, but spent in silence. He was
but intemperate in his best temper, but when distempered with sickness, most
of all, as appeared at his last, when being in a Fever he would needs be
eating of raw Peaches, and drinking of sweet Ale. If we look upon his works
we must needs think him a worthy Prince, but if upon his Actions, nothing
less: For his Works of Piety were very many, as has been showed before, but
as for his Actions, he neither came to the Crown by Justice, nor held it with
Honor, nor left it in Peace. Yet having had many good parts in him, and
especially having his Royal posterity continued to this day, we can do no
less then honor his memory.

Casualties that happened in his time.
ONe Casualty we might count dysastrous, if it had not had relation to our
selves: for Hugh de Bones coming to aid King John with threescore thousand
out of Britany and Flanders, by misfortune at Sea were all Drowned, to whom the
King had granted Norfolk and Suffolk for the people he brought with him to
Inhabit. In this Kings time were great thunders and lightnings, and showers
with hailstones as big as Goose-Egges. Fishes of strange shape were taken in
England, armed with helmets and shields, and were like unto armed knights,
saving that they were far greater in proportion. About Maidestone in Kent a
certain Monster was found stricken with the Lightning, which Monster had a
head like an Ass, a belly like a man, and all other parts far differing from
any other Creature.

Of his death and burial.
When Prince Lewis of France was come into England, and was received by the
Lords and by the Londoners, King John with an Army went into the North parts,
and coming to Wallpoole, where he was to pass over the Washes, he sent one to
search where the water was passable, and there himself with some few passes
over, but the multitude with all his Carriages and Treasure passing without
Order, they cared not where, were all Drowned. With the grief of which
dysaster, and perhaps distempered in his body before, he fell into a Fever and
was let blood; but keeping an ill diet, (as indeed he never kept good) eating
green Peaches, and drinking sweet Ale, he fell into a looseness, and grew
presently so weak, that there was much ado to get him to Newarke^ where soon
after he dyed. Though indeed it be diversely related; Caxton says, he was
poisoned at Swi^^sheads Abbey by a Monk of that Covent; the manner and cause
this: The King being there, and hearing it spoken how cheap Corn was, should
say, he would ere long make it dearer, and make a penny loa^e be sold for a
shilling. At this speech the Monk took such indignation, that he went and put
the poison of a Toade into a cup of Wine, and brought it to the King, telling
him there was such a cup of Wine as he had never drunk in all his life, and
therewithal took the assay of it himself, which made the King to drink the
more boldly of it; but finding himself presently very ill upon it, he asked
for the Monk, and when it was told him that he was fallen down dead; then
(says the King) God have mercy upon me, I doubted as much. Others say, the
poison was given in a dish of Pears. But the Physician that dis-bowelled his
body, found no sign of poison in it, and therefore not likely to be true; but
howsoever the manner of his death be uncertain, yet this is certain, that at
this time and place he dyed, on the 19. day of October, in the year 1216. when
he had Reigned seventeene years and six months; Lived one and fifty: He was
buried, his bowels at Croxton Abbey, his body at Worcester under the High
Altar, wrapped in a Monks Cowle, which the superstition of that time accounted
Sacred, and a defensative against all evil Spirits.

Of the prises of things in his time.
NEitheir is this unfit to be recorded in Chronicles, to the end comparison may
be made between the time past and the present: as in the time of King Henry
the second, a Quarter of Whea^e was sold for twelve pence; a Quarter of Beans
or Oats for a groat. Neitheir is the price of Silver it self much less
altered, for an ounce of Silver was then valued but at twenty pence; which is
now valued at least at five shillings. Whereof Philosophers must tell the
reason, for seeing scarcity makes things dear, why should not plenty make them
cheap?

Of Men of special Note in his time.
IN Military matters there were many famous men in his time, as Robert
Fits-Roger, and Richard Mount-Fitchet, with many others; but chiefly two,
whose Acts make them specially memorable: the one was Hubert Burgh, whom K.
John had left Governor of Dover Castle, of whom it is related, that when
Prince Lewis of France came to take the Town, and found it difficult to be
taken by force; he sent to Hubert, whose brother Thomas he had taken prisoner a
little before; that unless^ he would surrender the Castle, he should presently
see his brother Thomas be put to death with exquisite torments before his eyes:
but this threatening moved not Hubert at all, who more regarded his own
loyalty, then his brothers life: then Prince Lewis sent again, offering him a
great sum of money; but neither did this move, but he kept his loyalty as
inexpugnable as his Castle. The other was Robert Fits-Water, of whom it is
related, that King John being with an Army in France, one of his knights in a
great bravery would needs make a challenge to any of the French Camp, that
durst encounter him in a Combat, when presently comes forth this Robert
Fits-Water; and in the encounter, threw horse and man down to the ground:
whereof when King John heard, By Gods tooth (says he) he were a King indeed
that had such a Champion; whereupon some that stood by, saying to him, He is
Sir, a servant of your own, it is Robert Fits-Water, whom you have banished.
Whereupon his sentence of banishment was presently reversed, and the King
received him, as he well deserved, into special favor. In matter of
Literature also there lived many famous men in the Kings Reign; as Geoffrey
Vinesaufe, Simon Fraxinus, alias Ash, Adam Dorensis, John de Oxford, Colman
surnamed The wise^ Richard Canonicus, William Peregrine, Alane Tewksbery,
Gervasius Dorobernensis, John Hanwill, Nigell Worker, Gilbert Holland, Benet de
Peterborough^ William Parvus a Monk of Newburgh, Roger Hoveden, Hubert Walter,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander Theologus, Gervasius Tilberiensis,
Gyraldus Cambrensis, Johannes Devonius, Walter Mapis, Radulphus de Diceto,
Gilbert Legley, Mauricius Morganius, John de Fordeham, William Leycester,
Ioceline Brakeland, Roger of Crowland, Hugh White, alias Candidus, who wrote an
History entitled Historia Petroburgensis; John de Saint Omer, Adam Barking,
John Gray an Historigrapher, and Bishop of Norwich; Walter of Coventry,
Radulphus Niger, and lastly, Simon Thurvay, who for his pride in Learning, but
more for his blasphemies against Moses and Christ, became at last so utterly
ignorant, that hardly he could read a letter of the book.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING HENRY THE THIRD.
Of his coming to the Crown, and of Acts done in his Minority.
KING John being dead, his eldest soon Henry was next to succeed: who being
but nine years old, though he were capable of having his Right, yet he was
scarce c^pable of understanding his Right: especially there being another at
that tim^, to whom a great part of the Kingdom had sworn Allegiance. But
those Lords who had been constant to the Father, notwithstanding his faults,
were more tender of the son, who was altogether innocent, and whose gracious
aspect gave no small hope of a better disposition. Amongst all which Lords,
there was none of eminent in worthiness, none so near him in Alliance, as
William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, who had married his Aunt; and he drawing
the rest of the Lords together, with a solemn Oration in behalf of the young
Prince, so confirmed them, and so ordered the matter, that on the twenty eight
day of October, in the year 1216. he was Crowned at Gloucester, by Peter Bishop
of Winchester, and Ioceline Bishop of Bathe, in the presence of Guallo the
Popes Legate, and many Lords and Bishops: and the said William Earl of
Pembroke, by a general consent, assigned Protector of the Realm during the
Kings Minority. In which place, the first thing he did, was to give notice of
the new Kings Coronation to all the Countries round about; and proclaim pardon
to all offenders, that within a time limited should come and submit themselves
to him. In the mean time Prince Lewis of France, who at his first hearing of
King John's death, thought himself then sure of enjoying the Kingdom quietly,
and that he should need to fear no more opposition; now that he hears of the
new Kings Crowning, and that so solemnly, and with so unanimous a consent, he
begins to think himself in worse case then before; and to grow jealous of the
English Lords that had adhered to him, what they would do in this new world.
And indeed a conflict was already grown in their minds, which of the two
Obligations should be the greater; either that of their Oath to Prince Lewis,
or that of their Allegiance to King Henry. They could not but think it extreme
ungratfulnes to forsake Prince Lewis, whom they had themselves invited to come:
and they could not but think it extreme undutifulnesse to stand out in
opposition against K. Henry, their natural Sovereign: and that which added no
small weight to this scale, was a discovery lately made by the Viscount Melun a
French Lord at the time of his death, who confessed as a matter of conscience,
that Prince Lewis had (...), if once he got the kingdom, utterly to extirpate
all the English Nobility and to admit (...) but F^^nch to any place of dignity.
But whether any of these reasons, or any other (...) their motives; certain it
is, that many of them, of who^ were princip^^^, the Earls of Ar^nd^ll, Warren,
Salisbury, and William, the eldest son of the Protector, shrunk from Prince
Lewis, and went to King Henry, as thinking no Obligation so great as
Allegiance: and many again continued constant to Prince Lewis, as thinking no
Obligation so great as an Oath. And now Prince Lewis^ to cast the Dice of
Fortune, before his enemies, though they had gotten them a Head, should gather
to a head, and draw more for^^s together; staying ^imself^ a London, (...) his
Lieu^enant^ with an Army of twenty thousand, to take in as many Towns as they
could; and many they took with small opposition: but coming to Lincoln,
where though they had the Town it self, yet the Castle stood o^^^ and ^ad
been defended by a Noble Lady a whole year before; they found such
resistance, that their proceeding was there arrested; for thither came
presently Wi^^ia^ the Pro^ect^ur with h^s sonn^ William, the Bishops of
Winchester, ^alis^ury, and ^^ester; the ^arles of ^alisbury, Ferrers and
Albemarle, William de Albinet, William de Cantilupe, Falcasius, Thomas Basset,
Robert Vipon^, Bren^ de Lis^e, Ge^^frey Lacie, and many other Barons, with all
the power of the young King: who with wonderful violence assault the City; at
which time it was propounded by the French, to sally forth, and give them
battle; but conceiving their Army to be greater then indeed it was (for the
English had set double Ensigns to every Company, which made a show of twice as
many as they were) they forbear that course, and kept them selves within the
Town; by which means being cooped up and straightened i^ place, so as they cou^^
(...) make use of their Forces as otherwise they might; the^ were in conclusion
(...), and all the principal men of the English that had adhered to Prince
(...)^ were taken prisoners: as namely, Sa^^ Earl o^ Winchester, Henry de
^ohun (...) of Hereford, Gilbert de Gant, lately made Earl of Lincoln by
Prince Lewis; (...) Fi^^^water, Richard Mount-fi^^het, William Mawbr^y, William
Beauchamp, Willi^^ Maude^, Oliver Harcourt, Roger de Cressy, William de
Colvil^, William de Ro^, Robert de Rope^^^y, ^alph Chendui^ Barons; besides
four hundred knights or men at Arms. Only the Earl of Perch their General,
being compassed about, and willed to render himself, swore he would never
become prisoner to any English: and thereupon was run through the sight of his
Helmet into the brains, and instantly died. This was a maine blow to Pr^nce
L^^is, and the last of his battles in England; and because the City was very
rich in Merchandise, the English in derision called it Lewis Fair. But Prince
Lewis was not yet discouraged, for he had sent to King Philip his Father, to
send him new supplies out of France; and new supplies were indeed sent: but
Hubert de Bu^gh, Governor of D^ver, being as vigilant as he was valiant,
watched their coming, and in a Sea Fight defeated them all, of whom but few
escaped: and now this blow at Sea was so much greater then that at Land; that
where that made him only doubt, this made him despair, at leas^ made him
malleable, and fit to be wrought upon by composition; whereupon it was at last
concluded, that Prince Lewis should have fifteen thousand Marks for the
charges he had been at, and abjure his claim to any interest in the kingdom;
and withal to work his Father for restitution of such Provinces in France as
appertained to this Crown: and that when himself should be King, he should
resign them in a peaceable manner. On the other part, King Henry takes his
Oath; and for him the Legate Guallo and the Protector, to restore unto the
Barons of the Realm, and other his subjects, all their Rights and Privileges;
for which the discord began between the late King and his people. After this
Prince Lewis is honorably attended to Dover, and departs out of England about
Michaelmas, above two years after his first arrival.

And now the kingdom is come to unity within it self, one King and one
people; and for a year or two there was little to be done, only some few
there were, whom the corruption of the times had engendered; and who being borne
in a storm, could not live in a calm: of whom the principal were the Earl
of Albemarle, Robert de Vipount, Foulke de Brent, Brian de Lisle^ and Hugh de
Bayli^l^; who bustling about, got possession of some Castles: with what
intention, all men knew; but with what hope of effecting their intention, no
man could imagine: for being but a handful of men to the body of the Realm;
they were easily suppressed; and either brought to acknowledge their faults, or
else punished for not acknowledging them. It was now the fourth year of King
Henry's Reign, at which time William Earl of Pembroke, Protector of the
Realm, died, and was buried in the new Temple at London: in whose place came
the Bishop of Winchester; and now was the King the second time Crowned, and had
granted him by Parliament^ for E^c^age, two Marks of silver of every knights
Fee, for the affairs of the kingdom, and recovery of his Transmarine
Dominions, which is now designed: and Mall^on de Savery, the Poicto^in, with
William Long-sword Earl of Salisbury, sent over to try the affections of that
people; whom they find for the most part inclinable to the obedience of this
Crown: but the King of France being required peaceably to deliver them; made
answer, that having gotten them by the sword, by the sword he would hold them.
But now the King being come to some years of understanding, was in a
Parliament holden at London, put in mind by the Archbishop of Canterbury, of
the Oath he had taken for confirmation of the Liberties of the kingdom, which
though oppugned by some (and sp^cially by William Brewer, and Hubert de Burgh,
whom the King had now made his chief Justiciar) as having been an Act of
constraint: yet the King then again ratified, and twelve knights or other
Legate men of every Shire, by Writs were charged to examine what the Laws and
Liberties were which the kingdom enjoyed under his Grandfather; and that they
should return them by a certain day: and here the King by Parliament resumeth
into his hands such Alienations as had been made by his Ancestors of any
Crown Land. The next year after, another Parliament is held at Westminster,
wherein is required the fiftieth part of all the movables, both of the Clergy
and Laity, for the recovery of those parts in France, withheld from the Crown
by Lewis now King, contrary to his Oath and promise made here in England at his
departure; which, though it concerned the Honor and Dignity of the kingdom,
and the estates of most of the Nobility; yet would it not be yielded to, but
upon confirmation of their Liberties, which in the end was obtained, in the
same words and form as King John had granted them in the two Charters before:
and twelve knights are chosen in every Shire, to dispart the old Forests from
the new, and the new to be laid open and ploughed, and improved^ to the great
comfort and benfit of the subject; and two years they were accordingly enjoyed.

Of his Acts after he came to be of age.
IT was now the tenth year of King Henry's Reign, and being about nineteen
years of age, he claimed to take the government of the kingdom into his own
hands, and no longer to be under a Protector; and now will presently appear
the difference between a Prince that is ruled by good Counsel, and a Prince
that will do all of himself, and take no advise. For the ten years he was
ruled by a Protector, were all passed, as it were in a calm, without noise or
clamor; but as soon as he took upon him the government himself, there grew
presently storms and tumults; no quietness either to the subject or himself:
nothing but grievances all the long time of his Reign. For at the Parliament
now holden at Oxford, as soon as he was Crowned again, he presently cancels
and annuls the Charter of the Forests, as granted in his Nonage; and therefore
he not bound to observe it: and then not using any longer the Seal which the
Protector had used, he makes a new; and causes a Proclamation to be made,
that whosoever would enjoy any benefit of Grants under his Seal, should come
and have them signed by his new Seal; by which course he drew much money from
many: and this was the first grievance. Shortly after, he commits the keeping
of Barkehamstead Castle to one Walleran a Du^chman, which Castle belonged to
his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall: but when Earl Richard required to have
the possession^ as o^ right he ought, it was then plotted by Hube^t Burgh
Chief Justice, and the Kings chief Counselor, to commit him to prison, which
the Earl understanding, o^ at least suspecting, flies pres^ntly to
M^rleborough, where he finds William Earl Marshall his vowed friend, with whom
he has^ens to Stamford, and there mee^es with the Earls of Chester, Gloucester,
Warren, Hereford, Ferrers, Warwick, and diver^ other Barons; who all
confederate together, and send to the King that unless he restore the Castle
to his brother, and ^o them the Liberties of Forests which he had lately
cancelled at Oxford, they would seek to recover them by the sword. Here, upon
King Henry to pacifi^ his brother^ not only renders the Castle to him^ but
gives him besides all that his Mother had in Dower and also great possessions
which the Earl of Britain, and the Earl of B^leigne lately deceased^ had in
England; but to the Petition of the Lords he makes a dilatory answer^ and this
was another grievance. Not long after King Henry is persuaded by Hugh ^e Brun,
Earl of March, who had married his Mother, to make a journey into France, for
recovery of his right there^ but the Earl persuaded it for ends of his own;
which to have discovered, had been no way to com^^^^e them ^e must therefore
^ay some colors upon his work, and it was color enough^ that the action
would be of great benefit to the King, if it might succeed^ and the likelihood
of succeeding was most apparent, by reason of the great inclina^ion of the
people to King Henry; and their great averseness from King Lewis. Upon these
colors, King Henry undertaking the action, raises great sums of money from
the Clergy^ and from the Londoners for redemption of their Liberties^ and takes
the ^hird part of all the goods of the Iewes^ but when he returned home a year
after, without having done any thing but spent his treasure and his time^ and
that which was mo^e worth then both these, the lives of many Noble men and
others: this was another grievance. And now King Henry bringing many P^^ct^^ins
over with him, who had served him in his warres^ he was to reward them ^ere;
which he could not do, but by displacing and spoil of his Officers. First
therefore he calls Ralph Bretton Treasurer of his Chamber to account, and
grievously F^nes him for defrauding him in his Office: Then likewise is Hubert
de Burgh Chief Justiciar, and his Chief Counselor called to account, for
such Treasure as passed his Office, who being further charged with crimes of
Treason, flies to the Church of Merton for sanctuary; from whence, when the
King commanded him to be drawn out by violence, the Bishop of London hearing
of it, commanded him to be returned back to sanctuary, upon pain of
Excommunication: but the King commanding him to be kept from sustenance, hunger
at last enforced him to render himself to the Kings mercy: all his goods,
which were very great, confiscate. Also Walter Bishop of Carlisle is thrust out
of his Office of Treasure, and William Rodon knight, from his place of Ma^shall
of the Kings house, and all the chief Counselors, Bishops, Earls, and
Barons of the kingdom are removed, as distrusted^ and only strangers
preferred to their rooms: of which course, Peter de Rupibus a Poictouin,
Bishop of Winchester, and one Peter de Rivalis, the Kings special Favorite,
were said to be the Authors: and this was another grievance. The King was now
about eight or nine and twenty years old, and a Consultation was had for a fit
wife for him. There was propounded a sister of Alexander King of Scots, but it
was not thought fit the King should marry the younger sister, when Hubert de
Burgh had married the elder: he therefore takes one of his own choosing, and
marries Eleanor, daughter to Raymond Earl of Province; by which match he
neither had Portion by his Wife, nor strength of Alliance by friends; or if any
were, it was all made vain by distance: only he had by her a number of poor
kindred, who to his great cost, lay hanging upon him; yet was the marriage
solemnised with as great charge as if he had been to have Mountains with her:
and this was another grievance. And now is the score of these grievances called
upon to be paid, for the Lords could no longer endure so many indignities, to
see themselves fleighted, and only strangers advanced; as Foulke de Brent^ who
held the Earledomes of Nottingham, Oxford, Bedford, and B^ckingham, and others
the like: and to see their persons exposed to danger, and their estates to
ruin; for which no remedy could be but only the Kings confirming their
Charter of Liberties: wherein it is strange to observe upon what different
grounds the King and the Lords went: It seems the King thought, that to
confirm that Charter, were to make himself to be less then a King; and the
Lords thought, that as long as it was denied, they were no better then slaves^
and as the King could endure no diminution, so the Lords could endure no
slavery; but the King might keep his own with sitting still, the Lords could
not recover their own but by motion: and seeing their strength must be in
their number, by commotion; hereupon they confederate together, and of this
confedencie, Richard now Earl Marshall, upon the death of his brother William,
is chief; who repair to the King, and boldly show him his error, and
requires satisfaction. Hereupon the King sends presently over for whole Legions
of Poict^uins, and withal summons a Parliament at Oxford, whither the Lords
refuse to come after this a Parliament is called at Westminster, whither
likewise they refuse to come, unless the King would remove the Bishop of
Winch^ster, and the Poictouins from the Court; and more then this, they send
him word, that unless he did this; they would expel both himself and his
evil Counselors out of the Land, and create a new King. Upon this
threatening, Pledges are required of the Nobility for securing of their
Allegiance, and Writs a re^ent out to all who hold by knights service, to
repair to the King at Gloucester by a certain day; which the Earl Marshall
and his associates refusing, the King without the judgment of hi^ Court and
their P^^rs, causes them to be Proclaimed Out-lawes, seiseth upon all their
Lands, which he gives to his Poictouins; and directs out Writs to attach their
bodies wheresoever in the kingdom. But now of these confederate Lords, the
Bishop of Winchester won the Earls of Chester and Lincoln with a thousand
Marks; and the King had so pleased his brother the Earl of Cornwall, that he
likewise left them: whereupon they withdrew them into Wales, and confederate
with L^^ilin Prince of Wales^ whither also came Hubert de Burgh, escaped out of
prison, and joins with them; taking intermutuall Oaths, that no one without
other should make their accord. Hereupon the King goes himself in person into
Wales, where not prevailing, he returns to Gloucester, imployes new forces of
strangers, but all without success. At last a Friar is employed to persuade
the Earl Marshall to submit himself to the King, but all in vain; till at
length a train is laid to draw him over into Ireland, to defend his state
there, being seized upon by the King; where by treachery circumvented he lost
his life. Yet the King disavowes the sending of any such Commission into
Ireland, protesting he never knew thereof; and lays the fault upon his
Officers: an easy way for Princes, never to be found in any fault.

After two years affliction, a Parliament is assembled at Westminster,
wherein the Bishops admonish the King by his Fathers example, to be at unity
with his people, and to remove from him strangers, and to govern the kingdom
by Natives of the Realm; and by the Laws: otherwise they would proceed by
Ecclesiastical censure, both against his Counselors and himself. The King
seeing no way to subsist but by temporising, consents to call home those Lords
out of Wales; restores them to their places and possessions; removes all
strangers from about him, and calls his new officers to account. Hereupon the
Bishop of Winchester, Peter de Rivalis, and Stephen Seagrave take sanctuary;
but afterward by mediation they obtained with great Fines their Liberty, dearly
paying for their two years greatness. After this a Parliament is again called,
which the King would have to be kept in the Tower, whither the Lords refusing
to come, another place of more freedom is appointed; in which Parliament,
order is taken for removing all Sheriffs from their places, upon complaint of
corruption: and here the King displaceth his Steward, and offers to take from
the Bishop of Chichester then Chancellor, the great Seal, which he refuses
to deliver, as having received it by the common council of the kingdom; and
now Pe^^r de Rivali^, and St^phen Seagrave, are received again into grace: by
which may appear the vici^^itude of fortune in Princes favors. After this, in
the one and tw^ntieth year^ of ^is Reign, another Parliament is held at
London; where the King requires the thirteenth part of all the movables as
well of the Clergy as Laity; which being directly opposed, the King promises
by oath, never more to injure the Nobility, so they would but relieve him at
that present: After four days consultation, ^he King p^omising to use only
the counsel of his natural Subjects, and protesting against the Revocation
lately propounded^ and freely granting the inviolable obse^vation of their
Liberties, under pain of Excommunication, a Subsidy is granted him; bu^ so,
that four knights be appointed in every Shi^e to receive and deliver the same,
(...) to some Abbey or Castle, where it may be saf^ly kep^, that if the King
^aile in p^rformance of his Grants, it may be restored to the Coun^rey from
whence it was collected: And now the King, to make a show of true
reconciliation for his part, suddenly causes the Earls, Warren and (...),
with John Pits Geoffrey to be sw^rn his Counselors, yet was neither of the
points either for removing of strangers, or for disposing the money observed
afterward by the King^ for the money he made bold to take at his pleasure; and
for strangers, they were so far from removing, that they were drawn nearer
to him: for now William Valentine; Uncle to the Queen, is grown the most
inward man with him, and nothing done but by his counsel; also the Earl of
Province, the young Queens Father, a poor Prince, has a good share of the
money that was collected: and Simon de Montford, a French man borne, is
entertained by the King, and preferred s^cretly in marriage to Eleanor the
Kings sister, Widow of William Earl of Pembroke, the great Marshall, and is
made Earl of Leycester, by right of his Mother Avice, daughter of Blanchman,
Earl of Leycester: which courses so incense the Nobility, that it put them out
into a new commotion; and Richard the Kings brother becomes one of the party
whom the other Lords make their spokesman to the King, to aggravate his breach
of promise, and to acquaint him with all the disorders of the kingdom; with
whose remonstrance the King is so moved, that after he had tried the Londoners,
and found them also to partake with the Lords, he calls a Parliament a^ London,
whither the Lords come armed for their own safety: where after long debating,
the King taking his Oath to refer the matter to certain grave men of the
kingdom; Article^ are drawn, sealed, and publicly set up to the view of all,
with the seals of the Legate, and diverse great men: but before it came to be
effected, the Earl of Cornwall, by the working of Simon Montford, has his
edge rebated, and is brought to be unwilling to meddle in the matter any more;
which the other Lords seeing, they also grow cold, and so for that time it
rested, and no more was done in it.

And now is the Kings turn to play his part, in using his authority, which he
fails not to do to the uttermost: for upon a small-occasion he causes the
gates of Gilbert now Earl of Pembroke (the third son of William the great
Marshall) to be shut against him at Winchester, whereupon the Earl retires
into the North. Also Simon Norman, Master of the Kings Seal, and his greatest
Favorite, is thrown out with disgrace, and his brother Geoffrey a knight
Templar, is put out of the Counsel; both of them for not yielding to pass a
Grant from the King, made unto Thomas Earl of Flanders, the Queens Uncle, of
four pence upon every sack of Wool. And now that load enough is laid upon
those of the Laity, comes a new load to be laid upon the Clergy; for the Pope
nothing dainty to make use of the power he had in the King, sends over three
hundred Romans, requi^ing to have the first Benefices that should be vacant,
bestowed upon them: which seemed so unreasonable a request, and to the Clergy
of England so dammageable, that it made Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury to
give over all, and betake himself to a voluntary Exile in the Abbey of
Pontiniac in France; yet to show his respect to the Pope, gave him e^ght
hundred Marks before his departure. And to lay more weight upon the Clergy,
great sums are also required of them for maintenance of the Popes war
against the Emperor: which though the Clergy opposed, and showed many good
reasons of their opposition both to the King and the Legate, yet by promises or
threatenings, they were won or forced to yield unto it. And now comes the Earl
of March, and once again solicits the King to make another journey into
France, which being yielded to by the King, and assented to in Parliament, an
aid presently was demanded toward it: but this demand was not only opposed,
but all the Kings Taxations and aides before granted, were now repeated; and
thereupon an absolute denial to grant any more. Upon this, the King comes to
the Parliament himself in person; earnestly, and indeed, humbly craving their
aid for this once: but all prevailed not, they had made a vow to the contrary:
and the King is driven to get what he could of particular men, of whom partly
by gift, and partly by ^oane, he gets so much, that he carries over with him
thirty Barrels of Sterling money. This expedition had no better success then
the former, for after a whole years stay, the King was driven to make a
dishonorable Truce with the King of France, and return home. At his return
he puts the Jews to another redemption, and the Londoners to another exaction;
and to help on his charge, his wives mother, the Countess of Provence comes
now to visit him; who bringing her daughter Zanchia with her, a marriage is
solemnised between her and Richard Earl of Cornwall, whose wife was lately
dead, and he returned from the Holy wars. The old Countess at her return,
is presented with many rich gifts, having besides received an Annual Pension
of four thousand Marks out of England, for five years past; in consideration
of a pact made, that King Henry after her decease should have the Earldom of
Provence: but shortly after her return, she disappoints him of that, and
bestows it upon her youngest daugh^er Beatrix, married to Charles the French
Kings brother; who was after King of Naples and Sicilie^ so as this Countess
lived to see all her four daughters Queens: Richard Earl of Cornwall coming
after to be elected King of the Romans. Upon th^se profusions, a consultation
is had for new supplies, and no way thought so fit as by Parliament; hereupon a
Parliament is again assembled at Westminster, whith^r the King comes again
himself in person, urging his necessities, yet nothing wou^d be granted
without the assurance of reformation and due execution of the Laws. And here
they desire to have it ordained that four of the most grave and discreet
Peers should be chosen as conservatours of the kingdom, and sworn of the
Kings Council, both to see Justice administered, and the treasure issued; and
these, or two of them at least, should ever attend about the King. Also that
the Lord Chief Justiciar, and the Lord Chancellor, should be chosen by the
general voices of the States assembled, or else be one of the number of those
four. Besides they propound, that there might be two Justices of the Benches,
two Barons of the Exchequer, and o^e Justice for the Jews, and those likewise
to be chosen by Parliament. But while these things were in debating, comes one
Martin, a new Legate from the Pope, with a larger Commission then ever any
before, to exact upon the State; but at the same time, Letters coming from the
Emperor Frederick, to entreat that the Pope might have no more supplies out
of England; the Popes Mandate is rejected, and his Agent Martin disgracefully
sent home. This business took up so much time, that nothing else was done in
this Parliament; but only an aid granted to the King for the marriage of his
daughter to Alexander King of Scots, twenty shillings of every knights Fee; and
that with much ado, and repetition of his former aides.

The Winter following he assembles another Parliament, wherein he moves for an
aid upon a design he had upon Wales, and to pay his debts, which were urged
to be so great that he could not app^are out of his Chamber for the infinite
clamor of such, to whom he owed for his Wine, Wax, and other necessaries of
house: but they all to his face, refused to grant him any thing: whereupon
other violent courses are taken, an ancient quarrel is found out against the
City of London, for which they are commanded to pay fifteen thousand Marks,
and Passeleve the Clerk is employed, with others, in a most peremptory
commission, to inquire of all such Lands as had been inforested, and either to
fine the occupyers thereof at their pleasure, or else to take it from them and
sell the same to others; wherein such rigor was used, that multitudes of
people were undone. But now to show the King the estate of his kingdom, and
the oppressions of Popes, inquiry was made of the Revenues which the Romans and
Italians had in England: which were found to be annually sixty thousand Marks;
being more then the yearly Revenues of the Crown: which so moved the King
that he caused the same to be notifyed, with all other Exactions, to the
General Council now Assembled at Lions; and this (with the ill usage of his
Agent Martin) so vexed the Pope, that he is said to have uttered these words:
It is time to make an end with the Emperor, that we may crush these petty
Kings, for the Dragon once appeased or destroyed, these lesser Snakes will
soon be trodden down. But upon the Popes rejecting the consideration of these
grievances of England, and despi^ing the Kings message (who he said, began to
Frederize) it was absolutely here ordained, under great penalty, that no
contribution of money should be given to the Pope by any Subject of England:
and the King for a time assents unto it, but being of an irresolute and
wavering nature, and afraid of threats, he soon gave over what he undertook,
so as the Pope continued his former rapine; and though he had promised never to
send any more Legates into England, ye^ sent he other Ministers under the title
of Clerks, that had as great power as Legates, and effected as much. And now,
for the other part of the State, new occasions also of complaint were offered:
Peter of Savoy Earl of Richmond, comes into England, bringing with him certain
Maids to be married to young Noble men of this Country, the Kings Wards, of
whom Edmund Earl of Lincoln has one, and Richard de Burgh another, and the
same year three of the Kings Brothers by the Mother, Guy de Lusignan, William
de Valence, and Athelmar Clerk, are sent over to be provided of Estates in
England: also Thomas of Savoy (sometimes Earl of Flanders by Right of his
Wife) comes with his sister Beatrix, Countess of Provence the Queens Mother,
who are again Feasted and Gifted; for which the King is taxed the next
Parliament in Candlemas Term, and besides sharply reprehended for his breach
of Promise, having Vowed and Declared by his Charter never more to injure the
State in that kind; also for his violent taking up of provision, of Wax,
Silk, Roabes, and specially of Wine, contrary to the will of the sellers, and
many other grievances they complain of; all which the King patiently hears,
in hope to obtain his desire, but yet nothing is effected, and the Parliament
being Prorogued till Midsummer following, and the King growing more obdurate
then before, it afterward brake up in discontent. But the Parliament not
supplying him, he is advised to furnish his wants with sale of his Plate, and
Jewels of the Crown, being told, that though they were sold, yet they would
revert again unto him; and having with great loss received money for them, he
asks who had bought them: Answer is made, the City of London. That City (said
he) is an inexhaustible Gulf: If Octavius Treasure were to be sold, they
surely would buy it.

And now to vex them, he appoints a Fair to be kept at Westminster,
forbidding under great penalty, all exercise of Merchandise within London, for
fifteen days, and all other Fayres in England, and namely that of Ely: but
this Novelty came to nothing; the Inconvenience of the place, as it was then,
and the foulness of the weather, brought more affliction then benefit to the
Traders. That Christmas also he requires Newyeares gifts of the Londoners, and
shortly after writes unto them his Letters imperiously deprecatory to aid him
with money, and thereby gets of them twenty thousand pounds, for which the next
year after he craves pardon of them. And notwithstanding his continual taking
up all Provisions for his House, yet he lessens his Housekeeping in no
honorable manner. And then seeing he could get nothing of the States together,
he calls unto him, or writes to every Nobleman apart, declaring his poverty;
and how he was bound by Charter in a debt of thirty thousand pound to those of
Bordeaux and his Gascoynes, (who otherwise would not have suffered him to
depart home) at his last being in France: but fa^ling herein of Temporal
Lords, he addresseth his Letters to the Prelates, of whom he finds as little
relief; by much importunity and his own presence, he got of the Abbot of
Ramsey a hundred pound, but the Abbot of Borough had the face to deny him,
though the King told him, it was more Alms to give money to him, then to a
Beggar that went from door to door. The Abbot of Saint Albons yet was more
kind, and gave him threescore Marks. To such lowness did the necessity of
this indigent King (through his profusion) bring him. The Jews ever exposed to
his will, feel the weight of these his wants; One Abraham, found a Delinquent,
redeemes himself for seven hundred Marks, and Aaron another Jew protests, the
King had since his last being in France taken from him at times thirty thousand
Marks of Silver, besides 200. Marks of Gold given to the Queen.

But now the Lords assemble again at London, and press him with his promise
made unto them, that the Chief Justiciar, Chancellor and Treasurer, should be
appointed by the General Council of the kingdom, but by the absence of
Richard Earl of Cornwall, (which was thought to be done of purpose) they
return frustrate of their desire. And now the Bishopric of Winchester
falling void, the King sends presently to the Monks of the Cathedral Church;
to Elect his Brother Athelmar; and because he would not be denied, he goes
thither himself in person, and there enters the Chapter house as a Bishop or
Prior, gets up into the Presidents Chair, begins a Sermon, and takes his
Text, Justice and Peace have kissed each other; and thereupon uses these
words: To me and other Kings who are to govern the people, belongs the rigor
of Judgment and Justice; to you who are men of quiet and Religion, Peace and
Tranquillity; and this day I hear you have (for your own good) been
favorable to my request; with many such like words: whereby the Monks finding
the earnestness of his desire, held it in vain to deny him, and Athelmar is
Elected; but with this reservation, if the Pope allow it. Shortly after
follows the memorable Case of Sir Henry de Bathe, a Justiciar of the kingdom,
and a special Counselor to the King^ who by corruption had attained to a
mighty Estate, and is said, in one Circuit to have gotten two hundred pound
land per annum; He is accused by Sir Philip D^rcy of falsehood in the Kings
Court; and the King is so incensed against him, that in the Parliament at this
time holden in London, Proclamation is made, that whosoever had any Action or
Complaint against Henry de Bathe should come and be heard. One of his fellow
Justiciars accused him of acquiting a malefactor for a bribe. The King seeing
Henry de Bathes friends to be many and strong^ breaks out into rage,
protesting, that whosoever would kill Henry de Bathe should be acquitted for the
deed. But afterward by intercession of the Earl of Cornwall, and the Bishop of
London; the King becomes pacifyed, and Sir Henry is released, paying two
thousand Marks; and after is restored to his former place and favor. The King
keeping his Christmas at York, the marriage is solemnized between Alexander
King of Scots, and Margaret his Daughter: to the Feast of which solemnity it is
said the Arch-bi^hop gave six hundred fat Oxen, which were all spent at one
meal: and besides, the Feast cost him four thousand Marks.

About this time, the Pope solicits King Henry to undertake the Cross, and so
does Alphonsus King of Castile, offering to accompany him in person, to rescue
the King of France, who was now held Prisoner by the Souldan. And because a
ransom collected for him in France was by tempest cast away at Sea, the
Captive King offers to restore Normandy to the King of England, so he would
come to his rescue. Upon this solicitation of the Pope, and the grant of a
tenth of the Clergy and Laity for three years to come; the King undertakes the
Cross, rather, it seems, to get the money, then with any purpose to perform
the Journey: which had it been collected (says Paris) would have amounted to
six hundred thousand pounds, to the utter impoverishing of the kingdom. And
now the King by Proclamation calls the Londoners to Westminster, and there
causes the Bishops of Worcester and Chichester to declare his Intentions, and
to exhort the people to undertake the Cross and attend him: but few are moved
by their persuasions, only three knights of small note, whom thereupon the
King in open view, imbraceth, kisseth, and calls his Brethren; checking the
Londoners as ignoble Mercenaries: and there himself takes his Oath for
performing it, and to set forth upon Midsummer day next. In taking his Oath, he
lays his right hand on his Breast, according to the manner of a Priest; and
after on the Book, and kissed it as a Layman. About this Tenth (granted by the
Pope, but not by the People) a Parliament is called at London, where the
Bishops are first dealt withal, (as being a work of Piety) and they
absolutely refuse it; then the Temporal Lords are set upon, and they answer as
the Bishops: which put the King into so great a rage, that he drove out all
that were in his Chamber, as he had been mad. Then he ^als to persuade them
apart, sending first for the Bishop of Ely, and deals with him in all kind
manner, recounting the many favors he had done him. The Bishop replies,
Dissuading him from the Journey by the Example of the King of France; and to
that purpose uses many good reasons; which the King hearing, in great passion
commanded his servants to thrust him out of door, perceiving by this what was
to be expected of the rest; and thereupon falls upon his former violent courses;
and first the City of London is compelled to the Contribution of a thousand
Marks: and the Gascoyners being upon revolt, unless speedy succor be sent
them; general Musters are made, and commandment given, that whosoever could
dispend thirteen pounds per annum, should furnish out a Horseman. This
occasions another Parliament, wherein it seems, the State began wisely to
consider that all their oppositions did no good, the Kings turn must be served
one way or other; therefore they agreed to relieve him rather by the usual
way, then force him to those extravagant courses which he took; but yet so, as
the Reformation of the Government, and the ratification of their Laws and
Liberties, might once again be solemnly confirmed. And after fifteen days
consultation, to satisfy the Kings desire for his holy Expedition, a Tenth is
granted by the Clergy, and Scutage, three Marks of every knights Fee by the
Laity; and thereupon those often confirmed Charters are again ratifyed, and
that in the most solemn and Ceremonial manner, that State and Religion could
possibly devise. The King with all the Great Nobility of England, all the
Bishops in their reverent Ornaments with burning Candles in their hands,
assemble to hear the terrible sentence of Excommunication against the
infringers of the same. And at the lighting of those Candles the King having
received one in his hand, gives it to a Prelate that stood by, saying: It
becomes not me, being no Priest, to hold this Candle, my heart shall be a
greater Testimony; and withal laid his hand spread upon his Breast all the
time the sentence was read; which was thus Pronounced, Authoritate Dei
Omnipotentis, etc. Which done, he caused the Charter of King John his Father,
granted by his free consent, to be openly read. In the end, having thrown away
their Candles, which lay smoking on the ground, they cried out, So let them
who incur this sentence be extinct, and have no better savor then these
snuffes: and the King with a loud voice said, As God help me, I will, as I am
a Man, a Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and anointed, inviolably observe
all these things: and therewithal the Bells rung out, and the people shouted
for Joy.

Yet was not all so quieted by this Grant, but that there were grievances
still, whereof the first falls upon his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall: for
the King having seven and twenty years before given him the Province of
G^scogne, now that he had a Son of his own, he would take it from his
Brother, and give it to his Son; and the Earl refusing to deliver his
Charter, it is plotted to imprison him, but he escaping out of Bordeaux, comes
over into England. The King to win the Nobility of Gascogne to turn to him,
promises them thirty thousand Marks, which they accept, so as he bind
himself by his Oath and Charter to perform it. This strictness of theirs the
King takes in ill part, and thereupon sends Sim^^ Montford Earl of Leycester,
a stern man, to be their Governor, who with his insolent Government, so
discontents them, that after three years suffering, they send the Archbishop
of Bordeaux, with other great men, to complain of his Insolences; whereupon
Montford is sent for, and because the Lords took part with him, the King takes
part with the Gascoyners; which Montford took so ill, that he upbraides the
King with breaking his Promise: to whom the King in great rage replied, that no
promise was to be kept with an unworthy Traitor: at which word Montford rises
up, protesting that he lied; and were he not Protected by his Royal Dignity,
he would make him repent those words. The King commands his Servants to lay
hold on bim, but the Lords would not permit it. Yet after this great affront to
the King, is Montford sent over again into Gascogne, though with a more
limited Authority, and shortly after the King with a Fleet of three hundred
Ships goes thither himself, and soon composeth all differences in the Country.

But now the King of Spain pretends a title to Aquitaine, and to take him off,
King Henry sends to treat of a marriage between Prince Edward and his Sister
Eleanor, which being accepted by the King of Spain, the Marriage is solemnized
at Burgos, where the King of Spain knights the Prince, and quits his claim to
Aquitaine for him and his Successors for ever: and King Henry invests the
Prince and his Wife in it, and gives unto him besides, Ireland, Wales, Bristow,
Stamford, and Grantham; and from hence it came that ever after this, the Kings
eldest Son was immediately upon his Birth Prince of Wales, and Earl of
Chester. After this King Henry prepares to return home, and well he might,
having spent in this and his former Journeyes into those parts, the sum of
seven and twenty hundred thousand pounds: More then all the Lands if they had
been sold were worth; which when the King was told, he desired there might be
no words made of it for his credit. And now being to return, he is desirous
with the King of Frances leave, to pass through France; and coming to Paris
with a thousand Horse, where he stayed eight days, is there most Royally
Feasted by the King of France; and he as royally Feasts the King of France
again. But it is the Londoners and the Jews that are like to pay for all. For
coming home about Christmas, when the Londoners presented him with a hundred
pounds in money, and afterward with two hundred pounds in Plate: it was so
slighted, and so ill taken, that a hole was presently found in their coat,
for an escape of a Prisoner, which cost them three thousand Marks: Yet was not
this enough, but he takes good Fleeces from the Jews, and then lets them out to
Farm to his Brother Richard, for a great sum of money, and he to make what
more of them he could.

Yet after all this he complains of his Debts, which he says are at least
three hundred thousand Marks, which must needs be the heavyer to him, because
he had diminished his own^ means, by the allowance of fifteen thousand Marks
per annum to his Son the Prince. The only hope is in the Parliament, but a
Parliament being called, they fall presently upon their old Grievances,
complaining upon the King for breach of Charters, and renewing their Claim, to
have the Chief Justiciar, the Chancellor and Treasurer, to be chosen by
themselves: so nothing was done for the King at this time, and the Parliament
being prorogued till Michaelmas after, as little then, by reason many of the
Peers came not, as not being summoned according to the tenor of Magna Charta.
And now while the King was using means to wind himself out of Debt, there
happened occasions to put him further in; For now Thomas Earl of Savoy, the
Queens Brother, being at war with the City of Thuryn, must be supplied with
money toward it by the King of England: Now the Elect Bishop of Toledo the
King of Spaines Brother, comes into England, and must be sumptuously Feasted,
and have great gifts presented him: Now Eleanor the Princes Wife, arrives with
a multitude of Spaniards, and must all be entertained at the Kings charge, and
have no small presents given them at their departure: Now comes Rustandus from
the Pope, with power to Collect the Tenth of the Clergy, for the Popes use and
the Kings, and to absolve him from his Oath of the Holy war, so he would come
to destroy Manfred Son to the Emperor Frederick, now in possession of the
kingdom of Sicilie, and Apulia. And this man likewise has great gifts
bestowed upon him, besides a rich Prebend in York. But the Pope by too much
seeking his profit, loses credit and all, for the Clergy sleights him, and
will give him nothing: and when he would have borrowed of the Earl of Cornwall
five hundred Marks, the Earl answered, he liked not to lend his money to one,
upon whom he could not Distraine. But King Henry's greatest charge, was his
purchasing a kingdom for his Son Edmund; for now comes the Bishop of B^nonia
from the Pope, with a Ring of Investiture to Prince Edmund, in the kingdom of
Sicilie, which he pretends to be at his disposing; and King Henry takes it in
so good earnest, that after this he calls his Son Edmund by no other name then
King of Sicilie. But all this was done by the Pope, but to angle away King
Henry's money, as indeed upon this hope, he had drawn the King into the
engagement of a hundred and fifty thousand Marks; for to draw the King on, it
was given out that the Pope had dele^ted all Manfreds Forces, and was thereby
in possession of the kingdom, when the truth was, that Manfred had defeated
the Popes Forces, and was thereby himself established in the kingdom.

The year 1275. the King keeps his Christmas at Winchester, where new
Grievances arise. The Merchants of Gascogny, having their Wines taken from them
by the Kings Officers without satisfaction; complain to their Lord the Prince,
he to his Father, and his Father having been informed beforehand by his
Officers, that their clamor was unjust, as relying upon the Princes favor; he
falls into a great rage with the Prince, and breaks out into these words: See!
now my Blood and my own Bowels impugn me: but afterward pacified, he gives
order the injuries should be redressed. And now the Princes Followers
themselves come to be a Grievance, who relying upon their Master commit many
outrages, and spoil and wrong men at their pleasure, and the Prince himself
is not altogether free, of whom it is said, that meeting a young man travailing
by the way, he caused one of his ears to be cut off, and one of his eyes to be
put out: and many such prankes played by him and his Followers in Wales, made
the Welsh break out into open Rebellion, which the Prince would feign have
suppressed, but there was no money to be had toward the doing it. And now the
King falls to shifts, he comes into the Chequer himself, and there lays
penalties upon Sheriffs, that return not their moneys in due time; then he
falls upon measures of Wine and Ale, upon Bushels and Weights, and something he
gets; but London is his best Cheq^er, and every year commonly he has one
quarrel or other to the Londoners, and they are sure to pay. And now falls out
an accident, seeming of great honor, but certainly of no profit to the
kingdom. Richard Earl of Cornwall the Kings Brother is Elected King of the
Romans, for although Alphonsus King of Spain the great Mathematician were his
Competitour, yet Earl Richards money wrought more then his Learning, and the
Archbishop of C^llen comes over to fetch him, and Crowned he is at Aquisgrane.
This Earl of Cornwall is reported able to dispend a hundred Marks a day, ^or
ten years, besides his Revenues in England. But now, as a man that pays dear
for an Office, looks that his Office should pay him again: So Earl Richard
having given infinitely to compass this Advancement, looked to help himself
again by the Place; and this, and the desire he had to revenge himself upon
those tha^ had opposed his Election^ made him take such violent courses that he
came soon to be dispossessed, forsaken, and forced to return into England a
poorer King, then he went out an Earl.

Acts done in the c^ntention between the King and his Barons.
NOw King Henry very proud to have his younger son a King as well as his
brother, calls a Parliament, wherein he brings forth his son Edmund, clad in
Sicilian habit, and ^els the Parli^ment, that for advancing this son of his
to the kingdom of Sicilie, he had bound himself under covenant of losing his
kingdom in the sum of an hundred and forty thousand Marks, and hoped they
would not think much to aid him with money for so great an advancement: but
the Parliament stood firm to their usual condition of Margna Charta; so as
that might be confirmed, they were content to give two and fifty thousand
Marks, but this gave the King no satisfaction. The year after, another
Parliament is holden at London, wherein upon the Kings pressing them again for
means to pay his debts to the Pope; the Lords tell him plainly, they will not
yield to give him any thing for any such purpose; and give their reasons, and
withal repeat their own grievances, his breach of promise, the insolency of
his brothers, and specially William de Valence, who had given the lie to the
Earl of Leycester, and no right done him in it; and many such things, which
the King hearing, and not able to deny, humbles himself, and tells them how he
had often by ill counsel been seduced; but promises by his Oath which he
took on the Tomb of Saint Edward, to reform all those errors. But the Lords
not well knowing how to deal in this business, as being divided between a
desire to satisfy the King, and a desire to be satisfied themselves; and
knowing withal the variableness of the Kings nature, they get the Parliament
to be adjourned to Saint Barnabies day, and then to assemble at Oxford. In
which mean time, the Earls Gloucester, Leycester, Hereford, the Earl Marshall
Bigod, Spenser, and other great men confederate, and provide by Arms to effect
their desire: and here is the foundation laid of those bloody wars that ensued
between King Henry and his Barons. And now the King being put to his shifts
for money, gets the Abbot of Westminster to put his Seal and that of his
Covent to a Deed Obligatory, as a surety for two hundred Marks; making
account, that by his example, others would be drawn to do the like: but his
trusty servant Simon Passeleve being employed to other Monasteries, and telling
them amongst other reasons to persuade them, that the King was Lord of all they
had, they only answered; they acknowledged indeed the King to be Lord of all
they had, but yet so, as to defend, not to destroy the same: and this was all
he could get of them. The Prince also in no less want then his Father, is
driven to morgage his Town of Stamford, Brahan, and many other things, to
William de Valence, a Poictouin, whereby appeared the disorder of the time, when
the Prince was in want, and strangers had such plenty. And now is the
Parliament assembled at Oxford, whither the Lords come attended with large
trains: and here they begin with the expostulation of the former Liberties,
requiring that the Chief Justiciar, the Chancellor and Treasurer may be
ordained by public choice; and that the twenty four Conserva^ours of the
kingdom may be confirmed, twelve by the election of the Lords, and twelve by
the King, with whatsoever else made for their imagined security. The King
seeing their strength, and in what manner they required these things; swears
solemnly again to the confirmation of them, and causes the Prince to take the
same Oath. But the Lords left not here, the Kings brethren, the Poictouins, and
other strangers must presently be removed; and this also, though with some
little opposition, was at last concluded: and thereupon the Kings brethren and
their followers are despoyled of all their fortunes, and ^xiled by proscription
under the Kings own hand, directed to the Earls of Hereford and Surrey. But
now sickness and mortality happening to many great ones, it is imputed to
poisons, supposed to have been prepared by those strangers proscribed; the
Earl of Gloucester in a sickness, suddenly lost his hair, his teeth, his
nails; and his brother hardly escaped death: which made many to suspect their
nearest servants, and their Cooks: Walter Scoynie the Earl Steward, is
strictly examined, committed to prison, and afterward without confession, is
upon presumptions only executed at Winchester: Elias a converted Jew, is said
to have confessed, that in his house the poison was confected; but it was when
he was a Jew, and not a Christian. Every man that had received any wrong by
those strangers, now put up their complaints, and are heard. Guydo de ^^chfort
a Poictouin, to whom the King had given the Castle of Rochester, is banished,
and all his goods confiscate. William Bussey, Steward to William de Valence, is
committed to the Tower of London, and most reproachfully used. Richard Gray,
whom the Lords had made Captain of Dover Castle, is set to intercept
whatsoever the Poictouins convaied that way out of England; and much treasure
of theirs, and of the elect of Winchester is by him taken, besides great sums
committed to the new Temple are found out, and seized for the King.

And now the new Chief Justiciar Hugh Bigod, brother to the Earl Marshall,
(chosen this last Parliament by public voice) procures that four knights in
every Shire should inquire of the oppressions of the poor, done by great men;
and certify the same, that redress might be made. Also order was taken
against corrupting of justice; when yet notwithstanding this pretended care of
the public, it is noted by the Writers and Records of that time, how the Lords
were themselves but as ^otidem tyranni, enforcing the services of the Kings
tenants that dwelt near them. But to make their cause the more popular, it was
rumored that the King stood upon it, that his necessity must be supplied out of
the estates of his people, whether they would or no: which the King hearing,
sends forth Proclamation, declaring how certain malicious persons had falsely
and seditiously reported, that he meant unlawfully to charge his subjects, and
subvert the Laws and Liberties of the kingdom; and by these false
suggestions, averted the hearts of his people from him: and therefore desires
them not to give credit to such per^urbers: for that he was ready to defend all
Rights and Customs due unto them: and that they might rest of this secured, he
caused his Letters to be made Patents. But now Montford Gloucester, and Spenser,
enforce the King to call a Parliament at London, where they get the authority
of the twenty four to be estated wholly upon themselves, and they alone to
dispose of the custody of the Castles, and other businesses of the kingdom: and
here they bind the King to lose to them their Legal obedience whenever he
infringed his Charter. At this time intelligence was given to the Lords, that
Richard King of the Rom^ns had a purpose to come into England; and the Lords
suspecting he would come with power to aid the King his brother, take order
for guarding the Ports, with intent to hinder his landing: but finding his
train to be but small, accompanied only with his Queen, two German Earls,
and eight knights: upon his promise to take their propounded Oath, they admit
him to land; but would nether permit the King (who came thither to mee^e him)
nor himself to enter into Dover Castle. At Canterbury they bring him into the
Chapter house, where the Earl of Gloucester standing forth in the midst, calls
out the Earl, not by the name of King, but Richard Earl of Cornwall; who in
reverent manner coming forth, takes his Oath in these words. Hear all men,
that I Richard Earl of Cornwall, do here swear upon the holy Evangelists,
that I shall be faithful and diligent to reform with you the Kingdom of
England, and ^e an effectual Coadjutor to expel all Rebels and disturbers of
the same; and this Oath will inviolably observe, under pain of losing all the
Land I have in England: so help me God. But though this Earl came home but
weak and poor, yet upon his return the King takes heart, and seeks all
means to vindicate his power: and first sends messengers secretly to Rome, to
be Absolved from his enforced Oath; and to have the more assurance from the
King of France, he makes an absolute resignation of all his Right to the Duchy
of Normandy, and the Earledomes of Anjou, Poictou, Tourene, and Maine: in
regard whereof, the King of France gives him three hundred thousand pounds
(some say Crowns) o^ Anjouin money; and gran^s him to enjoy all Guyen, beyond
the River Garo^ne, all the Country of Xan^oigne to the River of Charente, the
Country of Limousin and Quercy, for him and his successo^rs, doing their
homage to the Crown of France, as Duke of Aquit^i^e. And now was the King of
France made Arbiter of the difference between King Henry and his Barons, who
gives sentence against the Barons concerning the Provisions at Oxford; but of
their side concerning King John's Charter: by which nice distin^tion, though he
did but leave the matter as he found it: (for those Provisions, as the Lords
pretended, were grounded upon that Charter) yet did his sentence draw many away
from the party of the Barons, amongst whom was Henry son to the Earl of
Cornwall, Roger Clifford, Roger de Leisbourne, Haimo Lestrange, and many
others. But the Earl of Leycester, notwithstanding this revolt, recovers the
Town and Castle of Gloucester; constraines the Citizens to pay a thousand pounds
for their redemption; goes with an Army to Worcester, possesses him of the
Castle, thence to Shrewsbery, and so comes about to the I Will of Ely, subdues the
same, and grows exceeding powerful. The King doubting his approach to London,
falls to treat of a Peace, and a Peace is concluded upon these conditions; that
all the Castles of the King should be delivered to the keeping of the Barons;
the Provisions of Oxford should inviolably be kept; all strangers by a certain
time should avoid the kingdom, except only such as were licensed to stay. The
Prince had fortified Windsor Castle; but Leycester coming to besiege it, he
treats with him for Peace, which is refused, and the Castle is rendered to him.

The King at this time, to win time, convokes another Parliament at London,
wherein he won many Lords to take his part; as namely the Prince Richard his
brother, Henry his son, William Valence, with the rest of his brothers lately
returned, and with them the King marches to Oxford, whither diverse Lords of
Scotland repair to him; as John Commin, John Baylioll, Lords of Galloway,
Robert Bruce, and others: also many Barons of the North; Glifford, Percey,
Basset, and others. From Oxford he goes to Northampton, where he took
prisoners, Simon Montford the younger, with fourteen other principal men;
thence to Nottingham, making spoils of such possessions as pertained to the
Barons in those parts. And now the Kings side grows strong, which the Earls
of Leycester and Gloucester seeing, they write to the King, protesting their
loyalty, and how they opposed only such as were enemies to him and the
kingdom, and had belied them. The King returns answer, that themselves were
the perturbers of him and his State, and sought his and the kingdoms
destruction; and therefore defies them. The Prince likewise and the Earl of
Cornwall send letters of defiance to them. Yet the Barons continue to mediate a
Peace, and send the Bishops of London and Worcester, with offer of thirty
thousand Marks to the King, for the damages done in these wars, so as the
Statutes of Oxford may be observed; but this offer is not accepted. The Earl
seeing no remedy, but it must be put to a day; takes his time to be earlier
ready then was expected, and supplies his want of strength with policy,
placing on the one side of a hill near Lewis, where the battle was fought,
certain Ensigns without men, in such sort, as they might seem a far off,
to be Squadrons of succors to second those he brought to the encounter, whom
he caused all to wear white Crosses, both for their own notice, and the
signification of his cause, which he would have to be thought for justice. Here
the fortune of the day was his, the King, the Prince, the Earl of Cornwall,
and his son Henry, the Earls of Arundell and Hereford, with all the Scottish
Lords, are taken prisoners; the Eale Warren, William de Valence, Guy de
Lusignan, the Kings brothers, with Hugh Bigod Earl Marshall, save themselves
by flight: five thousand (some say twenty thousand) others are slain in the
battle. A year and a half is Simon Montford in possession of his prisoners,
carrying the King about with him to countenance his actions, till he had gotten
all the strongest Castles in the kingdom.

And now comes Erinnys and sets debabte between the two great Earls of
Leycester and Gloucester, about their Dividend: Leycester is taxed to do more
for his own particular then the common good; his sons also presuming upon
his greatness, grew insolent: whereupon Gloucester discontented, forsakes that
side, and betakes him to the Prince; who lately escaping out of the Castle of
Hereford, had gotten a power about him to try the fortune of another battle.
The revolt of this Earl being great in it self, was greater by its example;
for now many others revolted likewise: and the Earl of Leycester seeing the
improvement of the Princes forces, who was now with his Army about Worcester,
though he ^aw his own disadvantage, yet imbattels in a Plain near Ev^sham to
encounter him, and noting the manner of the approach of the Princes Army, said
^o those about him; These men come bravely on, they learn it not of
themselves, but of me; and seeing himself likely to be be^et, and overlaid
with multitude, he advised his friends, Hugh Spenser, Ralph Basset, and others,
to shift for themselves; which when they refused to do, then (says he) let us
commend our souls to God, for our bodies are theirs: and so undertaking the
maine weight of the battle, perished under it^ and with him are slain, his
son Henry, eleven Barons, with many thousands of common Soldiers. And thus
ended Montford the great Earl of Leycester, highly honored in his life, and
more highly should have been after his death, if the people might have had
their will, who talked of Miracles enough to have made him a Saint.

And now is King Henry by this victory of his son, at liberty; who together
repair to Winchester, where a Parliament is convoked, and all who adhered to
the Earl Montford are disinherited, and their estates conferred on others, at
the Kings pleasure; the Londoners also have their Liberties taken from them.
But though the death of Montford gave a great wound to the party of the Barons,
yet it was not mortal, at least not mortal presently, for there remained
relics that kept it alive a good while after. Simon and Guy de Montford, sons
of the Earl of Leycester, and other of the Barons, take and defend the I Will of
Ely: the Castle of Killingworth held out half a year, till their victuals
failed; and then yielded upon conditions to have their lives and goods saved:
and many others there were, resolute and desperate persons, strongly knit and
fastened together, though now shortly upon dissolving. For after the Parliament
at Westminster, the King with an Army going against them, and being at
Northampton, Simon and Guy de Montford submit themselves to him: but when the
Earl of Gloucester opposed the restoring them to their estates, they were feign
to fly the kingdom, and make their fortunes in other Countries, as indeed
they did; the younger in Italy, the elder in France, where they were Propatours
of two great Families. Their mother was banished shortly after the battle of
Evesham, a Lady of eminent note, as being the daughter and sister of a King;
and yet of more note for her patient bearing of adversity, or rather for her
making a benefit of adversity; for by this means she betook her self to the
veil of piety, and died a Nun at Montarges in France.

Three years after this, the disinherited Barons held out, till at length,
conditions of render are propounded; but here the Council are divided in
opinion: Mortimer and others stated in the possessions of the disinherited, are
against restoration; alleging, it were injustice to take from them the
rewards of their service. Gloucester, and the twelve ordained to deal for the
peace of the State, are earnest for restoration; alleging, it were hard
measure to grant them their lives, and not their livelihoods: but not
prevailing, in great coffeehouse Gloucester retires from Court, sends
messengers to warn the King to remove strangers from his counsel; and observe
the Provisions at Oxford, as he promised at Evesham: otherwise that he should
not marvel if himself did what he thought fit. Hereupon John de Warren, Earl
of Surrey, and William de Valentia are sent to the Earl of Gloucester: who
though they could not persuade him to submit to the King; yet thus much they
got of him under his hand and seal, that he would never bear Arms against
the King or his son Edward, but only defend himself, and pursue Roger
Mortimer and his other enemies. And now a Parliament is convoked at Bury,
wherein many demands are made by the King and the Legate, and all for money from
the Clergy; but all denied, that nothing but denials are done in this
Parliament. After this, the Legate imployes Solicitours to persuade the
disinherited Lords which held the I Will of Ely, to return to the faith and unity
of the Church, and to the peace of the King, according to the form propounded
at Coventry: to which the Lords make answer, that they never opposed the unity
of the Church^ but the ^varice of Churchmen that were put in authority; and
that they never opposed the King, but for the good of the kingdom: and then
required that the Provisions of Oxford might be observed, and pledges be given
them for their security. Hereupon the year after, the King prepares a mighty
Army, and Prince Edward with bridges entering the I Will of Ely, shuts them up so,
that he constraines them at last to yield; also the Earl of Gloucester coming
to London with an Army, is by the Legate once again persuaded to render
himself to the King, and upon forfeiture of twelve thousand Marks if ever he
should raise any commotion again, is reconciled. Now remains Lewilin and the
Welsh, to be chastened for aiding of Simon Montford; but the King going against
them with an Army, they give him two and thirty thousand pounds Sterling, and
so make their peace. And here was an end of the first wars between the Kings
of England and their Barons. The next year after the Popes Legate Ottobon
signs with the Croysado both the Kings sons, Edward and Edmund, the Earl of
Gloucester, and diverse Noble men induced to undertake the Holy war, by the
solicitation of him and the King of France: who nothwithstanding his former
calamities endured in that action, would once again adventure it: and because
Prince Edward wanted means to furnish himself out, the King of France lends
him thirty thousand Marks upon a morgage of Gascoyne. And now whilst this
preparation is in hand, King Henry labors to establish the peace of the
kingdom, and to reform the excesses which the war had bred; and the same
year assembles his last Parliament at Marleborough, where the Statutes of that
title were enacted. Near two years it seems to have been after the
undertaking the Cross before Prince Edward set forth; but then taking his wife
Eleanor with him, though young with child, he set forward; and in the voyage,
when many of his people seemed desirous to leave him^ and return home, he is
said to have stricken his breast, and sworn; that if all his followers
forsook him, he would yet enter Acon, or Ptolemais; though but only with his
horse-keeper Fowin. Shortly after Richard King of the Romans died, and the
year following King Henry.

Of his Taxations, and ways for raising of money.
NEver son was more like a Father in any thing, then King Henry was like his
Father King John, in this point, for raising of money; for he trod directly in
all his steps, if he added not something of his own. King John had great
Subsidies granted him by Parliament, for any great action he undertook, so had
King Henry. King John resumed the lands aliened from the Crown, so did King
Henry. King John made benefit of the vacancie of Bishoprics and Abbeys, so did
King Henry. K. John took great Fines of many for crimes not proved, but only
supposed, so did King Henry. King John made benefit of a new Seal, so did King
Henry. King John extorted great sums from the Jews, so did King Henry. And
one way more he had to get money, which perhaps his Father had not, and that
was by begging, as he told the Abbot of Borough; It was more Alms to give
money to him, then to the Beggar that went from door to door. Indeed
Taxations in this Kings Reign may be reckoned amongst his Annual Revenues,
for scarce any year passed without a Parliament, and seldom any Parliament
without a Tax; or if any sometimes without, it was then cause of the greater
Taxation some other way; as when he took of the Londoners for having aided the
Barons, twenty thousand Marks.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
IN this Kings Reign were ratified and confirmed the two great Charters of
Magna Char^a, and Charta de Foresta: also in his time were enacted the Statutes
called of Merton, of Oxford, and of Marleborough. Also stealing of cattle,
which before was but Pecuniary, he made capital: and the first that suffered
for the same, was one of Dunstable; who having stolen twelve Oxen from the
Inhabitants of Colne, and being pursued to Redburne, was by a Bailiffe of Saint
Albons, according to the Kings Proclamation, condemned and beheaded. And it may
seem strange that in these times so much blood should be shed in the field,
and none upon the scaffold; for till the twenty sixth year of this King, that
one William Marisc, the son of Geoffrey Marisc, a Noble man of Ireland, being
condemned for Piracie and Treason, was hanged, beheaded, and quartered; there
is no example of that kind of punishment to be found in our Histories.
Particularly in this Kings Reign was made that Statute, by which the Ward and
marriage of the heirs of Barons within age, is given to the King. Also in this
Kings Reign the Pleas of the Crown were pleaded in the Tower of London. All
Wears in the Thames are in this Kings time ordained to be plucked up and
destroyed. Also the Citizens of London are allowed by Charter, to pass
Toll-free through all England, and to have free Warren about London, also to
have and use a common Seal. Also it was ordained that no Sheriff of London
should continue in his office longer then one year, which they did before for
many. In the five and twentieth year of this King were Aldermen first chosen
within the City of London, which then had the rule of the City, and of the
Wards of the same, and were then yearly changed, as now the Sheriffs are. It
was in this Kings time allowed to the City of London, to present their Major to
the Barons of the Exchequer to be sworn, which before was to be presented to
the King, wheresoever he were. In his time the clause No^ obstante (brought in
first by the Pope) was taken up by the King in his grants and writings. Also in
this Kings time, William Bishop of Salisbury, first caused that custom to be
received for a Law, whereby the Tenants of every Lordship are bound to owe
their suite to the Lords Court, of whom they hold their Tenements.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
Affairs of the Church for matter of Doctrine, were never more quiet then in
this Kings Reign; for now all Heresies accounted of the time, especially the
Albigenses were in a manner suppressed by the Arms of the King of France, not
without the Vote of the King of England, who forbore to make war upon him in
tenderness to this service; but for matter of manners, they were never more
turbulent: for now Abbeys were fleeced, Sanctuaries violated, Clergymen
outraged, Bishops themselves not spared; and all for greediness of money, or
for revenge. Ottobone the Popes Legate here in England, lying at the Abbey of
Oseney, there happened a difference between his servants and the Scholars of
Oxford; in which contention, a brother of his was slain, and the^ Legate
himself feign to fly into the Steeple for safeguard of his life: whereupon
afterward being gotten from thence by the Kings safe conduct, he thundered out
curses against the Scholars, and interdicted the University, so as the
Colleges grew desolate, and the Students were dispersed abroad into other
places, for the space of half a year: till the Monks of Oseney, and the
Regent Masters of Oxford were feign to go bare-foote and bare-head through
London, as far as Durham house, where the Legate lay; and there upon their
humble submission, and great men's intercession, they were absolved, and the
University restored to its former estate. But of this Ottobone, it may not be
impertinent to relate a little further; that going afterward out of England, he
came by degrees, after the death of Innocent the fifth, to be Pope of Rome
himself, by the name of Adrian the fifth, and died within fifty days after
his election. Amongst affairs of the Church, may be reckoned the Ulcers of any
member of the Church: such a one as in this Kings time brake out most
loathsome; for one procuring five wounds to be made in his body, in resemblance
to the five wounds in Christ's body, took upon him to be Christ, and had gotten
a Woman, that took upon her to be the Virgin Mary; who continuing obstinate in
their madness, were adjudged to be immured and shut up between two walls, to
the end (no doubt) the contagion of their filthiness should spread no further.
In this Kings time, a little novelty was first brought in by Pope Innocent the
fourth, who ordained that Cardinals should wear red Hats: something perhaps
for mystery, and something for distictnion.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
THis King caused a chest of Gold to be made for laying up the Relics of King
Edward the Confessor, in the Church of Westminster. He builded a Church for
converted Jews in London: also an Hospital at Oxford, for passengers and
diseased persons: also the new Coventuall Church and the Chapel of our Lady
at Westminster, whereof he laid himself the first stone: also the hou^e of
Blackfriars in Canterbury. In his time, Ela Countess of Salisbury, founded
the Abbey of Lacok in Wiltshire; Richard Earl of Cornwall, founded Hayles a
Monastery of Cistersian Monks near to Winchcombe in Glocestershire: Reginold
de Moun, Earl of Somerset, and Lord of Dunster, founded the Abbey of Newham in
Devonshire: Ranulph the third Earl of Chester, and Lord of little Britain,
builded the Castles of Chartley, Bestone, and the Abbey of Dela Cresse: Sir
John Mansell the Kings Chaplain, founded a house of Regular Chanons near to
Rumney in Kent: William de Albineto Earl of Arundell, founded the Priory of
Wimondham: William Brunc, a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the
Hospital of our Lady without Bishopsgate in London: And Isabel Countess of
Arundell, founded the Nunnery of Marran near to Linne. Friars Minors first
arrived at Dover, nine in number, whereof five remained at Canterbury, and
there builded the first Covent of Friars Minors that ever was in England: the
other four came to London, who increasing in number, had a place assigned them
in Saint Nicholas Shambles; which John Iwyn, Mercer of London, appropriated to
the use of the said Friars, and became himself a Lay brother. Also in this
Kings time the new work of Saint Paul's Church in London was begun. If it
were piety in the Jew, who falling into a Privy upon a Saturday, would not be
taken out that day, because it was the Jews Sabbath: It was as much piety in
the Earl of Gloucester, that would not suffer him to be taken out the next day,
because it was the Christian Sabbath; and when the third day he was taken out
dead, whose piety was the greater? A strange accident upon an act of piety, is
related in this Kings time; which if true, is a Miracle, if not true, is yet a
Legend, and not unworthy to be read: that in a time of dearth, one man in a
certain Parish, who allowed poor people to relieve themselves with taking
Corn upon his ground, had at Harvest a plentiful crop; where others that
denied them, had their Corn all blasted, and nothing worth. In this Kings time
also, Hugh Balsamus, Bishop of Ely, founded Saint Peter's College in Cambridge.
Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, was buried in the Church of the Friars Preachers
in London, to which Church he gave his Palace at Westminster, which afterward
the Archbishop of York bought, and made it his Inn; since commonly called
York place, now White Hall.

Casualties happening in his time.
AT one time there fell no Rain in England, from the first of March to the
Assumption of our Lady; and at another time there fell so much Rain, that
Holland and Holdernes in Lincolneshire were over-flowed and drowned. In the
seventeenth year of his Reign, were seen five Suns at one time together;
after which followed so great a Dearth, that people were constrained to eat
horse flesh, and barks of Trees: and in London twenty thousand were starved
for want of food. Also in his time the Church of Saint Mildred in Canterbury,
and a great part of the City was burnt. Also the Town of New Castle upon Tine
was burnt, Bridge and all. And though it may seem no fit place to tell it, yet
here or no where it must be told; that in this Kings time there was sent by the
King of France, the first Elephant that ever was seen in England.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married Eleanor, the second of the five Daughters of Raymond Earl of
Provence, who lived his Wife thirty seven years, his Widow nineteen, dyed a
Nun at Aimesbury, and was buried in her Monastery. By her, he had six Sons,
and three Daughters: of his Sons, the four youngest dyed young, and were
buried, three of them at Westminster, and the fourth in the New Temple by
Fleetstreet. His eldest Son Edward, surnamed Longshanke, of his tall and
slender body, succeeded him in the kingdom. His second Son Edmund, surnamed
Crouch-backe, of bowing in his back, (as some say) but more likely of wearing
the sign of the Cross, (anciently called a Crouch) upon his back, which was
usually worn of such as had vowed voyages to Jerusalem, as he had done. He
was invested Titular King of Sicilie and Apulia, and created Earl of
Lancaster; on whose person originally the great contention of Lancaster and
York was Founded. He had two Wives, the first was Avelin. Daughter and Heir
of William Earl of Albemarle, by whom he left no issue. The second was Queen
Blanch, Daughter of Robert Earl of Artois, (Brother of Saint Lewis King of
France) Widow of Henry of Champaigne King of Navarre: by her he had issue three
Sons, and one Daughter. His eldest Son Thomas, who after his Father was
Earl of Lancaster, and having married Alice, Daughter and Heir of Henry Lacie
Earl of Lincoln, was beheaded at Pomfret without issue. His second son
Henry Lord of Monmouth, who after his Brothers death was Earl of Lancaster,
and Father of Henry the first Duke of Lancaster: his third Son John; who dyed
unmarryed. His Daughter Mary married to Henry Lord Percy, Mother of Henry the
first Earl of Northumberland. This Edmund dyed at Bay in Gascoyne, in the
year 1296. when he had lived fifty years, whose body half a year after his
death was brought over into England and entombed at Westminster. Of King
Henry's three Daughter, the eldest Margaret was married to Alexander the third,
King of Scotland, by whom she had issue, two Sons, Alexander and David; who
dyed both before their Father, without issue, and one Daughter Margar^t Queen
of Norway, Wife of King Erike, and Mother of Margaret the Heir of Scotland and
Norway, that dyed unmarryed. The second Daughter of King Henry was Beatrice,
borne at Bordeaux, married to John the first Duke of Britain, and had issue by
him, Arthur Duke of Britain, John Earl of Richmont, Peter; and Blanch married
to Philip Son of Robert Earl of Artois, Eleanor a Nun at Aimesbury, and
Mary married to Guy Earl of S. Paul^ she deceased in Britain, and was buried
at London, in the Quire of the Gray Friars within Newgate. The third Daughter
of King Henry, named Katherine, dyed young, and lies buried at Westminster, in
the space between the Chapels of King Edward and Saint Benet.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was of stature but mean, yet of a well compacted body, and very strong:
one of his eyelids hanging down, and almost covering the black of his Eye:
For his inward endowments, it may be said, he was wiser for a man, then for a
Prince; for he knew better how to govern his life then his Subjects. He was
rather Pious then Devout, as taking more pleasure in hearing Masses then
Sermons, as he said to the King of France, He had rather see his Friend once,
then hear from him often. His mind seemed not to stand firm upon its Basis,
for every sudden accident put him into passion. He was neither constant in his
love, nor in his hate; for he never had so great a Favorite whom he cast not
into disgrace, nor so great an Enemy whom he received not into favor. An
example of both which qualities was seen in his carriage toward Hubert de
Burgh, who was for a time his greatest Favorite, yet cast out afterward in
miserable disgrace, and then no man held in greater ha^red, yet received
afterward into grace again. And it is memorable to hear with what crimes this
Hubert was charged at his Arraignment; and ^pecially one: That to dissuade a
great Lady from marriage with the King, he had said, the King was a squint-eyed
Fool, and a kind of Leper, deceitful, perju^ed, more faint-hearted then a
Woman, and utterly unfit for any Noble Ladies company. For which, and other
crimes laid to his charge in the Kings Bench, where the King himself was
present; he was adjudged to have his Lands confiscate, and to be deprived of
his title of Earl; yet after all this, was restored to his estate again, and
suffered to live in quiet. He was more desirous of money then of honor, for
else he would never have sold his Right to the two great Dukedomes of Normandy
and Anjou to the King of France for a Sum of money. Yet he was more desirous
of honor then of quietness, for else he would never have contended so long
with his Barons about their Charter of Liberty, which was upon the matter, but
a point of Honor. His most eminent virtue, and that which made him the more
eminent, as being rare in Princes, was his Continency; for there is nothing
read, either of any ba^e children he had, or of any Concubine he kept.

Of his Death and Burial.
THough he had lived a troublesome life, yet he dyed a quiet death; for he had
^etled Peace in his kingdom, and in his Conscience. For being at Saint
Edmundsbury, and finding himself not well at ease, he made the more have to
London; where calling before him his Lords, and specially Gilbert de Clare,
Earl of Gloucester; he exhorted them to be true and faithful to his Son
Prince Edward, who was at that time far from home, and therefore had the more
need of their care, which consisted chiefly in their agreement one with
another. And then, his sickness increasing, he yielded up his Soul to God, on
the sixteenth day of November, in the year 1272. when he had lived threescore
and five years, Reigned five and fifty, and was buried at Westminster, which
he had newly Builded.

Of Men of note in his time.
OF Martial men famous in his time there were many, but three specially who
obscured the rest: The first was William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, memorable
for the great care he had of King Henry in his minority, and more memorable for
the little care, that Destiny had of his Posterity; for leaving five Sons
behind him, they all lived to be Earls successively, yet all dyed without
issue: So as the great name and numerous Family of the Marshals came wholly to
be extinct in that Generation. The second was Richard de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, who in a Battle against Baldwyn de Gisnes, a valiant Fleming,
employed by King Henry, himself alone encountered twelve of his Enemies, and
having his Horse slain under him, he pitched one of them by the leg out of
the saddle, and leapt into it himself, and continued the fight without giving
ground, till his Army came to rescue him. An Act that may seem fitter to be
placed amongst the Fictions of knights Errant, then in a true Narration. The
third was Simon Montford, a man of so audacious a spirit, that he gave King
Henry the lie to his face, and that in presence of all his Lords; and of whom
it seems, the King stood in no small fear: for passing one time upon the
Thames, and suddenly taken with a terrible storm of Thunder and Lightning, he
commanded to be set ashore at the next Stairs, which happened to be at Durham
House, where Montford then lay, who coming down to meet the King, and
perceiving him somewhat frighted with the Thunder, said unto him, Your Majesty
need not fear the Thunder, the danger is now past: No Montford (said the King)
I fear not the Thunder so much as I do thee. Of men famous for Sanctity of
life, there were likewise many in his time, but three more eminent then the
rest, Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Chichester, and
Thomas Archdeacon of Hereford; All three either Canonized, or at least thought
worthy to be Canonized for Saints. To these may be added Robert Grosshead
Bishop of Lincoln, who Translated the Testaments of the twelve Patriarchs, out
of Greek into Latin; which through envy of the Jews never came to the
knowledge of Saint Hierome, wherein are many Prophesies of our Savior Christ.
Of men famous for learning there were likewise many in his time; of whom, some
left works behind them for testimonies of their knowledge in diverse kinds,
as Alexander Hales a Friar Minor, who wrote many Treatises in Divinity; Ralp^
Coggeshall, who wrote the Appendix to the Chronicle of Ralph Niger; Randulph
Earl of Chester, the third and last of that name, who compiled a Book of the
Laws of England; Henry Bracton, who wrote the Book commonly called by his
name, De Consuetudinibus Anglicanis: and besides these, Hugh Kirkestead,
Richard of Ely, Peter Henham, John Gyles, and Nicholas Fernham, excellent
Physicians; Richard surnamed Theologus, and Robert Bacon, two notable Divines;
Stephen Langthon, Richard Fisaker, Simon Stokes, John of Kent, William
Shirwood, Michael Blaunpaine, John Godard, Vincent of Coventry, Albericke Veer,
Richard Which, John Basing, Roger Waltham, William Seningham, and others.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE FIRST. Surnamed of WINCHESTER.
Of his coming to the Crown,
AS soon as King Henry was dead and buried, the great Lords of the Land caused
his eldest Son Prince Edward to be proclaimed King: and assembling at the New
Temple in London, they there took order for the quiet Governing of the
kingdom, till he should come home. For at this time he was absent in the Holy
Land; and had been there above a year when his Father dyed. But we cannot
bring him home without telling what he did, and what he suffered in all that
time, and in his return; for at his first coming thither, he rescued the
great City of Acon, from being ^urrendred to the Souldan; after which, out of
envy to his Valor, one Anzazim a desperate Saracen, who had often been
employed to him from their General, being one time, upon pretense of some
secret message, admitted alone into his Chamber, with a poisoned knife gave him
three wounds in the Body, two in the Arm, and one near the armepit, which
were thought to be mortal, and had perhaps been mortal, if out of
unspeakeable love, the Lady Eleanor his Wife had not sucked out the poison of
his wounds with her mouth, and thereby effected a cure, which otherwise had
been incurable: and it is no wonder, that love should do wonders, which is it
self a wonder. And now being disappointed of Aides that were promised to be
sent him, and leaving Garrisons in fit places for defense of the Country, he
with his Wife Eleanor takes his journey homewards, and first passing by
Sicilie, was there most kindly received by Charles King of that Island, where
he first heard of his Fathers death; which he took more heavily far, then he
had taken the death of his young Son Henry, whereof he had heard a little
before; at which when King Charles marvailed, he answered, that other Sons
might be had, but another Father could never be had. From hence he passes
through Italy, where much honor is done him both by the Pope and other
Princes; and then descends into Burgoigne, where by the Earl of Chalboun, a
stout man at Arms, he is challenged at a Turneament, with a pretense to
solemnize his presence, but with a purpose indeed to disgrace his person; and
though Prince Edward in many respects might justly have refused it, yet the
nobleness of his mind would not suffer him to pass by any occasion of showing
his valor and in this (...) as he made it appear, that ^ame had been no
(...) the report it ma^e of hi^. And here a great part of his English Nobility
met (...); from whence he passes into France, where the King Philip his ^eare
Cou^^ (as being Sister Sons) entertaines him with great solemnity: and
graceth his solemnity with so much courtesy, that it won Prince Edward
vol^ntarily to do him homage for the Territories he held in France; and this
voluntarines in Prince Edward, won the King of France again to grant quietly
unto him, all the Lands in France that belonged to him; and so these two great
Kings by reciprocal courtesy effected that, which their Predecessors by
force could never effect. From her (...), passes through A^uitaine, and having
there taken homage of his Subjects, and set all things in order, he set Sail
and arrived in England, above a year after the death of his Father: a long
time for plotting of mischief, and a strong temptation to plotters of
mischief; if all the causes of quietness had not concurred: but such was the
worthiness of Prince Edwards person, and such the undoubtednesse of his Title,
that as there could be no Competitour, so there would be no Oppugner^ And
indeed the Divine Providence had showed a special care over him from his
Childhood! whereof one or two Examples will not be unfit to be related. One
was this, that being yet but young, and playing one time at Chesse with a
Friend, in the midst of his game, without any apparent occasion, he removed
himself from the place where he sat, when suddenly there fell from the roof
of the house a great stone, which if he had stayed in the place but never so
little had beaten out his brains. Another Example of the Divine Providence
over him, (though it happened afterward) was this: Having prepared a great
Fleet of Ships for a journey into Flanders, and being at Winchelsey, where the
Ships were to meet; it happened that riding about the Harbor, his Horse
frighted with the noise of a Windmill, which the wind drove violently about,
skrambled up and leapt over the Mud^wall of the Town, so as neither the King
nor the Horse was to be seen, but every one judged the King could not choose
but be thrown and killed; yet such was the Divine Providence over him, that
the Horse lighted upon his feet, and the King keeping the Saddle returned safe.
And under the wing of this Divine Providence, he had now passed all the dangers
of his tedious Journey; and being safely come to London, was on the fifteenth
day of August in the year 1274. Crowned at Westminster, together with his Wife
Queen Eleanor, by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury: where five
hundred great Horses were let loose, for any that could take them; and yet the
outward solemnity was not more great, then the inward joy was universal, every
man rejoicing, not only at a change, which of it self is pleasing, but at a
change so much for the better, as this was like to be.

Of his Acts done after he was Crowned.
THe Acts of this King after he was Crowned, may not unfitly be divided into
five parts: His Acts with his Temporal Lords; His Acts with his Clergy; Then
with Wales; Then his Acts with Scotland; And lastly with France. And first,
concerning his Lords, he gave them good contentment in the beginning of his
Reign, by enlarging their liberties, and granting them easier Laws, for which
purpose he called a Parliament, wherein were made the Statutes called of
Westminster the first, so as he had no difference with them, till toward the
end of his Reign, as shall be showed hereafter. In the next place, concerning
his Acts with his Clergy, he began with them betimes; for having lived to be of
good age, three or four and thirty years old, in his Fathers Reign, he
observed in that time, that their power was too predominant, and therefore
thought fit to clip their wings; at least to keep them from farther growing:
which he did by these means: First, in the sixth year of his Reign, he
deprived many chief Monasteries of their Liberties, and took from the Abbot
and Covent of Westminster, the Return of Writs granted them by the Charter of
his Father, King Henry the third. The next year after he got to be enacted the
Statute of Mortmaine, to hinder the increase of their Temporal Possessions. In
the second Statute of Westminster, he defalked the Jurisdiction of
Ecclesiastical Judges; and growing more upon them, he required the moity of
all their Goods, as well Temporal as Spiritual, for one year. Then calls he a
Parliament of his Nobles at Salisbury, without admission of any Churchmen in
it: And it is worth the noting, that Marchian his Treasurer, acquainting him
that in Churches and Religious houses, there was much treasure to be had, if it
might be taken; he made no scruple of it, but caused it to be taken and brought
into his Exchequer. But finding his Prelates not well contented with it, to
please them again, he bids them ask something of him, wherein they should see
how much he favored them. And they asking of him to repeal the Statute of
Mortmaine, that had been made so much to their hinderance; He answered, that
this was a Statute made by the whole body of the Realm, and therefore was not
in his power, who was but one Member of that Body, to undo that which all the
Members together had done; and perhaps whatsoever they should have asked else,
he would have had an answer to redeem his Offer. And thus much concerning his
Clergy.

In the next place are the Welsh, who had themselves begun with the King: For
their Prince Leolyn being summoned to attend at his Coronation, refused to
come; and afterward at more leisure, being required to come and do his Homage,
he stood upon terms of safe conduct, pretending doubt to be used, as his
Father Gryffin had been; who upon hard usage in the Tower, seeking to make
escape, fell from the Walls and brake his neck. But indeed it was always a
Custom with this Nation, at every change of Princes in England, to try
conclusions, hoping at one time or other to have a day of it, and to change
their yoke of bondage into liberty; for which they were never better Provided
then now; especially (which is the greatest matter in War) having a Valiant
Prince to be their Leader. But there happened an accident which took off their
edge at this time: For the Lady Eleanor, a Daughter of the late Earl Simon
Montford, whom Prince Leolyn extremely loved, being passing out of France into
Wales, was by the way upon the Sea taken by English ships, and brought to King
Edward, and for the love of her, Prince Leolyn was content to submit himself
to any conditions: which besides subjection of his State, was to pay fifty
thousand pounds Sterling, and a thousand pounds per annum during his life; and
upon these conditions the marriage with his beloved Lady was granted him, and
was solemnized here in England, whereat the King and Queen were themselves
present. Three years Leolyn continued loyal, and within bounds of obedience,
in which time David, one of his Brothers, staying here in England, and found by
the King to be of a stirring Spirit, was much honored by him; Knighted, and
matched to a rich Widow, Daughter of the Earl of Darby, and had given him by
the King besides, the Castle of Denbigh, with a thousand pounds per annum:
though (as it was afterward found) he lived here but in the nature of a spy:
For when Prince Leolyns Lady was afterward dead, and that he (contrary to his
Conditions formerly made) brake out into rebellion, then goes his Brother David
to him, notwithstanding all these Favors of the King: and they together enter
the English Borders: Surprise the Castles of Flynt and Rutland, with the person
of the Lord Clifford, sent Justiciar into those parts: and in a great Battle
overthrew the Earls of Northumberland and Surrey, with the slaughter of Sir
William Lyndsey, Sir Richard Tanny, and many others. King Edward advertised of
this Revolt and overthrow, being then at the Vyzes in Wiltshire, prepares an
Army to repress it; but before his setting forth, goes privately to his Mother
Queen Eleanor, lying at the Nunnery of Aimesbury, with whom whilst he
conferred, there was one brought into the Chamber, who feigned himself (being
blind) to have received his sight at the Tomb of King Henry the third:
A^soone as the King saw the man, he remembered he had seen him before, and knew
him to be a most notorious lying Villain, and wished his Mother in no case to
believe him: but his mother, who much rejoiced to hear of this Miracle, for
the glory of her husband, finding her son unwilling that his Father should be
a Saint, grew suddenly into such a rage against him, that she commanded him to
avoid her Chamber: which the King obeyes; and going forth, meets with a Clergy
man, to whom he tells the story of this Impostour, and merrily said; He knew the
justice of his Father to be such, that he would rather pull out the eyes (being
whole) of such a wicked wretch, then restore them to their sight. In this mean
time the Archbishop of Canterbury had gone of himself to Prince Leolin, and
had labored to bring him and his brother David to a re-submission, but could
effect nothing; for besides other reasons that swayed Prince Leolin, the
conceit of a Prophecy of Merlin, that he should shortly be Crowned with the
Diadem of Brute, so overweighed him, that he had no care for peace, and shortly
after no head: for after the Earl of Pembroke had taken Bear Castle, which was
the seat of Prince Leolin, he was himself slain in battle; and his head cut
off by a common Soldier, was sent to King Edw. who caused the same to be
Crowned with Ivy, and to be set upon the Tower of London; And this was the end
of Leolin, the last of the Welsh Princes, betrayed (as some write) by the men
of Buelth. Not long after his brother David also is taken in Wales, and judged
in England to an ignominious death: First, drawn at a horse tail about the
City of Shrewsbury, then beheaded, the trunk of his body divided, his heart
and bowels burnt, his head sent to accompany his brothers on the Tower of
London, his four quarters to four Cities, Bristow, North^^pton, York, and
Winchester: A manifold execution, and the first showed in that kind to this
kingdom, in the person of the son of a Prince, or any other Noble man that we
read of in our History. It is perhaps something which some here observe, that
at the sealing of this conquest, King Edward lost his eldest son Alphonsus, of
the age of twelve years, (a Prince of great hope) and had only left to succeed
him, his son Edward lately borne at Carnarvan, and the first of the English,
entitled Prince of Wales, but no Prince worthy of either Wales or England. And
thus came Wales to be united to the Crown of England, in the eleventh year of
this King Edwards Reign; who thereupon established the government thereof,
according to the Laws of England, as may be seen by the Statute of Rutland,
in the twelfth year of his Reign.

The work of Wales being settled, King Edward passes over into France, upon
notice of the death of Philip the Hardy, to renew and confirm such conditions
as his state in those parts required, with the new King Philip the fourth,
entitled the Fair; to whom he does homage for Aquitaine, having before
quitted his claim to Normandy for ever. After three years and a half being
away in France, he returns into England; and now in the next place comes the
business with Scotland, and will hold him wo^ke at times as long as he lives,
and his son after him. Alexander the third, King of Scots, as he was running
his horse, fell horse and man to the ground, and brake his neck, and died
immediately^ by reason whereof (he leaving no issue, but only a daughter of
his daughter Margaret, who died also soon after) there fell out presently
great contention about succession. Ten Competitors pretend title, namely, Erick
King of Norway, Florence Earl of Holland, Robert Bruce Earl of Anandale, John
de Baylioll Lord of Galloway, John de Hastings Lord of Abergeveny, John Cummin
Lord of Badenaw, Patrick de Dunbarre Earl of March, John de Vescie, Nicholas
de Sul^s, William de Rosse; all or most of them de^cending from David Earl of
Huntington, younger brother to William King of Scots, and great Uncle to the
late King Alexander. This title King Edward takes upon him to decide,
pretending a Right of Superiority from his Ancestors over that kingdom and
proving it by authority of old Chronicles, as Marianus Scotus, William of
Malmsbury, Roger de Hoveden, Henry of Huntington, Ralph de Luceto, and others;
which though the Scottish Lords who swaied the Interregnum opposed, yet are
they constrained for avoiding of further inconveniences, to make him Arbiter
thereof, and the ten Competitours bound to stand to his award. Two are
especially found, between whom the ^ight lay, John de Baylioll Lord of
Galloway, and Robert Br^ce; the one descending from an elder daughter, the
other from a son of a younger daughter of Alan, who had married the eldest
daughter of this David brother to King William. The controversy held long,
twelve of either kingdom learned in the Laws, are elected to debate the same
at Berwick; all the best Civilians in the Universities of France are solicited
to give their opinions; all which brought forth rather doubts then resolutions:
whereupon King Edward the better to sway this business by his presence, takes
a journey Northward; where being come as far as Lincolnshire, he lost his
beloved wife Queen Eleanor: and thereupon going back to see her Funeral
performed at Westminster: that done, he returns presently to his Scottish
business. And now six years were passed since the death of King Alexander,
and yet nothing concluded in this controversy; whereupon King Edward deals
privately with Bruce, (who had the weaker Title, but the more friends) and
promises him, if he would swear fealty and homage to the Crown of England,
he would Invest him in that of Scotland. But Bruce answers, he was not so
d^sirous to rule, as thereby to infringe the liberties of his Country.
Whereupon with the like offer he sets upon Baylioll, who having better right,
but less love of the people, and more greedy of a kingdom then honor,
accepts the condition; and thereupon is Crowned King at Scone, has fealty done
him by all the chief Nobility, except Bruce: comes to New Castle upon Tyne,
where King Edward then lay; and there, with many of his Nobles, swears fealty,
and does homage to him, as his Sovereign Lord. Which act done to secure him,
overthrew him: for being little beloved before, hereby he became less: such as
stood for Bruce, and others of the Nobility (tender of the preservation of
their Countries liberty) took stomach against him; and not only for this, but
shortly after for his injustice in the case of the Earl of Fife, one of the
six Governors in the time on the Interregnum, who had been slain by the
Family of Alberneth; the brother of which Earl prosecuting Law before King
Baylioll, in his high Court of Parliament, and having no right done him (King
Baylioll giving judgment of the side of the Alberneths) he appeals to the
Court of the King of England: whereupon King Baylioll is summoned, appears,
sits with King Edward in his Parliament till his cause was to be heard, and
then is cited by an Officer to arise, and to stand in the place appointed for
pleading; then he craves to answer by a Procuratour, but is denied, and
thereupon descends to the ordinary place, and defends his cause himself: which
indignity (as he took it) so incenseth him, that he returns home with a
breastfull charged with indignation; meditates revenge, renues the ancient
league with France, confirms it with marriage of his son Edward, to a
daughter of Charles brother to King Philip, glad in regard of late offenses
taken against the King of England, to embrace the same; which done, Baylioll
defies King Edward, renounceth his Allegiance, as unlawfully done, being not in
his power, without consent of the State, to do any such Act. Hereupon brake
out that mortal dissension between the two Nations, which consumed more
Christian blood, and continued longer then ever quarrel we read of did,
between any two people in the world. For he that began it, could not end it,
but it lasted almost three hundred years, and was never thoroughly abolished,
till the late blessed union wrought by him in whom Wisdom and Virtue, Right
and Power concurred all to make it firm. And now the fatal Chair in which
the Kings of Scotland used to be Inaugurated, seems to recover its secret
operation, according to ancient Prophecy: that whither soever that Chair
should be removed, the kingdom should be removed with it; and this Chair King
Edward caused to be brought out of Scotland to Westminster, and to be placed
there amongst the Monuments, where it still continues. But now King Baylioll
being summoned to appear at New Castle, and refusing to come; King Edward
enters Scotland with an Army, consisting of four thousand horse, and thirty
thousand foot, besides five hundred horse, and one thousand foot of the Bishop
of Durham. Berwicke is first won, with the slaughter of fifteen thousand
Scots; (our Writers say more) and after that, the Castles of Dunbarre,
Roxborough, Edinbough, Sterli^g, and Saint John's Town; and now King Balioll
sues for Peace, submits himself, takes again his Oath of Fealty to King
Edward, as his Sovereign Lord: which done, a Parliament for Scotland is held
at Berwicke, where the Nobility likewise did Homage to him, confirming the same
by their Charter, under their hands and seals: only William Dowglasse
refuses; content rather to endure the misery of a Prison, then yield to the
subjection of the King of England. But King Baylioll, notwithstanding his
submission, is sent prisoner into England after his four years Reign in
Scotland; and King Edward returns home, leaving John Warren Earl of Sussex
and Surrey, Warden of all Scotland; Hugh Cressingham Treasurer, and Ormesloy
Chief Justice, with Commission to take in his name, the Homages and Fealties
of all such as held Lands of that Crown. But this continued not long, for King
Edward being absent in France, the Scots fell upon the Officers he had left;
slew Sir Hugh Cressingham with six thousand English, recovered many Castles,
and regained the town of Berwick, and all by the animation and conduct of one
William Walleys, a poor private Gentleman, (though Nobly descended) who seeing
his Country without a Head, and thereby without a Heart (all the great men,
either in captivity or subjection^ assembles certain of as poor and desperate
estate as himself, and leads them to attempt upon whatsoever advantages they
could find to annoy the English, and having therein good success, it so
increased both his courage and company, that he afterward came to be the
general Guardian of the whole kingdom; and was in possibility to have
absolutely redeemed his Country from the subjection of the English, if the
speedy coming of King Edward had not prevented him. For now King Edward, to
bring his work near together, removes his Exchequer and Courts of Justice to
York, where they continued above six years; and thither he calls a
Parliament, requiring all his subjects that held of him by knights service, to
be ready at Roxborough by a peremptory day: where there assemble three thousand
men at Arms on barded horses, and four thousand other armed men on horse
without bards, with an Army of foot answerable, consisting most of Welsh and
Irish, besides five hundred men at Arms out of Gascoyne; and with this power
he makes his second expedition into Scotland: the Earls of Hereford and
Norfolk, with the Earl of Lincoln, led his Vauntgard at the famous battle
of Fonkirke, where the shouts of the Scots were so great, that King Edwards
horse frighted withal, cast him off, and brake two of his ribs; which
notwithstanding he gets up again, goes on, and gets the victory; wherein are
reported to be slain two hundred knights, and forty thousand foot of the
Scots: but William Walleys with some few, escaped to make more work. And here
again that kingdom might seem as if quite overthrown. Most of the estates
of the Earls and Barons of Scotland (with their titles) that had stood out,
were bestowed on the English; and a Parliament is called at Saint Andrews,
where all the great men of that kingdom, except only Walleys, once again
swear Fealty to the King of England. It seems swearing of Fealty was with the
Scots but a Ceremony without substance, as good as nothing: for this is now the
third time they swore Fealty to King Edward; yet all did not serve to make them
loyal: for not long after, comes the news of a new King made and Crowned in
Scotland: Robert Bruce Earl of Carrick, son to that Bruce who was
competitour with Baylioll, escaping out of England, becomes Head to the
confused Body of that kingdom: and perceiving John Cummyn (who had a title
himself) to go about to bewray his intentions to King Edward; he finding him
at Dunfrayes, sets upon him, and murders him in the Church. Whereof as soon
as King Edward heard, he sends Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, and the
Lords Clifford and Percie, with a strong power to revenge the death of Cummyn,
and to relieve his Wardens of Scotland; who upon Bruces revolt, were all
retired to Berwicke, whilst himself prepares an Army to follow: wherein to be
the more nobly attended, he caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever
ought by their Paternall succession, or otherwise had means of their own for
service, should repair to Westminster, at the Feast of Pentecost, to receive
the Order of knighthood, and a Military Ornament out of the Kings Wardrobe.
Hereupon three hundred young Gentlemen, all the sons of Earls, Barons, and
knights, assemble at the day appointed, and receive Purples, silks, Sindons,
Scarffes, wrought with Gold or Silver, according to every man's Estate. For
which train (because the Kings House was too little, by reason a part of it
had been lately burnt) room is made, and the Apple Trees cut down at the new
Temple for their Tents, where they attire themselves, and keep their Vigile.
The Prince (whom the King then likewise knighted, and gave him the Duchy of
Aquitaine, kept his Vigile with his Train at Westminster, and the next day
girds these three hundred knights, with the Military Belt, in such manner as he
himself had received it. Which done, the King before them all makes a Vow,
that alive or dead, he would revenge the death of Cummyn upon Bruce, and the
perjured Scots: Adjuring his Son and all the Nobles about him, upon their
Fealty, that if he dyed in this Journey, they should carry his Corpse with them
about Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred, till they had vanquished the
Usurper, and absolutely brought the Country to Subjection. The Prince and all
the Nobles promise upon their Faith, to employ their uttermost power to
perform his Vow: and herewithall he sets forth with a potent Army, presently
after Whitsontide, and makes his last Expedition into Scotland, in the four
and thirtieth year of his Reign.

The Earl of Pembroke, with that power sent before, and aid of the Scottish
party, had before the King arrived in Scotland, defeated in a battle near
Saint John's Town, the whole Army of the new King, and narrowly missed the
taking of his Person, but he escaping in disguise, and sheltring himself in
obscure places, was reserved for greater Battles, his Brothers Nigell, Bruce,
and shortly after, Thomas and Alexander a Priest, were taken and Executed after
the manner of Traitors at Berwicke. And now King Edward had done for Fighting,
all was now for Executions, and indeed his desire of Revenge made him
inexorable, and vow to spare none of what degree soever. The Earl of Atholl,
(though of Royal blood, and allied unto him) was sent to London, where all his
preferment was, to have a higher pair of Gallows then the rest. The Wife of
Robert Bruce, taken by the Lord Rosse, is sent Prisoner to London, and his
Daughter to a Monastery in Lindsey. The Countess of Boughan, who had been
ayding at Bruces Coronation, is put into a wooden Cage, and hung out upon the
walls of Berwicke for people to gaze on. But though Bruces party was thus
dejected, and himself at this time appeared not, but shifted privily from
place to place, in a distressed manner, (attended only with two Noble
Gentlemen, who neeer forsook him in his misfortunes, the Earl of Lenox and
Gilbert Hay) yet gives he not over, but gathers new Forces, with which he
suddenly assailes the Earl of Pembroke at unawares, gives him a great defeat,
and within three days after chaseth the Earl of Gloucester into the Castle of
Air, where he besieged him, till by the Kings Forces he was driven again to
his former retire. Whereupon King Edward, who had spent his Winter at Carlisle,
in July following with a fresh Army enters Scotland himself, but falling into
a Dysentery or Bloody-flix, at Borough upon the Sands he ended his life: and
thus ended King Edwards troubles with Scotland, but not Englands troubles,
which are more to come, then yet are past.

But though this business of Scotland never left King Edward till his dying
day, yet it had been upon him but as an Ague, sometimes putting him into
violent heats, and sometimes leaving him in a quiet temper, with such a
vicissitude, that when he had quietness with Scotland, he had troubles with
France, whereof the time is now to speak. It is well known, that Philip King
of France, Father of the present King, and Edward King of England were near
Cousins, the Sons of two Sisters; and it has been showed before at King
Edwards returning from the Holy Land, and passing through France, what
extraordinary kindness and mutual courtesy passed between them, that one
would have thought neither they no^ theirs should ever have fallen out: and
perhaps never should, if they had been private men, and not Princes. For
private men may easily continue Friends, as having none to consider but
themselves; but Princes hardly, as having besides themselves, their Subjects to
consider. And though they be the Subjects oftentimes that make the Quarrel,
yet they are the Princes that must maintain it. And besides, between Princes
there can never be but jealousies, and where jealousies are, every trifle makes
a quarrel. And this was the case of these two Kings, certain of the King of
Englands Subjects, had upon the Coast of Normandy done spoil to some Subjects
of the King of France: and this difference of the Subjects made a difference
between the Kings, while each of them standing in defense of his own, fall
out themselves; and for a beginning the King of France summons King Edward, as
owing homage to that Crown, to appear and answer it in his Court. And King
Edward, though voluntarily before he had done it in a way of Courtesy, yet
being now impetiously commanded, he refuses it: upon which refusal, all his
Territories in France are condemned to be forfaited, and an Army is presently
sent to seize upon the same, led by Charles de Valois, and Arnold de Neele,
Constable of France. Bordeaux; with diverse other Peec^s of importance, are
taken from him. And now King Edward well knowing what danger it was to have so
powerful an Adversary; endeavors first to strengthen himself with Friends
abroad, seeks to match his Son Edward with a Daughter of Guy Earl of
Flanders: Marries one of his Daughters to the Duke of Barr^, who pretended
Title to Champaigne; another to John Duke of Bra^ant; sends fifteen thousand
pounds Sterling to Adolph de Nassaw the Emperor, for recovery of certain
Lands which he claimed in France; and with all these and many other con^ining
Princes, he sets upon the King of France, and then sends over his Brother
Edmund Earl of Lancaster, the Earls of Lincoln and Richmond, with eight and
twenty Banners, seven hundred men at Arms, and a Navy of three hundred and
sixty Sail. In the mean time the King of France, having had intelligence of
the intended alliance between King Edward, and Guy Earl of Flanders, sends
for the said Earl (as if knowing nothing thereof) to come with his Wi^e and
Daughter to make merry with him at Paris: where instead of Feasting him, he
makes him Prisoner, and takes from him his Daughter, in regard he sought (being
his Vassal) to match her with his capital Enemy. The Earl excuses it the
best he could, and by much mediation is released himself, but not his
Daughter; whereupon the Earl, presuming upon aid from King Edward, takes
Arms, and defies the King of France; who thereupon comes with an Army of sixty
thousand against him: which caused King Edward, with all speed possible to
relieve this distressed Earl; and so leaving the Government of the kingdom in
his absence, to the Bishop of London, the Earl of Warwick, and the Lords
Reynold, Gray, and Clifford; with five hundred Sail, and eighteen thousand
men at Arms, he passes over into France, but finding the Country distracted
into many popular Factions, and the King of France daily getting upon them,
(having already won Lisle, Doway, Courtray, Burges and Dam) and the Emperor
Adolph failing to send him aid as he had promised, he fell into great
perplexity: and having stayed the whole Winter at Gaunt, where by reason of
many outrages committed by his Soldiers, he was so affronted by the Gauntois,
that his own person was not without some danger; He thereupon in the Spring of
the year, concludes a Truce with the King of France for two years, takes his
sister Margaret to Wife, and affianceth the Daughter of the same King to his
Son Prince Edward, and so returns into England: And these were all the
troubles King Edward had with France.

But now must something be spoken of troubles with his Lords at home, whereof
this was the beginning: In a Parliament at Salisbury, the five and twentieth
year of his Reign, the King requires certain of his Lords to go to the
Wars in Gascoyne; which needed a present supply by reason of the death of his
Brother Edmund: but the Lords make all their excuses, every man for himself:
Whereupon the King in great rage threatened, they should either go, or he would
give their Lands to others that should. Upon this Humfrey Bohun Earl of
Hereford, High Constable, and Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of
England, make their Declaration, that if the King went in Person they would
attend him; otherwise not. Which answer offended the King more, and being urged
again, the Earl Marshall protested he would willingly go thither with the
King, and march before him in the Vauntguard, as by right of inheritance he
ought to do; But the King told him plainly, he should go with any other,
though he we^^ not himself in Person^ I am not so bound (says the Earl)
neither will I take t^^t journey without you. The King swore by God, Sir Earl,
you shall either go or h^^^^ And I swear by the same Oath (said the Earl) I
will neither go no^ hang^ and so without leave departs. Shortly after the two
Earls assemble many Noble men, and other their Friends, to the number of
thirty Bannere^s, so as they were fifteen hundred men at Arms, well appointed,
and stood upon their Gu^^d^ The King like a prudent Prince, who knew his times,
prosecu^es them not as then, b^^ lets the matter pass, in regard that his
business called him presently into Flanders; when being ready to take ship,
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the Commons send him a Roll of
the Grievances of his Subjects, concerning his Taxes, Subsidies, and other
Impositions, with his seeking to force their services by unlawful courses: to
which the King sends answer, that he could not a^t^r any thing without the
advice of his Council, who were not now about him, and therefore required
them, seeing they would not attend him in his Journey, (which they absolutely
refused to do, though he went in Person, unless he had gone into France or
Scotland) that they would yet do nothing in his absence, prejudi^iall to the
peace of the kingdom; and that at his return, he would set all things in good
order to their contentment. But having taken his Journey, and being held there
with long delays, to his exceeding great expenses, he was forced to send over
for more supply of Treasure; and thereupon gave order for a Parliament to be
held at York by the Prince, and (because of his Minority, for he was then but
sixteen years of age) by such as had the manage of the kingdom in his
absence: and to the end he would not be disappointed of aid, he condescends to
all such Articles as were demanded, concerning the great Charter: Promising
from thenceforth never to charge his Subjects otherwise then by their consents
in Parliament, and to pardon all such as had denied to attend him in this
Journey. After this, in the 27. year of his Reign, a Parliament is called at
Westminster, wherein the promised Confirmation of the two Charters, and the
allowance of what disafforestation had heretofore been made, was earnestly
urged, and in the end with much ado Granted; and that with omission of the
Clause, Salva Iure Coronae nostr^: which the King labored to have inserted,
but the people by no means would agree, and the perambulation of the Forests
of England was then committed to three Bishops, three Earls, and three Barons.
But some years after, in the two and thirtieth year of his Reign, King
Edward begun to show his resentment of the stubborn behavior of his Nobles
toward him in times past; and so terrifies Roger Bigod, Earl Marshall, that
to recover his favor the Earl made him his Heire^ in Possession; (though he
had a Brother of his own living) reserving only to himself a thousand pounds
per annum, during his life. Of others likewise he go^ great sums for the same
offense; The Earl of Hereford escaped his fine by death. But the Archbishop
of Canterbury, (whom he accused to have disturbed his Peace in his absence) he
sends over to Pope Clement the fifth, (who succeeded Bonifac^) that he might be
crushed with a double power. This Pope was Native of Bordeaux, and ^o the more
regardfull of the Kings desire; and the King^ the more confident of his favor;
which to entertain and increase, King Edward sends him a whole furnish of all
vessels for his Chamber of clean Gold: which great gift so wro^ght with the
Pope, that he untied the King from the Covenant made with his Subjects
concerning their Charters, confirmed unto them by his last three Acts of
Parli^ment, and absolved him from his Oath: A safe time for Princes, when they
mighttye themselves in any obligation to their Subjects, and afterward for a
bribe to the Pope be untyed again.

His Taxations, and ways for raising of money.
IF Taxations may suffer degrees of comparison, it may not unfi^ly be said of
these three last Kings, that King John was in the Positive; his Son Henry the
third in the Comparative: and this King Edward in the Superlative. For not
only he far exc^eded the two former, but he has left a spell to all that
come after, for ever coming near him: but then under the name of Taxations,
we must include the ways he took for raising of profit. But first in the way
of Parliament. In the first year of his Reign, was granted him a tenth of the
Clergy for two years, besides a fifteenth of them and the Temporalty. In his
fifth year, a twentieth of their goods toward the Welsh wars. In his
seventh, the old money was called in, and new coined, in regard it had been
much def^ced by the Jews; for which 297. were at one time executed in London:
and this brought in profit of no small value. In his eleventh year, he had a
thirtieth of the Temporalty, and a twentieth of the Clergy, for his wars in
Wales. In the thirteenth, Escuage, forty shillings of every knights Fee. In his
foureteenth year, he had a thousand Marks of certain Merchants Fined for
false weights. In his nineteenth, the eleventh part of all movables of the
Clergy, and shortly after a tenth for six years. In his twentieth, William
Marchyan then Lord Treasurer of England, perceiving great riches to be in
Churches and religious houses, put it so into the Kings head, that they were
all brought into the Kings Treasury. In the eighth year of his Reign, he sent
ou^ his Writ Quo Warrant^, to examine by what title men held their lands; which
brought him in much money, till John Earl of Warren, being called to show his
title, drew out an old rusty Sword, and then said, He held his land by that,
and by that would hold it to death; which though it made the King desist from
his Project, yet he obtained at that time a fifteenth part of the Clergy. In
his seventeenth year he Fined all his Judges for corruption: Sir Ralph Higham
Chief Justice of the higher Bench, in seven thousand Marks: Sir John Loveton
Justice of the lower Bench, in three thousand Marks: Sir William Brompton, in
six thousand Marks: Sir S^l^mon Rochester, in four thousand Marks: Sir
Richard Boyland, in four thousand: Sir Walter Hopton, in two thousand: Sir
William Saham, in three thousand: Robert Lithbury Master of the Rolls, in one
thousand: Roger Leycester, in one thousand: He^^y Bray Escheatour, and Judge
for the Jews, in one thousand: but Sir Adam Stratt^^ chief Baron of the
Exchequer, in four and thirty thousand: and Thomas Wayland (found the greatest
Delinquent, and of the greatest substance) had all his goods, and whole estate
confiscated to the King; and himself banished out of the kingdom. In his
eighteenth year he banished the Jews; of whom there was at that time above
fifteen thousand in the kingdom, who had but all their goods confiscate^
leaving them only means to bear their charges in going away.

In his four and twentieth year, he commanded a new Subsidy to be levied upon
all sarplers of Wool going out of England: as likewise with Fels and Hides. In
his five and twentieth year, he calls a Parliament at Saint Edmundsbery, where
is granted the eighth part of the goods of good Towns, and of other people the
twelfth. As for the Clergy, they desire to be excused, and refuse to
contribute, in regard of their many late paiments; as in the two and twentieth
year of his Reign, they paid the mo^ty of their goods: and in his three and
twentieth year, he sei^ed into his hands, all Priories aliens and their goods:
besides he had a loan of the Clergy, which amounted to an hundred thousand
pounds: but notwithstanding upon this refusal of the Clergy, the King puts all
Clergy men out of his protection, whereby they were to have no Justice in any
of his Courts; (a strain of State beyond any of his Predecessors) which so
amazed them, that in the end, the Archbishop of York, with the Bishops of
Durham, Ely, Salisbury, and Lincoln, yielded to lay down in their Churches,
the fifth part of all their goods toward the maintenance of the Kings wars;
whereby they appeased his wrath, and were received into grace. But the
Archbishop of Canterbury, by whose animation the rest stood out, had all his
goods seized on, and all the Monasteries within his Diocese, taken into the
Kings hands, and Wardens appointed to minister only necessaries to the Monks,
conve^ting the rest to the Kings use: at length by much suite, and Abbots and
Priests, giving the fourth part of their goods, redeem themselves, and the
Kings favor. In the six and twentieth year of his Reign, at a Parliament
holden at York, is granted him the ninth penny of the goods of the Temporalty:
the tenth penny of the Clergy of the Diocese of Canterbury, and of York the
fifth: and in this year also he raised the Imposition upon every sack of
Wool, from a noble to forty shillings. In his two and thirtieth year he sends
out a new Writ of Inquisition, called Traile-baston, for intruders on other
men's lands; who to oppress the right owner, would make over their land to
great men; for Batterers hired to beat men, for breakers of Peace, for
Ravishers, Incendiaries, Murderers, Fighters, false Assisours, and other such
Malefactors: which Inquisition was so strictly executed, and such Fines taken,
that it brought in exceeding much treasure to the King. As likewise did another
Commission at the same time, sent forth to examine the behavior of Officers,
and Ministers of Justice; wherein many were found Delinquents, and paid dearly
for it. At this time also he called his Lords to account for their
stubbornness some years before, in denying to attend him into Flanders; which
brought him in profit answerable to their greatness that were called. After
all this, in his four and thirtieth year, there is granted him the thirtieth
penny of both Clergy and Laity, and the twentieth of all Merchants toward his
journey into Scotland. And this may be sufficient to show his Taxations to have
been in the Superlative degree. And yet besides these, he had no small benefit
by Silver Mines, which in his time were found in Devonshire.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
IN the first year of his Rain were made the Statutes called of Westminster
the first. In his twelfth year were made the Statutes of Acton Burnell. In the
foureteenth year of his Reign were made the Statutes called Additamenta
Glocestriae. He ordained such men to be Sheriffs in every County, as were of
the same County where they were to be Sheriffs. He ordained that Jews should
wear a Cognizance upon their upper Garment whereby to be known, and
restrained their excessive taking of Usury. In his time was also Enacted the
Statute of Mortmaine. In his twelfth year, in the Quindenes of Saint Michael,
the Justices Itinerants began to go their general Circuits. In his time new
pleces of money were coined, and half pence of Silver came to be in use, which
were before of base metal. In his time, three men for rescuing a prisoner,
arrested by an Officer, had their right hands cut off by the wrists. In his
time all Jews were banished out of the Realm. This King by Proclamation
prohibited the burning of Sea-coale in London and the Suburbs, for avoiding the
noisome smoke. In his eleventh year the Bakers of London were first drawn
upon Hurdles, by Henry Waleys Major; and Corn was then first sold by weight.
In this Kings time the title of Baron which had before been promiscuous to men
of estate, was first confined to such only as by the King were called to have
voice in Parliament.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN his time, at a Synod holden at Reading by the Archbishop of C^nterbury, it
was ordained according to the Constitutions of the General Council, that no
Ecclesiastical person should have more then one Benefice, to which belonged
the Cure of souls: and that every person promoted to any Ecclesiastical
Living, should take the Order of Priesthood within one year after. In his time
lived and died Pope Boniface the 8. of whom his Predecessor had Prophesied:
Ascendes ut Vulpes, Regnabis ut Leo, Morieris ut Canis.

Works of Piety done by him, or by others in his time.
THis King Founded the Abbey of the Vale Royal in Cheshire, of the Cisteaux
Order. In his time John Baylioll King of Scots, builded Baylioll College in
Oxford: also in his time, Walter Marton Lord Chancellor of England, and after
Bishop of Rochester, Founded Marton College in Oxford, who was drowned passing
over the water at Rochester, being at that time no Bridge there, as now there
is. In his time was finished the new work of the Church of Westminster, which
had b^ene threescore and six years in building. In his time was laid the
Foundation of the Blackfriars besides Ludgate, and of Baynards Castle: also in
his time, his second wife Queen Margaret began to build the Quire of the
Gray-Friers in London. In his time was begun to be made the great Conduit in
London, standing against the Church called Acres in Cheap. In his time Henry
Walleys, Major of London, caused the Tonne upon Cornhill, to be a Prison for
night-walkers: and also builded a house called the Stocks, for a Market of fish
and flesh, in the midst of the City. In this Kings time, Edmund Earl of
Leycester, the Kings brother, Founded the Minories, a Nunnery without Aldgate.
This King builded the Castle of Flint in Wales, and the Castle of Beaumaris in
the I Will of Anglesey, and the Castle of Carnarvan by Snowdon. Also in this Kings
time, John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, Founded a College of Canons at
Wingham in Kent.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN the second year of this Kings Reign, there happened the greatest rot of
Sheep in England that ever was known, which continued five and twenty years;
and came (as was thought) by one infected Sheep of incredible greatness,
brought out of Spain by a French Merchant into Northumberland. In the
fifteenth year of this Kings Reign, Wheat was sold for ten Groats a
Quarter; where the next year after there was so great a Dearth, that it was
sold for eighteen pence the Bushel. In the seventeenth year of his Reign,
there fell so much rain, that Wheat was raised from three pence the Bushel,
to sixteen pence; and so increased yearly, till at last it was sold for
twenty shillings the Quarter. And this year the City of Carlisle, and the Abbey
with all the houses belonging to the Friars Minors, was consumed with fire. In
his one and twentieth year, a great part of the Town of Cambridge, with the
Church of our Lady, was also burnt. In the seven and twentieth year of his
Reign, his Palace at Westminster, and the Monastery adjoining, were consumed
with fire. The Monastery of Gloucester also was burnt to the ground. In this
year also, an Act of Common Counsel, by consent of the King, was made
concerning victuals; a fat Cock to be sold for three half pence, two Pullets
for three half pence, a fat Capon for two pence half penny, a Goose four
pence, a Mallard three half pence, a Partridge three half pence, a Pheasant
four pence, a Hearon six pence, a Plover one penny, a Swanne three shillings,
^ Crane twelve pence, two-Woodcocks three half pence, a fat Lamb from
Christmas to Shrovetide, sixteen pence; and all the year after for four
pence.

Of his Wives and Children.
HE had two Wives, his first was Eleanor, daughter to Ferdinand the third King
of Spain; and was married to him at B^res in Spain: who having lived with him
six and thirty years, in a journey with him toward Scotland, at Herdeby in
Lincolneshire she died; in whose memory, and as Monuments of her virtue, and
his affection, King Edward caused Crosses with her Statue to be erected in all
chief places, where her Corpse in carrying to Westminster, rested: as at
Stamford, Dunstable, Saint Albons, Waltham, Cheapside; and lastly, at the place
called Charing Cross: she was buried in Westminster, at the feet of King
Henry the third, under a fair Marble Tomb, adorned with her Portraiture of
Copper guilt. By this wife, King Edward had four sons and nine daughters;
his eldest son, John; his second, Henry; his third, Alphonsus; died all young
in their Fathers time: his fourth son, Edward, called of Carnarva^, because
borne there, succeeded him in the kingdom. Of his daughters, the eldest named
Eleanor, was first married by Proxy to Alphonsus, King of Arragon; but he
dying before the marriage solemni^ed, she was afterward married at Bristow, to
Henry Earl of Barry in France; by whom she had issue, sons and daughters.
Ioane the second daughter of King Edward and Queen Eleanor, borne at Acon in
the Holy Land, was married to Gylbert Clare called the Red Earl of Gloucester
and Hereford; by whom she had issue, sons and daughters. She survived her
husband, and was re-married to the Lord Ralph Monthermere, Father to Margaret
the mother of Thomas Montacute, Earl of Salisbury; from whom the now Vicount
Montacu^e is descended. Margaret the third daughter of King Edward and Queen
Eleanor, was married to John Duke of Brabant. Berenger and Alice, their fourth
and fifth daughters, dying young and unmarried. Mary their sixth daughter, at
ten years of her age, was made a Nun in the Monastery of A^mesbury in
Wiltshire, at the instance of Queen Eleanor her Grandmother, who lived there.
Elizabeth their seventh daughter, was first married to John Earl of Holland,
Zeland, and Lord of Freezeland; he dying within two years, she was afterward
married to Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Breknok, and
High Constable of England; by whom she had issue, sons and daughters.
Beatrice and Blanch, their eighth and ninth daughters, died young and
unmarried. King Edwards second Wife was Margaret, eldest daughter of Philip
King of France, called the Hardy, and sister to Philip called the Fair; at
eighteen years old she was married to King Edward, being above threescore;
yet at the unequal years she had issue by him, two sons and a daughter:
their eldest son was borne at a little Village in Yorkshire called
Brotherton, and was thereof called Thomas of Brotherton: he was created Earl
of Norfolk, and Earl Marshall of England, after Roger Bigod, who died without
issue. Their second son Edmund, was borne at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, and
of the place was so called: he was created Earl of Kent, and married Margaret
daughter of John, and sister of sole Heir of Thomas Lord Wakes of Lydell in
the County of Northampton; by whom he had issue two sons and one daughter:
his sons Edmund and John, died without issue; his daughter Ioane, for her
beauty called the Fair maid of Kent, was married first to William Montacute
Earl of Salisbury, and from him divorced; was re-married to Sir Thomas
Holland, in her Right Earl of Kent, and by her, Father of Thomas and John
Holland, Duke of Surrey, and Earl of Huntington: and lastly, she was the Wife
of Edward of Woodstocke, the black Prince of Wales; and by him Mother of King
Richard the second. This Earl Edmund was beheaded at Winchester, in the fourth
year of King Edward his Nephew. Eleanor, the daughter of King Edward by his
second Wife Margaret, died in her childhood.

Of his personage and conditions.
HE was tall of stature, higher then ordinary men by head and shoulders, and
thereof called Longshanke; of a swarthy complexion, strong of body, but lean;
of a comely favor; his eyes in his anger, sparkling like fire; the hair of
his head black and curled. Concerning his conditions, as he was in war
peaceful; so in Peace he was warlike, delighting specially in that kind of
hunting, which is to kill Stagges or other wild beasts with Spears. In
continency of life, he was equal to his Father; in acts of valor, far
beyond him. He had in him the two wisdoms, not often found in any, single;
both together, seldom or never: An ability of judgment in himself, and a
readiness to hear the judgment of others. He seemed to be a great observer
of opportunity (a great point of wisdom in any, in Princes greatest) and that
he could bear an injury long, without seeking to revenge it; as appeared by
his carriage toward the Earl Roger Bigod, whom when he saw his time, he
called to account for an affront he had offered him di^ers years before. He
was not easily provoked into passion, but once in passion, not easily appeased,
as was seen by his dealing with the Scots; toward whom he showed at first
patience, and at last severity. If he be censured for his many Taxations, he
may be justified by his well bestowing them; for never Prince laid out his
money to more honor of himself, or good of his kingdom. His greatest
unfortunatenesse was in his greatest blessing; for of four sons which he had
by his Wife Queen Eleanor, three of them died in his own life time, who were
worthy to have outlived him; and the fourth outlived him, who was worthy
never to have been borne.

Of his death and burial.
IN his last expedition into Scotland, being at Carlisle, he fell sick; and
lying in his deathbed, he sent for his son Edward: to whom, besides many
admonitions to Piety; he commanded three things specially: that he should carry
his bones about with him through Scotland till he had subdued it: that he
should send his heart into the Holy Land, with sevenscore knights to that
war, and the two and thirty thousand pounds he had provided for that purpose;
and that he should never recall Gaveston from banishment: and soon after of a
dysentery or Bloudy-Flix, he died at Borough upon the Sands, the seventh of
July, in the year 1307. when he had Reigned four and thirty years and seven
months, lived threescore and eight years: Being dead, his Corpse was brought
to Waltham Abbey, and there kept the space of sixteen weeks, and after, on
Simon and Iudes day buried at Westminster.

Men of Note in his time.
OF Martial men there were many, these specially: John Earl of Warren, who
opposed the Kings Inquisition by Quo Warranto: and Roger Bigod, who gave the
King an affront to his face. Of learned men also many, specially these; John
Breton bishop of Hereford, who compiled a book of the Laws of England, called
l^ Breton: Thomas Spot a Chronographer: John Eversden a writer of Annals, and
of this Kings Reign: Gregory Cairugent a Monk of Gloucester, and a writer also
of Annals. John Peckham a Franciscan Friar, made Archbishop of Canterbury, who
writ many excellent works: John Read an Historiographer: Thomas Bungey a Friar
Minor, an excellent Mathematician: Roger Bacon a Franciscan Friar, an excellent
Philosopher and Mathematician: Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, and
after made a Cardinal: also Ralph Baldock Bishop of London, who writ a
Chronicle of England in the Latin tongue: but above them all, though of
another Country, Thomas Aquinas, borne of a Noble Family, whose works are too
famous to be spoken of; who going to the Council holden at Lions by Pope
Gregory the tenth, died by the way.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE SECOND.
Of his Acts before, and at his Coronation.
EDward of Carnarvan, eldest Son of King Edward the first, succeeded him in
the kingdom; and never did Prince come to a Crown with more applause of
Nobility and People; and there was good cause for it: For he had been trained
up in all good courses for Piety and Learning; he had seen the Government of
his Father, from whose Example he could not but have learned many good Lessons;
he had been initiated in the ways of State, having been left Governor of the
Realm, and presiding in Parliament in his Fathers absence; and he was now
three and twenty years old, a fit age for bearing the weight of a Scepter; and
yet for all these advantages, there wanted not fears of him in the minds of
many, who could not but remember what prankes he had played not long before;
how he had broken the Bishop of Chesters Park, and in most disorderly manner
had killed his Dear, for which both himself had been committed to Prison,
and his Friend Pierce Gaveston banished the Realm: and if he did such things
being but Prince, what might not be feared of him coming to be King? For
seldom does advancement in honor alter men to the better; to the worse often,
and commonly then, when it is joined with an Authority that sets them above
controlement. Neither yet was their fear more out of what they had seen, then
out of what they saw; for where he should have endeavored to accomplish the
charge his Father had given him in his deathbed, he seemed to intend nothing
less: nothing more then wholly to break it; for he presently called home
Pierce Gaveston from banishment; and the two and thirty thousand pounds, which
his Father had specially appointed for the Holy War; either all or the most
of it he be^towed upon Gaveston: and for carrying his Fathers bones with him
about Scotland; it had been well if he had suffered them quietly to be laid at
rest in England; for after the Corpse had been kept above ground, sixteen
weeks in the Abbey of Waltham, and that the Bishop of Chester, Walter Langton,
the then Lord Treasurer, and Executor of his Fathers Will, was busy in
preparing for his Funerals; he sent the Constable of the Tower to arrest him,
and imprison him at Wallingford, seizing upon all his Goods, and giving them to
Gaveston; and all for old grudges. And (that which seemed a high strain of
incongruity) before he had seen performed his Fathers Funerals, which was not
till the 27. of October following; he entered into Treaty of his own Nuptials,
forgoing over to Boleigne, on the two and twentieth of January, he married
Isabell, the Daughter of Philip the Fair, King of France: which Marriage was
honored with the presence of four Kings, the King of France himself, the
King of Nav^rre his Son, the King of the Romans, and the King of Sicilie: and
three Queens besides the Bride, Mary Queen of France, Margaret the Dowager
Queen of England, and the Queen of Navarre: and yet did Gavest^n exceed them
all in bravery. This was observed by the Lords of England: and thereupon when
his Queen and he came afterward to be Crowned, they went unto him, signifying
what a heinous transgression of his Fathers will it was to call home G^veston;
and seeing the charge was no less given to them then to him, if he did not
perform it they would; and therefore unless he would remove Gaveston from the
Court and kingdom, they would hinder his Coronation from proceeding: which
struck such a dampe to Prince Edwards spirits, to think what a disgrace it
would be to him; if so many of his great Friends being present, Charles of
Valois, the King of Frances Brother, the Dukes of Britain and Brabant, the
Count of Luxenburg, who was afterward Emperor, the Duke of Savoy, the two
Dutchesses of Brabant and Artois, with many other Princes and great Ladies, if
now his Coronation should be called in question, that he solemnly swore he
would do what they desired in the next Parliament, so they would be quiet now;
and thereupon, on the 24. day of February, in the year 1307. his Queen and he
were both Crowned at Westminster, by the hands of Henry Bishop of Winchester,
by Commission from Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, being then in Exile, and
out of the kingdom: At which solemnity there was so great a press of People,
that Sir John Blackwell knight was crowded to death. And now in the very Act of
his Coronation, there was given another provocation to the Lords against
Gaveston: for the King had appointed him to carry the Crown of Saint Edward
before him, (the greatest honor could be done to a Subject) which added to the
other honors the King had done him, (for he had made him Earl of Cornwall,
Lord of Man, and Lord Chamberlain) so incensed the Lords, that they entered
into consultation, how to suppress this violence of the Kings affection; which
shortly after they put in execution. Portion in money King Edward had none with
his Wife: but the King of France gave him the Duchy of Guyenne, which he had
seized upon before, as confiscate to him: and thereupon King Edward did him
Homage for that Duchy, and for the County of Ponthieu.

Of his difference with his Lords about Gaveston.
WE shall have here no Quinquennium Neronis, no such five years, as Nero
afforded in the beginning of his Reign; but this King at his first entrance
will show what he is, and what he will continue to be as long as he lives; for
though he took some great and grave men to be of his Council, yet (as
appeared afterward) he did it rather to the end they should be pliant to him,
then that he had any meaning to apply himself to them; For let them say what
they would, Gaveston must be the Oracle; all the Kings actions were but
Gavestons impressions: And now Gaveston presently after the Coronation, to let
the world be a witness of his worthiness, and that the King had not bestowed
his Favors upon him without cause; caused to be published a Turneament at
Wallingford: whither came all the great Lords of the kingdom, as Thomas Earl
of Lancaster, Humfrey Earl of Hereford, Aymer Earl of Pembroke, and John
Earl of Warren, with many others, all Valiant men at Arms; yet none had the
honor of the day like to Gaveston. And thus far he did well, if he could
have stayed here, if having gotten true glory, he had not fallen into
vainglory: For the Lords envyed him not so much for his advancement in
Honors, as they hated him for his insolency in Manners: for in a scornful
pride he would be casting scoffs upon them all, calling Thomas Earl of
Lancaster the Stage Player, the Earl of Lincoln Burstenbelly; ^imer de
Valence Earl of Pembroke, Joseph the Jew; and Guy Earl of Warwick, the
black Dog of Arderne; which scoffs together with his other insolences,
drew such a party upon him, that in the next Parliament, the whole assembly
obtaines of the King to draw Articles of their grievances: of which the chief
were, that the great Charter of Magna Charta should be observed^ that all
strangers should be banished the Court and kingdom; that the business of the
State should be treated of by the Counsel of the Clergy and the Nobles; and
that the King should not begin any war, nor go out of the kingdom without
consent of Parliament. Which Articles, though seeming harsh to the King, yet
for avoiding of further inconvenience, he yields unto them; and specially to
the bani^hment of his Minion Gaveston, as hoping that would excuse him for all
the rest; and Robert of Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, lately called
home from Exile, pronounces Excommunication against all such as should oppose
the Articles. Hereupon Gaveston is sent away into Ireland, where he lived
awhile, not as a banished man, but as Lieutenant rather of the Country, and
indeed not unworthily; for in the time of his being there, he is said to have
made a Journey into the Mountains of Dublin, and to have broken and subdued
the Rebels there; built New Castle in the Kerns Country, repaired the Castle of
Kevyn, and passed up to Munster, and Thoumond: performing every where much
service with great valor and worthiness, that if he had stayed there but a
while longer, he might perhaps by his desorts in Ireland, have redeemed his
defects in England: but the King impatient of his absence, and asking advice
what means might be used to recall him; It was told him, that if he could but
match him with the Earl of Glocesters sister, a man of such greatness, and so
greatly beloved of the people, for his sake certainly no man would grudge at
his coming home. Hereupon the King sends for Gaveston, and makes up the match
between them, and married they were at Barkamstead; but this did no good. For
Gaveston still working upon the King in such manner, that he scarce left him
means to sustain himself, and as little to maintain the Queen; nothing
being done but as Gaveston would have it; put the Lords into a new
coffeehouse; who thereupon went again to the King, and told him plainly,
that unless he would put Gaveston out of the Court and kingdom, they would
rise up in Arms against him as a perjured King. This put the King into a great
strait: Loath he was to leave Gaveston, and fearful he was to provoke the
Lords; in the end, his fear prevailing over his love, he was content he should
be Banished, and in such sort Banished, that if ever he returned, or were found
in the kingdom, he should be held, and proceeded against as an Enemy of the
State. So once again is Gaveston sent packing out of the kingdom, and goes
into France, but found no safe Harboring there: For the King of France hearing
of it, gave strait charge, if he were found in his Dominions to apprehend him:
Then he passes into Flanders, but is there no sa^er then in France: After
waving about, and finding no place to rest in safety, he returns secretly into
England, relying upon the Kings Love, and the Duke of Glocesters Favor. The
King receives him as an Angel sent from Heaven, and to be out of the Lords
Eye, goes a Journey to York, taking Gaveston along with him, and there thinks
to be in quiet; but the Lords hearing of it follow him thither, choosing for
their General, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, a man possessed of five Earledomes,
Lancaster, Leycester, Ferrers, Lincoln, and Salisbury, besides the Liberty of
Pickering, and the Honor of Cokermore, and other Lands in Wales; and there was
not a man of the whole Nobility that was not of the Party, but only Gilbert
Earl of Gloucester, the Kings Sisters Son; These Lords sent to the King,
either to deliver Gaveston into their hands, or at least to send him
peremptorily out of the kingdom. But the King led by ill Counsel, and little
regarding the Lords Message, takes Gaveston with him to New Castle upon Tine,
thence to Tynmouth, where the Queen then lay, who (though great with Child,
and entreating the King with tears to stay with her) yet such was his desire
to see Gaveston put into some place of security, that hearing of the Lords
approaching, he took a Ship, and passed with Gaveston to Scarborough, and
leaving him there in a strong Castle, not easy to be won, he went himself
into Warwickshire; perhaps that the Lords might see he had not Gaveston with
him. But the Lords hearing where Gaveston was, assaulted the Castle with such
violence, that Gaveston seeing no means to escape, was content to render
himself; requesting only, that he might but once be allowed to see the Kings
face; and the King hearing he was taken, desired as much: to which the Earl of
Pembroke consented; and taking Gaveston into his custody, promised upon
Forteiture of all he had, to have him forth-comming: but desiring to be with
his Wife that night, who lay not far off, at Dedington h^ delivers him to his
Servants to carry to Wallingford; From whom, as they passed by Warwick, the
Earl of that place hearing of it, took him forcibly from his keepers, and
brought him to his own Castle. Where after long deliberation, whether it were
wisdom to suffer Gaveston to speak with the King or no; It was at last
concluded to take of^ his head; which at a place thereby, called Blacklow, was
presently put in execution. His Corpse was carried to Oxford, and kept there two
years, till the King caused it to be brought to Longley, and there builded a
Monastery of purpose, where his Soul should be prayed for.

This Gaveston was the Son of a Gentleman of France, who had done good
service for King Edward the first, in France; and for his sake this Son of
his was taken and brought up with the Prince: a man of excellent parts of body,
and of no less Endowments of mind; Valiant and Witty; to which if we might
add Virtuous, he had been complete; Though the Lords (whether they had heard
so, or whether they said it to weane the King from him) told the King that his
Father was a Traitor to the King of France, and for the same was executed; and
that his Mother was burnt for a Witch; and that this Gaveston was banished out
of France for consenting to his Mothers Witchcraft; and that he had now
bewitched the King himself. But why should the Lords be so violent against
Gaveston? might not the King place his Affection where he pleased? Might he not
make his own choice of what companion he liked? No doubt he might; and fit he
should: but yet in this case, the Lords had great cause to do as they did;
both in regard of the King, of themselves, and of the Commonwealth. It is
true, if the Valor of Gaveston could as well have made the King Valiant, as
his riot made him riotous; there might some good have come of their
extraordinary conjunction: but seeing Virtues are but personal, Vices only
are communicative; it now made the King not only more Vicious then otherwise
he would have been, but Vicious, where otherwise he would not have been; and
therefore great cause in regard of the King, to remove Gaveston from his
company; and no less in regard of the Lords themselves; For Gavestons
advancing was their debasing; his greatness with the King made them but
Ciphers: but in regard of the Commonwealth, most cause of all; For while the
King was altogether ruled by Gaveston, and Gaveston himself was altogether
irregular; the Commonwealth could have but little hope of Justice, but was
sure to suffer as long as Gaveston was suffered. And this may be sufficient to
justify the Lords, that it be not interpreted to be Rebellion, which was
indeed but Providence.

Of his Troubles with Scotland.
ANd now we have seen two of the charges of his Fathers Will broken by the
King, and punished in him; the two and thirty thousand pounds appointed for the
Holy War, bestowed upon Gaveston, and the King for it punished himself with
want; Gaveston called home from banishment, and the King for it punished with
the loss of his Subjects love. It remains to see how well he performed the
third charge of his Fathers Will, for subduing of Scotland. It was now the
sixth year after the death of his Father King Edward, and Robert Bruce now
gotten to be King of Scotland, had stayed all this while to see how this new
King Edward would prove: and when he found by the courses he held, that he was
like to prove a good easy Enemy; he thereupon took heart, and began to
stir, and in a very short time had brought almost all Scotland under his
obedience; and finding no opposition he entered the English Borders, took and
burnt Towns; that now King Edward, unless he would sit still, and suffer
Bruce to come and pull his Crown from his head, he could not choose but do
something to stop his proceeding. Hereupon he prepares an Army, but like
himself, fitter for a Court then for a Camp: Many men, and great Bravery; but
readie^ to take spoils, then to make spoil: and accordingly they sped; For
going to raise the siege at Str^veling, defended for King Edward, by the
valiant knight Philip Mowbray; the Kings Army consisting of a hundred thousand,
was defeated and overthrown by the Scots Army, consisting of scarce thirty
thousand: So true is that saying of an ancient Soldier; There is more hope of
an Army where the General is a Lion, though the Soldiers be but Sheep; then
of an Army where the General is a Sheep, though the Soldiers be Lions. But
indeed the Scots, besides Valor, used Policy: For having in their own Army
none but Foot, no Horse at all, they had made Trenches in the Ground three foot
deep, covering them with Twigges and Hurdles, where the English Horsemen were
to pass, who Floundring in those Trenches, were killed no less by their own
Fellows then by the Enemy. In this Battle, called of Bannocks borough, were
slain the Lord Mawle, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Tiptoft, the Lord William
Marshall, Sir Giles, Doctor Argenton, and seven hundred Knights and Squires,
specially Gylbert Earl of Gloucester, who had showed much Valor that day; and
whom the Scots would willingly have kept for ransom; if they had known him;
but he had forgotten to put on his Coat of Arms, whereby to be known. The
slaughter of common Soldiers was certainly great, though perhaps not so great
as Hector Boethius speaks of, who says they were fifty thousand. There were
taken Prisoners, Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, John Seagrave, John
Claveringham, William Latimer, and Sir Roger Northbrooke, bearer of the Kings
shield; the King himself with the Bishops, the Earls of Hartford and
Pembroke, and Hugh Spenser, saved themselves by flight; Humfrey de Bohun Earl
of Hereford, was afterward released in exchange for Bruces Wife, who had been
long kept a Prisoner in England. After this, many English fell away to the
Scots, and all the North parts from Carlisle to York, came under their
Subjection; and the English grew so faint-hearted, and into such contempt, that
three Scots durst venture upon a hundred English, when a hundred English durst
scarce encounter with three Scots. And what can be thought the cause of this
great dysaster to this King, but the want of his Fathers blessing for not
performing the charge he gave him dying, which is commonly accompanied with the
want of a higher blessing, without which a Vacat is set upon the labors of
men, that makes them all frustrate? But Bruce, not satisfied with his Acquests
in England, sends his Brother Edward into Ireland also; who so far prevailed,
that many Irish came in unto him, and in the end Crowned him King of a great
part of that Island, and so continued the space of three years; till the
Primat of Armagh, and the Lord Brinningham, Justiciar of Ireland, gathering
Forces together opposed him, and in a Battle taking him Prisoner, at Dundalke
cut off his head, with the slaughter of many thousands of the Scots besides.
With which the Scots are so incensed, that they invade again the English
Borders, forraging as far as York; whereupon a Parliament is assembled at
London, wherein an aid is granted of Armed men to go against them; London
sets forth two hundred, Canterbury forty, Saint Albons ten, and so
proportionably for all Cities and Boroughs, whereby a great Army was levied;
which coming to York, through mutiny, emulation, and other impediments, was
soon dissolved, and returned back without effecting any thing. Not long after
the Town of Berwicke was betrayed to the Scots, through the treason of Peter
Spalding the Governor, and other Englishmen; whom the King of Scots to make
them an Example, caused to be hanged for being Traitors to their Country. King
Edward hearing of the surrendering of Berwicke, raises an Army, and beleaguers
it; but the Scots to divert his Forces, enter upon England by other ways, and
were like to have surprised the person of the Queen, lying then near ^orke.
The siege of B^rwicke is notwithstanding eagerly continued, and the King in
great possibility to have regained the Town, had not the Earl of Lancaster
with his foll^wers withdrawn himself upon discontent, hearing the King say he
would give the keeping thereof to Hugh Spen^^r the younger, who was now grown a
special favorite of the Kings, and theref^r^ not to be en^ured by the Earl.
In the mean (...) the Scots won the Castles of (...), and Mid^ord; so as they
possessed the greater part of all North^mberland, burning all before them,
(...) they came to ^^^pon, which Town they spoyled^ and carrying there three
days, they received ^ thousand Marks to save the Town from burning, as they
had done the Towns of Nor^hallerton, Bor^ugh-bridg^ and others. In their
returning back, they (...) Knaresborough, and Shipton in C^^ven; and all other
before them, carrying into ^^land a mavelous number of Cattle, besides
prisoners, men and women^ The^ ^^^^shire men thus grievously endammaged, gather
together to the number of ten thousand: and at the Town of Mitton, ten miles
from York, encounter the Sco^^ where they lost three thousand of their men,
and were defeated^ which b^ttell, because of the many Spiritual men that were
in it, was called the white battle. Whereof when the King heard^ he left the
siege of Be^wicke, to follow the Scots, but they returned another way. The
year following, King Edward once again with a great Army entered Scotland; but
the Scots having destroyed all before, the King oppressed with famine was forced
to re^urne^ whom the Scots followed, and in a place of the Forest of Blackmore,
se^ upon him that he hardly escaped; where were taken John Earl of Britain,
and the Lord of Sil^ac^, the French Kings Ambassador, and many others. After
this, King Edward finding the Scots either too strong, or too wily for him,
made a Truce with them for two years, some say for thirteen. And this was the
success of this unfortunate King in his wars with Scotland.

Of his tr^^bles at home.
BUt his troubles abroad were not so grievous as those at home; or rather, they
were those at home that made his troubles abroad so grievous; for though the
Lords having made an end of Gaveston, and cut off his head, thought they had
made an end of their need to bear Arms, and had cut off the head of all their
discontents; yet as if Gaveston had been a Phoenix, as it were out of his
ashes another Phoenix rises presently up, and puts the Lords to as much
trouble as ever Gaveston did. For now the younger Spenser upon a sudden grows
as great a Favorite of the Kings as ever Gaveston was: and indeed in all points
just such another, equal to him in goodlinesse of personage, in favor of the
King, and in abusing the Lords, for though they were the Lords themselves that
brought him at first in to be the Kings Chamberlain, the rather (as was
thought) because he was one whom the King did not love: yet being once in the
place, he so won upon the King by diligent service, and by complying with the
Kings humor; that he brought the King at last to comply with his humor, and
nothing must be done but as Spenser would have it. It seems it was the Kings
nature, that he could not be without a bosom friend; one or other to be an
Alter idem: and to seek to remove such a one from him, was to seek to remove
him from him selfe^ as impossible a thing as to alter nature; yet the Lords
being more sensible of their own grievance, to be insulted on by a Favorite,
then of the Kings grievance to be affronted by his subjects, are more intentive
to work their own ends then the Kings: and therefore to remove Spenser and
his Father from the King, which they knew was a work not to be done but by
strong hand; they continue their Arms, and conf^der^ting together, they send
to the King, peremptorily requiring the confirmation and execution of the
Articles formerly granted; threatening withal, that unless he presently
perform the same, they would constrain him to it by force of Arms: and
thereupon assemble strong forces about Dunstable, where the King ^hen lay. The
great Prelates of the kingdom, with the Earl of Gloucester, labor to appease
them, and with two Cardinals sent lately by the Pope to reform these
disorders: they repair to Saint Alb^ns, and desire conference with the Lords,
who receive them very peaceably; but the Letters which the Pope had written to
them, they refuse to receive, saying, they were men of the Sword, and cared not
for reading of Letters; that there were many w^rthy and learned men in the
kingdom, whose counsel they would use, and not strangers, who knew not the
cause of their commotion: so the Cardinals with this answer returned to London.
But the Prelates of England ^o labor the business, that the Lords were
content to yield up to the King such horses, treasure, and jewels, as they had
taken of Pierce Gaveston at New Castle, so as the King would grant their
Petitions; and thereupon John Sandall Treasurer of the kingdom, and Ingelard
Warle keeper of the Wardrobe, are sent to Saint Albons to receive those things
at their hands.

Shortly after a Parliament is called at London, wherein the King complains of
the great contempt was had of him by the Barons, their rising in Arms, their
taking and murdering Pierce Gaveston, and such other affronts. Whereunto with
one accord they answer, that they had not offended therein, but rather merited
his love and favor; having taken Arms, not for any contempt of his royal
person, but to destroy the public enemy of the kingdom, which otherwise would
never have been done. Which stout resolution of theirs, the Queen with the
Prelates and the Earl of Gloucester seeing, they seek by all means to
qualify their heat; and at length so prevailed with them, that they humble
themselves to the King, and crave pardon for that they had done, which they
obtained; and the King receives them into grace, as his loyal subjects: grants
them their Articles^ and particular pardons by his Charter, for their Indemnity
concerning the death of Gaveston: and for the greater show of true
reconcilement, Guy de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, is made of the Kings
Counsel, though shortly after he ended his life, not without suspicion of
poison; as being a man much envied by such as possessed the King. The King kept
his Christmas at Clipston, and his Easter at Clarendon: and they seemed to be
all good friends, but this reconcilement of the King with his Barons, was but
as the covering of fire with ashes, every little wind that blew, made it break
out into flames afresh; and the time being so unsettled as it was, it was
impossible but such winds would continually be blowing. It was such a wind
blew, when the great Earl of Lancaster had his wife (a Lady who had lived with
him always in good fame) taken out of his house at Canford in Dorsetshire^ by
one Richard Saint Martin^ a deformed lame Dwarf, who challenged her to be his
wife, and that he had lien with her before the Earl married her^ and this wind
was made to blow the stronger, by the Ladies own confession; for upon
examination, she voluntarily averred, it was all true: and thereupon the o^gly
fellow in her right claimed the two Earledomes of Lincoln and S^lisbury, which
he durst not have done^ if he had not been backed with great Abettours: and it
was not without aspersion upon the King himself. It was another such wind
blew, when at the Feast of Pentecost, at dinner in the open Hall at
Westminster; a woman fantastically disguised, entered on horseback, and riding
about the Table, delivered the King a Letter, wherein was signified the great
neglect he showed of such as had done him and his Father noble services, taxing
him for advancing men of unworthy parts, and such other complaints; which
Letter read, and the woman departed, put the King into a great rage; they who
guarded the door being sharply reprehended for suffering her to enter in such
manner, answered, It was the fashion of the Kings house in times of Festivals,
to keep out none that came as this woman did, to make sport. Search being made
for the woman, she is found and examined who set her on; she confessed a knight
gave her money to do it; the knight is found, and upon examination, boldly
answered, he did it for the Kings honor, and to no other end; and thereupon
escaped without further trouble. It was such another wind blew, when a knight
was taken passing by Pomfret, with Letters sealed with the Kings Seal,
directed to the King of Scots, about murdering the Earl of Lancaster; which
messenger is executed, his head set upon the top of the Castle, and the Letters
reserved to witness the intended plot. Which whether it were fained, or true,
the report thereof reflected upon the King, and made many to take the Earls
part. It was such another wind blew, when a fanatic fellow, one John P^^dras,
a Tanners son of Exeter, gave forth, that himself was th tr^e Edward, eldest
son of the late King Edward the first, and by a false Nurse was changed in
his Cradle, and that the now King Edward was a Carters son, and laid in his
place: but this wind was soon blown over, when at his death, being drawn and
hanged, he confessed he had a Familiar Spirit in his house in the likeness of
a Cat, that assured him he should be King of England, and that he had served
the said Spirit three years before to bring his purpose about. But most of
all, it was such a wind blew, when a Baron named William Brewis, having wasted
his estate, offers to sell unto diverse men, a part of his inheritance called
Powis. Humphrey (...) Earl of Hereford, obtaines leave of the King to buy it,
and bargains for it. The two Roger M^rtimers, Uncle and Nephew, great men
likewise in those parts, not understanding, it seems, any thing of the former
bargain, contract also for the same Land with the said Sir William Brewis.
Hugh Spenser the younger, hearing of this sale, and the land adjoining to part
of his, obtaines a more special leave of the King, being now his Chamberlain,
and buys it out of their hands. The Earl of Her^ford complains hereof to the
Earl of Lancaster: who thereupon at Sherbourne enters into a new confederation
with diverse Barons there assembled, taking their Oaths intermutually, to live
and die together in maintaining the right of the kingdom; and to procure the
banishment of the two Spens^r^, father and son, whom they now held to be the
great seducers of the King, and oppressors of the State, disposing of all
things in Court at their pleasure, and suffering nothing to be obtained but by
their means: and under this pretense they take Arms, and coming armed to
Saint Albons, they send to the King, being then at London, the Bishops of
London, Salisbury, Hereford, and Chichester, (who were there assembled to
consul^ for peace) requiring him as he tendered the qu^et of the Realm, to rid
his Court of those Traitors, the Spensers, condemned in many Articles of high
treason by the communalty of the Land; and withal to grant his Letters Patents
of pardon and indemnity both to them and all such as took part with them. The
King returns answer, that Hugh Spenser the father was now beyond the Seas,
employed in his business, and his son was guarding the Cinque Ports
according to his office; and that it was against Law of Custom they should be
banished without being heard: and withal swore, he would never violate the
Oath made at his Coronation, by granting Letters of pardon to such notorious
offenders, who contemned his person, disturbed the kingdom, and violated the
royal Majesty. Which answer so exasperated the Lords, that presently they
approached to London, and lodged in the Suburbs, till they had leave of the
King to enter into the City, where they peremptorily urge their demands: to
which at length by mediation of the Queen, and the chief Prelates, the King
is wrought to condescend, and by his Edict, published in Westminster Hall, by
the Earl of Hereford, the Spensers are banished the kingdom. Hugh the father
hearing it, keeps beyond the Seas, but the son secretly hides himself in
England, expecting the turn of a better season. And indeed shortly after, the
Archbishop of Canterbury in a Council holden at London, pronounces the
banishment of the Spensers to have been erroneous; and thereupon the Edict is
revoked, and the Spensers are called home, and se^ in as great authority as
they were before. But the Lords having thus obtained their desire, with the
Kings Letters of indemnity return home, but yet not with such security as to
give over the provision for their own defense. Not long after there fell ou^
an unexpected accident, that suddenly wrought the Lords confusion. The Queen
making her progress toward Canterbury, intended to lodge in the Castle of
Leedes, belonging to the Lord Badlesmer, (who had been long the Kings Steward,
but now took part with the Lords) and sending her Marshall to make ready for
her and her train; they who kept the Castle told him plainly, that neither
the Queen, nor any else should enter there without Letters from their Lord.
The Queen her self goes to the Castle, and receives the like answer;
whereupon she is driven to take such lodging otherwhere as could be provided.
Of which indignity she complains to the King; who took it so to heart, that
presently with a power of armed men out of London, he lays siege to the
Castle, takes it, hangs the keeper Thomas C^^epepper, sends the wife and
children of the Lord Badlesmer to the Tower, and seiseth upon all his goods and
treasure. And having this power about him, and warmed with success and the
instigation of the Queen, suddenly directs his course to Chi^hester, where he
keeps his Christmas, and there provides for an Army against the Barons:
whereof many (seeing the Kings power increasing) lef^ their Associats, and
yield themselves to his mercy: amongst whom were the two Roger Mor^i^^rs, men
of great might and means; the Lord Hugh Audely, the Lord M^^rice Barkely, and
others: who notwithstanding, contrary to their expectation, were sent to diverse
Prisons. The Earls of Lancaster and Hereford seeing this sudden change,
withdrew themselves and their companies from about Gloucester, toward the
North-parts: whom the King follows with his Army; wherein were the Earls of
Ath^ll and Angus; and at Burton upon Trent, where they had made a head,
discomfited their forces, and put them to flight. In the mean time the Earl
of Lancaster had sent into Lancashire a knight of his, named Robert Holland,
(one whom he had brought up of naught) to raise more forces amongst his
Tenants; but he hearing of this flight of his Lords, goes with his forces to
take the Kings part; which so dismaies the Earl, that he began now to think
of suing to the King for grace; but being in the way, at a Town called
Borough-bridge, was there set upon by Sir Simon Ward Sheriff of York, and
Sir Andrew Harkeley Constable of Carlisle, who utterly defeat his forces: In
which fight was slain the Earl of Hereford, (who fighting valiantly upon a
Bridge, was by a Varlet skulking under the Bridge, thrust with a Spear into
the fundament) Sir Roger Benefield, Sir William Sulland and others; there was
taken the Earl of Lancaster, Sir Roger Clifford, Sir John M^wbray, Sir Roger
Tuckets, Sir William Fits-Williams, with diverse other, and were led to York.
This field was fought the fifteenth day of March, in the year 1320. It was not
long after that Sir Hugh Daniell, Sir Bartholomew de Baddelsmer were taken.
Three days after the Earl of Lancaster is brought to Pomfret, where the King
sitting himself in judgment with Edmund Earl of Kent his brother, the Earl
of Pem^^^ke, the Earl Warren, Hugh Spencer, lately created Earl of
Winchester, and others; sentence of death is given against him, to be drawn,
hanged, and beheaded as a Traitor. The two first punishments are pardoned, in
regard he was of Royal blood: only beheaded he was the same day without the
Town of Pomfret, before his own Castle. To speak of the Miracles said to be
done by him after his death, might be fit for a Legend, but not for a
Chronicle, and therefore I omit them. By the like judgment were condemned, the
Lord Roger Clifford^ the Lord Warren Lisle, the Lord William Tuchet, Thomas
Maudit, Henry Bradburne, Willi^m Fits-Williams, William Lord Cheyney, Thomas
Lord M^wbray, Ioceline Lord Danill, all which were executed at York. Shortly
after, the Lord Henry Teyes is taken, drawn, hanged, and quarter^d at London;
the Lord Aldenham at Windsor; the Lords Baddlesmere and Ashburton at
Canterbury: at Cardiffe in Wales, Sir William Flemming; at Bristow, Si^ Henry
Womington; and Sir Henry Montford Bannerets; at Gloucester, the Lord Clifford^
and Sir William Elminbridge, principal men in principal places, to spread the
more ^e^rour over the kingdom: all their estates and inheritances are
confiscated, and ^^ny new men advanced by the same. And this is the first blood
of Nobility that ever was shed in this manner in England since William the
Conqueror.

But not long after, the King in a calmer humor, began to have a sense o^
the Earl of Lancasters execution, which he discovered upon this occasion: some
^bou^ him making earnest suite for a Pardon to one of the Earls followers; and
pre^^^ng the King hard to it, he fell into a great p^ssion, excl^iming ^g^inst
them as unjus^ and wicked Counselors, who would urge him to save the life of
a notorious V^^let, and would not speak one word for his near kinsman, the
Earl of Lancaste^: who (said he had) he lived, might have been use^ull to me,
and the whole kingdom; but this fellow the longer he lives, the more mischief
he will do, and therefore by the soul of God, he should die the death he had
deserved. Sir Andrew Harkeley, who was the man that took the Earl of
Lancaster prisoner, being advanced for his service to the Earldom of Carlisle,
enjoyed his honor but a while; for the next year after, either thrust out
into discontent by the Spensers, envying his high preferment, or combining with
the Scots, upon hope of a great match, (as he was accused) he is degraded of
all his honors; drawn, hanged, and quartered at Lond^n for Treason. But now
the King of France summons King Edward to come and do his homage for Gascoyne;
and he not coming, all his Territories in France are adjudged to be forfeited,
and many places of importance are sei^ed on by the French. Hereupon a
Parliament is called, and it is by common consent of all agreed, that the King
should not go in person himself, in regard of the distraction of the times,
but should send some special man to excuse his appearance; whereupon Edmund
Earl of Kent the Kings brother is sent, but to little effect. Then it is
thought fit the Queen should go, and indeed the Queen went; but what was the
cause of her going, there is amongst Writers great variance: some say she was
sent by the King to accommodate this business, which she negotiated so well,
as that all quarrels were ended, upon condition the King should give to his
son Edward, the Duchy of Aquitaine, with the Earldom of Ponthieu, and
send him over to do his homage for them; which after many consultations^ the
King is wrought to yield unto; and the Prince is sent with the Bishop of Exeter
and others to the Court of France accordingly: but others say^ she went out of
discontent, to complain to her brother the King of France, for wrongs offered
her by the Spensers, who had so alienated the Kings mind from her, that he
would scarce come where she was, nor allow her fit maintenance for her calling.
But whatsoever was the cause of her going^ there appeared no cause of her
staying, but that she had gotten into her company, Roger Mortimer Lord of
Wigm^re, a gallant young Gentleman^ whom she specially favored, lately escaped
out of the Tower of London, by giving his keepers (as was said) a sleeping
drink. And withal, the Bishop of Exeter perceiving some plots to be in hand,
and their close consultations made without him, withdrawes himself secretly,
and discovers to the King what he observed in their courses. Whereupon the King
sends presently for the Qu^ and Prince, and solicits the King of France to
hasten their return; which when he saw was neglected and delaied, he caused
them openly to be proclaimed enemies to the kingdom, banished them and all
their adherents out of the Land: and withal causes all the Ports to be
strongly kept; and sends three Admirals to attend in several Coasts to hinder
their landing. It was not without suspicion, that as the King for love of the
Spensers, had his mind alienated from loving the Queen; so the Queen for love
of M^rtimer, had her mind alienated from loving the King, and therefore having
him with her, c^red not how long she stayed. However it was, when the Queen
heard of the Kings Proclamation, she knew there was no returning for her into
England without some good assistance: whereupon soliciting her brother the King
of France, he aided her with men and money (say some: but others, that he
refusing to aid her, as being wrought under hand by the Spensers against her;
she left the French Court, and went into Heynault, to the Earl of that
Country, who upon a contract between her son Prince Edward and Philippa the
Earls daughter^ ^ided her with a competent Army, under the conduct of his
brothe^ John: and with them and her beloved Mortimer, she took shipping and
landed at Orwell, a Port near unto Harwich in Suffolk: where presently came
to her the Earl Marshall, Henry Earl of Leycester, and Henry Earl of
Lancaster with the wry neck, called T^rtc^ll, with many other Lords and
Bishops. The King at this time being at London, and hearing of the Queens
landing with such forces, and chiefly how all the Realm ran flocking to
her, was ^uddenly stricken into a great amazement; and though he had his great
Counselors the Spensers about him, yet now he found what little good their
counsel could do him: and indeed in this case, what should he, or what could he
do? To stay in London was apparent danger, for he plainly saw the Lond^ners to
be more inclining to take the Queens part then his; and to go from London to
any other place was as unsafe, all places being possessed either with certain
Enemies or uncertain Friends^ at last the Isle of Lundy is thought of, a place
plentiful of provision^ abounding with Conies, Fish and Foul, and the Island
of hard access, as having but one place in it where it could be entered, and
that so narrow, that a few might easily keep out many; upon this place he
resolves^ and taking with him the Earl of Gloucester, the Spensers, and Robert
^ald^cke, with some fe^ others, he ^akes shipping, but by contrary winds is
driven back, and rain through Tempests to land in Wales, and there in the
Abbey of Neth in (...) kept himself close. In the mean time the Queen was
come to Oxford where Ad^m Bishop of Hereford Preaching took for his Text,
Caput meum dol^^, and thereupon inferred, that the kingdom being now deadly
sick of its head, it was fit to remove that head, and put a sounder in the
place. At this time also, the L^^d^ners to show their love to the Queen,
seized upon Walter Staplet^n the good Bishop of Exceter and Lord Treasurer of
England, left Governo^r the^^ by the King, and with great despite beheaded
him, as also diverse others, only because they favored the King. In the mean
time, the Queen went from Oxford to Gloucester, and from thence to Bristow,
where Hugh Sp^ncer the Father was, a man of fou^escore and ten years old, who
is there taken, and without examination or Judgment, in most cruel manner
Executed, having his heart pulled out of his body being yet alive, and his body
left hanging upon the Gallows. After this the Queen stayed at H^reford the
space of a moneth^ and then dividing her Army, she sends one part of it, under
the Conduct of Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Ryce a Powell a Clerk, ^o find
out the King: and this Ryce being a Welsh^an, and knowing the Country well,
brought the Earl to the Monastery of N^th^ where the King was, whom they there
take together with Spenser the Son, Rober^ Bald^cke, and Simon of Reading.
The King is by the Bishop of Hereford committed to the custody of the Earl of
Leycester: where all that Winter he was used no worse then was fit for a
captive King. But Edmund Earl of Arundell, John Daniel, and Th^m^^ Micheldens,
at the instance of Mortimer, are all three beheaded. Presently after is Hugh
Spenser the younger, who was now Earl of Gloucester, drawn, hanged and
quar^e^ed, his head sent up to be set upon London Bridge, and his four
quarters bestowed in several Cities. The like is done with Simon of Reading,
but Robert Baldocke is committed to Newgate, against whom, when no just cause
of death could be found, there was used so much cruelty in his imprisonment,
that he shortly after dyed.

Presently after Christmas a Parliament is called, wherein it is agreed to
depose the King, and set up his Son; which he hearing refused it, unless his
Father would freely resign; whereupon are appointed three Bishops, two Earls,
two Abbots, four Barons, and of every City a Burgess, to go to the King; (in
custody then at Kenelworth) The Bishops were, John of S^ratford Bishop of
Winchester, Adam Torleton Bishop of Hereford, and Henry Bishop of Lincoln. But
the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, getting to the King before the rest
came, persuade the King to resign his Crown to his eldest Son; cra^tily
promising him he should have as good maintenance afterward, as ever he had when
he was King. And contrarily threatening him, that if he did it not, the people
would exclude both him and his Son too, and m^ke a King of another Race. By
these promises and threatenings, the meek King is drawn to yield to the
Bishops mo^^on; but when afterward the Bishop of Hereford, and the other
Commissioners came, and were sat in a place appointed to take his Resignation,
the King coming forth amongst them in mourning Robes, upon a sudden fell down
in a swound^ in whom the Earl of Leycester, and the Bishop of Winchester, had
much ado^ to recover life; but then the Bishop of Hereford rising up, delivered
the cause of their coming, as the other Bishops before had done. To which ^he
King answered, that as he much grieved his People should be so hardened against
him as utterly to reject him; so it was some comfort unto him, that they would
yet receive his Son to be their Sovereign. After this, Thomas Blunt knight,
Steward of the Kings house, brake the Staff of his Office; and William
Tr^ssell Speaker of the Parli^ment, in name of the whole kingdom, pronounced a
Form of Renouncing all Allegiance to Edward of Carnarvan. Here Caxton writes,
that from the time of this Kings Deposing, which was in December, to the time
of his Sons Crowning, which was not till Candlemas following, all Pleas of
the Kings Bench were stayed, and all Prisoners, arrested by Sheriffs,
commanded to be set at liberty; which seems to have little probability, seeing
his Son Edward presently upon his Deposing was received for King: But
howsoever so great a Dowre was then assigned to Queen Isabel, that scarce a
third part of the Revenues of the Crown is le^t for the new King and his Wife:
And to the late King is allowed a hundred Marks ^ month for his maintenance;
with which he lived with his Cousin the Earl of Leycester, in good plenty and
contentment for a time; only this grieved him most of all (he said) that the
Queen his Wife would never be gotten to come to see him: For he swore most
devoutly that from the time he first saw her face, he could never like of any
other Woman. By which it may appear, that neither Gaveston no^ the Spensers
had so debauched him, as to make him false to his bed, or to be disloyal to
his Queen. But the Queen being hardened against him, and conceiving he had too
great Liberty under the Earl of Leycester, by advise of her pestilent
Counselor, Adam Torleton Bishop of Hereford, appoints Thomas Go^rney, and
Io^^ Matrevers knights, to take him from the Earl into their own Custody, and
to carry him whither they thought good; who thereupon take him from Kenelw^rth,
and carry him first to Corfe Castle, and from thence to Bristow, where they
shut him in the Castle; till upon knowledge of a Plot laid to get him out, and
send him beyond Sea, they took him in the night and carried him to B^rkeley
Castle, where by the way they abused him most inhumanely, as Sir Thomas de la
More a knight of Glocestershire in his Life relates: For to the end he should
not be known, they shaved his Head and Beard, and that in most beastly manner;
for they took him from his Horse and set him upon a Hillocke, and then taking
puddle water out of a Ditch thereby, they went to wash him, his Barber telling
him that cold water must serve for this time: whereat the miserable King
looking sternely upon him, said, That whether they would or no, he would have
warm water to wash him: and therewithal to make good his word, he presently
shed forth a shower of tears. Never was King turned ou^ of a kingdom in such
a manner; Many kingdoms have been lost by the chance of War, but this
kingdom was lost before any Dice were cast; no blow struck, no Battle
fought; done forcibly, and yet without force; violently, and yet with consent;
both parties agreed, yet neither pleased; for the King was not pleased to leave
his kingdom, and the Queen was not pleased to leave him his life; it was not
safe to leave him a part, by which he might afterward recover the whole; and
therefore this was the mark now aimed at, having taken away his kingdom
openly, how they might take away his life secretly; be the Authors of it, and
not be seen in it; but this must be the Contents of a Chapter hereafter.

Of his Taxations.
BY this King it appears, there is something else besides the grievance of
Taxations, that alienates the minds of English Subjects from their King; for
never were fewer Taxations then in this Kings time, yet never were the Subjects
minds more alienated from their King, then they were from him. Before his
Coronation, in a Parliament holde^ at Westminster, ^^ere was granted him a
fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the Temporalty. In his fifth year
in a Parliament at L^^don, was granted him a fifteenth of the Temporalty. In
his fifteenth year was granted the sixth pen^y of temporal men's Goods,
through England, Ireland, and Wales, toward his Warre^ with Scotland. And more
then these we read not of: but then at the defeat of the Earl of Lancaster,
there were Confiscations that supplied the place of Taxations, by which (as one
says) he became the richest King that had been since the Conquest.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
HE Ordained that the moneys of his Father, though counted base by the People,
should be current. In the eight year of his Reign, by reason of a dear^h
which raised the price of all Victuals, it was Ordained by Parliament, that an
Ox fatted with grass, should be sold for fifteen shillings; fatted with
Corn, for twenty; the best Cow for twelve shillings; a fat Hog of two years
old, three sh^llings four pence; a fat Sheep shorn, fourteen pence, with
the Fleece, twenty pence; a fat Goose for two pence halfe-penny; a fat Capon
two pence; a fat Hen a penny; four Pigeons a penny; whosoever sold for more,
should forfait their Ware to the King. But after these Rates imposed, all kind
of Victuals grew so scarce, that provision could hardly be made for the Kings
house; whereupon shortly after, the Order was revoked, and Market Folks
permitted to make the best of their Wares. In this Kings time an Ordinance was
made against knights Templars, accused of Heresy and other crimes, and they
were all apprehended, and committed to diverse Prisons. The like was done by all
the Kings of Christendom, at one instant, being condemned in a General
Counsel at Vienna. In the 14. year of his Reign, on the 15. of October, the
Clerks of the Exchequer went toward York with the Book called Domus Dei,
and other Records and Provision that laded one and twenty Carts, but within
half a year they were brought back again.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN the 17. year of his Reign the Bishop of Hereford was arrested^ accused of
High Treason, for aiding the Kings enemies in their late rebellion; but he
refu^ed to answer, (being a consecrated Bishop) without leave of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, whose Suffragan he was, (and who he said was his
direct Judge, next the Pope) or without the consent of his fellow Bishops: who
then all arose, and humbly craved the Kings Clemency in his behalf; but
finding the King implacable, they took him away from the Bar, and delivered
him to the custody o^ the Archbishop of Canterbury: shortly after, he was
again taken and convented as before, which the Clergy understanding, the
Archbishops, Canterbury, York, and Dublin, with ten other Bishops, all with
their Crosses erected, went to the place of Judgment, and again took him
away with them; charging all men, upon pain of Excommunication, to forbear to
lay violent hands upon him; with which audacious Act, the King was so much
displeased, that he presently commanded inquiry to be made ex Officio Iudicis,
concerning those Objections against the Bishop; wherein he was found guilty,
though absent, and had all his Goods and Possessions seized into the Kings
hands. In this Kings time the Crowchet Friars came first into England. In his
time, Pope John the two and twentieth, first Instituted the Feast of Corpus
Christi; begun before by Urban the fourth.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
THis King founded Oriall College, and Saint Mary Hall in Oxford: He builded ^
Church of Friars at his Manor of Langley, where the soul of Gaveston, should
b^ prayed for. In this Kings twentieth year, Richard Rothing Sheriff of
London b^^lded the Parish Church of Garlickhithe in London. Ralph Baldocke
Bishop of London gave two thousand Marks to the building of the new Work of
the Chapel, on the South side of Paul's Church: And left much more by his
Testament.

Casualties.
IN the eighth year of this Kings Reign, was so great a dear^h, that Horses
and Dogs were eaten, and Thieves in prison plucked in pieces those that were
newly brought in amongst them, and eat them half alive; which continuing
three years, brought in the end such a pestilence, that the living scarce
sufficed to bury the dead. In the fourth year of his Reign, the Church of
Middleton in Dorsetshire, with all the Monuments, was consumed with Lightning,
the Monks being at Mattins. In this Kings time, digging the Foundation of a
work about Paul's, were found more then a hundred heads of Oxen and kine, which
confirmed the opinion, that of old time it had been the Temple of Jupiter, and
that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married Isabel Daughter of Philip the Fair, King of France, she being but
twelve years of age; who lived his Wife twenty years, his Widow thirty, and
dying at threescore and three years old, at Rysings near London, was buried
in the midst of the Gray Friars Quire in London. By her he had issue two Sons
and two Daughters: his eldest Son named Edward of Windsor, because borne
there, succeeded him in the kingdom. His second Son named John of Eltham,
because borne there, was at twelve years old created Earl of Cornwall: he
dyed in Scotland, in the flower of his Youth, unmarryed. His eldest Daughter
Ioane, being a child, was married in the fourth year of King Edward her
Brother, to D^vid Prince of Scotland, Son to King Robert Bruce, at seven
years old, who coming afterward into England to visit her Brother, dyed here,
and was buried at the Gray Friars in London. His second Daughter Eleanor, was
married to Reginold the second Earl of Gelder, with a portion of fifteen
thousand pounds, and had issue by him two Sons, who were Earls successively.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was fair of body, and of great strength, but given much to drink, which
made him oftentimes bewray his own Secrets; For his other conditions, his
greatest fault was, that he loved but one, for if his love had been divided,
it could not have been so violent. He was extreme in nothing but in loving;
and though love moderated, be the best of affections, yet the extremity of it
is the worst of passions. He was rather unfortunate then unhappy; seeing
unfortunatenesse is in the Event, unhappiness in the Cause; and if his fortune
had been to love good men, his own goodness would have made him happy. Two
Virtues were eminent in him above all his Predecessors, Continence, and
Abstinence: So continent that he left no base issue behind him; So abstinent,
that he took no base courses for raising of money. They who despised him being
alive, so much honored him being dead, that they could have found in their
hearts to make him a Saint.

Of his Death and Burial.
MAny ways were attempted to take away his life: First, they vexed him in his
diet, allowing him nothing he could well endure to eat, but this succeeded
not. Then they lodged him in a chamber over carrion and dead carcasses, enough
to have poisoned him; and indeed he told a workman at his window, he never
endured so great a misery in all his life, but neither did this succeed: Then
they attempted it by Poisons, but whether by the strength of his constitution,
or by the Divine Providence, neither did this succeed. At last the pestilent
Achit^phel, the Bishop of Hereford, devised a Letter to his keepers, blaming
them for giving him too much liberty, and for not doing the service which was
expected from them: and in the end of his Letter wrote this line, Edwardum
Octidere ^^lite timere bonum est: Craftily contriving it in this doubtful
sense, that both the keepers might find sufficient warrant, and himself might
find sufficient excuse. The keepers guessing at his meaning, took it in the
worst sense, and accordingly put it in execu^ion; they took him in his bed,
and casting heavy bolsters upon him, and pressing them hard down, stifled him;
and not content with that, they heated an iron red hot, and through a pipe
thrust it up into his Fondament, that no marks of violence might be seen; but
though none were seen, yet some were heard; For when the Fact was in doing, he
was heard to roar and cry all the Castle over. Gourney and Matrevers, his
murderers, looking for reward, had the reward of murderers: For the Queen
and Bishop Torleton disavowing the command, threatened to question them for the
Kings death: whereupon they fled beyond Sea; and Gourney after three years
being taken in France, and sent into England, was in the way upon the Sea
beheaded. Matrevers flying into Germany, had the grace to repent, but lived
ever after miserably. Thus dyed this King in the year 1327. more then half a
year after his deposing; when he had Reigned almost 19. years, lived 43. His
body was c^rryed to Gloucester, and there without any Funeral Pomp buried in
the Monastery of Saint Peter, by the Benedictine Friars.

Of Men of note in his time.
IN this Kings time, of Martial men were many, whose Acts have been spoken of
in the late Kings life. Of Learned men, also many, as John Duns the great
Logician, called Doctor Subtilis, borne in Northumberland, at Emildune a
Village three miles distant from Al^wi^ke; though both the Scots and the Irish
challenge him for thei^s. Robert Walsingham a Carmelite Friar, who wrote diverse
Treatises. Robert Baston borne in Nottingham-shire, a Carmelite Friar of
Scarborough, whom King Edward took with him into Scotland, to write some
Remembrances of his victories; but being taken by the Scots was constrained by
Robert Bruce to write Remembrances of his overthrowes. William Rishanger, a
Monk of Saint Albans, an Historiographer; Ralph Baldocke Bishop of London, who
wrote a History entitled Historia Anglica; John Walsingham, a Carmelite Friar,
who wrote diverse Treatises; Nicholas de Lyra a Jew by birth, who wrote many
excellent Treatises in Divinity; William Ockam a Friar Minor, who wrote diverse
Treatises, and namely against John Duns, and also against Pope John the 23. in
favor of the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria; Thomas Haselwood, a Canon of Leedes in
Kent, who wrote a Chronicle, called Chronicon compendiarium; Robert
Perscrutator, borne in Yorkshire, a black Friar and a Philosopher, or rather
a Magician; and lastly, though not least worthy to be remembered, John
Mandevile, the great Travellour, a Doctor of Physic, and a Knight.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
Of his coming to the Crown, and Acts done in his minority.
EDward of Windsor, eldest son of King Edward the second, by Order of
Parliament, upon his Fathers Resignation, was proclaimed King of England, on
the five and twentieth day of January, in the year 1327. and because he had
not yet received the Order of knighthood, he was by Henry Earl of Lancaster
gi^t solemnly with the Sword; and on the first day of February following, was
Crowned at Westminster by Walter Reginolds Archbishop of Canterbury: and
thereupon a general Pardon is Proclaimed, which has since been used as a
Custom with all the succeeding Kings: that at their first coming to the
Crown, a General Pardon is always granted. And because the King was under
age, scarce fifteen years old (though Froyssard says he was then Eighteen)
there were twelve appointed Governors of him and the kingdome^ namely the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of Winchester, Hereford, and
Worcester; Thomas of Brotherton, Earl Marshall, Edmund Earl of Kent, the
Kings Unkles; John Earl Warren, Thomas Lord Wake, Henry Lord Percie, Oliver
Lord Ingham, and John Lord Rosse: but though these were appointed and bore the
name, yet the Queen and Roger Mortimer took all the authority to themselves.
The first action that was undertaken, was an expedition against the Scots; for
Robert Bruce, though now old and sickly, and (as was said) Leprous: yet
considering the youth of the new King, and the distractions of the kingdom,
thought it now a ^it time to do some good upon England: and entering the
English borders with an Army, sent defiance to King Edward: whereupon an Army
is raised, and the Heyna^lders (whom the Queen had brought over) are joined
with the English; but a variance falling out between the two Nations, made the
action not successful. For the Kings Army encountering the Scots at Stanhope
Park in Weridall in the Bishopric of Durham, though three times as many as
the Scots, as being thirty thousand; yet through this variance, but more
through treason of some great men, suffered them all to escape their hands, and
the Scots returned home in safety, the English with dishonor: and after this,
the English seeing the Heynaulders could do them no good, sent them away to
their own Country. In King Edwards second year, his marriage with Philippa
of Heynault is solemnised, (a dispensation being first gotten, because of their
nearenesse in blood) and a Parliament is holden at Northampton, where the King
made three Earls: John of Eltham his brother, Earl of Cornwall; Roger
Mortimer, Earl of March, and James Butler of Ireland, Earl of Ormond: and in
this Parliament a dishonorable peace is concluded with the Scots, and
confirmed by a match between David Bruce Prince of Scotland, being but seven
years old, and Ioane sister to King Edward, not so old; at which time, by the
secret working of Queen Isabell, Roger Mortimer and Sir James Dowglasse; the
King surrenders by his Charter, all his title of Sovereignty to the Kingdom of
Scotland, restores diverse Deeds and Instruments of their former Homages and
Fealties, with the famous Evidence called Ragmans Roll, and many ancient Jewels
and Monuments, amongst which was the black Cross of Scotland; and besides,
any English man is prohibited to hold lands in Scotland, unless he were a
dweller there. In consideration whereof King Bruce was to pay thirty thousand
Marks, and to renounce his claim to the Counties of Cumberland and
Northumberland, and any other place possessed by him in England. This was no
good beginning, and yet worse followed after. For another Parliament being
holden at Winchester, Edmund Earl of Kent, the Kings Uncle, is there accused,
and condemned upon his confession, for intending to restore his brother, the
late King Edward; an intention only without any fact; yet condemned he was,
and brought to the Scaffold, but generally, so beloved of the people, that he
stood on the Scaffold from one a clock till five, before any executioner could
be found that would do the office, till at last a silly wretch of the
Marshalsey was gotten to cut off his head. But the Authors of his death escaped
not long themselves, for in the third year of the Kings Reign, another
Parliament is holden at Nottingham, wherein the Queen has all her great
Jointure taken from her, and is put to her Pension of a thousand pounds a
year, and her self confined to a Castle, where she remained the rest of her
days, no fewer then thirty years, a time long enough to find that her being
the daughter of a King, the sister of a King, the wife of a King, and the
mother of a King, were glorious titles, but all not worth the liberty of a
mean estate; and as for Mortimer, (lying then in the Castle of Nottingham) and
lately created Earl of the Marches of Wales) he was seized on in this manner;
the King taking with him William Montacute, Robert Holland, and others, go
secretly one night by Torchlight, through a privy way under ground, till they
came to the Queens Chamber, where leaving the King without, they entered, and
found the Queen with Mortimer, ready to go to bed: then laying hands on him,
they led him forth, after whom the Queen followed, crying, Bell fits, ^el fits,
ayes pity du gentil Mortimer; good son good son, take pity upon the gentle
Mortimer, suspecting that her son had been amongst them: this course was
taken to apprehend him for avoiding of tumult, he having no fewer then
ninescore knights and Gentlemen, besides other meaner servants continually
about him. But thus seized on, he is committed presently to the Tower, accused
of diverse great crimes, whereof these were chief; that he had procured the
late Kings death; that he had been the author of the Scots safe escaping at
Stanhope Park, corrupted with the gift of thirty thousand pounds; that he had
procured the late marriage and Peace with Scotland, so dishonorable to the
King and kingdom; that he had been too familiar with the Queen, as by whom
she was thought to be with child: of which Articles he is found guilty, and
condemned; and thereupon is drawn and hanged on the common Gallows at the
Elmes, now called Tiburne, where his body remained two days as an opprobrious
spectacle for all beholders.

After these businesses in England, there comes a new business upon him from
the King in France: for about this time Philippe le Bell, King of France, the
Queens brother dying without issue, the right of succession to the Crown is
devolved upon the Heir to Charles a former King, wherein are competitours
Philip Duke de Valois, and Edward King of England; Edward is the nearer in
blood, bu^ draws his Pedigree by a Female: Philippe, the further off, but
descending by all Males; and because the Law Salique excluding Females, was
conceived as well to exclude all descendants by Females, therefore is Philips
title preferred before King Edwards, and Philip is received and crowned King of
France: to which preferment of his, Robert d' Arthois a Peer of great power,
gave no small furtherance. And now as soon as Philip was Invested in the
Crown, he summons King Edward to come and do his Homage for the Duchy of
Guyenne, and his other lands in France, held of that Crown, according to the
custom; which though it were some prejudice to King Edwards claim afterward,
yet in regard his kingdom of England was scarce well settled, and himself but
young, he was contented to do; and thereupon the sixth of June, in the year
1329. King Edward in a Crimson Velvet gown imbroidered with Leopards, with his
Crown on his head, his Sword by his side, and golden Spurs on his heels;
presents himself in the body of the Cathedral Church of Amyens before King
Philip, sitting in his Chair of Estate, in a Velve^ Gown of a Violet color
imbroydered with Flowers de lys of Gold, his Crown on his head, and his
Scepter in his hand, with all his Princes and Peers about him. The Viscount
Melun Chamberlain of France, first commands King Edward to pu^ off his Crown,
his Sword, and his Spurs, and to kneel down, which he did, on a Crimson
Velvet Cushion before King Philip; and then the Viscount putting both his hands
together between the hands of the King of France, pronounced the words of the
Homage, which were these: You become Liegeman to my Master here present, as
Duke of Aquitaine and Peer of France, and you promise to bear faith and
loyalty unto him; Say yea: and King Edward said yea, and kissed the King of
France in the mouth, as Lord of the Fee. The like Homage also he did for the
Earldome of Ponthieu. But this act of submission left a rancour in King Edwards
heart, which afterward brake so out, that it had been good for France (...)
had never been exacted.

This done, King Edward returns home, and there finds a new business with
Scotland, upon this occasion. Edward Baylioll, son to John Baylioll
(sometimes King of Scotland) two and thirty years after his fathers
deposition, began now to show himself, attempting the recovery of that
Crown; and coming out of France, where he had all that while remained; and
getting aid underhand in England, with them he suddenly assailes those who
had the government of Scotland, during the Nonage of the young King David,
(being at that time with the King of France) and in a battle overcame them,
with the slaugher of many Noble men, and thousands of the common people; and
thereupon was immediately Crowned King of Scotland at Scone. But notwithstanding
this great defeat, King Baylioll was forced to retire him into England to get
more aid of King Edward: who now shows himself in the action, joins with
Baylioll against his brother in Law, King David; goes in person with a strong
Army to recover Berwicke, which after three months siege, being valiantly
defended by the Lord Seton, was taken in; and the Army of the Scots which came
to the rescue thereof, at Hallidowne-hill, utterly defeated: where were slain
seven Earls, ninety knights and Bannerets, four hundred Esquires, and about
two and thirty thousand common Soldiers, as our Writers report; as theirs, but
fourteen thousand: and with this effusion of blood is Baylioll returned to
his miserable kingdom, and to hold good correspondence with the King of
England hereafter, does him Homage for his Realm of Scotland, and the Islands
adjacent. But though he had a kingdom, yet he had not quietness, for many of
the Scots aided by the French, made war upon him diverse years after; during
all which time, King David with his wife remained in France. If any man marvel
why King Edward would aid Bailioll against King David, who had married his
sister; he may consider that Alliances, how near soever, weigh but light in
the Scales of State.

About this time the I Will of Man is conquered by William Montacute, Earl of
S^lisbury; for which service King Edward gave him the Title of King of Man.

Of his Acts after he came of age.
ANd now Robert of Arthois banished out of France, comes into England, whom
King Edward makes Earl of Richmond, and of his Counsel. This Robert persuades
King Edward to make war upon France, to which Crown (he said) he had more
right then he that held it; with whose persuasions, King Edward is at last
resolved to undertake the enterprise: and to furnish himself of Noble
Chiefetaines, he at one time in a Parliament at Westminster, the eighth year
of his Reign, creates six Earls, Henry of Lancaster he made Earl D^rby,
William Montacute he made Earl of Salisbury, Hugh Audeley Earl of Gloucester,
William Clinton Earl of Huntington, and Robert Clifford or Ufford Earl of
Suffolk; also twenty knights, of whom Thomas de la Moore, who writ the life of
the Kings Father, was one: withal he enters League of amity with many Princes
abroad, with the Dukes and E^rles of Gelders, Iulyers, Cleves, Heynault, and
Brabant, and with the Archbishop of Colen, and Valeran his brother: as on the
other side, the King of France got to take his part the Bishop of Liege, John
King of Bohemia, Earl of Luxemburg, Henry Count Palatine, Aubert Bishop of
Mets, Otho Duke of Austria, Ame Earl of Geneva, with many other Princes and
Captains out of Germany, Spain, and other Countries. King Edward thus
resolved in himself, and furnished with friends abroad, goes over into
Flanders with his Queen and children, makes his residence at Antwerp, where by
persuasion of the Flemings he takes upon him the Style, Title, and Arms of the
King of France; for by this they accounted themselves disobliged of the Bond of
twenty hundred thousand crowns, which they had entered into, never to bear
Arms against the King of France; and hereupon the League was established
between them and King Edward. And now King Edward for a beginning to put his
claim in execution, sets upon Cambray, and enters France by the way of
Vermandois and Thierach; on the other side King Philip seiseth on the Duchy of
Guienne, and sends thither the Conte d' Eu, Constable of France, with the
Earls of Foix and Armigniack. At last both Armies came so near together, that
a fight was appointed the Friday after; but upon better consideration, the
English thought it no discretion to give battle to an Army so much greater
then their own, if they could avoid it; and the French thought it as little
discretion for them to hazard the person of their Prince within his own
kingdom; and perhaps were not a little moved with the warning given them by
Robert King of Sicilie, a great Astronomer, that he foresaw by the Stars,
some great misfortune to threaten the French, if they should that day fight
with the Engli^h, King Edward being present: and thus both Armies having their
several reasons to decline the battle, they parted without doing any thing;
only an accident happened scarce worth remembering, yet must be remembered. A
Hare starting out before the head of the French Army, caused a great shout to
be made; whereupon, they who saw not the Hare, but only heard the shout,
supposing it to be the onset to the battle, disposed themselves to fight, and
fourteen Gentlemen for encouragements sake, as the custom is, were knighted;
called afterward in merriment, knights of the Hare.

But now King Edward must a little look home, and therefore leaving the Queen
in Brabant, he passes himself into England about Candlemas, having been in
Brabant about a year; and landing at the Tower about midnight, and finding ^t
unguarded, was so much displeased, that he presently sends for the Major of
^ondon, commanding him to bring before him the Chancellor and Treasurer, with
Sir John Saint Paul, Michael Watch, Philp Thorpe, Henry Stratford, Clergy men,
(who it seems were Officers for his Receipts) and John Sconer Justice of the
Bench; all which, except the Chancellor, were apprehended and committed to
prison; as were afterward in like manner diverse Officers of Justice, and
Accomptants, upon inquiry made of their unjust proceeding. During the Kings
abode in England, William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, and Robert Ufford Earl
of Suffolk, le^t in Flanders to oppose the French, having performed diverse
great e^ploits, were a^ last in an encounter about Lis^e, so overlaid by
multitude, as they were both taken, and sent prisoners to Paris. Besides, about
this time two accidents happened that were thought would be great rubs in King
Edwards proceeding; one, that his Wives Father, William Earl of Hayn^ult,
dying, and leaving his son to succeed, this son left his brother King Edward,
and fell to take part with the King of France: the other, that the Duke of
Normandy, thinking himself as strong as ever William Du^^ of Normandy was that
conquered England, he saw no reason but he might conquer it as well as that
William; and thereupon makes preparation by Sea and Land to attempt the
enterprise: but these were but vapors that never came to be winds, at least
brought no storms: for John Earl of Haynault had quickly enough of the King
of France, and was soon after reconciled to his brother King Edward; and the
Duke of Normandy went no further then preparations: for indeed King Edw^^d
prosecuted his courses against France with such heat, that all the
neighboring Princes seeing a fire kindled so near their own borders, were
glad to look ^o themselves at home. But now to impeach the King of Englands
return into Fra^ce^ King Philip had provided a mighty Navy in the Haven of
Sluice, consisting of tw^ hundred sail of Ships (besides many Galleys) and two
thousand armed men in the Port ready to encounter him upon his landing: whereof
King Edward being adve^tised, prepares the like number of Ships, and sets out
to Sea upon Midsommer Eve; is m^ the morrow after with a Navy likewise from the
North parts, conducted by Sir ^^bert Morley; and encounters his enemy who lay
to intercept him with such force and courage, and such advantage of Wind and
Sun, that he utterly defeated their whole Navy, took and sunk all their Ships,
slew thirty thousand men, and landed with as great glory, as such a victory
(the greatest that ever before was gotten by the E^glish at Sea) could yield,
though King Edward himself was there wounded with an Arrow in the thigh. Most
of the French, rather then to endure the Arrows of the English, or be taken,
desperately leapt into the Sea; whereupon the French Kings Jester, set on to
give him notice of this overthrow, (which being so ill news, no^^ else would
willingly impart unto him) said, and oftentimes repeated it in the Kings
hearing; Cowardly English men, Dastardly English men, faint-hearted Englis^
men^ the King at length asked him why^ for that (said he) they durst not leap
out of their Ships into the Sea, as our brave French men did. By which speech
the King apprehend a notion of this overthrow: which the French attribute to
Nichol^^ ^^chet, one of their chief Commanders, who had armed his Ships with
men of base condition (content with small pay) and refused Gentlemen and
sufficient Soldiers, in regard they required greater wages: And indeed it
often happens that the avarice of Commanders is the occasion of great defeats.

By this victory King Edward gained a free entrance into Flanders, and
presently went and besieged Tournay with an Army of five and fifty thousand,
but was so valiantly encountered by the Duke of Burgundy and the Earl of
Armigniack, that they routed his Army, and slew four thousand upon the place;
which so enraged King Edward, that two days after he sent a Challenge to King
Philip to meet him in ^ single combat, or with an hundred against as many,
before the walls of Tourn^^. King Philip answers, that his Challenge being made
to Philip de Valois, without mention of King, he took it not to be to him, who
was truly King of France^ but he wished him to remember the Homage he had done
him at Amiens, and the wrong he did to the Christian world^ by his troublesome
courses to hinder him from his voyage intended to the Holy Land. Besides this
answer in writing he sends to him by word of mouth; that by his Challenge he
hazarded nothing of his own, but exposed only the Dominion of another, which
was against all reason: but if he would set his kingdom of England, though
much meaner, agai^^^ his of France, he would then accept the Challenge, and
meet him in the field (...) single combat. But this King Edward would not
hearken to for as he was valiant to make the Challenge, so he was circumspect
to look to the conditions. But here upon he continues his siege of T^^rnay; to
the relief whereof King Philip sends all the forces he could possibly make by
himself o^ his friends; and after the siege had continued three months,
partly by mediation of Robert King of Sicilie, but chiefly by the Lady Jane of
Valois, sister to King Philip, and mother of King Edwards wife (who had vowed
her self a Nun; but to do this good office, traveled from one to another)
a Truce was concluded for a year, and both their Armies are dissolved.

After this, K. Edward returning into England, was advertised how the Scots
after many other places gained, had besieged the Castle of Striveling; for
relief whereof, the King makes all the haste he can; and yet before he could
come, it was by force of battery, compelled to render it self upon conditions.
Then King Edward being at Berwicke, passes to New Castle upon Tyne, where he
stays a month waiting for his provision that was to come by Sea; but that
being driven into other parts by tempest, he makes a Truce with the Scots for
three or four months, and then returns home. In the time of this Truce; the
Scots send to King David, to come and govern the kingdom in his own person;
who thereupon taking his leave of the King of France, with whom he had remained
seven years, he with his wife Ioane, King Edwards sister, returns into
Scotland; where after he had been most honorably received by the Prince of
Or^nay, and the other Lords and Barons of the Kingdom, as soon as the Truce
was ended, with a strong Army enters Northumberland, passing on to New Castle
upon Tyne, where he plants his Camp. Of this Castle, John Nevile was left
governor by King Edward, who sending out certain companies, took the Earl
Murray prisoner, and with the slaughter of diverse of his men, and rich booties,
returned back to his Castle; which so incensed King David, that he assaulted
the Castle as a man enraged, but finding it too strong for his taking, he then
passed into the Province of Durham, where he used all kinds of cruelty, first
upon the Country, and then upon the City, killing men, women and children,
Clergy, and others; burning and destroying houses and Churches, and utterly
defacing it. From thence he passes on to the Castle of Salisbury, which Castle
belonged to William Mountacute Earl of Salisbury in right of his wife; but
himself being then prisoner in France, only his Countess, and one William
Mountacute a Cousin of his, was in the Castle. This William perceiving the
Scottish horse to be so overcharged with pillage, that they were scarce able
to go; issues out of the Castle with forty horse, sets upon them, kills two
hundred, and takes six score, whom he brings with their rich pillage, into the
Castle. King David soon after with his whole Army arrived, but hearing of King
Edwards coming (who certified of these things, made all the haste he could) he
retires himself from thence; and King Edward finding him gone before he came,
yet would needs go in and visit the Countess: of whom, as soon as he saw
her, he was so enamoured, that he laid more battery to her chastity, then King
David had done to her Castle; but finding it inexpugnable, after a day and a
night he left it, and followed after the Scots, with whom for three days
together he had many skirmishes, till at last a Truce was concluded for two
years; and amongst other conditions, William Earl of Salisbury, prisoner with
the King of France, was set at liberty in exchange for the Earl Murray,
prisoner with the King of England.

About this time another difference fell out between the Kings of France and
England. John Earl of Montford laid claim to the Duchy of Britain, but in
the quarrel was taken prisoner by the King of France: his Lady sends to King
Edward for succor; which King Edward grants upon condition that a marriage be
made between his daughter Mary and the Earl of Montfords son; which being
agreed on, he sends over to her aid, first, Walter de Manny a valiant knight,
and afterward Robert d' Arthois: but whilst his Army was preparing, King
Edward was informed by Edward Baylioll, the pretended King of Scotland, and
Governor of Berwicke, that the Scots had not kept the conditions of the Truce;
whereupon King Edward draws a great Army to Berwicke, with a purpose to do
great matters, but nothing was done, for a new Truce was again concluded for
two years. By this time Robert d' Arthois had made ready his Army, and taking
with him the Countess of Montford, the Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury, and
Suffolk, and many other Barons; after great tempests and encounters at Sea
lands safely at last near to Vannes, which was held by the French, and laying
^^ege to the City, with the assistance of Walter de Manny, who came unto him,
after many assaults, at last he took it, to the great joy of the Countess of
Montford, though she held it not long; for certain resolute French knights
assaulted it soon after, and recovered it from the English. In which action
many Lords were slain or wounded, and particularly Robert de Ar^hois himself;
who passing over into England, for the better curing of his wounds, soon after
died, and was buried in Paul's Church in L^ndon. And now King Edward himself
with a strong Army passes over into Britain, and plants his Camp before the
City of Vannes, where was like to have been a cruel battle; but in the
instant, there came from Pope Cl^ment the sixth, two Cardinals, the Bishops of
Preneste and Thusculum; who upon certain conditions concluded a Peace; amongst
other conditions, this was one; that the City of Vannes should be delivered to
^ing Philip, and thereupon John Earl of Montford should be set at liberty, but
yet with this charge, not to go into Britain: which promise notwithstanding,
he kept not, but went presently and besieged a Tow^e in Britain, though he
were forced to retire, and died shortly after. But the Truce cracked ^hus, as
it were, by Montford, was afterward absolutely broken by King Edward though he
charged the breach of it upon K. Philip, and King Philip upon him. But
howsoever broken it was; and Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, with diverse
other Earls and Barons, is sent into France, who won many Towns in Gascoyne^
and in the Counties of Perigort and Tholo^se, and then went to winter at
Bordeaux. And afterward, in May following, pursuing his victories, he won
many more Towns; and amongst others, the great Town of Reoll. After this
again, he took Montpesat, Maurore, Villefranche, and many other Towns; and
at last the great City of Ango^lesme, and then came to winter again at
Bordeaux.

Of his Acts together with the Prince.
KING Philip informed of so many great losses, assembles a mighty Army, no
less then a hundred thousand men, with which he recovers Miremont, and
Villefranche, and then proceeded to besiege Angoulesme, whom the Earl of Derby
having not forces sufficient to encounter, King Edward (leaving for Wardens of
England in his absence, the Lords Percie and Nevill) goes himself in person
with an Army (as Froyssard says) of fourscore thousand men at Arms, and ten
thousand Archers, besides those out of Wales and Ireland; taking with him his
son, the Prince of Wales, and Duke of Guyenne, being then but of the age of
fifteen years. It may be thought preposterous in King Edward, to put his
son to be a Soldier before he was come to be a man; but it seems he had a
longing to try his sons valor in the bud, and perhaps was loath to omit any
thing that might give any countenance to this battle, in which the two
kingdoms were laid as it were at stake; but howsoever, taking him along with
him, and almost all the Lords of his kingdom, he takes Shipping, and lands at
Normandy, where at the first setting his foot on ground, he took such a fall,
that the blood gushed out at his nose; which the Barons took for an ill sign,
but the King took it for a good: saying, it was a sign that the Land desired
to have him: and in deed he presently took the Towns of Harsteur, Moulbourg,
Carenton, and Saint Lo, and afterward the City of Ca^n it self; and from
thence passed to the County of Eureux, saccaged and pillaged it, as also the
City of Gisors, Vernon, Meulan, and Boulebourse to the City of Poyssy. King
Philip all this while stayed about Paris, as looking for King Edward to give
him battle there; and for that purpose had planted his Camp near to Saint
Germans; but King Edward deceived him: for going from Poyssy, he passed into
Picardie and Ponthie^, where he took and burned many Towns and Castles: and
then passed the River of (...), though not without danger: for King Philip had
sent thither Gundemar de Fay with a thousand horse, and six thousand foot, to
stop his passage: King Edward notwithstanding resolves to pass, or perish, and
plungeth forem^^^ into the River; crying out, They who love me, will follow me
at which voice, (...) man strove who should be foremost, and so the shore was
presently gained by the English. Gun^emar astonished with this bold adventure,
astonisheth his peo^^^ with his fearful countenance: so that the English
encountering the French all in (...), put them to flight. King Philip enraged
with this dishonor, resolves to (...) it; and presently provokes King Edward
to a battle. King Edward had (...) ^^camped in a Village called Cressy, his
Army consisted of thirty thousand (...) which he divided into three battalions:
the first was led by the young Prince (...), with whom were joined the Earl of
Warwick, Geoffrey of Harecourt, (...) Holla^d, Ric^ard Stafford, John
Chandoes, Robert Nevile, and many other (...) and Gentlemen, to the number of
eight hundred men at Arms, two thou(...), and a thousand Welsh. In the second
were the Earls of Northam^^^^ and of (...), the Lords Rosse, Basset, and
others, to the number of eight hun(...) Arms, and twelve hundred Archers. In
the third the King was him^^^^^ h^ving about him seven hundred men at Arms,
and three thousand Archers. (...) battles thus ordered, mounted on a white
Hobby, he rode from rank to rank (...) ^^em; encouraging every man that day
to have regard to his right and ho(...) The French Kings Army was far
greater, consisting of above sixty thou(...) well armed; whereof the chief
were Charles Duke of Alanson (...) John of Luxembourg King of Bohemia, Charles
de Blois the Kings (...) Duke of Lorraine, the Earls of Flanders, Nevers,
Sancerre; of Ba(...) and Gentlemen, about three thousand. The Vauntguard he
commits to his ^rother the Count de Alanson, the Reere to the Earl of Savoy,
the maine battle ^e lead^ himself; his heat out of confidence of victory was
so great, that (...) permitted time for a little counsel what was fit to be
done. The old King (...) advised that the Army should take some repast, and
that the Infantry c^^^isting of Ge^oueses (which were above fifteen thousand
Crossebowes, and (...) men^ should make the first Front, and the Cavallery to
follow; which was agreed on. But the Count of Alanson, contrary to this order,
took it ill that the (...) were in the first rank, and in fury caused them to
change place; which (...) coffeehouse, that it irritated them more against
the Leader, then the (...); besides there fell at the instant, such a shower of
rain, as dissolved their (...), and made their Bows of little use; and at the
breaking up of the shower, the (...) full in the face of the French (dazzling
their sight) and on the back of the (...), as if all made for them. K. Edward
who had gotten to a Windmill, beholding (...) a Sentinel, the countenance of
the Enemy, and discovering the disturbance (...) by the change of place;
instantly sends to charge that part, without giving (...) to re-accommodate
themselves; whereupon the discontented Gen^^ese (...) which the Co^nt de
Alanson perceiving, he comes on with the horse, and (...) ^age cries out, On,
on, Let us make way upon the bellies of these Genoueses, (...) but hinder us:
and instantly pricks on with a full careere through the midst (...), followed
by the Earls of Lorraine and Savoy, and never stays till he came (...) the
English battle, where the Prince was; the fight grew hot and doubtful, (...)
as the Commanders about the Prince send to King Edward to come up with his
power to aid him. The King asks the messengers whether his son were (...)
hurt: who answering, no; but that he was like to be over-laid: Well then ((...)
^he King) return, and tell them who sent you, that so long as my son is
a(...) they send no more to me what ever happen; for I will that the honor of
this (...) his. And so being left to try for themselves, they wrought it out
with the (...)^ the rather by reason the French King having his horse slain
under him, and (...) danger to be trodden to death, had he not been recovered
by the Lord Beau(...)^ ^^s to the great discouragement of his people,
withdrawn out of the field: (...) no^^ce being once taken by the English, the
day was soon after theirs, and (...) victory they ever had yet against the
French, and so bloody, as there is (...) made of any one prisoner taken in the
battle, but all ^laine outright; ^nely ^ome few troops that held together,
saved themselves by retiring to places near adjoining. The French King
himself with ^ small company, got to Bray in the night, and approaching the
walls, and the Gu^rd asking him who goes there? he answered, the Fortune of
Fr^^c^. By ^i^ voice ^e was known, and thereupon received into the Town, with
the tears and lamenta^ions of his people. The number of the slain are
certified to be thirty thousand: the chief whereof, were Charles de Al^ns^n,
John Duke of (...), ^alph Earl of Lorraine, L^wis Earl of Fl^^^ers, I^ques
Da^lphin de (...), So^^e to I^b^rt, (who after gave Daulphin to the Crown of
France) the Earl^^ of S^^c^rre, H^r^court, and many other Earls, Barons, and
Gentlemen, to the number of fiftee^^ hundred. This memorable Victory happened
upon the S^turday after Bart^^l^^^^ day, in the year 1346. The next day,
early in the morning, being Sunday, he s^n^ out 300. Lances, and 2000.
Archers^ to discover what was becom^ of t^^ (...) who found great Troops
coming from Abbe^^l^, Saint (...), and B^^uvoyes, (ignorant of what had
happened (...) by the Archbishop of R^^^, and the Priour of France: whom they
likewise defeated, and slew s^ven thousand.

But this was not all the Victories that fell to King Edward that year, there
was another of no less importance gotten in Engl^^d, by the Queen and hi^
people at home against the Scots; who being set on by the French, to divert the
wa^^^ there^ entered upon this kingdom wit^ ^hreesco^e thousand men, (as our
Writers report) assuring himself of success, in regard (as he supposed)^ the
ma^^e strength thereof was now gone into France; but ^e found it otherwise^ For
the Lords of the North, as Gylbert de Umfrevile, the Earl^ of Ang^^^, Henry
Perc^, Ralph Nevile, William D^y^co^^t, with the Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of Dur^am, and others of the Clergy, gathered so great Forces, and so
well ordered them, by the animation of the Queen, (who was there in person) as
fighting a great Battle at Nevils Cross in the Bishopric of Durha^, they
utterly defea^ed this great Army, took David their King Prisoner, with the
Earls of Fif^, Menteth, Murry, Sutherland, the Lord Douglas, the Archbishop
of Saint Andrews, and others; and put to the sword fifteen thousand Sc^ts.
This Victory also fell upon a Saturday, six weeks after that of Cressy. He
that took King David Prisoner, wa^ one John C^pl^nd, an Esquire of
Northumberland, whom King Edward rewarded with five hundred pounds land a
year, and made him a Banner^t. And as if all concurred to make this year
Triumphant, the Aides sent to the Countess of Montford in Britain, led by
Thomas Dagworth a Valiant knight, overthrew and took Prisoner, Charles de
Blois, Pretender to that Duchy, and with him Mounsi^ur la Vall, the Lords
Rochford, Bea^^anoyre, Loi^c^ue; with many other Barons, Knights, and Esquires:
Where were slain the Lord De la Vall, Father to him that was taken, Viscount
Rohan, Mounsieur de Chastea^ Bryan, de ^alestroit, de Quintin, de Dyrev^ll,
besides many other knights and Esquires, to the number of seven hundred. And
now King Edward without meddling with the great Cities of Amiens and Abbevile,
marches on directly, and sits down before Callice, a Town of more importance
for England, and the Gate to all the rest: Wherein John d^ Vienne Marshall of
France, and the Lord de Andregh^n, (a great man in his time) commanded.

All that Winter King Edward lay without any molestation by the French King,
who was busied at home in his own State about raising of money; wherewith
supplied at last, he raises an Army and approaches Callice, but finds no way
open to come to relieve it. The King of England was both Master of the Haven,
and possessed all other ways that were passable; and the Flemings his friends
had besieged Air; to oppose whom, John Duke of Normandy is sent for out of
Guyenne: who departing leaves Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, Master of the
Field, and ^e having an Army consisting of twelve hundred men at Arms, two
thousand Archers, and three thousand other Foot, takes in most of the Towns of
Xaintoigne, and Poict^^, and in the end besieged and sacked P^ityer^, and then
returns to B^rdea^x, with more ^illage then his people could well bear: Thus
the (...) prosper every ^^here, and the French suffer. During this siege of
Calli^e, (^n (...) some t^in^^ King Edw^^^ first used Gunnes) the Fleming^ send
to King (...) to make a marriage between his Daughter Isabell and their Lord
the (...); to which the King consented, but the Duke of Br^^^nt gets (...) of
(...), ^o make the match for a Daughter of his^ The Flemings press (...) Lord
with the match of England; but he absolutely refuse^h it, saying^ h^ (...)
never marry a Daughter of him, that had killed his Father, though he would
(...) ^^lf^ his kingdom. This answer so incensed the Flemi^gs, that they (...)
Lord in Prison, till with long durance he at last consented; and there (...)
E^ward and his Queen, with their Daughter Is^^^ll, come over to (...) there
the young Earl is aff^an^ed to her; but returning after^^rds (...) as ^e found
opportunity, he went to King Philip, and ^eft (...); and married afterward a
Daughter of the (...) this whi^^ ^he siege of Callice was continued; and King
Philip (...) come to relieve it; sollicits King Edward to appoint some^ place
(...) would mee^e him. But King Edward returns answer, that if he (...) own
way to come thither to him, there he should find him, but (...) be would not
pa^^^ having lain there so long to his great l^^our and (...) b^ing now so
near the point of gaining the place^ Two^ ^a^^^nals (...) the Pope, to mediate
a Peace, but could effect nothing, so as the (...) was forced to break up his
Army and retire to Paris, leaving C^llice (...) the Besieger: which when the
Town understood, they sent to de(...) granted, and therein received this
final answer, that ^ixe of the chief Burgesses should be sent to the King,
bare-headed, barefooted, in their shirts, (...) their neckes^ the keys of the
Town and Castle in their hands, (...) th^^^elves to the Kings will; the rest
he was content to take to mercy. (...) condition, and much difficulty who
should be those six: but (...) up, and out of love to his Country offering
himself to be one, the six (...) made ^p; for now by his example every one
strove to be of the (...) who presenting themselves before the King, he
commanded them instantly (...) to death. Great supplication was made by his
Lords for their lives, but (...) would not be drawn to alter his sentence,
till the Queen, great with (...) on her knees, and with tears obtained pardon
for them; which done, (...) them to be clothed, and besides a good repast,
gives to every one of them (...) Nobles a p^ece. But though the King in this
sentence showed severity, (...) Act before he had showed mercy; For when
Victuals began to fail in (...), and all unusefull persons, as old men, women,
and children, were put (...) Gates; he forced them not back again as he might
have done, there^^ (...) sooner to consume their store; but suffered them to
pass through his Ar^y^ (...) them to eat, and two pence a piece to all of
them. And thus was that strong (...) of Callice gotten, the third day of
August, in the year 1347. after eleven (...) siege, and continued afterward in
possession of the English two hundred (...). All the Inhabitants are turned
out, but only one Priest, and two (...) to inform of the Orders of the Town:
and a Colony of English, amongst which seven and thirty good Families out of
London is sent to inhabit it^ (...) and Queen enter the Town triumphantly,
and make their abode there, (...) Queen was brought a bed of her Daughter
Margaret. The King made (...) of the Town Ayme^y of Pavia a Lombard, whom he
had brought up from (...), and then with his Queen returns into England; at
which time the (...) Electours send to signifie^ that they had chosen him King
of the Romans, but (...) refuses to accept it, as being an honor out of his
way, and scarce com(...) his State at home.

after this Tr^^^s were made by mediation, from one time to another, for the
(...) ^wo years, in which time, Geoffrey de Charmy Captain of Saint Omer,
(...) Aymery of P^via, whom King Edward had left Governor of Callice, to (...)
for twenty thousand Crowns: which King Edward hearing of, sent to A^mery, and
charged him with this perfidiousnesse; whe^^^pon Ay^^^y comes to the King, and
humbly desiring pardon, promises to h^ndl^ the (...) so as shall be ^o the
Kings advantage, and thereupon i^ sen^ back to Callice. The King, the ^ight
before the time of agreement^ arrives with three ^und^ed men at (...), and
(...) hundred Archers: (...) de Charmy (...) likewise the (...) ^^ght from
Saint Omers with his Forces, and sent a hundred m^n before with the Crowns to
(...): the men are let in at a Posterne Gate^ the crowns received, and assured
to be all weight: which done, the Gates of the Town are opened, and out
marches the King before day, to encounter (...) de Charmy; who perceiving
himself betrayed, defended ^imselfe^ the best he could, and put King Edward to
a hard bickering, who for that ^e would not b^ (...) person, put hi^self^ and
the Prince under the Colors of the Lord (...) bea^en ^^wne on ^is knees by
(...) whom he fought hand to hand) and ye^ recove^^d, and (...) prisoner.
Charmy was likewise taken, and all his Fo^^^^ defeated. King ^dward the night
after (which was the first of the New-yeare) feasted with the Prisoners, and
gave ^ibo^^^nt in honor of his valou^, (...) Chaplet of Pearl, which himself
wore on his head, (for a New-yeares gift) forgave him his ransom, and set him
at liberty. But the English not long after, in the like practice, had better
success, and got the Castle of Guysnes, (a piece of great importance ne^r^
Callice,) for a sum of money, given to one Beaconr^y a French ^^n. Of which
C^s^le, when the French King demanded restitution in regard of the Truc^, King
Edwar^ returns answer, that for things bought and sold between their people,
there was no exception, and so held it.

About this time Philip King of France dyed, leaving his Son John to succeed
him; in the beginning of whose Reign, Humber^ Prince of D^^lphin, dying
without issue, made him his Heir, and ther^upon Charles King Ioh^^ Son, was
created the first Daulphin of France: from whence it grew to be a Custom, that
the King of France his Heir should always be called Daulphin of France. About
this time also the Duke of Lancaster was to perfo^me a combat, upon a
challenge, with a Prince of B^h^mia, but when they were entered the Lists, and
had taken their Oaths, King John interposed, and made them Friends. And now
when after many means of mediation, no Peace could be concluded between the
two Kings; the Prince of Wales being now grown a man, is appointed by
Parliament, to go into Gascoyne with a thousand men at Arms, two thousand
Archers, and a great number of Welshmen; and in June following he sets forth
with three hundred Sail, attended with the Earls of Warwick^, Suffolk,
Salisbury, and Oxford, the Lord Chand^s, the Lord James A^deley, Sir ^obert
Knolles, Sir Francis Hall, with many others. About Michaelma^ following^ the
King himself passes over to Callice, with another Army, taking with him two
of his Sons, Li^n^ll of Antwerpe, now Earl of Ulster i^ Right of his Wife,
and John of Gant, Earl of Richmond. There met him at Callice of mercenaries
out of Germany, Flanders and Brabant, a thousand men at Arms, so that his Army
consisted of three thousand men at Arms, and two thousand Archers on
horseback, besides Archers on foot. The City of London sent three hundred men
at Arms, and five hundred Archers, all in one livery, at their own charge;
but all this great Army effected nothing at that time, by reason the King of
France would not be drawn to any Encounter, and had so disfurnished the
Country of all provisions, that the King of England was forced to return. King
Edward solicited by the King of Navarre to aid him against the King of France,
sends over the Du^e of Lancaster with four thousand men at Arms, who winnes
many Townes^ and the Prince enters G^yenne, passes over Langn^d^c to Toulouse,
Narbonne, Burges, without any Encounter, sackes, spoils and destroys where he
goes, and laden with booties returns to Bordeaux. The French King thus
assaulted on all ^ides, gathers all the power he possibly could, and first
makes against his E^emies in N^^^^^dy, recovers many of his lost Towns, and
was likely to have there prevaile^, but that he was drawn of force to oppose
(...) fresh Invader, the Prince of Wales, who was come up into Tourayne,
against (...) he brings his whole Army, consisting of above threescore
thousand: where^^^^ the Prince, whose Forces were not likely to be able to
encounter him (being (...) for one) was advised to retire again to Bordeaux.
But the French King, to preve^^ this course, follows; and within two leagues
of Poyctiers, has him at a (...) advantage: at which instant, two Cardinals
came from the Pope to mediate ^ Pe^ce. But the French King supposing he had his
enemy now in his mercy, would accept of no other conditions, but that the
Prince should deliver him four Hostage^, and ^s vanquished, render himself
and his Army to his discretion. The Prince wa^ content to restore unto him what
he had gained upon him, but without pr^ju^^^^ of his honor, wherein he said he
stood accomptable to his Father, and to his C^u^tr^y. But the French King would
abate nothing of his demands, as making hims^lf^ sure of victory; and thereupon
was instantly ready to set upon the Princ^: (...) seeing himself reduced to
this straight, takes what advantage he could of the (...), and providently got
the benefit of Vines, Shrubs, and Bushes, on that part (...) like to be
assailed, to impester and entangle the French horse, which he saw (...) ^ome
furiously upon him. The success answered his expectation, for the (...) of his
enemies upon their first assault were so wrapped and encombred (...) ^he Vines,
that his Archers galled and annoyed them at their pleasure. For (...) Fre^^h
King, to give the honor of the day to his Cavallery, employed them only
without his Infantery; so as they being disordered and put to rout, his whol^
Army came utterly to be defeated. In this battle were taken prisoners, King
John himself, with his yo^ngest son Philip, by Dennis de Morbecque a knight
of Ar^h^is; Jacques de Bourbon, Conte de Ponthieu; the Archbishop of Sens; John
de Arth^is; Conte de En; Charles de Arthois; his brother Count de Longueville;
John de (...), Count de Tankarvile; the Counts of Vendosme, Va^demont,
Estampes, Salbourg, (...) and La Roche; also John de Ceintre, accounted (as
Froissard says) the (...) ^night of France, with many other Lords, besides two
thousand Knights and Gen^lemen; in so much, as the Conquerours holding it not
safe to retain so many, le^ ^^ny of them go. The French, who can give best
account of their own losses, ^^por^ there died in the battle, a thousand
seven hundred Gentlemen, amongst which were fifty two Bannerets: the most
eminent, Peter de Bourbon, the Duke of Ath^^s Constable of France, Iehan de
Clermont Marshall; Geoffrey de Charmy, High Chamberlain^; the Bishop of
Chalons, the Lords of Landas, of Pons, and of Cham^^y. There escaped from this
battle, three of the French Kings sons, (for he brought them all thither)
Charles Prince Daulphin; Louys after Duke of Anjou; and John Duke of B^^ry^ all
great actours in the time following. The special great men of the English i^
th^^ fight, were the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, Oxford, Stafford;
the Lord^^ Cobham, Spenser, Barkeley, Basset: of Gascoynes, Le Capital de
Beuff; the Lords, Pumyer, Chaumont, and others. The Lord James Andeley won
honor both by his valor, and his bounty; for having vowed to be foremost in
this fight, he pe^formed his word, and sealed it with many wounds: for which
the Prince having rewarded him with the gift of five hundred Marks Fee-simple
in England, he p^esently gave it to four of his Esquires; whereupon the Prince
demanding whether he accepted not his gift? he answered, that these men had
deserved the same as well ^s himself, and had more need of it; with which
reply the Prince was so well pleased, that he gave him five hundred Marks more
in the same kind. A rare example, where desert in the Subject, and reward in
the Prince, strive which should be the greater.

And now, though King John had the misfortune to fall into the hands of his
enemy, yet he had the happiness to fall into the hands of a Noble enemy; for
Prince Edw. used him with such respect and observance, that he could not find
much d^^ference between his captivity and liberty. After the battle, which
was fought the ^in^^^enth day of September, in the year 1357. Prince Edward
leads King John and the captive Lords to Burde^ux, where he retains them till
the spring following; but (...) present news of his victory to his Father: who
thereupon causes a general Thanksgiving all England over eight days
together: and in May following; King John rather coming over with the Prince,
then brought over by him, is lodged at the Savo^; a Palace belonging to Henry
Duke of Lancaster, and the fairest at that time about London. And King Edward,
as though he thought it honor enough to have one King his prisoner at once, at
the suite of his sister Queen I^ane, he sets her Husband David King of Scots
at liberty, after he had been prisoner in England eleven years, but not
without paying a Ransom, which was a hun-thousand Marks, to be paid in ten
years.

After this, by mediation of Cardinals sent by the Pope, a Truce for two years
is concluded between the two kingdoms of France and England, and in the time
of this Truce, Articles of Peace between the two Kings are propounded^ King
Edward requires the Dutchies of Norm^^^^ and G^yenn^, the Counties of Poicto^,
T^uraine, Main, and Anjo^^ with all their ^ppur^e^ances as large as King
Richard the first held them, and many other Provinces besides, and to hold them
all without Homage or any other service; to which Articles, King John (weary of
imprisonment) assents and seals, but the (...) and Council of France utterly
reject it: whereupon King Edward in great disple^sure resolves to make an end
of this work with the sword, and to take possession of the kingdom of France;
and leaving his younger son Thomas Gove^^our of his kingdom at home, with a
Fleet of ^leven hundred sail, and taking all the great Lords of the Realm
with him, he passes over to Callice, dividing his Army into three battles,
whereof one he commits to the Prince of Wales, another to the Duke of
Lancaster, and the ^hird he leads himselfe^ and first marching through (...)
where he takes in many Towns, he plants his si^ge afterward before (...); but
having spent there six or seven weeks without effecting any thing, he ^asseth
thence, and takes in the Cities of Sens and Nevers; the Duchy of, B^rgoyne
redeemes it self from spoil with paying two hundred thousand Flo^ens of gold:
then he marches up to ^aris, and plants his Camp within two small Leagues of
the Tow^^, where ^e honored 400. Esquires and Gentlemen with the Order of
knighthood: but when Sir Walter de Manny had made a Bravado before the Gates of
the City, and the King saw that the Daulphin would by no provocations be drawn
out to battle; he raises his siege, and returns into Bri^aine to refresh his
Army; from thence he marches toward Char^res with a purpose to besiege that
City, and though great offers were made him by the French, and Commissioners
from the Pope solicited him with all earnestness to accept them, yet neither
they, nor the Duke of Lancasters persuasions could prevail with him, till a
terrible ^torme of hail with thunder and lightning fell upon his Army, which
so terrified him, being a warning as it were from Heaven, that he presently
vowed to make Peace with the French King upon any reasonable conditions, as
shortly after he did at a Treaty of Britigny near to Chartres, upon these
Articles: that the Fiefs of Thouars and Belleville, the Duchy of Guyenne,
comprising Gascoyne, Poictou, San^ogne, Limo^sin, Perigort, Quercie, Rhodes,
Angoulesme, and Rochell, together with the Counties of Guysnes and Callice, and
some other places, with the Homages of the Lords within those Territories
should be to the King of England, who besides was to have three Millions of
crowns of gold^ whereof six hundred thousand in hand, four hundred thousand
the yea^e following, and the rest in two years after: and for this the King of
England, and his son the Prince of Wales, for them and their successors for
ever, should renounce all their right pretended to the C^owne of France; the
Duchy of Normandy, the Countries of Touraine, Anjou, Main, the Homage and
Sovereignty of Britain, and the Earldom of Flanders; and within three weeks
King John to be rendered at Callice at the charge of the King of England, except
the expenses of his house. For assurance of which accord, should be given into
his hand five and twenty of the greatest Dukes and Lords of France for
Hostages. The Scots not to be aided by the French King, nor the Flemmings by
the English. This accord and final Peace signed by both Kings, was ratified by
their two eldest sons, Edward and Charles, and sworn unto by the Nobility of
both kingdoms. The Hostages are delivered to King Edward, who brought them
into England; and thereupon King John is honorably conducted to Callice, after
he had remained prisoner in England near about five years: but being come to
Callice, he was detained there above three months, till the money which he was
to pay in hand, could be provided; and for providing the rest he was put to
hard shifts; being feign to give the Jews leave to dwell in France for twenty
years, paying twelve Florins a man at the entry, and six every year after.
At this time the Prince by dispensation marries the Countess of Kent, daughter
to Edmund, brother to Edward the second, and his Father investing him with the
Duchy of Aquitaine, he was now Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester and Kent: and not long after, with the Princess
his wife, he passes over into France, and keeps his Court at Bordeaux.

This was now the year 1362. and the fiftieth year of King Edwards age,
wherein for a Iubilee, he shows himself extraordinarily gracious to his
people, freely pardoning many offenses, relesing prisoners, revoking exiles;
with many other expressions of his love and bounty. The year following was
famous for three Kings coming into England: John King of France, Peter King of
Cyprus, and D^vid King of Scots. The King of Cyprus came to solicit King
Edward to join with other Princes in the Holy War, but receives only royal
entertainment and excuses. The King of Scots came for business and visitation,
but why the King of France came, is not so certain, whether it were about
taking order for his Hostages, or to satisfy King Edward for breach of some
Articles, or else for love to the Countess of Salisbury; or perhaps out of a
desire to let England see his Majesty, being at liberty, which had been
darkened before by the cloud of captivity; but whatsoever the cause of his
coming was, the cause of his staying (at least, of longer staying then he
meant) was a mortal sickness, whereof (having lien all the Winter at the
Savoy) in March or April following, he died; and his body convaied over into
France, was buried at Saint Donis with his Ancestors. The Prince of Wales was
now grown famous all the Christian world over, and the man to whom all wronged
Princes seemed to appeal, and to fly for succor: for which end there came at
this time to his Court, James King of Majorque, and happened to come at a time
when the Princess lay in; and thereupon he and Richard King of Navarre were
taken to be Godfathers to his son Richard. For the like assistance also,
there came at the same time to him, Peter King of Castile, driven out of his
kingdom by the French, in favor to Peter King of Aragon: and Prince Edward,
partly out of charity, to succor a distressed Prince, and partly out of
policy, to keep his Soldiers in exercise; undertakes the enterprise, and was
so prosperous in it, that with one battle, (having but thirty thousand against
a hundred thousand) he put King Peter in possession of his kingdom, though he
was ill rewarded for his labor: for the ungrateful King would not so much as
pay his Soldiers. An unfortunate journey for the Prince, for though he came
back with victory, yet he brought back with him such an indisposition of body,
that he was never thoroughly well after: not perhaps by poison, nor given him by
his brother the Duke of Lancaster, though both were suspected; but there were
causes of distempering him enough besides, the Country, the season, the action
it self; and it may be more marvelled that his Soldiers came home so well,
then that he came so ill; but howsoever, being now returned, there was
presently to his indisposition of body, added coffeehouse of mind: for not
having means to pay his Soldiers, which forced him to wink at that which he
could not choose but see, and seeing, grieve at, how they preyed upon the
Country, and thereupon how the Country murmured against him: and now to stop
this murmuring, his Chancellor, the Bishop of Rhodes, devised a new
Imposition, of leavying a Frank for every Chimney, and this to continue for
five years, to pay the Princes debts: but this Imposition made the murmuring
the more; for though some part of his Dominions, as the Poict^^ins,
Xaingtonois, and Lymo^sins in a sort consented to it, yet the Count of
Armigni^ck, the Count of Comminges, the Viscount of Carmayn, and many others so
much distasted it, that they complained thereof to the King of France, as to
their Supreme Lord; who upon examination finding their complaint to be just, he
thereupon, by advise of his Council, Summons Prince Edward to appear in
person, to answer the complaint: whereunto Prince Edw. made answer, that if he
must needs appear, he would bring threescore thousand men in Arms to appear
with him; and had certainly brought his Army that Summer against Paris, if he
had not fallen into Symptoms of a Dropsy, which ( Walsingham says) was
wrought by Enchantments. But upon this answer of the Prince, King Charles sends
defiance to King Edward; who thereupon prepares Arms both by Sea and Land to
oppose him. The French enter upon the Territori^s of the Prince, and defeat
diverse of his Troops; in revenge whereof, John Chandos the Princes Lieutenant,
assaults Terrieres in the Province of Toulouse, and takes it. The Count of
Perigourd a^saults Royanville, in Quer^y, and puts all the English to the
sword; in revenge whereof, James Audeley Sene^chall of Poicton, assaults the
City of Brosse, and takes it. In the mean time Robert Knols, by some called
Robin, and by others, Arnould, or Reynold Knoll, had drawn Perducas de Albert
to the party of the English; and thereupon wen^ and encamped before the Fort of
Darc^ell in Quercy, which John Chandos understanding, went also and joined with
him in the Siege; but finding they could do no good there, they removed, and
Besieged the City of Damme: and when they could do no good there neither, they
marched forward, took the Fort of Froyus, Rochevaudour, and Villefranche; and
that done, returned to the Prince at Angoulesme. At the same time, the Earls
of Cambridge, and Pembroke, having spent nine weeks at the Siege of Bordeille,
at last took it; but other Captains of the English did yet more, for they
scaled Belleperche in the Province of Bourbon, where the Mother of the Duke of
Bourbon, and of the Queen of France was, and take her prisoner.

About this time, Philippa Queen of England, King Edwards Wife died, and was
buried at Westminster; but this hindered not the proceeding of the English in
France; the Earl of Pembroke enters Anjou, where he takes many Towns: the
Duke of Lancaster does the like about Callice, and marching forward, plants his
Camp before Harfleur, with a purpose to burn the King of France his Navy, but
being watched by the Count Saint Poll, was forced to forbear that design; and
so passing other ways, and spoiling all the places where he passed, he
returned to Callice. Winter now was drawing on, and John Chandos, desiring to
recover the Abbey of Saint Silvin in Poictou, which not long before had been
betrayed to the French; was in the enterprise discovered, and being assaulted
by greater forces, was slain in the place, to the great grief of the Prince
of Wales, and of the English Lords: but dying without issue, his estate, which
amounted to four hundred thousand Franks, came to the Prince. At this time,
the Dukes of Anjou and Berry, with two great Armies enter upon the Territories
of the Prince of Wales; whereof the Prince advertised, assembles Forces to
oppose them: but when the news was brought him of the taking of Limouges, he
was so much troubled at it, by reason of the Bishop of that place was his
Gossip, and one in whom he specially had affiance; that he resolved to recover
it at any price, and not to spare a man that had any hand in the rendering it
up: and thereupon taking it by force, he commanded to sack and pillage it, and
would not be stayed by the cries of the people, casting themselves down at his
feet; till passing through the Town, he perceived three French Captains, who
themselves alone had withstood the assault of his victorious Army, and moved
with the consideration of their valor, he then abated his anger; and for their
sakes, granted mercy to all the Inhabitants. So much is virtue even in an
enemy, respected by generous minds. In the mean time, David King of Scots died
without issue; and Robert Stuart his Nephew succeeded him in the kingdom, and
was Crowned at Scone. At this time Robert Knolls with a great Army is sent into
France, where making many attempts, with valor enough, but with little
success; he was coming home, though with no gain, yet with no loss: till
Bertrand de Gueschlyn assaulting him, slew the most part of his men; and so
this great Army on a sudden came to nothing. It seems Knolls his action was
the less succesfully, by reason some young Lords that wen^ with him, sco^ning
to ^e (...) his command, as being but a new man, and risen from a low estate;
were refractory to hi^ directions: And indeed what can a General do, if he
have not as well reputation of person, as of place?

And now the Prince of Wales, his eldest son Edward dying (...) Bu^de^^^, the
(...) with his wife, and his other son Richard, come over into England, at
whi^^ time the vallant knight Walter de M^^ny died at Lond^n, and was buried in
the Monastery of the Chartreux which he had builded; leaving one only
daughter; married to John Earl of Pembroke. This Earl of Pembroke was soon
after sent Go^ernour into Aquita^ne, but set upon by the way by Spaniards in
favor of the Fr^^ch; was by them taken prisoner, and carried with other into
Spain^^ who being chained together, as the manner is; one Evans a Welsh
Fugitive^ who gave ^^^selfe out for the right Heir of Wales; cam^ unto him
foolishly playing upon him with scornful language, as though to insult over
another man's misery, could s^^le for a co^diall to mitigate his own. And now
upon the taking of this Earl, the Princes Dominions in France are either taken
away, or ^all away faster then they ^ere gotten; Gueschly^ enters Poictou, and
takes Montm^rillon, Chauvigny, Luss^^, and Mo^t^onti^r: straight after follows
the Country of Aulnys, of Xaintoigne, and the rest of Poic^ou; then Saint
Maxen^, Neele, Auln^y; then Benaon, Marant, Surg^rs, (...); and at last they
came to Thouars, where the most part of the Lords of Poic^o^, that held with
the Prince, were assembled; at which time King Edward with the Pr^^ce, the Duke
of Lancaster, and all the great Lords of England, set forward to their succor,
but being driven back^ by tempest, never came to give them assistance, so as
Thouars yielded upon composition. Yet did this preparation of the King stand
him in nine thousand Marks; that it may be truly said, it cost him more now to
lose Towns, then it had cost him before to win them so great odds there is
between the Spring and Fall of Fortune. After this, the Duke of Lancaster is
sent over with another great Army, who passed up into many parts of the
Country, but King Charles resolved to hazard no battle; saying, They were but
clouds, and would soon pass away; yet so watched him, that what with light
skirmishes, and what with skarcity of victuals, his forces were so diminished,
that of thirty thousand which went out of Callice, there scarce retunred six
thousand home: which made King Edward say of this King Charles, that he did him
more mischief sitting still, then his Predecessors had done with all their
stirring. And now by this time all Poictou is lost, and all Aquitaine also, but
only Bordeaux and Bayon: when the Archbishop of Roan and others, are sent
from Pope Gregory the eleventh, to mediate a Peace between the two Kings; but
each of them standing upon high terms of conditions, nothing could be effected
but Truce upon Truce, for two or three years together. In which time Edward
Prince of Wales died, and with him we may say, the Fortune of England; being a
Prince so full of virtues, that he left no place for any vice; and if he had
lived in the Heroicke times, might well have been numb^ed amongst the nine
Worthies. His body was buried at Canterbury, where his Monument stands. King
Edward in his seven and fortieth year calls a Parliament at W^stminster,
which lasted but eight days; and to which were Summoned by Writ, of Clergy men
only four Bishops, and five Abbots.

Of King Edwards Acts after the death of the Prince.
IN the time of the Princes sickness, King Edw^rd calls a Parliament at
Westminster; in which, when demands were made for supply of the King, demands
were presently made for redress of grievances for the subjects. It was
required that the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Latymer then Lord Chamberlain,
Dame Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, and one Sir Richard Sturry might be
removed from Court. And this was so vehemently urged by their Speaker, Sir
Peter la Moore, that the King, rather then not to be supplied, gave way unto
it; and thereupon all these persons are presently put from Court: but the
Prince soon after dying, they are all recalled to Court again, and restored
to their former places.

About this time ex^mplary justice was done upon Sir John Minsterworth knight,
who was drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tiburne, for Treason, by him
committed, in defrauding Soldiers of their wages.

Thi^ was now the f^ftieth year of King Edw^^ds Reign, and he for another
Iubilee, gra^^s another general pardon to his subjects^ only William Wic^ham
Bishop of Winchester is excepted, being lately, by procurement of the Duke of
Lancaster, fallen into the Kings displeasure^ and forbidd^^ to come to the
Parliament. This Parliament was called the good Parliament^ ^^ough it wrought
ill effects; for Sir. Peter de la Mare, at the suite of Alice Pierce, is
committed to perpetual imprisonment at Not^ingham, though within two years
after, by importunate suite of friends; he regained his liberty. This Alice
Pierce presuming upon the Kings favor, grew so insolent, that she entermedled
with Courts of Justice, and other Offices, where ^he herself would fit, to
countenance her Causes. And now the Duke of Lancast^^ is come to have the
Regencie, and to manage all the affairs of the kingdom; but King Edward to
prevent the mischiefs, when by disordering the succession might grow in the
kingdom, providently settled the same in Parliament upon Richard of Bordeaux;
^reating him first Earl of Chester and Cornwall, and then Prince of Wales, and
caused all the Lords of the Realm to tal^e an Oath, to accept him for their
King, as his lawful Heir, when himself should be dead. In this mean time a
Treaty was had about a marriage between this Prince Richard, and M^ry a
daughter of Charles King of France: and an offer was made to King Edward, to
leave him fourteen hundred Towns, and three thousand fortresses in
Aq^itaine, upon condition he would render Callice and all that he held in
Picardy; but before any thing could be concluded, King Edward died.

Of his Taxations.
IN the eighth year of his Reign, in a Parliament holden at London, there was
granted him a fifteenth of the Temporalty, a twentieth of the Cities and
Boroughs, and a tenth of the Clergy. In his tenth year, in a Parliament at
Northampton, is granted a tenth penny of Cities and Boroughs, a fifteenth of
others, and a tenth of the Clergy. Also all such treasure as was committed to
Churches through England for the Holy War, is taken out for the Kings use,
toward his wars with France. The next year after, all the goods of three
orders of Monks, Lom^ards, Cluniakes, and Cistercians; are likewise seized into
the Kings hands: and the like Subsidy as before granted at Nottingham. In his
twelfth year (and as some write, in absence of the King) in a Parliament at
Northampton, is granted by the Laity, one half of their Wool, but of the
Clergy the whole. The next year after a fifteenth was likewise paid in Wool
by the Commonalty. In his foureteenth year, in a Parliament at London, is
granted him for Custom^ of every sack of Wool forty shillings, for every
three hundred Wool Fells forty shil^ for every Last of Leather forty
shillings; and of other Merchandises according to the rate: the same to endure
from that Easter to the Whitsontide twelve month after. Besides, there was
granted of Citizens and Burgesses, a ninth part of goods; of foreign Merchants
and others, a fifteenth; of Husbandmen, the ninth Sheafe, the ninth Fleece, the
ninth Lamb for two years; also another tenth of the Clergy: and for his present
supply, he had Loanes of diverse persons; and the City of London lent tw^nty
thousand Marks. For the grant of which mighty Subsidy, the King (besides his
Pardon to diverse kinds of offenders) remits all Amerciaments for
transgressions in his Forests, Reliefs and Scurage, to the first time of his
going into Flanders, besides all aides for the marriage of his sons and
daughters during his Reign; pardoning and remitting all ancient debts and
^rr^rages, both of his Fermors and others, till the tenth year of his Reign;
and likewise confirms the great Charter of Magna Chartae: In his eighteenth
year, in a Parliament at London, a tenth was granted by the Clergy, and a
fifteenth by the Laity^ Besides a Commission is sent into every Shire to
inquire of men's abilities, and all of five pounds to ten of Lay Fee, were
appointed to find an Archer on horseback; of twenty five, a Demilaunce; and
so ratably above. There had formerly been made a certain coin of Gold called
the Floren, of base alloy, for the Kings benefit, toward his wars in France,
but this was now called in^ and Nobles of finer metal coined, to the great
contentment of the people. In his nine and twentieth year, he has by
Parliament granted unto him fifty shillings upon every sack of Wool, for six
years next ensuing; by which Imposition, it was thought, the King might dispend
a thous^^d Marks Sterling a day, the vent of Wool was so great in that time.
But that which exceeded all his Taxations, was the Ransom he had in his four
and thirtieth year, of the King of France, three millions of crowns of Gold.
In his twelveth year, he had taken from the Priors Aliens, their houses,
lands, and tenements, for the maintenance of his French wars, which he kept
twenty years in his (...) and then restored them again. In his six and
thirtieth year was greater twenty six shillings eight pence, for
transportation of every sack of Wool for three yeare^. In the five and
fortieth year of his Reign, in a Parliament at Westminster, the ^lergy
granted him fifty thousand pounds to be paid the same year, and the Lai^y as
much; which was lev^ed by setting a certain rate of five pounds fifteen
shillings upon every Parish, which were found in the 37^ Shires to be eight
thousand and six hundred; and so came in the whole to fifty thousand one
hundred eighty one pounds and eight pence: but the 181. li. was abated to the
Shires of Suffolk^ and Devonshire, in regard of their poverty. In his eight and
fortieth year, in a Parliament, is granted him a tenth of the Clergy, and a
fifteenth of the Laity. In his fifti^h year, a Subsidy of a new nature was
demanded by the young Prince Richard, whom (being bu^ eleven years of age) the
Duke of Lancaster had brought into the Parliament of purpose to make the
demand; to have two tenths to be paid in one year, or twelve pence in the
pound of all Merchandises sold, for one year; and one pound of silver for
every knights Fee, and of every Fire-house, one penny: but instead of this
Subsidy, after much altercation, there was granted another of as new a nature
as this; that every person, man and woman, within the kingdom, above the age
of fourteen years, should pay four pence, (those who lived of Alms only
excepted) the Clergy to pay twelve pence of every Parson Beneficed, and of all
other religious persons four pence; a mighty aid, and such as was never
granted to any King of England before.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
HE instituted the Order of the Garter, upon what cause is not certain; the
common opinion is, that a Garter of his own queen, or (as some say) of the
Lady Ioane Countess of Salisbury, slipping off in a Dance, King Edward stooped
and took it up; whereat some of his Lords that were present, smiling, as at an
amorous action; he seriously said, it should not be long ere Sovereign honor
should be done to that Garter; whereupon he afterward added the French Morto,
Honi soit qui maly pense; therein checking his Lords sinister suspicion. Some
conjecture that he instituted the Order of the Garter, for that in a battle
wherein he was victorious, he had given the word Garter, for the word or sign:
and some again are of opinion, that the institution of this Order is more
ancient, and begun by King Richard the first, but that this King Edward
adorned it, and brought it into splendor. The number of the knights of this
Order is twenty six, whereof the King himself is always one, and president;
and their Feast yearly celebrated at Windsor on Saint Georges day, the Tutelar
Saint of that Order. The laws of the Order are many, whereof there is a book
of purpose. In the five and thirtieth year of his Reign, he was earnestly
Petitioned by a Parliament then holen, that the great Charter of Liberties, and
the Charter of Forests might be duly observed; and that the great Officers of
the kingdom should (as in former times) be elected by Parliament: to which
Petition, though the King at first stood stiff upon his own Election and
Prerogative; yet at last (in regard to have his present turn served, (as
himself after confessed) he yielded, that such Officers should receive an Oath
in Parliament, to do justice to all men in their Offices: and thereupon a
Statute was made and confirmed with the Kings Seal, both for that and many
other Grants of his to his Subjects^ which notwithstanding were for the most
part shortly after revoked.

This King also causes all Pleas, (...) were before in Fren^h, to be made in
English, that the Subject might understand the course of the Law. Also in his
time an Act was passed for Purveyours, that nothing should be taken up but for
ready money, upon strict punishment. In the next Parli^ment holden the seven
and thirtieth year of his Reign, certain S^mp^uary Laws were ordained, both
for apparel and diet; appointing every degree of men, the stuff and habits
they should wear, prohibiting the wea^ing of gold and silver, silks and rich
furs to all, bu^ eminent persons. The lab^^rer and husbandman (...) ^ppointed
but one (...) day^ and what meats he should (...). Also in his time, at the
instance of the Lo^^oners^ an Act was made that no common Whore should wea^e
any Hood, except striped with diverse colors; nor Furs, but Garments reversed
the wrong side outward. This King also was the first that created Dukes^ of
whom Henry of B^llingbr^oke, (...) of Lancaster, created Duke of Lancaster, in
the seven and twentieth year of his Raigne^ was the first. But afterward he
erected Cornwall also into a Duchy, and conferred it upon the Prince: after
which time, the Kings eldest son used always to be Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester. This King altered moneys, and abated them in
weight, and yet made them to pass according to the former value. Before his
time, there were no other pieces but Nobles and half Nobles, with the small
pieces of Silver, called Sterlings; but ^^w Groats of four pence, and half
Groats of two pence, equivalent to the Sterling money, are coined; which
inhaunsed the prises of things, that rise or f^ll, according to the plenty or
scarcity of coin; which made Servants and Laborers to r^ise their wages
accordingly. Whereupon a Statute was made in the Parliament now held at
Westminster, to reduce the same to the former rate. Also an Act was made in
this Kings time, that all Wears, Mils, and other stoppages of Rivers,
hindering the passage of Boats, Lighters, and other Vessels, should be removed;
which though it were most commodious to the kingdom, yet it took little
effect, by reason of bribing and corrupting Lords and great men, who regarded
more their own private, then the public benefit. In a Parliament holden the
tenth year of his Reign, it was enacted that no Wool growing within the
Realm should be transported, but that it should be made in Cloth in England.
Peter Pence are forbidden by the King, to be paid any more to Rome. The c^stome
of washing poor men's feet on Maundy-Thursday, thought to have been first
brought in by this King.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
KING Edward upon some displeasure had imprisoned diverse Clergy men; whereupon
John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury writes him a Letter, charging him with
violation of the Rights of the Church, and with the breach of Magna Charta; and
after much good counsel given him, threatens, that if he amend not these
disorders, he must and will exercise his Ecclesiastical authority, and
proceed to Excommunication of his Officers, though not of himself, Queen, or
children. The King answers, and sends his Letter to the Bishop of London;
charging the Archbishop to be the c^^se of all this disturbance, having been
the man that first set him upon the war with France; assuring him he should
want no money, and now had been the hinderance, that moneys given him by
Parliament, were not duly levied: and after many remonstrances to such purpose,
concludes, that if he desisted not from his re^^llions obstinacy, he would use
his Temporal authority, and prooceed (...) as against a Rebel. But this
difference between them was not long after, upon the Archbishops submission,
reconciled. And indeed the great account which this King made of Clergy men,
may appear by his employing almost none but Clergy men in all his Offices of
account^ Simon ^^^gham Archbishop of Canterbury, was Chancellor of England;
William Wickam Archdeacon of Lincoln, keeper of the Privy Seal; David Willer
Parson of Somer^^^^, Master of the Rolls; ten Beneficed Priests, Civilians,
Masters of the Chancery; William Mulse Deane of Saint Martins le Grand, chief
Chamberlain of the (...), Receiver and keeper of the Kings Treasure and
Jewels^ Will^am A^^^y Archdeacon of Northampton, Chancellor of the Exchequer^
William Di^ht^^ (...) of Saint Mar^ins, Clerk of the Privy Seale^ Richard
Chesterfield P^eb^nd (...) Stephens^ Treasurer of the Kings house; Henry Snatc^
Parson of (...) of the Kings Wardrobe; John N^w^ham Parson of Fen^y-sta^^on,
one of the (...) of the Exch^quer; John ^ouseby Parson of (...), Surveyor and
(...) of the Kings works; Thomas Brittingham Parson of Asby, Treasurer (...)
King, for the parts of Guisnes, and the Marches of Callice, John Troys a
Priest, (...) of Ireland.

(...) the seventeenth year of his Reign, in a Parliament holden at
West^inster, (...) is made of the great inconvenience that came by the Popes
Collation of Benefices in England, conferring them upon Strangers who
understood not the (...); and therefore not fit to be Pastors over a Flock
they could not feed: and hereupon Sir John Shordich is sent to Pope Clement the
sixth, to require him to fo^^eare such Collations, and to signify his consent
therein: but this Message was (...) welcome to the Pope, that the Messenger
came back, unheard, at least unanswered^ and the King taking his silence for
consent^ or perhaps not much caring whether he consented or no; proceeded to a
Prohibition of all such Collations within his Realm, on pain of Imprisonment,
or death, to whomsoever should in time to come, present or admit any such
person, who by the Pope were so preferred to the prejudice of the Kings
Prerogative. These were disturbances in matter of Discipline; but toward the
end of his Reign, there fell a disturbance in matter of Doctrine, for a
certain Divine, named John Wickliffe, inveighed in his (...) and other Acts in
the Schools, against the abuses of Churchmen, Monks, and other religious
Orders; and had by his Doctrine won many Disciples unto him, (who after were
called Lollards) professing poverty, going barefoot, and poorly clad in
Ru^^et; amongst other his Doctrines, he taught that neither King ^^r other
secular Lord, could give any thing ^n perpetuity unto Churchmen; and th^^
Temporal Lords, if they needed, might lawfully take the Goods of Religious
Persons to relieve them in their necessities, by the example of William Rufus,
and others. This man, the Duke of Lancaster, and Sir Henry Percy Marshall, much
favor and cherish, extolling him for his learning and integrity of life; which
made him so far to presume, that daily in one Church or other, he published
his Opinions; whereupon at length he is cited to answer before the Archbishop,
the Bishop of London and others in ^auls. At the day appointed, the Duke of
Lancaster and the Lord Marshall go to conduct him; when they were come to our
Ladies Chapel, the Duke and Barons with the Bishops sitting down, John
Wickliffe was by the Lord Marshall willed to sit down, in regard (he said) the
man had much to answer, and needed a convenient seat. The Bishop of London told
him; It was against all Law and Reason, that he who was there ^ited before his
(...) should sit. Hereupon contumelious words arose between the Lord M^^^hall
and the Bi^^op; the Duke takes the Marshals part, and sharply reprehended the
Bishop; the Bishop returns the like to the Duke; who in a gre^^ rage (...) he
would pull down the pride of him, and of all the Bishops of E^gland^ and
whispering in his ear, told him he had rather pull him out of the Church by
(...) of the head, then to suffer such indignities; which words, the Londo^ers
over-hearing, swore with a loud voice, they would rather lose their lives the^^
suffer ^^eir Bishop to be thus injuriously used. Their fu^y was the more
against the Duke, for that the day before in the Parliament (whereof he was
President) it was (...) in the Kings name, that from thenceforth ^h^re should
be no more a Major of London, but a Captain appointed for the Government of
the City, and that the Lord Marshall of England should arrest Offenders within
the Liberties, as in other places. The morrow after the Citizens assembling to
consult of this business, it happened the Lord Fits-water, and Guid^ Bryan,
came into the City; which the People seeing, furiously ran upon them, and
were like to beat them down for coming at that time. The Lord Fits-water
protested, he came to no other end, but to offer his service to the City, being
by inheritance their Standard bearer, and was to take injuries offered to them,
as to himself; and therefore willed them to look to their defense. Whereupon
they pres^ntly take Arms, assail the Marshals Inn, bre^ke open the Ga^es,
brought fo^th a Prisoner in his Gives, and set him at liberty, but found (...)
the Lord (...) with the Duke, was that day to dine with one John de (...). T^^n
this furious multitude ran to assail the Sav^y; which a knight of the Duk^^
^^^ing, ha^tes to the plac^ where his Lord dined, and acquain^^ him with this
(...) in the C^^y. The Duke upon hearing it, leapes from the Table so hastily,
that he hurt bot^ his shinnes on the fowrme; and with Sir Henry ^ercy alone
takes boat, and goes to, Kennington near Lambe^h, where the Princess with
the young Prince lay: to whom he complains of this Riot, and the violence
offered him. In the me^ne time the multitude coming to the Savoy, a Priest
inquisitive to know the business, was answered, they went to take the Duke,
and the Lord Marshall, and compel them to deliver Sir Peter de la Mar^,
unjustly kept in Prison. The Priest replied, that Sir Peter was a Traitor to
the King, and worthy to be h^nged. At which words they all cried out, This is
Percy, This is the Traitor of England, his speech bewrayes him, though his
App^rell be disguised, and presently they r^n upon him, and wounded him to
death. The Bishop of London hearing of this outrage, leaves his dinner, hastes
to the Sav^y, admonishes them of the holy time being Lent; assuring them all
should be fairly ended for the good of the City with whose persuasions they
were somewhat pacified; but yet they took the Dukes Arms, and hung them up
reversed, in sign of Treason, in all the principal stree^s of the City. Upon
the Princesses advice, the chief Citizens send to the sick^ King, to excuse
this tumult; saying, it was not in their power to suppress it, the Commonalty
being in commotion, upon an information that their Liberties should be taken
from them by Parliament. The King told them, it never was in his thought to
infringe their liberties, but he rather desired to enlarge them. But this
affr^nt of the Citizens would not down with the Duke, till he had pulled down
some of the Principal of them; for he caused the Major and Aldermen to ^e
displaced, and other put in their rooms: a revenge he had better been
without, for he never had the love of the City after: and to want their love is
a kind of banishment. Wickliffe himself, censured by the Bishops to abjure his
Opinions, chose rather to leave his Country then his Doctrine, and going over
into Bohemia, was there much honored while he lived, and has been more since
he dyed; at least, a great part of his Doctrine continues in veneration amongst
that people to this day.

Works of piety done by him, or by others in his time.
HIs works of Piety were great and many, as the Founding of East Minster, an
Abbey (of the Cistea^^ Order) near the Tower. An Abbey for Nuns at D^rtford
in Kent. The Kings Hall in Cambridge for poor Scholars. An Hospital for the
poor at Callice. He conferred upon the University of Oxford, where he had
himself been trained up, under the learned Walter Burley, the chief rule of
the City, subordinating the Major and Citizens to the Chancellor of the
University. He Built Saint Stephens Chapel at Westminster, with the endowment
of 300. pound per annum. He augmented the Chapel at Windsore, and made
provisions there for Churchmen, and four and twenty poor knights. These were
his public works; But besides these, his private Buildings were, the Castle
of Windsore, which he re-edified and enlarged, the Castle at Quinborough,
Fortifications at (...) and other places. His Queen Philippa founded Queens
College in Oxford: (...) Countess of Pembroke, the College called Pembroke
Hall in Cambridge. In this Kings t^me Sir John Poultney Major of London, built
the College in London cal^^d (...) L^wrence Poult^^y, and little Alhollo^es, a
Parish Church in Thames street, ^^d also the Carmelite Friars Church in
C^ventry. Henry Earl of Lancaster and (...), ^ounded the new Hospital by the
Castle of Leycester, wherein a hundred (...) impotent people were provided for
with all things necessary. William Elsing Merc^^ of London, made a new
Hospital of an old house of Nuns by Crippleg^^^, and placing Chanons Regular
there, he became the first Prior thereof. Walter (...) Bishop of Exeter,
Founded Exeter College, and Heart Hall in Oxford. William B^^eman Bishop of
Norwich, builded Trinity Hall in Cambridge. Simon (...) Archbishop of
Canterbury, Founded Canterbury College in Oxford. William (...) Treasurer of
England, Founded the Monastery of Edendon; the religious brethren whereof were
called B^nhommes. Sir Walter de Manny, borne in Cambray, purchased a piece of
ground called Spittle Croft, containing thir^eene Acres, without the bars of
West Smithfield, and caused the same to be enclosed, where he built a Chapel,
and after Founded the same to be a house of Charter House Monks. Humphrey
Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, re-edified the Augustine Friars Church in
London, and was buried in the Quire there^ In the two and thirtieth year of
this Kings Reign, John Stody Major of London, gave unto the Vintners of London
all the Quadrant where the Vintners Hall now stands, with the Tenements round
about, from the lane to this day called Studis lane^ where are Founded
thir^eene houses for thirteen poor people, which are there kept of charity.
Also in this Kings time Sir John Cobham Founded the College of Cobham in Kent.
John L^vekin four times Major of London, builded at Kingston upon Thames,
where he was borne, a Chapel called Magdalens, to the which he joined an
Hospital, wherein was a Master, two Priests, and certain poor men: and for
that the Parish Church of Saint Michael by Crooked-lane, where he dwelled, was
a very homely thing, and the ground thereabout a filthy plot, by reason of the
Burchers in Eastcheape, who made the same their lay-stall; he on the same
ground builded the fair new Parish Church of Saint Michael now standing, and
was buried there in the middle of the Quire, under a fair Tomb of stone. He
also Founded a College to the same Church, near thereunto adjoining. John
Barnes Major of London, gave a Chest with three locks, and a thousand Marks to
be lent to young men, upon sec^rity, so that it passed not one hundred Marks;
and for the occupying thereof, if he were learned, to say at his pleasure, De
Profundis, for the soul of John Barnes; if he were not learned, to say Pater
Noster: but howsoever the money is lent, the Chest at this day stands in the
Chamber of London, without money or p^^dges. Thomas of Woodstocke, the youngest
son of King Edward, Founded a College at Playsi^ in Essex, where in his life
he had provided a sumptuous Tomb, where he was first laid, but translated
afterward to Westminster.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN the the two and twentieth year of his Reign, a contagious Pestilence
arose in the East and South parts of the world, and spread it self over all
Christendom; and coming at last into England, it so wasted the people, that
scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive. There died in London (some
say in N^rwich) between the first of January, and the first of July, 57374.
persons. In Yarmouth, in o^e year, 7052. men and women: before which time, the
Parsonage there was worth 700. Marks a year, and afterward was ^carce worth
forty pounds a year. This Plague began in London about Alhollan^ide, in the
year 1348. and continued till the year 1357. ^here it was observed, that
those who were borne after the beginning of this mortality, had but twenty
eight teeth, where before ^hey had two and thirty. In the twelveth year of his
Reign, a sudden ^^undation of water, at New Castle upon Tyne, bare down a
pi^ce of the Town w^ll, and six pearches in length, near to a place called
Walkenew; where a hundred and twenty men and women were drowned. In the five
and thi^^ieth year of his Reign, another Pestilence h^pp^ned in England,
which was called the second Pestilence, in which died Henry Duke of La^caster,
also Regin^ld Lord C^^ha^^, and Walter Fits-warren, two famous men; and five
Bishops, of W^rcester, of London, of Ely, of Lincoln, and of Chich^ster. In
this Kings time, a Frost lasted from the midst of September, to the month of
April. In the fourth year of his Reign, a solemn Justing or Turnament was
holden at London in Ch^^pside, be^wixt the great Cross and the great Conduit,
(...) S^per-la^^^ which lasted three days; where the Queen Philippa, with many
Ladies, fell from a Stage, set up for them to behold the Justing; and though
they were not hurt at all, yet the King threa^^ed to p^nish the Carpenters for
their negligence, till the Que^ne in^^^ated pardon for them upon her knees: as
indeed she was always ready to do all good offices of mercy to all people.
In the eleventh year of his Reign was so great plenty, that a quarter of
Wheat was sold at London for two shillings, a fat Ox for a Noble, a fat
Sheep for six pence, and six Pigeons for a penny, a fa^ Goose for two pence,
and a Pigge for a penny, and other things after that rate.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married Philippa, the daughter of William Earl of Haynault at York; a
match made up in haste by Queen Isabell his mother, for her own ends,
although a better could never have been made upon deliberation for King
Edwards ends: for though her Parentage were not great, and her portion less^;
yet she made amends for both, in virtue; for never King had a better Wife. By
her King Edward had seven sons and five daughters: his eldest son Edward
Prince of Wales, and commonly called the Black Prince, (but why so called
uncertain for to say, of his dreadful acts, as Spe^de says, has little
probability) was borne at Woodstocke, in the third year of his Fathers Reign;
he married Ioane, the daughter of Edmund Earl of Kent, brother by the Fathers
side to King Edward the second. She had been twice married before; first to
the valiant Earl of Salisbury, from whom she was divorced: next to the Lord
Thomas Holland; after whose decease, this Prince passionatly loving her,
married her: by her he had issue two sons, Edward the eldest, borne at
Angoulesme, who died at seven yea^es of age; and Richard borne at Bordeaux, who
after his Father, was Prince of Wales, and after his Grandfather King of
England. This Prince had also natural issue, Sir John Sounder, and Roger
Clarendon Knights; the latter being attainted in the Raign^ of King Henry the
fourth, is thought to have ^eene Ancestour to the house of Smiths in Essex. He
died at Canterbury, in the six and fortieth year of his age; and of his
Fathe^^ Reign, the nine and fortieth, and was buried at Christ's Church there.
His second son William was borne at Hatfield, in Hertfordshire, who deceased
in his childhood, and was buried at York. His third son Lyonell was borne at
Antwerpe, in the twelveth year of his Fathers Reign; he married first
Elizabeth, the daughter and Heir of William Burgh, Earl of Ulster in Ireland;
in who^e Right he was first created Earl of Ulster: and because he had with
her the honor of Clare, in the County of To^mond; he was in a Parliament,
created Duke of Clarence, as it were of the Country about the Town and Honor
of Clare; from which Duchy, the name of Clarentieux (being the title of the
King of Arms, for the South parts of England) is derived. This Duke had issue
by her one only daughter, named Philippa afterward wife of Edmund Mortimer,
Earl of March; mother of Earl Roger, Father of Anne Countess of Cambridge,
the mother of Richard Duke of York, Father of King Edward the fourth. The
second marriage of this Duke was at Millaine in Lombardy, with the Lady
Vi^lanta, daughter of G^leac^^ the second Duke thereof; but through
intemperance he lived not long after. King Edwards fourth son named John, was
borne at Ga^^t, in the foureteenth year of his Fathers Reign; he had three
wives, the first was ^l^nch, daughter and Coheire, and in the end the sole
Heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, son of Edmund, surnamed Crouch back; by
whom he had issue, Henry of Bullingbrooke Earl of Derby, after Duke of
Hereford, and lastly King of England, named Henry the fourth, who first placed
the Crown in the house of Lancaster. By her also John of Gaunt had two
daughters, Philip wife of John the first, King of Portugal; and Elizabeth
married first to John Holland, Earl of Huntington, and after him, to Sir John
Cornwall, Baron of Fanhope. John of Gaunts second wife was Constance, the
eldest daughter of Peter King of Castile and Leon, in whose Right, for the time
he entitled himself King of both those Realms: by her he had issue one only
daughter named Katherine, married to Henry the third, son of King John, in
possession before, and in her Right after King of both the said Realms. John
of Gaunts third wife was Katherine, the Widow of Sir Hugh Swinford, a knight of
Lincolnshire, eldest daughter and Coheire of Pain Roet, a Gascoyne, called
G^^en King of Arms for that Country; his younger daughter being married to
Sir Geoffrey Chawcer, our Laureat Poet. By her he had issue born before
matrimony, and made legitimate afterward by Parliament, in the twentieth year
of King Richard the second; John Earl of Somerset, Thomas Duke of Exeter,
Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal, and Ioane (who was first married to
Robert Ferrers Baron of Wemme, and Ou^sley, in the Counties of Salop and
Warwick) and secondly, to Ralph Nevill, the first Earl of Westmerland. She
and all her brethren were surnamed Beaufort, of a Castle which the Duke had in
France, where they were all borne; and in regard thereof, bare the Portcullis
of a Castle for the Cognizance of their Family. This Duke in the thirteenth
year of his Nephew King Richard was created Duke of Aquitaine, but in his
sixteenth year he was called home, and this title re-called; and the third
year after, in the sixtieth of his age, he died at Ely house in Holbourne, and
lies honorably Entombed in the Quire of Saint Paul. King Edwards fifth son
Edmund, surnamed of Langley, was first in the year 1362. created Earl of
Cambridge, and afterward in the year 1386. made Duke of York; he married
Isabell, daughter and Coheire to Peter, King of Castile and Leon: his son
Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, took to wife Anne Mortimer, Heir of the
foresaid Lyonell, elder brother to Edmund of Langley. King Edwards sixth son
William, surnamed of Windsor, where he was borne, died young, and is buried at
Westminster. King Edwards youngest son Thomas, surnamed of Woodstocke, where
he was borne, was first Earl of Buckingham, and after made Duke of Gloucester
by his Nephew King Richard the second. He was a man of valor and wisdom, but
the King surmizing him to be a too severe observer of his doings; consulted
with Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, how to make him away: whom Mowbray
unawares surprising, convaied secretly to Callice, where he was strangled the
twentieth year of King Richards Reign. He had issue one son, Humphrey Earl
of Buckingham, who died at Chester of the Pestilence, in the year 1400. and
two daughters, Anne married first to Edmund Earl of Stafford, by whom she had
Humphrey Duke of Buckingham; secondly to William Bourchier Earl of Ewe, by
whom she had Henry Earl of Essex, and Ioane married to Gylbert Lord Talbot,
and h^d issue by him a daughter, who died young. Of King Edwards daughters, the
eldest named Isabell, was married at Windsor to Ingelram of Guysnes, Lord of
Co^cy, Earl of Soysons, and after Archduke of Austria; created also by King
Edward, Earl of Bedford: by whom she was mother of two daughters; Mary married
to Henry Duke of Bar, and Philip married to Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford,
Duke of Ireland, and Marquess of Dublyn. This Robert in the height of his
fortunes forsook his Lady Philip, and married one Lancerona a Joyners da^ghter
(as was said) which came with King Richard the seconds wife ou^ of Bohemia; and
being for abusing the Kings ear, driven out of the Land by the Lords, he died
at London in extreme poverty in the year 1392. Isabell his wives mother, was
buried in the Church of Friars Minorites near Aldgate in London. King Edwards
second daughter Ioane was married by Proxy to Alphonsus, King of Castile and
Leon^ but passing into Spain, died by the way; and King Alphonsus met her,
instead of consummating his Espousall, to solemnise her Funeral. His third
daughter Blanch died young. His fourth named Mary, was married to John Montford
Duke of Britain. His youngest named Margaret, borne in Callice, was the first
wife of John de Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, but died without issue.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was of stature indifferent tall, of sparkling eyes, of a comely and manly
countenance, in his later time something bald; and concerning his conditions,
no man was more gentle, where there was submission; where opposition, no man
more stern. He was a Prince no less of his passions, then of his people; for
he was never so loving, as to be fond; nor ever so angry, as to be inexorable:
but this must be understood of the time while he was a man, for in his old age,
when he came to be a child again, he was Prince of neither. He was no less
fortunate then valiant; and his fortunatenes was the greater by a kind of
Antiperistatis, as coming between two unfortunate Princes; Successor to one,
and Predecessor to another. He was of so warlike a disposition, that his very
sports were warlike; for no delights were so frequent with him as Justs and
Tournaments. To show his devotion, one example may be sufficient, for when
neither Cardinals nor Counselors could move him to make peace with France, a
tempest from Heaven did it; to which may be added, that he never wanne great
battle, of which he wanne many, but he presently gave the glory of it to God
by public Thanksgiving. He outlived the best wife, and the best son that
ever King had; and to say the truth, he outlived the best of himself, for his
later years were not answerable to his former.

Of his Death and Burial.
KING Edward besides his being old, and worn with the labors of war, had
other causes that hastened his end: his grief for the loss of so worthy a
son, dead but ten months before; his grief for the loss of all benefit
of his conquests in France, of all which he had little now left, but only
Callice: and oppressed thus in body and mind, he was drawing his last breath,
when his Concubine Alice Pierce packing away what she could catch, even to the
Rings of his fingers, left him; and by her example, other of his attendants,
sea^sing on what they could come by, shift away; and all his Counselors and
others forsook him, when he most needed them, leaving his Chamber quite empty;
which a poor Priest in the house seeing, he approaches to the Kings Bedside,
and finding him yet breathing, calls upon him to remember his Savior, and to
ask mercy for his offenses, which none about him before would do: but now
moved by the voice of this Priest, he shows all signs of contrition, and at
his last breath expresses the name of Jesus. Thus died this victorious King at
his Manor at Sheene, (now Richmond) the one and twentieth day of June, in the
year 1377. in the sixty fourth year of his age, having Reigned fifty years,
four months, and odd days. His body was conveyed from Sheene by his four
sons and other Lords, and solemnly interred within Westminster Church, where
he has his Monument, and whereit is said, the sword he used in battle, is yet
to be seen, being eight pound in weight, and seven foot in length.

Of Men of Note in his time.
Martial men were never more plentiful then in this Kings Reign: whet^^r it
were that the Stars have an influence to produce such men at one time more
then another: or whether it were that Regis ad exempl^^, the Kings example made
his subjects like himself: or lastly, that his continual exercise of Arms
put them as it were into a mould of fortitude. The first of this kind, is
worthily Edward the Black Prince, and so worthily the first, that Long erit ^
primo quisque secundus erit. Next him is Henry Earl of Lancaster, the Princes
right hand, in all his great at^^^evements: then William the valiant Earl of
Salisbury, then John Eure, Ancestor to (...) Lord Eures that now lives; then
follow the Lord John Chandos, Sir James Aude^^, Sir Walter de Manny, Sir Robert
Knolls, then Sir John Hawkewood born in Essex; who ^^ough not much honored at
home, having been a Taylour, yet in foreign parts, and ^^ecially in Italy so
famous, that his Statue was erected in public, for a Monument (...) testify
his valor to posterity. And here must not be forgotten, Robert Venile ^night,
a Norfolk man; who when the Scots and English were ready to give battle, ^
certain stout Champion of great stature, commonly called Tournboll, coming
(...) of the Scots Army, and challenging any English man to meet him in a
single combat; this Robert Venile accepts the challenge, and marching
toward the Champion, and meeting by the way a certain black Mastiffe Dog
which wai^ed on the Champion, he suddenly with his sword cut him off at the
loins, and afterward did more to the Champion himself, cutting his head from
off his shoulders. And as there was this great plenty of Martial men, so there
was no less plenty of learned men; John Baconthorpe borne in Norfolk, a
Carmelite Friar, who wrote diverse excellent Treatises in Divinity; Nicholas
Trivet born also in Norfolk: a black Friar, who wrote two Histories, and a book
of Annals: Richard Stradley, born in the Marches of Wales, a Monk and a Divine,
who wrote diverse excellent Treatises of the Scriptures: William Herbert a
Welshman, and a Friar Minor, who wrote many good Treatises in Divinity: Tho.
Walleis a Dominican Friar, and a writer of many excellent books: John Eversden
a Monk of Bury in Suffolk, an Historiographer: Walter Burley a Doctor of
Divinity, brought up in Martin College in Oxford, who wrote diverse excellent
Treatises in Natural and Moral Philosophy, which remain in estimation to
this day; and who for the great fame of his learning, had the honor to be one
of the Instructours of Edward the black Prince: Roger of Chester, a Monk of
that City, and an Historiographer: John Burgh a Monk, who wrote a History, and
also diverse Homilies: Richard Aungervill Bishop of Durham, and Lord Chancellor
of England, borne in Suffolk: Walter Heminford, an Historiographer: Richard
Chichester a Monk of Westminster, who wrote an excellent Chronicle from the
year 449. to the year 1348. Richard Roll, alias Hampole, who writ many
excellent Treatises in Divinity: Robert Holcot a black Friar, borne in
Northampton, a learned Schooleman, and wrote many books in Arguments of
Divinity: Thomas Bradwardin, borne near Chichester in Sussex, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and who wrote against the Pelagians, and for his depth of learning,
had the Title of Doctor Profundu^: Richard Fits Ralph, Archbishop of Armagh in
Ireland, a learned writer: William Grysant, named Anglicus, a notable
Physician, whose son came to be Pope, and was called Urbane the fifth: John
Killingworth an excellent Philosopher, Astronomer, and Physician: Ranulph
Higden a Monk of Chester, an Historiographer: Bartholomew Glanvile, descended
of those Glanviles that were sometimes Earls of Suffolk: Simon Islip
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Founder of Canterbury College in Oxford, who
wrote many Treatises: Matthew Westmonasteriensis, who wrote the book called
Flores Historiarum: William Fleet an Hermit, who wrote sundry Treatises,
exhorting England to repentance: Henry Knighton, who wrote a History Entitled
De gestis Anglorum: and lastly two other, worthy perhaps to have been placed
first; John Mandevill the great Travellour, a Doctor of Physic, and a knight,
who died at Liege, in the year 1372. and Sir Geoffrey Chawcer, the Homer of
our Nation; and who found as sweet a Muse in the Groves of Woodstocke, as the
Ancients did upon the banks of Helicon.

THE REIGN OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND.
RICHARD, called of Bordeaux, because born there, the only Son of Edward the
black Prince, was by his Grandfather in his lifetime declared to be his Heir
and lawful Successor; and accordingly after his death was crowned King of
England, at Westminster, the sixteenth day of July, in the yerre 1377. by Simon
Su^bury Archbishop of Canterbury: And for the more solemnity of his Coronation,
he then m^de nine Knights, and created four Earls: Thomas of Woodstock, King
Edward the Thirds youngest Son, was created Earl of Buckingham and
Northampton; Thomas Mowbray, younger brother of John L. Mowbray, Earl of
Nottingham; Gifford Angoulesme a Gascoigne, was made Earl of Huntington; and
Henry Percy son of Henry L. Percy, was created Earl of Northumberland. At
the time of the Coronation, the Duke of L^ncaster, by the name of John King of
Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, put in his claim as Earl of
Leicester, to have the place of Earl Marshall of England; as Duke of
Lancaster, to carry the sword called Curtana; as Earl of Lincoln, to be
Carver that day; all which to be executed by himself, or by his sufficient
Deputy; which, with the fees thereunto belonging, were confirmed unto him. As
likewise, diverse others made their claims: Robert de Veere, E^rle of Oxford,
to have the office of Chamberlain, and to power out water for the King to
w^sh: John Wiltshire Citizen of London, by reason of a Moyitie of the Manor of
Heydon, holden in Sergeantie, claimed to hold a Towell for the King to wipe
with when he went to meat: Thomas Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, to bear the
third Sword before the King; and also to exercise the office of Pantler: Sir
John Argentine, by reason of his Manor of Wimondtey in the County of Hartford,
to serve the King at his Cup: William L. Furnivall, for his Manor of Fernham,
to support the Kings right arm when he held the Royal Scepter: Anne late wife
of John de Hastings Earl of Pem^rooke, ^or hi^ Manor of Ashele in Norfolk,
to have the Office of Naperer; which she was admitted to do by her Deputy Sr.
Thomas Blunt: Richard Earl of Arundell, for his Manor of B. in Kent, was
admitted to be chief Butler: The L. Major of London, to attend in his own
person, as chief Cup-waiter: Sir John Dimmock, for his Manor of Scrivelbie;
and Sir Baldwin Frevile, for his Castle of Tamworth, in the County of Warwick,
contended for the Office of being the Kings Champion; but adjudged to Dimmock:
William de Latimer, and John the son and heir of John Mowbray of Axholm,
jointly petitioned to have the Office of Almoner; but adjudged to Latimer:
Richard Lion, as Tenant of the Manor of L. held by the service of making
wafers for the King at his Coronation, was thereunto admitted: The Barons of
the Cinque Ports were admitted to bear the Kings Canopy, upon four staves of
silver, over the Kings head; and also to sit at meat in the Hall, at the
highest Table on the Kings right hand: John Fitz-Iohn, by reason of his Manor
of S. in Norfolk, was admitted to be chief Larde^er: Richard Herring, for the
Manor of C. in the County of Surry, claimed to be Usher of the Kings Chamber;
but because that claim did no way concern the Coronation, he was left to pursue
his Right some other time. The Coronation it self was performed with great
solemnity: After a Sermon, the King took his Oath; and then the Archbishop
blessed the King; which done, he tore ^ff his garments, and strippped him into
his shirt; then he anointed his hand^, head, breast, shoulders, and the joints
of his arms, with the s^cred Oil; and after certain Prayers, he then cl^dd^
him, first with the Coat of S. ^dward, and after with his Mantle: after which,
the Archbishop delivered him the Sword, saying, Accipe Gladium; with which two
Earls gyrded him: Then he gave him Bracelets, saying^ Accipe Armillas: After
this, he put upon him an upper vesture called a Pall, saying^ Accipe Pallium:
In the mean time, while the Archbishop blessed the Crown, he to whose Office
it pertained, put spurs on his heels; after the Crown was blessed, the
Archbishop set it on his Head, saying, Coronet te Deu^: then he delivered him a
Ring, saying, Accipe An^^lum: Immediately herewith came the L. Fur^ivall, by
virtue of his Office, offering him a red Glove; which the Arch B. blessed, and
putting it on his hand, gave him the Scepter, saying, Accipe Scep^rum: and
after that, in his other hand, delivered him a Rod, on the top whereof stood a
Dove, saying, Accipe Virgam Virtuti^; and then blessed the King, saying,
Benedicat te De^^: which done, the King kissed the Bishops and Abbots, by whom
he was afterward led to his seat: and so ended the solemnity.

The tender years of the King, being but eleven years of age, required a
Protector: but being perhaps thought dangerous to commit that Authority to
only one, who might rather seek to get it for himself, then to keep it for
another, It was thought fit to commit it to many; and thereupon John Duke of
Lancaster, Edm^^d Earl of Cambridge, the Kings Unkles; with some other Lords
and Bishops, were joined in Commission to manage the State; and Guishard de
Angoulesme appointed to be his Schoolmasters. And now the Kings Minority made
foreign Princes conceive, that this would be a time of advantage for any that
had quarrel to England: which the French and Scots took presently hold of;
For, the French came now, and burnt the Town of Rye; and soon after, entering
the Isle of Wight, burnt diverse Towns there; and though they were repelled
from the Castle by the valiant Sir Hugh Tyrrell Captain thereof, yet they
constrained the men of the Isle to give them a thousand Marks, to spare the
residue of their houses and goods: and departing thence, they set on land where
they saw advantage, burning sundry Towns near to the shore; as Portsmouth,
Dertmo^th, and Plimmouth: and then sailing toward Dover, they burnt Hastings,
assaulted Winchelsey; but being valiantly defended by the Abbot of Battle,
were forced to retire: After this, they landed not far from the Abbey of Lewis,
at a place called Rottington; where the Prior of Lewis, with Sir Thomas Cheyny,
and Sir John F^llesly, encountering them, were overthrown, and taken Prisoners.
And no less then the French, were the Scots also now busy; for coming one
morning by stealth, they won the Castle of Barwick; but shortly after, upon
knowledge thereof had, they were driven out again by the Earls of
Northumberland and Nottingham; and all the Scot^ they found in it, except
Alexander Ramsey their Captain, put to the sword. About Michaelmas, a
Parliament was held at Westminster, wherein Alice Pierc^, the late Kings
Concubine, was banished the Realms, and all her goods confiscate; and two
Tenths of the Clergy, and two Fifteenths of the Temporalty were granted; but
so, as that two Citizens of London, William Walworth, and John Philpot, should
receive and keep it, to see it bestowed for defense of the Realm. In this
time, Sir Hugh Calverley, Deputy of Callis, burnt six and twenty French ships
in the Haven of Bulloigne: and at the same time a great Navy is set out, under
the guiding of the Earl of Bucki^gham, the Duke of Britain, the Lord L^timer,
Sir Robert Knolls and others, with a purpose to intercept the Spanish Fleet;
but through Tempest were twice driven back: when in the mean time, one Mercer a
Scottish Pyrate, came to Sc^rborough, took there diverse ships, and committed
many outrages: and no order being taken to repel him, a Citizen of L^^do^
n^med John Philpot, at his own charges set forth a Fleet, and in his own person
encountering them, took the said Mercer, and all his ships: and returning home,
in stead of being rewarded for his service, he was called in question for
presuming to raise a Navy, without advice of the Kings Council: but he gave
^uch reasons for that he had done, that not only he came off then wi^h credit,
but lives in reputation for it to this day. Indeed Reasons of State, though
they may secretly be censured, yet they must not openly be controlled, for this
were to bring Authority into contempt, and in stead of Errors to bring in
Confusion; but yet when wrongs be offered that are public, every particular
person seems to have an interest in taking revenge; and though it may be no
manners not to stay the States leisure, yet it can be no offense to do their
work for them. Many actions passed at this time with the French and Scots,
some prosperous, and some adverse: The Scots burn Roxborough; this was
adverse: but the Earl of Northumberland entering Scotland with ten thousand
men, spoyleth the Lands of the Earl of March, the chief Incendiary, this was
prosperous: but when the Northern men would needs make a Road into Scotland,
and were encountered by the Scots, and put to flight, this was adverse. Anon
after Midsomer, the Duke of Lancaster, with the Earls of Buckingham, Warwick,
Stafford, and others of the Nobility, with a strong Power to^ke the Sea, and
landing in Britain, besieged the Town of S^. Malo, but finding strong
opposition, is forced to raise his Siege, and return home: this was adverse.
And now again, the Scots by night entered secretly into the Castle of Berwick,
and slew Sir Robert Baynton, that was Constable there: this also was adverse:
But when the Earl of Northumberland, being advertised ther^of, came with a
Power, assau^ted the Castle, and after two daye^ defense recovered it again;
this was prosperous. William Montacute E^rle of Salisbury, the Kings Lieutenant
in Callis, forrageth the Country round about, and furnishes Callis with
Booties of French cattle: Sir Hugh Calverley and Sir Thomas Percy made
Admiralls^ put to Sea^ and take diverse ships laden with merchandise, and one
sh^p of war: Sir John H^^leston, Captain of Chierbourg in France, issuing
forth, assaults a Fortress of the French, which was the storehouse of their
Provision, and with much valor takes it: these were prosperous: But when Sir
John Clerk, lying in Ga^rison in a Castle in Britain, where la^ many Eng^^sh
ships in the Haven, ^ad ^he^e ships let upon by the French, where though he
showed incredible valo^r in the action, yet the ships were taken, and himself
slain: this was adverse. Also in the third year of this Kings Reign, Sir
John Arundell, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir William Elmham, Sir
Thomas Banister, and many other Knights, went to Sea, with a purpose to pass
over into Britain; but were so beaten back with Tempest, that diverse of their
ships were ^ast away; and Sir John Arundell, Sir Thomas Banister, Sir Nicolas
Trumping^on, Sir Thomas Dale, and above a thousand others were all drowned;
only Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir William Elmham, and certain
others escaped. It may not be imper^inent to note here the sumptuousness of
those times; for this Sir John Arundell was then said in his Furniture to have
two and fifty new suits of apparel of cloth of Gold and Tissue, all lost at
Sea. This year also, there being found inconvenience in having many Governors
of the King and Kingdom, it was by Parliament decreed, That the Lord Thomas
Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick^ should himself alone hold the place of Protector.
About this time Sir John Annesley Knight accused Thomas Katrington Esquire, for
betraying the Fortress of St. Savior to the French: which Katrington denying^
at the suit of Annesly a solemn combat is permitted to be between them; at
which combat the King and all the great Lords were present: the Esquire
Katrington was a man of a mighty statu^e, the Knight Annesley a little man^ yet
through the justness of his cause, after a long fight, the Knight prevailed,
and Katrington, the day after the combat dyed. In the beginning of the fourth
year of this King, Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, the Kings Uncle,
with diverse Earls and Lords, and an Army of seven or eight thousand, was sent
into France, to aid the Duke of Britain; but the King of France at that time
dying, the Duke of Britain grew to have peace with the new King; whereupon the
Earl of Buckingham came home again, without doing much, but making of
Knights, and forraging the Country. In this time the French and Spanish Galleys
did much mischief on the Coast of England: they burnt Rye, H^sti^gs, and
Portsmouth; and at last, ent^ing the River of Thames, they came up to
Gravesend, where they burnt most part of the Town, and taking many Prisoners
and Booties returned into France. At this time also, there fell out an Accident
of great disturbance to the Realm; for the Commons rose in diverse parts,
beginning at Dep^ford in Kent: and the cause of their Rising grew (as was
thought) through the rude behavior of a Collector of the Poll-money, who
coming into the house of one John Tyler, and demanding Pollmony of his wife
for a daughter of hers, and she saying that her daughter was not of that age to
pay, the rude fellow said, he would presently see whether that were so, or no,
and thereupon forceably turned up her clo^thes; whereat the mother making an
outcry, her husband being at work hard by, and hearing the noise, came in with
his lathing-staffe in his hand, with which he gave the Collector such a blow on
the head, that his brains flew out, and he presently dyed. Upon this, at the
complaint of Tyler amongst his neighbors, and withal, a factious Clergie-man,
one John ^^ll, taking occasion hereat to rip up the ground of this
Misgovernment, and telling the people, that this difference of men's Estates,
where some are Potentates, and some are Bondmen, was against Christian liberty,
taking for his Theme, When Adam delv'd and Eve span, who was then ^ Gentleman?
he so incensed them, that the Commons in diverse parts drew together; and
whether beginning in Kent, or otherwise in Essex, they drew at last into their
faction the Commons of S^ssex, Hartfordshire, Cambridgshire, Suffolk, Norfolk,
and other Shires; and arresting all such as passed, made them swear to be true
to K. Richard, and to the Commons, and never to receive any King that should be
called John; which they did for the envy they bore to John Duke of Lancaster.
Thus their number still increased, that by that time they were come as far as
Black Heath, they were esteemed to be a Hundred Thousand. The first thing they
did when they came to London, was to send for one Richard Lion, a grave
Citizen, who had been Tylers Master, and his head they struck off, and carried
it upon a pole, in Triumph before them: The next day they go to the Savoy, the
Duke of La^casters house, which they set on fire, burning all his rich
Furniture, breaking in pieces all his Pla^e and Jewels, and throwing them into
the Thames, saying, They were men of justice, and would not like Robbers enrich
themselves with any man's goods: and when one of their fellows was espied to
thrust a fair silver piece into his bosom, they took him, and cast both him
and the piece into the fire: Two and thirty of them were got into the Dukes
Wine-Cellar, where they stayed drinking so long, till the rafte^s of the house,
on fire, fell upon them, and so covered them, that not able to get out, they
were heard cry seven days after, and then perished. From the Savoy they went
to the Temple, where they burnt the Lawyers lodgings, with their books and
writings, and all they could lay hand on: Also the House of St. John's by
Smithfield they set on fire, so that it burned for the space of seven days
together. After this they came to the Tower, where the King was then lodged;
and though he had at that time six hundred armed men, and as many Archers
about him, yet he durst not but suffer them to enter; where they abused the
Kings mother, offering to kiss her, in such rude manner, that she fell into a
swound: and finding in the place Simon Thybold Archbishop of Canterbury and
Lord Chancellor; and Sr. Robert Hales also Lord Treasurer; they led them to
the Towerhill, and there in most cruel manner struck off their head^, as also
of diverse others: Neither spared they sacred places; for breaking into the
Church of the Augustine Friars, they drew forth thirteen Flemmings, and
beheaded them in the open streets; as also seventeen other, out of other
Churche^. Yet after all these outrages, the King proclaimed Pardon to all such
as would lay down Arms, and go quietly home; which the Essex-men did, but the
Kentish-men continued still, with their Captain Wat Tyl^r: to whom when the
King sent Sir John Newton to understand what his meaning was; Wat Tyler,
offended because he came on horseback, told him, it became him to light from
his horse in his presence; and therewith drew out his dagger to strike him: the
King perceiving his Knight to be in danger, bade him alight from his horse: but
when this would not pacify him, the Major of London, William Walworth, by the
Kings appointment rode to him and arrested him, and gave him such a blow on the
head, that he astonished him; and then other of the Kings servants drew their
swords, and thrust him through in diverse parts of his body, so as he died there
in the place. When the Commons saw this, they cried out, Our Captain is slain,
let us revenge it. Here the King, though very young, not above fifteen years
of age, yet had the courage to ride unto them, telling them, that now their
Leader was dead, he would be their Leader himself; and if they would follow
him into the fields, they should have whatsoever they desired. In the mean
time, the Lord Major Walworth had gone into the City, and raised a Thousand
armed men, and meeting Sir Robert Knolls by chance, got him to be their Leader;
who coming into the fields where the Rebels were, so daunted them, that
throwing down their weapons, they cried for mercy: that it was a wonderful
thing to see how suddenly Fear overtook Presumption; for scarce their words of
Insolency were out of their mouths, when they fell to words of most servile
submission: And as strange an alteration in those about the King, to see how
suddenly Boldness surprised Fear; for scarce they left trembling at the sight
of the Rebels, when suddenly upon sight of this Aid their fingers itched to be
setting upon them, but that the King would not suffer it, because some amongst
them were there by compulsion, and to set upon them thus mingled, might as well
be the death of the innocent, as of the guilty. But to pacify them the more,
the King caused his Charter of Manumission to be sent unto them; which yet
stayed them not from committing outrages at S^. Albans, and cancelling the
ancient Charters of the Abbots and Monks there. Besides, the Sedition was more
general, then that the appeasing it in one place could be final; for at the
same time there were gathered together in Suffolk to the number of Fifty
thousand, by the setting on of one John Wraw a lewd Priest: and these fell to
destroying the houses of Lawyers speciallly; and Sir John Cavendish L. Chief
Justice of England, they beheaded, and set his head upon the Pillory in St.
Edmundsbury. The like commotion of the Commons was at the same time also in
Cambridgeshire, in the Isle of Ely, and in Norfolk, under the guiding of one
John Littester a Dyer: and to countenance their proceeding the more, they had a
purpose to have brought William Vfford Earl of Suffolk into their fellowship;
but he, advertised of their intention, suddenly rose from supp^r, and got him
away: but many other Lords and Knights they compelled to be sworn to them, and
to ride with them; as the Lord Scales, the Lord Morley, Sir John Brewi^, Sir
Stephen Hales, and Sr. Robert Salle, who not enduring their insolences, had
his brains dashed out by a Country Clown that was his Bondsman: The rest
terrified by this example, were glad to carry themselves submissively to their
Chieftaine John Lit^ester, who named himself King of the Commons, and counted
it a preferment for any to serve him at his Table, in taking the assay of his
meats and drinks, with kneeling humbly before him, as he sat at meat. And
now these fellows, upon a c^nsultation, send two choycemen, namely, the L.
Morle^ and Sir John Brewi^, with three of their chief Commons, to the King,
for their Charter of Manumission and Enfranchising: who being on their way, at
Itchingham not far from New market, they met with Henry Spenser Bishop of
Norwich; and he examining them if there were any of the Rebels in their
company, and hearing that thr^e of the chief were there present, he presently
caused their heads to be struck off; and then pursuing on toward Northwalsham
in Norfolk, where the Commons stayed for Answer from the King; by that time he
came thither, where he had at first but eight Lances, and a small number of
Archers in his company, his number was so increased, that it came to be a
complete Army, with which he set upon the Rebels, discomfited them, and took
John Littester and their other Chieftains, whom he caused all to be executed;
and by this means the Country was quieted. After this, the Major of London
^ate in Judgment upon Offenders; where many were found culpable, and lost their
heads; amongst other, Jack Straw, John Kirkeby, Alane Tredder, and John
Sterl^ng, who gloried that he was the man had slain the Archbishop. Also Sir
Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, was appointed to sit in Judgment against the
Offenders; before whom above fifteen hundred were found guilty, and in sundry
places put to death: amongst others, John Ball Priest, their Incendiary; of
whom it is not impertinent to relate a letter he wrote to the Rebell-rabble of
Essex; by which we may see how fit an Orator he was for such an Auditory, and
what strength of persuasion there was in Nonsense: John Sheep St. Mary Priest
of York, and now of Colchester, greeteth well John Namelesse, and John the
Miller, and John Carter; and bids them that they beware of guile in Borough,
and stand together in Gods name: and bids Piers Plowman go to his work, and
chastise well Hob the robber, and take with you John Trewman and all his
fellows, and no more. John the miller ye ground small, small, small; the Kings
Son of Heaven shall pay for all. Beware or ye be woe: Know your friend from
your foe: Have enough, and say Ho; and do well and better: Flee sin, and
seek peace, and hold you therein: and so bids John Trewman and all his
fellows.

Neither is it impertinent to declare the Confession of Jack Straw at his
execution: When we were assembled (said he) upon Blackheath, and had sent to
the K. to come to us, our purpose was to have slain all Knights and Gentlemen
that should be about him: and as for the King, we would have kept him amongst
us, to the end the people might more boldly have repaired to us; and when we
had gotten power enough, we would have slain all Noblemen, and specially the
Knights of the Rhodes; and lastly we would have killed the King, and all men of
possessions, with Bishops, Monks, Parsons of Churches; only Friars Mendicants
we would have spared, for administration of the Sacraments: Then we would have
devised Laws according to which the people should have lived; for we would have
created Kings, as Wat Tyler in Kent, and other in other Countries: and the same
evening that Wat Tyler was killed, we were determined to set fire in four
corners of the City, and to have divided the spoil amongst us: and this was
our purpose, as God may help me now at my last end.] For his service done in
this seditious business, the King knighted the Major William Walworth, and
gave him a hundred pounds a year in Fee; also he knighted five Aldermen his
brethren, girding them about the waste with the girdle of knighthood, which was
the manner of Graduating in those days: And to do the City it self honor,
he granted there should be a Dagger added to the Arms of the City; for till
this time the City bore only the Cross without the Dagger.

And now all parts being quiet, the King by Proclamation revoked and made void
his former Charters of Infranchising the Bondmen of the Realm; and that they
should stand in the same condition they were before. In the time of this
sedition, the Duke of Lancaster had been sent into Scotland, to keep the Scots
quiet; who so carried the matter, that before the Scots heard of the Sedition,
a Truce was concluded for two or three years. But the Duke coming back to
Berwick, was denied by the Captain Sir Matthew Redman, to enter the Town,
because of a Commandment given him by the Earl of Northumberland, L. Warden
of the Marches, not to suffer any person to enter the same; which the King
indeed had appointed to be done, forgetting the Duke of Lancaster that was then
in Scotland: but howsoever, this bred such a spleen in the Duke against the
Earl, that at his coming home, he laid many things to the Earls charge, and
the Earl as stoutly answered his objections: and so far it proceeded, that
both of them came to the Parliament which was then beginning, with great
numbers of Armed men, and themselves in Armor, to the great terror of the
people: but the King, wisely taking the matter into his own hands, made them
friends. At which time, the Lady Anne, Sister to the Emperor Wincesl^us, and
affianced wife to the King, was come to Callis; whereupon the Parliament was
Prorogued: the Lady was brought to London, joined in marriage to the King, and
Crowned Queen at Westminster by the Archbishop of Canterbury, with great
solemnity. After the Marriage, the Parliament began again; in which William
Vfford Earl of Suffolk being chosen by the Knights of the Shires to deliver
in behalf of the Commonwealth certain matters concerning the same, the very
day and hour in which he should have done the business, as he went up the
stairs toward the upper House, he suddenly fell down and dyed, having been
merry and well before, to all men's judgments. About this time the Lord Scroope
was deposed from the Chancellourship, for refusing to seal some Grants which
the King had made: and the King receiving the great Seal at his hands, kept it
a certain time, and sealed with it such Grants and Writings as he pleased;
till at length it was delivered to Robert Braybrooke Bishop of London, who was
made Lord Chancellor.

Henry Spenser Bishop of Norwich, had lately with the Kings leave raised an
Army, and was gone into France, in behalf of Pope Urban, against the Antipope
Clement; and entering first into Fla^ders, he took and sacked many Towns; at
last besieged Ypres; till by an Army of French (greater then was thought could
have been raised in France) he was forced to raise his siege: and then passing
diverse places, he came to Gr^^eling; from whence he writ to King Richard, that
if ever he meant to try battle with the French, now was the time. The King was
at that time at Dayntrie in North^mptonshire; and being at supper when the word
was brought him, he instantly rose from the Table, got to horseback, and rode
in Post with such speed that he came to St. Albans about midnight; where making
no stay, but while he borrowed the Abbots Gelding, he hasted forth till he came
to Westminster, as though he had meant never to rest till he had given battle
to the Frenchmen: but after he had taken council of his pillow, his mind was
altered, and h^ thought it better to employ some other, then to go himself:
so the Duke of Lancaster is thought the fittest man; but he protracted the time
so long in making preparation, that before he could be gone, the Bishop was
come away: And this indeed is the condition of many, to spend so much time in
preparing, that they utterly lose all opportunity of acting; like to men that
are putting on their clothes so long, till it be time to put them off again.
Shortly after, a Truce was concluded between France and England, to endure till
the Feast of St. Michael, which should be in the year 1384.

Of Acts done after He came of Age.
THe Scots in this mean time had made Roades into England, and taken and burnt
diverse Towns upon the Borders: whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, with his
Brother the Earl of Buckingham, is sent with a mighty Army to repress them;
but having entered Scotland, and not able to draw the Scots to a Battle, they
only burnt certain Towns, and then returned.

About this time an Irish Friar, of the Order of the Carmelites, charged the
Duke of Lancaster with heinous crimes^ as that he intended to destroy the King,
and us^rpe the Crown; showing the time, the place, and other circumstances of
the whole plot. But the Duke called to his Answer, so cleared himself, a^
least gave such colors of clearing, that the Accuser was committed to the
custody of John Holland the kings halfe-brother, till a day appointed for
further trial: The ni^ht before which day, the said Lord Holland and Sir Henry
Green are said to have come to this Friar, and putting a cord about his neck,
tied the other end about his privy members; and after hanging him up from the
ground, laid a stone upon his belly, with the weight whereof his very backbone
burst asunder; thereby putting him to a most tormenting death: An act not more
inhumane then unadvised; for though it took away the Accuser, yet it made the
Accusation more suspicious.

At this time, though a Truce had been made with the Scots, yet they would not
be quiet, but entered and won the Castle of Barwick, whereof the Earl of
Northumberland was Captain, but had committed the keeping of it to another;
for which being blamed, he went against them with an Army, but took an easier
course, for with the sum of two thousand marks he bought them out, and had
the Castle surrend^ed into his hands again. The king upon some new
displeasure, being now incensed against the Duke of Lancaster, had a purpose to
have him arrested, and arraigned of certain points of Treason, before Sir
Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, though he ought to be tried by his Peers: but
the Duke having intimation hereof^ got him to his Castle of Pomfret, and stood
upon his guard; till the Kings mother, (notwithstanding her indisposition of
body, by reason of her corpulency) riding to and fro betwixt them, pacified the
King, and made them friends.

In the ninth year of K. Richards Reign, the French-king sent the Admiral of
France into Scotland, with a Thousand men of Arms, besides Crosse-bowes and
others, to aid the Scots against the English; with which aid the Scots
encouraged, enter the English Borders: whereof K. Richard advertised, himself
with a mighty Army enters Scotland; and coming to Edingborough, and finding
all the people fled^ he set fire on the houses, burnt the Church of S. Giles,
only Holy-Rood-house was spared at the Duke of Lancasters suit, in remembrance
of friendship he had formerly received in that house. The Scots by no means
could be drawn to any Battle; bu^ to divert the Kings Army, they entered
Cumberland, and besieged Carlisle, whereby the valor of Sir Lewis Clifford and
Sir Thomas Musgrave they were repelled; and hearing of the Kings Army coming
toward them, and fearing to be enclosed, they drew back into Scotland, and the
King returned into England. But in this mean while, the English of Callis
took many prizes of French ships at Sea, and many Booties also by land; at one
time four thousand sheep, and three hundred head of great Cattle. This year
the King called a Parliament at Westminster, where he created two Dukes, one
Marquess, and five Earls: Edmund of Langly Earl of Cambridge, the Kings
Uncle, was created Duke of York: Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, his
other Uncle, Duke of Gloucester: Robert Veere Earl of Oxford, was made
Marquess of Dublin: Henry of Bullingbrooke son of John of Gaunt, was created
Earl of Darby: Edward Plantagenet son to the Duke of York, was made Earl
of Rutland: Michael de la Poole Chancellor of England, was created Earl of
Suffolk: and Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, was made Earl Marshall. Also
by a^thority of this Parliament, Roger Mortimer Earl of March, son and heir
of Edmund Mortimer, and of the Lady Philip eldest daughter and heir to Lionell
Duke of Clarence third son to king Edward the Third, was established heir
apparent to the Crown of the Realm, and shortly after so Proclaimed: but
going into Ireland to his Lordship of Vlster, was there by the wild Irish
slain. This Roger Earl of March had issue, Edmund, Roger, Anne, Alice, and
Eleanor; which Eleanor was made a Nun: The two sons dyed without issue: Anne
his eldest daughter, was married to Richard Earl of Cambridge, son to Edmund
of Langley; which Richard had issue by the said Anne, a son called Richard,
that was after Duke of York, and father to king Edward the Fourth; also a
daughter named Isabel, married to the Lord Bourchier. Also this year Henry of
Bullingbrooke Earl of Darby, married the daughter and heir of Humfry Bohun
Earl of Hereford; in whose Right he was after made Duke of Hereford.

This year also K. Richard holding his Christmas at Eltham, Leo king of
Armenia came thither to him; who in fear to have his kingdom conquered by the
Turks, was come into Christendom to seek for aid: but his chief Errand
into England was, to have procured a Peace between the two kings of England and
Fran^e; but their spleenes were so great against one another, that it was not
in the physic of hi^ Power to cure them.

At this time, the Duke of Lancaster, taking with him his wife the Lady
Const^nce, and a daughter he had by her named Katherine, and two other
daughters which he had by his former wife, failed into Spain: he was attended
in his journey with the Lord Lucie, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Basset,
Willoughby, Fitzwater, Poy^ings, Br^^ston, and many other Lords and knights, to
the number of fifteen hundred men of Arms; whereof a thousand at the least
were knights and Esquires. The king at his taking leave gave him a Crown of
Gold, and commanded he should be called king of Spain: and the Queen likewise
gave another Crown of Gold to the Dutche^^e. He landed first at Breast, and
freed that Castle from the French: from thence he sailed, and arrived at the
Groyne in Spain, where he remained a month; and then went to Compostella,
where he stayed a while: In which time, his Constable Sir John Holl^^d won
diverse Towns. At Monson, the king of Portingale, and the Duke of L^^caster
met; where a marriage was concluded between the said king of Portingale and the
Lady Philip daughter to the Duke^ which marriage shortly after was consummated,
and the Lady sent into Portingale honorably accompanied. The Duke continued at
Co^postella all the winter: At March the king of Portingale and he en^^ed the
Confines of Castile, where they took many Towns; and passing over the River
of Dure, entered into the Country De Campo: But the Spaniards not willing to
come to a Battle, but meaning to weary them out with delays; the English not
used ^o such hot air, fell daily into many diseases: which the Duke seeing,
accorded ^o a Truce. There dyed in this action, the Lord Fi^zwater, Sir Richard
Burley ^ ^night of the Garter, the Lord Poynings, and Sir Henry Percy
Cosin-german to the E^^le of Northumberland, also the Lord Talbot; and in all,
twelve great Lords fourscore ^nights, two hundred Esquires, and of the meaner
sort above five hundred. When the Army was broken up, the Duke of Lancaster,
and the Dutche^se his wife went into Portingale; and after some stay there,
they sailed to Bayon, in the Marches of Gascoigne, where he rested a long time
after: In which mean while, there were offers made for a Marriage to be had,
between the Duke of Berry, Uncle to the Fr^^ch king, and the Lady Ka^herine,
daughter to the Duke of Lancaster: which the king of Spain understanding, he
began to doubt, least if that marriage went forward, it might turn to his
disadvantage; and thereupon by earnest suit, at length conc^uded a peace with
the Duke of Lancaster, on this wise, That his eldest son Henry should marry
the the Lady Katherine, the Duke of Lancasters daughter, and be entitled
Prince of Austurg^s; and in consideration of this marriage, and that all claims
should cease, which the Duke in right of his wife might challenge or pretend^
It was agreed, that the said Duke should receive yearly the sum of Ten
thous^nd marks, during the lives of him and his Duchess; and to have in hand
the sum of two hundred thousand Nobles.

At this time, the French had a purpose to invade England, with no less a hope
then to make a Conquest: and to that end, they prepared a mighty Navy; so as in
the month of September, there were numbered about Sluis, Dam, and Bla^kerk^,
1^87 ships, besides those which were rigged in Britain by the Constable, who
had caused an enclosure of a Field to be made of Timber, that when they were
landed in E^gland, they might therewith enclose their field, and so lodge at
more surety: but it so fortuned, that the Lord William Beauchampe Captain of
Callis, took two of their ships, whereof one was laden with a piece of the
said Enclosure; and after that, another ship, laden with Guns, Gunpowder, and
other Instruments of war; and after that again, two ships more, laden with
parcels of the said Enclosure, which K. ^ichard caused to be reared and set up
about Winchelsey Town: at last the foresaid Army came into Flanders, and
arrived at Sluis; where, after some stay, they were so distressed for victuals,
that in the end of November, they were glad to be gone, and return into France.

At this time, in a Parliament, Robert Veere Earl of Oxford and Marquis of
Dublin, was created Duke of Ireland; and Michael de la Poole, a Merchants son,
had lately before been created E. of Suffolk, and made Chancellor of England.
And now begins K. Richard to enter, I may say, upon the confines of his
Destiny: His gracing of undeserving men, and disgracing of men deserving, if
they were not the causes, they were at least the occasions of his own
disgracing, and destruction in the end. He was now come to be of full age to
do all himself; which was indeed to be of full age to undo himself: for the
faults of his younger years might have the excuse to be but Errors; but the
faults of the age he was now at, were peremp^ory against him, and admitted no
defense. And to hasten the pace of his destiny the faster, the ill Counsel
which before was but whispered in his ear, was now scarce forborne to be given
him aloud: It is told him, that he is under tuition no longer, and therefore
not to be controlled, as in former times he had been; That to be crossed of his
will by his subjects, was to be their subject; It is no Sovereignty, if it be
not absolute. At the instigation of which Counsel, the king in a Parliament
now assembled, fell to expostulate with his Lords, asking them what years they
thought him to be (...) who answering, that he was somewhat more then one and
twenty; Well, then (sa^^ he) I am out of Wardship, and therefore look to enjoy
my kingdom as freely, (...) your selves at the like years enjoy your
Patrimonies. But his flattering Favori^^ should have remembered, that though the
king may not be controlled, where he ca^ command; yet he may be opposed, where
he can but demand; as now indeed he wa^ for when he came to demand a Subsidy
toward his wars, he was answered, That he needed no subsidy from his
Subjects, if he would but call in the debts which the Chancellor owed him: and
if he were so tender of him, that he could not find i^ his heart to do it
himself, they would do that work for him: and thereupo^ charged him with such
crimes, that all his goods were confiscate, and himself adjudged to dye, if
the king so pleased: though some write, his sentence was only to pay a Fine of
twenty thousand marks, and a thousand pounds yearly beside. Upon this
provocation, the opposite side seek present revenge: It is devised, that the
Duke of Gloucester as principal, and other Lords that crossed the kings
courses, should be invited to a Supper in London, and there be murdered. In
the execu^^on of which plot, the former Lord Major, Sir Nicolas Brember, had a
special hand^ but the present Major Rich^rd Exton, moved to it by the king,
would by no mean^^ consent; and thereupon the plot proceeded not. But for all
these harsh strains, and many such other that passed this Parliament, a
Subsidy was at length granted to the king, of half a Tenth, and half a
Fifteenth; but with condition, that (...) should not be issued but by order
from the Lords, and the Earl of Arund^ll was appointed to receive it. But
before this time, both Houses had directly agreed, that unless the Chancellor
were removed, they would meddle no further in the P^^liament. The king
advertised hereof, sent to the Commons, that they should se^^ unto Eltham
(where he then lay) forty of their House, to declare their minds (...) him:
but upon conference of both Houses, it was agreed, that the Duke of Glo^^st^r,
and Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, should in the name of the Parliament go
unto him: who coming to the king, declared, That by an old Statute, the king
once a year might lawfully summon his Court of Parliament, for reformation of
all corruptions and enormities within the Realm: and further declared, That by
an old Ordinance also it was Enacted, That if the king should absent himself 40
days not being sick, the Houses might lawfully break up, and return home. At
this the king is said to say, Well, we perceive our people go about to rise
against us, and therefore we think we cannot do better then to ask aid of
our Cousin the king of France, and rather submit us to him then to our own
Subjects. To which the Lord answered, They wondered at this opinion of his
Majesty, seeing the French king was the ancient Enemy of the kingdom; and he
might remember what mischiefs were brought upon the Realm in king John's time,
by such a course. By these and the like persuasions, the king was induced to
come to the Parliament: and soon after, John Fortham Bishop of Durham is
discharged of his Office of Lord Treasurer; and in his place was appoint^d John
Gilber^ Bishop of Hereford, a Friar of the order of Preachers: also Michael de
la P^^le Earl of Suffolk, is discharged of his Office of Chancellor; and
Thomas Aru^dell Bishop of Ely, by consent of Parliament, placed in his room.
Also by Order of Parliament, thirteen Lords were chosen to have oversight,
under the king, of the w^ole government of the Realm: of which thirteen, there
were three of the New-Officers named; as the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor,
the Bishop of Hereford Lord Treasurer, and Nicolas Abbot of W^ltham Lord keeper
of the Privy Seal: The other ten were, William Archbishop of C^^terbury,
Alexander Archbishop of York, Edmund of L^ngley Duke of York, Thoma^ Duke of
Gloucester, William Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bishop of Exeter, Rich^rd Earl
of Arundell, Richard Lord Scr^^pe, and John Lord Devereux. But this
participation of the Government being found inconvenient, held not long. Also
in this Parliament, it was granted, that Robert de Veere, lately created Duke
of Ireland, should have and receive to his own use 30000. marks, which the
Frenchmen were to give for the heirs of ^he Lord Charles de Bl^ys: but it was
granted upon ^his condition^ That before the next Easter he should pass over
into Ireland, to recover such lands as the King had there given him: so
desirous the Lords and Commons were to have him removed from the Kings
presence. But though the King gave way to this torrent of the Parliament for
the present, yet as soon as the Parliament was dissolved, he dissolved also
all that had been done, either against the Lord Chancellor, or against the
Duke of Ireland, or against Alexander Nevil Archbishop of York; and received
them into more favor then ever he had done before.

In his Tenth year, about the Beginning of March, Richard Earl of Arundell
appointed Admiral, and Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of
Devonshire, and the Bishop of Norwich, went to Sea, with a warlike power of men
and ^rmes, to watch for the Fleet of Flanders, that was ready to come from
Rochell with wines; and meeting with them, they set upon them: and took of
them, to the number of a hundred Vessels, all fraught with wines; so as wine
grew so plentiful, that it was sold for thirteen shillings four pence the
Tonne; and the best and choysest for twenty shillings. Besides this, they
landed in Flanders, where they relieved and fortified Breast, and demolished two
Forts which the Enemy had built against it. But this happy service of the Earl
of Arundell; the Duke of Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk, Sir Simon Burley, and
Sir Richard Sturrey, who continued still about the King, seemed rather to envy,
then to commend; insomuch that when the Earl of Nottingham, that had ever been
the Kings play fellow, and of equal age to him, came to the Court, he was
neither received by the Duke of Ireland with any good welcome, nor by the King
with any good countenance: and therefore indeed, not by the King with any good
Countenance, because not by the Duke of Ireland with any good Welcome.

About this time; the Duke of Ireland sought to be divorced from his lawful
wife, daughter to the Lady Isabel, one of king Edward the third's daughters;
and took to wife one Lancerona a Vintners daughter of Bohemia, one of the
Queens maids: at which indignity, the Duke of Gloucester, that was uncle to the
Lady thus forsaken, took great displeasure; which the Duke of Ireland
understanding, studied how by some means he might dispatch the Duke of
Gloucester out of the way. Easter was now past, the time appointed for the D. of
Irelands going over into Ireland; when the King, with a show to bring him to
the waters side, went with him into Wales, and in his company, Michael de la
Poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian L. Chie^ Justice, and diverse others;
who there consulted how they might di^patch the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls
of Arundel, Warwick, D^rby, Nottingham, with diverse others of that Faction: but
when the King had remained in those parts a good while, he returned, and
brought back the Duke of Ireland with him; and so his voyage into Irel^^d was
clean forgotten. About the same time, Robert Tresilian Chief Justice came to
Coventry, where he Indicted two thousand persons. The King and the Queen came
to Groby; and thither came by his Commandment the Justices of the Re^^me,
Robert Belknap Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Holt, R^ger
Fulthorpe, and William Borough, knights: to whom it was propounded, to an^wer
to these Questions following: First, Whether the New Statute and Commission
made in the last Parliament, were against the kings Prerogative, or no? To
which they all answered, It was. Secondly, How they ought to be punished, that
procured the said Statute and Commission to be made? They answered with one
assent, that they deserved death, except the king would pardon them. Thirdly,
How they ought to be punished who moved the King to consent to the making of
the said Statute and Commission? They answered, They ought to lose their lives,
unless the King would pardon them. Fourthly, How they ought to be punished,
that com^elled the king to the making of that Statute? They answered, They
ought to suffer as Traitors. Fifthly, Whether the king might cause the
Parliament to proceed upon Articles by him limited, before they proceeded to
any other? They answered, That in this the king should overruled; and if any
presumed to do contrary, he was to be punished as a Traitor. Sixthly, Whether
the king might not at his pleasure dis^olve the Parliament, and command the
Lords and Commons to depart? They all answered, He might. Seventhly, Whether
the Lords and Commons might, without the kings will, impeach Officers and
Justices upon their offenses, in Parliament, or no? It was answered, They might
not; and he that attempted contrary, was to suffer as a Traitor? Eighthly, How
he is to be punished, who moved in the Parliament, that the Statute wherein
Edward the Second was indicted in Parliament, might be sent for; by i^spection
of which Statute, that present Statute was de^ised? It was answered, That as
well he that moved it, as he that brought the (...) into the House, were to be
punished as Traitors? Ninthly, Whether the Judgment given in Parliament
against Michael de la Po^le were erroneous and revocable? They answered, It was
erroneous and revocable^ and that if the Judgment were now to be given, the
Justices would not give the same. In witness of the Premises, the Justices
aforesaid, to these Presents have set their Seals; in the presence of
Alexander Archbishop of York, Rob^^t Arcbishop of Dublin, John Bishop of
Durham, Thomas Bishop of Chester, John Bishop of ^^ng^r, Robert Duke of
Ireland, Michael Earl of Suffolk, John Ripon Clerk, and John Blake.


At this time the Londoners incurred much obloquie; For, having before been
pardoned by the king of some crime^ said to their charge, they were now ready
to comply with the king in his desires; and thereupon being impannelled, they
indicted some Lords of many crimes informed against them. But not only the
Justices aforesaid, but all other Justices and Sheriffs of the Realm were
called at this time to Nottingham: the chief cause was, to understand what
power of men they could assure the king of, to serve him against the Lords: and
further, that where he mean^ shortly to call a Parliament, they should so use
the matter, that no knight or Burgess should be chosen, but such as the King
and his Council should name. To which the Sheriffs made answer, that it lay
not in their power to assemble any forces against the Lords, who were so well
beloved: And as for choosing knights and Burgesses, the Commons would
undoubtedly look to enjoy their ancient liberties, and could not be hin^ered.
But yet the king and the Duke of Ireland sent into all parts of the Realm, to
raise men in this quarrel against the Lords: Whereof the Duke of Gloucester
being advertised, he came secretly to Conference with the Earls of Arundell,
Warwick, and Darby; who upon consultation, determined to talk with the king,
with their Forces about them: and the king, on the other part, took advice how
he might apprehend them apart; and thereupon, sent the Earl of Northumberland
and others to the Castle of Rygate, to take the Earl of Arundell, who lay
there at that time: but howsoever it fortuned, they fa^^ed of their purpose.
After this, he sent others to apprehend him: but he being warned by a messenger
from the Duke of Gloucester, conveyed himself away by night; and by morning was
come to Haringey-Parke, where he found the Duke of Gloucester and the Earl of
Warwick, with a great power of men about them. The king hearing of this
Assembly at Hari^gey-Parke, called his Council, to hear their opinions what
was fit to be done: Some were of opinion, that the king should assemble his
friends, and joining them with the Londoners, give them battle; the chiefest
of this mind was the Archbishop of York: Others thought best, the king should
seek to appease the Lords with fair promises, till a fitter opportunity to
suppress them. But the king not yet resolved what course to take, caused only
order to be taken, that no Citizen of Lond^n should sell to the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earl of Arundell, or to any other of the Lords, any armor or
furniture of war, under a great pain. But for all this, the Lords proceeded
in their course, and sent the Arcbishop of Canterbury, the Lord John Lovell,
the Lord Cobham, and the Lord John Devereux, requiring to have delivered to
them such as were about the king, that were Traitors and Seducers both of him
and the Realm: and further to declare, that their Assembling was for the
honor and wealth both of him and the kingdom. The Duke of Ireland, the Earl
of Suffolk, and two or three other about the king, per^wad^d him to offer
Call^^ to the king of France, to have his assistance against the Lords.
Withal, the king seat to the Major of London, requiring to know how many able
men the City could make? To which the Major answered, that he thought it could
make Fifty thousand men at an hours warning. Well then (said the king) go and
prove what will be done. But when the Major went about it, he was answered,
They would never fight against the kings friends, and defenders of the Realm.
At the same time, the Earl of Northumberland said to the king: Sir, there is
no doubt but these Lords have always been, and still are your true and
faithful subjects, though now distempered by certain persons about you, that
seek to oppress them: therefore my advice is, that you send to them, to come
before your presence in some public place; and I verily believe, they will
show such reasons of their doings, that you will hold them excused. The
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor, and other of
the Bishops there present, approved all of the Earls advice: whereupon the
king sent the Archb^shop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Ely to the Lords,
requiring them to come to him to Westminster, on Sunday then next following:
which, upon oath given by the Archbishop and the Chancellor, that no fraud nor
evil practice should be used against them, they were content to do. But when
the Lords were ready to come at the day appointed, they heard of an Ambush laid
to entrap them at the Mewes, and thereupon stayed, so as they came not at the
time appointed: Whereupon, the king asking why they came not according to their
promise? It was answered, because he kept not his promise, there being an
Ambush of a Thousand armed men laid to surp^ize them at the Mewes. The king
hearing this was astonished, and swore he knew of no such thing, and commanded
presently the place should be searched, but it was true; an ambush was laid,
but not at the Mewes, but in a place a^out Westminster, where Sir Thomas Tryvet
and Sir Nicholas Brember had assembled them. This one action might have made
the king sensible of his favorites abusing his authority; but that where
affection makes the construction, all things are taken in a good sense; or was
it perhaps they had a VVarrant dormant, to prosecute the kings ends without the
kings knowledge? Yet the Lords after this, receiving a safe conduct from the
king, came to Westminster; of whose coming when the king heard, he apparelled
himself in his royall-Robes, and with his Scepter in his hand, came into the
great Hall; before whom, the Lords upon their knees presented themselves, the
king bidding them welcome, and taking each of them by the hand; Then the lord
Chancellor making a speech, wherein he blamed them for raising of Arms, and
requiring to know the cause; they answered, They had done it for the good of
the King and kingdom, and to take away the Tra^tors about the King. Upon this
the king himself spoke, asking him whether they thought to compel him by strong
hand? have not I (says he) sufficient men to beat you down? truly in this
behalf I make no more account of you then of the basest skullion in my kytchin;
yet after these great words, he lift up the Duke of Gloucester, who all this
while was kneeling, and commanded the rest also to rise, and then led them
courteously to his chamber, where they sat and drank together: And finally it
was concluded they should all meet again, as well these Lords, as those they
accused, at the next Parliament; which the king promised to call speedily, and
each party to receive there according to Justice, and in the mean time all
parties to be in the kings protection. But when the Favorite Lords heard this,
they told the king plainly, they neither durst nor would put themselves to the
hazard of such a meeting, and therefore the Duke of Ireland and the rest of that
faction left the Court to be out of the way: But the king not enduring their
abs^nce, app^l^ted Thomas Mollineux Constable of ^he castle of Chester, to
raise an Army, and to safe conduct the duke of Ireland to him; But ^^ey being
come as far as Radcoat-bridge, were encoun^red by the Earl of Darby; and the
Duke of Ireland, not d^ring to join battle with him, fled; and being to pass
a River, cast away his gantlets and sword (to be the more nimble) and giving
his horse the spur, leapt into the river, and so escaped; that when these
things were afterward found, it was verily thought he had been drowned, till
news came he was got into Holland, where being no very welcome guest, he went
from thence into the Bishopric of Vtricht, and after two or three years
scambling about in manner of a fugitive, at Lovaine in Brabant he ended his
life. A man of many good parts, and worthy enough of his Princes favor, if with
that favor he had not grown proud, and in that pride, injurious and insulting
over others no less deserving then himself. He was valiant enough against
any man but the Earl of D^rby, and of him indeed both the Genius of the Duke
of Ireland, and of King Richard himself seemed to stand in fear, for neither
of them durst meet him in the field, though encouraged to it by those about
them.

About this time the Duke of Suffolk doubting some plots laid to surprise him,
fled over to C^llis in disguise, shaving his beard, and counterfeiting himself
a Poulterer, to sell certain foul which he had gotten; but being come to
Callis, was by the Lord William Beauchampe, Deputy of the Town, sent back into
England, whom the King notwithstanding permited to go at large, to make it be
thought he was more afraid then hurt, more suspicious then he needed By this
time the Lords h^d gotten matter enough against the King, at least to justify
their Arms, and thereupon with an Army of forty thousand men, they came to
London, where after some debate, they were received; and then the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Darby and Nottingham went to the King in the Tower;
to whom, after humble salutations, they showed the Letter which he had written
to the Duke of Ireland, to levy an Army for their destruction: likewise the
Letters which the French King had written to him, containing a safe conduct for
him to come into France, there to do Acts to his own dishonor and the kingdoms.

This done, upon the Kings promise that he would come the next day to
Westminster to treat further of these matters, the Lords departed, only the
Earls of Nottingham and Darby, at the Kings instance, stayed all night; but
before the King went to bed, his mind was clean altered for keeping his
promise to meet the Lords the next day at Westminster: which the Lords
understanding, they sent peremptorily to him, that if he came not according to
his promise, they would choose another king, that should hearken to the
faithful Counsel of his Lords. This touched the king so to the quick, that
the next morning he went and met the Lords; who there declared to him, how much
it concerned the good of the kingdom, that those Traitors so often spoken of,
should be removed from the Court: To which, the king, though much against his
will, yet at last condiscended. And thereupon presently Alexander Nevil
Archbishop of York, and Thomas Rushoke Bishop of Chichester, and Confessor to
the king, were expelled the Court; who not willing to come to after-reckonings,
fled no man knew whither. They expelled also John Fourdham Bishop of Durham,
Lord Treasurer; the Lord Zouch of Haringworth, the Lord Burvell, the Lord
Beaumont, Albery de Veere, Baldwin de Bereford, Richard Adderbury, John Worth,
Thomas Clifford, and John Lovel, knights: but constreined to put in Sureties to
appear at the next Parliament. Also certain Ladies were expelled the Court;
as the Lady Poynings, the Lady Mouling, and others; bound to appear at the
next Parliament. There were also arrested, and committed to several Prisons,
Sir Simon Burley, William Elmham, John Beauchamp Steward of the kings house,
Sir John Salisbery, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir James Berneys, Sir Nicolas Dagworth,
and Sir Nicolas Brember, knights. Also Richard Clifford, John Lincoln, Richard
Mitford, the kings Chaplains; Nicolas Sclake Deane of the kings Chapel, and
John Blake a Lawyer.

Shortly after, the Parliament began, (called afterward, The Parliament that
wrought wonders:) On the first day whereof, were arrested as they sat in their
places, all the Justices (but only Sir William Skipwith:) as Sir Roger
Fulthorpe, Sir Robert Belknappe, Sir John Carry, Sir John Holt, Sir William
Brook, and John Alac^on the kings Sergeant at Law; and were all sent to the
Tower, for doing contrary to an Agreement made the last Parliament. Also in the
beginning of this Parliament, Robert Veere Duke of Irel^nd, Alexander Nevill
Archbishop of York, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, and Sir Robert
Tresilian Lord Chief Justice of England, were openly called to answer Thomas
of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundell, Henry Earl of
Darby, and Thomas Earl of Nottingham, upon certain Articles of high Treason:
and because none of them appeared, It was ordained by whole consent of
Parliament, they should be banished for ever, and all their land^ and goods
^eized into the Kings hands (their intailed lands only excepted.) Shortly
after, the Lord Chief Justice Robert Tresilian, was found in an Apothecaries
house in Westminster; where being taken, he was brought to the Duke of
Gloucester, who caused him the same day to be had to the Tower, and from thence
drawn to Tyburne, and there hanged. On the morrow after, Sir Nicolas Brember
was brought to his Answer; who being found guilty, was beheaded with an Axe
which himself had caused to be made for beheading of others. After this, Sir
John Salisbery, and Sir James Berneys, lusty young men, were drawn and hanged;
as also John Be^^champ L. Steward of the Kings house, John Blake Esquire: and
lastly, Sir Simon Burley, son to the great Sir John Burley Knight of the
Garter, was beheaded on Tower Hill; whose death the King took more heavily and
more heynously then all the rest. Also all the Justices were condemned to dye;
but by the Queens intercession, they were only banished the Realm, and all
their lands and goods confiscate, only a small portion of money was assigned
them for their sustentation. Finally, in this Parliament, an Oath was required
and obtained of the King, that he should stand unto, and abide such Rule and
Order as the Lords should take: and this Oath was required also of all the
Inhabitants of the Realm.

In the later end of the Kings eleventh year, the Earl of Arundell was sent
to Sea, with a great Navy of ships and men of war; with whom went the Earls
of Nottingham and Devonshire, Sir Thhmas Percy, the Lord Clifford, the Lord
Camoi^, Sir William Elmham, and diverse other Knights, to aid the Duke of
Britain against the king of France: but before they came, the Duke of Britain
was reconciled to the king of France; and so needing not their aid, all this
great Fleet returned with doing nothing. And it was indeed a year of doing
nothing, unless we reckon some petty Inroades of the Scots: and that Sir
Thomas Tryvet dyed with a fall off his horse: and that Sir John Holland, the
Kings brother by the mother, was made Earl of Huntington: and that there was
Contention in Oxford, between the Northern and the Southern Scholars; which
was pacified by the Duke of Gloucester.

In his twelveth year, Commissioners were appointed to meet at Balingham,
betwixt Calli^ and Bulloigne, to treat of a Peace between the Realms of
England, France, and Scotland: and after long debating, a Truce was at last
concluded, to begin at Midsomer next, and to last three years. But now the
king, to show his plenary authority of being at full age, removed the
Archbishop of York from being Lord Chancellor, and put in his place William
Wickham Bishop of Winchester: also he removed the Bishop of Hereford from being
Treasurer, and put another in his place: The Earl of Arundell likewise, unto
whom the Government of the Parliament was committed, and the Admiralty of the
Sea; was removed, and the Earl of Huntington put in his room.

About this time, the Lord John Hastings Earl of Pembrooke, as he was
practicing to learn to Just, was stricken about the Privy parts, by a knight
called Sir John St. John; of which hurt he soon after dyed. In whose Family,
it is memorable, that for many Generations together, no son ever saw his
father, (the father being always dead, before the son was borne.) The
Original of this Family was from Hastings the Dane, who in the Reign of K.
Alured, long before the Conquest, about the year 890. came with Rollo j^to
England. But howsoever, in this John Hastings ended the then Honorable Titles
of the Hastings; for this man dying without issue, his Inheritances were
dispersed to diverse persons: The Honor of Pembrooke came to Francis at Court,
by the kings Gift: the Baronies of Hastings and Welford came to Reynold Gray of
Ruthin: the Barony of Aburg^veny was granted to William Bea^^hamp of Bedford.

About this time, John Duke of Lancaster was created Duke of Aquitaine,
receiving at the Kings hands the Rod and the Cap, as Investitures of that
Duchy. Also the Duke of York's son and heir was created Earl of Richmond.

In his thirteenth year, a Royal Justs was Proclaimed to be holden within
Smithfield in London, to begin on Sunday next after the Feast of S. Michael:
which being published, not only in England, but in Scotland, in Almaigne, in
Flanders, in Brabant, and in France; many strangers came hither; amongst
others, Valeran Earl of S. Poll, that had married king Richards Sister; and
William the young Earl of Ostervant, son to Albert de Bav^ere Earl of
Hollond and Heynoult. At the day ^ppointed there issued forth of the Tower,
about three a clock in the afternoon, sixty Coursers apparrelled for the
Justs; and upon every one an Esquire of Honor, riding a soft pace: After them,
came forth four and thirty Ladies of Honor, ( Froyssard says, threescore)
mounted on Palfries, and every Lady led a knight with a chain of Gold: These
knights being on the Kings part, had their armor and apparel garnished with
white Hearts, and Crowns of Gold abo^^ their necks; and so they came riding
through the streets of London, unto Smithfield: The Justs lasted diverse days;
all which time the King and Queen lay at the Bishops Palace by Paul's Church,
and kept open house for all Comers.

In his Fifteenth year, the Duke of Lancaster went into France, having in his
train a thousand horse; and met the king of France at A^iens, to treat of a
Peace between the two kingdoms: but after long debate, a Truce only was
concluded for a year.

About this time also, the King required the Londoners to lend him a Thous^nd
pounds: which they refused ^o do; and not only so, but they abused an Italian
Merchant, for offering to lend it. This moved the King to some indignation: to
which was added the complaint of a Riot committed by the Citizens, against the
servants of the Bishops of Sali^bury L. Treasurer; for that, where one of the
Bishops servants, named Walter Roman, had taken a horse-loafe out a Bakers
basket, as he passed in the streets, and ran with it into his Lords house; the
Citizens thereupon assaulted the house, and would not be quieted, till the
Major and Aldermen were feign to come, and with much ado appeased them. Upon
complaint hereof, urged against the Citizens, by the Bishop of Salisbury L.
Treasurer, and Thomas Arundell Archbishop of York L. Chancellor, the Major and
Aldermen, and diverse other substantial Citizens are arrested: the Major is
committed to the Castle of Windsor, and the other to other Castles; the
liberties of the City are seized into the Kings hands, and the authority of the
Major utterly ceased; the king appointing a Warden to govern the City, first
Sir Edmund Derligrug, and afterward Sir Baldwin Radington; till at length, by
special suit of the Duke of Gloucester, the king was contented to come to
London, to so great joy of the Citizens, that they received him with four
hundred on horseback, clad all in one livery, and presented the king and
Queen with many rich gifts: yet all gave not satisfaction, to have their
liberties restored, till they afterward paid Ten thousand pounds. This it is
to provoke a Lion: It may be fortune enough to us, if by any means we can but
keep him quiet; for if once we provoke him to lay his paw upon us, it will be
hard getting from him, and not be torn in pieces.

In his Sixteenth year, the Dukes of Lanc^ster and Gloucester are once again
sent into France, to treat of a Peace: but when they could not agree with the
French-Commissioners upon Articles propo^nded, there was only a Truce
concluded for four years; though perhaps a further Agreement had then been
made, but that the king of France fell newly again into his old fit of
Frenzy, which called away the French Commissioners from further Treaty.

In his Eighteenth year, a Proclamation was set forth, That all Irish men
should avoid this Realm, and return home: The occasion was, because so many
Irish were come over, that Ireland in a manner was left unpeopled: in so much,
that where K. Edward the Third had received from thence yearly the sum of
Thirty thousand pounds, the king now laid forth as much to repel Rebels.
Whereupon at Michaelmas K. Richard went himself into Ireland, attended with the
Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of March, Nottingham, and Rutland, the Lord
Thomas Percy L. Steward, and diverse others of the English Nobility; to whom
came in the Great O^eale king of Meth, Bryan of Thomond king of Thomond, Arthur
Macmur king of Leymster, and C^nhur king of Cheveney and Darpe: and there K.
Richard stayed all that winter, and after Christmas called a Parliament; at
which time also, the Duke of York Lord Warden of England, in the Kings name
called a Parliament at Westminster: to the which was sent forth of Ireland the
Duke of Gloucester, that he might declare to the Commons the Kings great
occasions for supply of money: whose words so far prevailed, that a whole
Tenth was granted by the Clergy, and a Fifteenth by the Laytie.

In his Twentieth year was the famous Enterview between the two Kings of
England and France: There was set up for K. Richard a rich Pavilion, a little
beyond Guysnes, within the English pale; and another the like for the French
King, on this side Arde: The distance betwixt the two Tents was beset on either
side with Knights armed with their swords in their hands, four hundred French
on one side, and four hundred English on the other: The two Kings before their
meeting, took a solemn Oath, for assurance of their faithful and true
meaning, to observe the sacred Laws of Amity one toward another, in this
Enterview. After the two Kings were come together, it was accorded, that in the
same place where they met, there should be builded at both their costs, a
Chapel, for a perpetual memory, which should be called, The Chapel of our
Lady of Peace. On Simon and Iudes day, the kings talked together of Articles
concerning the Peace; and having concluded them, they received either of them
an Oath, upon the holy Evangelists, to observe and keep them. This done, the
French king brought his daughter Isabel, and delivered her to K. Richard, who
shortly after at Callis married her, and upon the 17. of January following, she
was Crowned Queen at Westminster. A Match of great honor, but of little
convenience, and less profit; for the Lady being but eight years of age,
there could be no hope of issue a long time, which was K. Richards greatest
want; and as little supply of his wants otherwise, her Portion perhaps scarce
paying the charges of his journey to fetch her, which cost him three hundred
thousand marks.

The Duke of Lancaster, in the thirteenth year of K. Richards Reign, had been
created Duke of Aquitaine: but when the Gascoigners would not receive him,
showing reasons why that Dukedom ought not to be separated from the Crown of
England, his Grant was revoked, and so it remained still in Demesne of the
Crown.

At this time, in a Parliament, the Duke of Lancaster caused to be legitimated,
the issue he had by Katherine Swinford, before he married her; of whom, Thomas
Beaufort was created Earl of Sommerset.

This year also, the king receiviug the money back, which had been lent to the
Duke of Britain, upon Breast, delivered up the Town unto him; and thereupon,
the English soldiers that were there in Garrison, were all discharged and sent
home; who, at a Feast which the king kept at Westminster, coming in companies
together into the Hall; as soon as the king had dined, and was entering into
his Chamber, the Duke of Gloucester asked him, if he did mark those men that
stood in such troops in the Hall: Yes marry (said the king) who were they? They
were (said the Duke) those soldiers, who by your rendering up of Breast have
been sent home, and now must either starve or steal; and therewithal, very
unadvisedly in words, taxed the king with unadvisednes of his deed: To whom the
king in great anger replied, Why Uncle, do you think me either a Merchant, or
a Fool, to sell my land? By S. John Baptist, no: But could I refuse to render
the Town, when tender was made of the money lent upon it? Indeed nothing could
more discover the Duke of Glocesters, either weakness, if he knew not that
Breast was but only a Morgage; or injustice, if knowing it, he would have had
the king, though the money were tendered, to have kept it still: but such is the
course of many, to take part with the Politics against the Ethics; work their
ends by doing unjustly, when doing justly ought to be their chiefest end.
How-ever it was, the multiplying of words about this matter, kindled in the
King such a displeasure against the Duke, that it could never afterward be
quenched, but by his blood. And first he complained to his other two Unkles,
the Dukes of L^ncaster and York, of his undutifull behavior toward him; who
told the King, Their brother perhaps might let fall some unadvised words, but
they knew his heart to be true and faithful. Yet doubting how far the King
might press upon them to answer for their brothers faithfulness, they retired
from Court: which gave the D^kes enemies time to incense the King farther
against him. It happened, that the Duke of Gloucester had with him one day at
his house, the Abbot of S. Albans, that was his Godfather, and the Prior of
Westminster: and after dinner falling in talk with them, amongst other
communications the Duke required the Prior to tell truth, whether he had any
Vision the night before? To which the Prior was loath, at first, to make a
direct Answer; but at last, being earnestly requested, as well by the Abbot as
the Duke, he confessed that he had a Vision indeed, which was, that the Realm
of England should be destroyed through the Misgovernance of K. Richard. By the
Virgin Mary (said the Abbot) I had the very same Vision. Whereupon the Duke
presently disclosed to them all the secrets of his mind, and by their devices
contrived an assembly of diverse great Lords of the Realm, to meet at
Arundell-Castle that day Fortnight^ at which time he appointed to be there
himself, with the Earls of D^rby, Arundell, Marsh^ll, and W^rwick; also the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Abbot of S. Albans, the Prior of Westminster,
with diverse others: And accordingly all these met at Arundell Castle, at the
day appointed: where receiving first the Sacrament, by the hands of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to be assistant each to other, in all such matters as
they should determine; They resolved to seize upon K. Richard, and upon the
Dukes of Lancaster and York, and commit them to Prison; and all the other Lords
of the Kings Council, they determined should be drawn and hanged. But the
Earl Marshall, that was Deputy of Calli^, and had married the Earl of Arundels
daughter, discovered all their Counsel to the King; who thereupon, by a plot
devised by his Council, took his brother the Earl of Huntington with him,
and rising from supper, rode that night to the Duke of Glocesters house at
Plashey in Essex. When the King came thither, the Duke was a-bed; but informed
of it, cast his cloak about his shoulders, and came down, bidding the Kings
Grace, with all reverence, welcome. The King courteously requested him to go
and make him ready, for that he must needs ride with him a little way, to
confer of some business. The Duke presently made him ready and came down; and
as soon as the King and his Company was gone a little way from the house, and
the Duke with him, the Earl Marshall arrested the Duke, as he had been
appointed to do by the King; who immediately was sent to Callis, where, after
some time, he was dispatched of his life, either strangled, or else smothered
with pillowes, as some write. At the very same time was the Earl of Arundell
apprehended, by the Earls of Rutland and Kent: the Earl of Warwick also, when
the King had invited him to dinner, and showed him very good countenance, was
taken and arrested in the place: As likewise at the same time were apprehended,
and committed to the Tower, the Lord John Cobham, and Sir John Ch^yny. Shortly
after, the King procured them to be indicted at Nottingham, suborning such as
should appeal them in Parliament; namely, Edward Earl of Rutland, Thom^^
Mowbray Earl Marshall, Thom^s Holland Earl of Kent, John Holland Earl of
Huntington, Thomas Beaufort Earl of Somerset, John Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, Thomas L. Spenser, and the Lord William Scroope L. Chamberlain: and
in the mean time, the King sent for a Power of Cheshi^^ men, to keep Watch and
Ward about his person.

On the 17. of September, a Parliament began at Westminster; wherein the King
complained as well of many things done by the Lords in his Minority, as also of
the hard dealing which they had used toward the Queen, who was three hours at
one time on her knees, before the Earl of Arundell, for one of her Esquires,
named John Calverley, who nevertheless had his head smitten from his
shoulders; and all the answer she could get, was this: Madame, pray for your
self and your Husband, and let this suit alone. Those that set forth the Kings
grievances in this Parliament, were John Bushie, William Bagot, and Thomas
Green. The cause of a^sembling the Parliament was showed, that the King had
called it for reformation of diverse transgressions against the Peace of his
Land, by the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell, Warwick, and others.
Then Sir John Bushie, Speaker of the Parliament, made request on behalf of the
Commonalty, that they might be punished according to their deservings; and
specially the Archbishop of Canterbury^ who then ^ate next the king, whom he
accused of high Treason. When the Archbishop began to answer, Sir John Bushie
besought the king that he might not be admitted to answer, lest by his great
wit and cunning he might lead men away to believe him. And here Sir John Bushie
in all his talk did not attribute to the king Titles of honor due and
^ccustomed, but such as were fitter for the Majesty of God then for any
Earthly Prince. And when the Archbishop was constrained to keep silence, Sir
John Bushie proceeded; requiring on the behalf of the Commons, that the
Charters of Pardon, granted to the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundell and Warwick, should be revoked. The king for his part protested that
they were drawn from him by compulsion, and therefore besought them to deliver
their opinions, what they thought thereof: whereupon, the Bishops first gave
their sentence, that the said Pardons were revocable, and might be called in;
but pretending a scrupulosity, as if they might not with safe consciences be
present where Judgment of Blood should pass, they appointed a Layman to be
their Prolocutor for that turn. The Temporal Lords likewise gave their
sentence, that the Pardons were revocable: only the Judges and Lawyers were
not of this opinion. But howsoever, the Archbishop of C^nterbury is hereupon
condemned to perpetual Exile, and appointed to avoid the Realm within six
weeks. Also the Earl of Arundell is by the Duke of La^caster who sat that
day as High Steward, condemned of Treason, and on the Towerhill beheaded. There
went to see the execution, diverse Lords; amongst whom was the Earl of
Nottingham, that had married his daughter, and the Earl of Kent, that was his
daughters son: to whom, at the place of his execution he said, Truly it would
have beseemed you rather to be absent, then here at this business; but the
time will come ere long, that as many shall marvel at your misfortune, as they
do now at mine. After his death, a Fame went, that his head was grown to his
body again: whereupon, the tenth day after his burial, his body, by the kings
appointment was taken up, and then found to be a Fable. After this, the Lord
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick was brought forth, and charged with the like
Treasons; but by the intercession of the Duke of Lancaster and other Lords,
after confession of his fault, was only confined into the Isle of Man. Likewise
the lord Cobha^, and Sir John Cheyny were only banished, or (as Fabian says)
condemned to perpetual Prison. The Parliament after this was held at
Shewsbery; where, for the love the king bore to the Gentlemen and Commons of
the Shi^e of Chester, he caused it to be Ordained, that from thenceforth it
should be called and known by the name of the Principality of Chester; and
herewith entitled himself Prince of Ch^ster. At this Parliament also, called
the Great Parliament, He created five Dukes, and ^ Duchess; one Marquess,
and four Earls. The Earl of Darby was created Duke of Hereford; the Earl of
Nottingham, Duke of Norfolk; the Earl of R^tland^ Duke of A^bemarle; the
Earl of Kent, Duke of Surrey; the Earl of (...), Duke of Exceter; and the
Lady Margaret Marshall Countess of Norfolk, was created Duchess of
Norfolk: The Earl of Somerset was created Marquess Dorse^; the Lord Spenser
was made Earl of Gloucester; the Lord Nevill, Earl of West^erl^^d; the Lord
Scr^^pe, Earl of Wiltshire; and the Lord Thomas Percy L. Steward of the king^
house, was made Earl of Worcester: and for the better maintenance of their
es^^te^, he divided amongst them a great part of those lands that belonged to
the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Aru^dell and Warwick. Also in this
Parliament, the Judges gave their opinions, That when Articles are propounded
by the king to be handled in Parliament, if other Articles be handled before
those be first determined, that it is Treason in them that do it. And in this
Parliament, the king brought it so about, that he obtained the whole power of
the Parliament to be conferred upon cer^taine persons, namely, John Duke of
Lancaster, Edmund Duke of York, Edm^^^ Duke of A^merle, Thomas Duke of Surrey,
John Duke of Exceter, John Marque^^e Dorset, Roger Earl of March, John Earl
of Salisbury, and diverse others; or to any seven or eight of them: and these,
by virtue of this Grant, proceeded to conclude upon many things, which
concerned generally the knowledge of the whole Parliament, to the great
prejudice of the State, and a dangerous example in time to come. A General
Pardon was also granted for all offenses, to all the Kings subjects, but only
to Fifty, whose names he would not express, but reserved them to his own
knowledge, that when any of the Nobility offended him, he might at his pleasure
name him to be one of the number excepted, and so keep them still within his
danger. And for the more strengthening the Acts of this Parliament, the King
purchased the Popes Bulls, containing grievous censures and curses to them that
should break them. And now the heads of the opposite Faction having lost their
heads, and all things as well settled as could be desired, the King was secure,
as thinking himself safe; and he had indeed been safe, if Time and Fortune
were not Actours in Revenge, as well as men; or rather, if a superior Power
did not interpose, whose ways are as secret as himself is invisible.

It now fell out, (though W^iters differ what it was fell out) for some write,
that Thom^s Mowbray accused the Duke of Hereford; others, that Henry Duke of
Herefo^d accused Thomas Mowbr^y Duke of Norfolk, for speaking words sounding
highly to the Kings dishonor: to which the Duke of Norfolk being called to
answer, charged the Duke of Hereford before the King, that he lied falsely.
Whereupon a Combat was agreed upon between them: The King labored to make them
friends; but not prevailing, he gave way to proceed in Combat, and the place to
be at Coventry: where at the day and hour appointed, the Duke of Hereford,
mounted on a white Cou^se^, b^rded with green and blew Velvet, imbroidered
sumptuously with Swans and Antelops of Goldsmiths work, approached the Lists;
Of whom the Marshall, being the Duke of Surry, demanding who he was? he
answered, I am Henry of L^^caster, Duke of Hereford, that am come hither to do
my endeavor against Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, as a Traitor, untrue to
God, the King, his Realm, and me: Then incontinently he swore upon the holy
Evangelists, that his quarrel was true and just, and thereupon required to
enter the Lists, where in ^ Chair of green Velvet he sat down and reposed
himself. Then came the Duke of N^rf^lke, his horse barded with Crimson velvet,
imbroidered richly with Lions of Silver, and Mulbery trees; and when he had
taken his oath before the Constable the Duke of A^merle, that his quarrel was
just, he entered the Lists, and sat him down in his Chair of Crimson velvet,
curtained about with white and red Damask. Then the Marshall viewed their
spears, to see that they were of equal leng^h; and then the Heralds
proclaimed, on the Kings behalf, they should mount on horseb^ck, and address
themselves to the Combat. But when they were set forward, and had their Spears
in their Rests, the King cast down his Warder, and the Heralds cried, Stay,
Stay. Then the king caused their Spears to be taken from them, and deliberated
with his Council, what was ^it to be done in so weighty a cause. After two
long hours, it was at last concluded, that Henry Duke of Hereford should
within fif^^en days depart out of the Realm, and not return before ten
years were expired, upon pain of death; And that Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, should likewise avoid the Realm, and never to return into England,
upon the like pain. It is observable, that this Censure was passed against the
Duke of Norfolk, the very same day Twelve-moneth, in which he had taken order
to put the Duke of Gloucester to death at Calli^, whereof he was then Governor.
When these Judgments were once read, the king called before him both the
Dukes, and made them swear, that the one should never come in place where the
other was. After this, the Duke of N^rf^olke went into Alm^i^^, and from thence
to Venice, where after some time he dyed with sorrow. The Duke of Hereford, at
the taking his leave of the king, had four years of his Banishment released;
and then went to Callis, and from thence to ^aris, where, of the French king he
was so kindly received, that by his favor he had obtained in marriage the only
daughter of the Duke of Berry, Uncle to the French king, if King Richard by
messengers had not hindered him.

It was a Custom in those days, to punish the delinquencies of Great men by
banishment out of the Realm; a Custom not more grievous to the Subject, then
dangerous to the Prince; for by this course, they had means to work so
closely in their mines of Revenge, that the Fabric of a Kingdom was in danger
to be blown up, before their working could be perceived. An example whereof was
never more plainly seen then at this time, in the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Duke of Hereford: For they in their Banishment meeting often together, and
aggravating the Grievances of king Richards Government, fell at last to consult
by what means he might best be removed, seeing there was no hope he could ever
be reclaimed. In the time of their consultation about it, John Duke of
Lancaster, father to the Duke of Hereford, dyed, at Ely house in Holborne: And
as if Fortune herself meant to do their work for them, Solicitations came
from many parts of England, to move the Duke of Hereford to come now and take
the Government upon him, wherein they would be ready to assist him. The Duke
heated before by the Archbishops instigation, and now set on fire by this
solicitation, gives Fortune no leisure to alter her mind, by delaying the
time, but without further deliberation prepares to be going: and taking with
him the Archbishop, the Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Erpington, and Sir Thom^s
Ramston Knights; John Norbury, Robert Waterton, and Francis Coynt Esquires, and
about some threescore other persons, as many as he could readily get; in three
ships which the Duke of Britain lent him, he put to Sea; where hovering about
the Coast a while, to mark the countenance of the shores, he landed at last,
about the beginning of July, at Ravenspurre in Yorkshire: which no sooner was
known, but there repaired to him, the Lords, Willoughby, Rosse: Darcie, and
Beaumont; and shortly after, at Doncaster, the Earl of Northumberland, and his
son Sir Henry Percy, with the Earl of Westmerland, and great numbers of the
Gentry and common sort; of whom, though some had invited him to come to take
the Government of the Realm upon him, yet he forbore to pretend that for any
cause of his coming, but made a solemn Protestation, that he came only to
take possession of the Inheritances descended upon him from his father, which
king Richard most unjustly, and contrary to his promise, had seized into his
hands: for this was a Reason had no objection: the other he reserved, till his
Power should not need to regard Objections. And indeed, no snow-ball ever
gathered greatness so fast by rolling, as his Forces, increased by marching
forward; for by that time he came to Berkly, he had got a mighty Army; and
within three days after, all the Kings Castles in those parts were surrendered
to him. The Duke of York, left Governor of the Kingdom, used his best means
to raise Forces to resist him, but found few willing to bear Arms against
him: whereupon, and perhaps hearing withal that the Dukes coming was but
only to take possession of his Inheritance, he thought good to go to Berkly
to him, to have there some communication about it. At Berkly, at that time, was
arrested the Bishop of Norwich, Sir William Elmham, and Sir Walter Burli^
knights; Laurence Drew, and John Golofer Esquires. From Berkly the two Dukes
went forward toward Bristow; where in the Castle were the Lord William Scroope
Earl of Wiltshire and Treasurer of England, Sir Henry Green, and Sir Henry
Bushye; who were taken, and brought forth bound before the Duke of Lancaster,
and the day after arraigned before the Constable and Marshall, found guilty of
Treason for misgoverning the King and the Realm, and presently had their heads
smitten off. Sir John Russell also was taken there; but he feigning himself to
be our of his wits, escaped for that time.

All this while K. Richard was in Ireland, where he performed Acts in
repressing the Rebels there, not unworthy of him; and having with him amongst
other of the Great Lords, the Duke of Lancasters son Henry, he there for his
towardliness in service, Knighted him^ by which it appeared that he had no
great fear of ^he Father, when he graced the Son; and indeed he needed not
have feared him i^ his own absence out of England had not given him advantage.
Six weeks were now passe^ after the Dukes arrival in England; in all which
time king Richard had no notice^ it, by reason the winds were contrary to come
^orth of England: But as soon as (...) heard it, and in what hostile manner he
proceeded, he then determined to return instantly into England; and had done
it, but that the Duke of Aumerle his princip^^ Counselor (whether out of a
good meaning, but grounded upon errors, or ou^ of an ill meaning, but shadowed
with colors) by all means persuaded him to stay so long till things fitting
for his journey might be made ready. It was king Richards ill luck to hearken to
this Counsel: but yet he presently sent the Earl of Salisbury into England,
to provide him an Army out of Wales and Ch^shire, against his own coming,
which he promised faithfully should be within six days at the most. The Earl
landed at Co^way in Wales, and had soon gotten to the number of Forty Thousand
men: but the six days passed, and no news of the King: which made the
soldiers suspect that he was dead, and thereupon were ready to disband; but at
the Earl of Salisburies persuasion, they were contented to stay for some days
longer; and when the King came not in that time neither, they then would stay
no longer, but departed and went home. At length, about eighteen days after
that the King had sent away the Earl of Salisbury, he took shipping, together
with the Dukes of A^merle, Exceter, and Surrey, and diver^ other of the
Nobility; with the Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Carlisle; and landed at
Barklowly in Wales. He had about him some Ch^shire men, and was at first in no
great doubt of prevailing: but when he heard that all the Castles from the
borders of Scotland unto Bristow, were delivered to the Duke of Lancaster, and
that the gratest part of the Nobility and Commons took part with him, and
specially that his principal Counselors had lost their heads at Brist^^;
then, solvuntur frigore membra, he fell so utterly to despair, that calling
his Army together, he licensed every man to be gone, and to shift for himself.
The soldiers besought him to be of good cheer, swearing they would stand with
him to the death: But this encouraged him not at all; so as the next night he
stole from his Army, and with the Dukes of Exceter and Surry, the Bishop of
Carlisle, Sir Stephen Scroope, and some half a score others, he got him to the
Castle of Co^^ay, where he found the Earl of Salisbury, determining there to
stay, till he might see the world at some better stay. Here the Earl of
Worcester Steward of the Kings house, broke his white staff, and without delay
went to the Duke of Lancaster; who understanding that k. Richard was returned
out of Ireland, he left the Duke of York at Bristow, and came back with his
Power to Berkly, and from thence the next day came to Gloucester, then to Rosse,
after to Hereford, where came to him the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Edmund
Mortimer: on the Sunday following he went to Ly^ster, and there the Lord
Charleton came to him: from thence he went to Ludlow, and the next day to
Shrewsbery, and thither came to him Sir Robert Leigh and Sir John Leigh, and
many other, being sent from Chester, to offer their service; thither also came
to him the Lord Scales, and the Lord ^ardolphe, forth of Ireland: From
Shrewsbery he went to Chester, and from thence sent for his son and heir,
and likewise for the Duke of Glocesters son and heir (whom K. Richard had
left in custody in Ireland) with all speed to come into England; but the Duke
of Glocesters son through misfortune perished at Sea, or as some write, dyed of
the plague; the sorrow whereof caused, shortly after, his mothers death. After
this, the Duke sent the Earl of Northumberland to the king; who upon
safe conduct coming to him, declared, that if it might please his Grace to
undertake, that there should be a Parliament assembled, in which Justice might
be had, and herewith pardon the Duke of Lancaster of all things wherein he had
offended, the Duke would be ready to come to him on his knees, and as an humble
subject obey him in all dutiful services. Yet upon this conference with the
Earl, some say, the king required only, that himself and eight more, whom he
would name, might have honorable allowance, with the assurance of a private
quiet life, and that then he would resign his Crown; and that upon the Earls
Oath that this should be performed, the king agreed to go^ with the Earl to
meet the Duke: but after four miles riding, coming to the place where they
had laid an Ambush, the King was enclosed, and constrained to go with ^he
Earl to Rutland, where they dined, and from thence to Flint, to bed. The (...)
had very few of his friends about him, but only the Earl of Salisbury, the
^ishop of Carlisle, the Lord Scroope, Sir Nicolas Ferehye, and James D'Arthois a
Gas^^^gne, who still wore a white Heart, the Cognizance of his Master K.
Richard, and neither for Promises nor Threats would be drawn to leave it off.

The King being in the Castle of Flint, and Duke Henry with his Army
approaching near the Town, the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Duke of
Aumerle and the Earl of Worcester, went before to the King; whom the King
spying from the walls where he stood, went down to meet, and finding they did
their due reverence to him on their knees, he took them up, and taking the
Archbishop aside, n^ked with him a good while; and as it was reported, the
Archbishop willed him to be of good comfort, for he should be assured not to
have any hurt as touching his person. After this, the Duke of Lancaster came to
the Castle himself, all-armed; and being within the first gate, he there
stayed, till the King, accompanied with the Bish^p of Carlisle, and Earl of
Salisbury, and Sir Stephen Scroope, who bore the sword before him, came forth,
and sat down in a place prepared for him. As soon as the^ Duke saw him, he
came toward him, bowing his knee; and coming forward, did so the second time,
and the third, till the king took him by the hand, and lift him up, saying,
Dear Cousin, you are welcome. The Duke humbly thanking him, s^^d^ My
Sovereign Lord and king, the cause of my coming at this present, is (your
Honor saved) to have restitution of my Person, my Lands and Heritage: Whereto
the king answered: Dear Cousin, I am ready to accomplish your will, so that
you may enjoy all that is yours without exception. After this, coming forth of
the Castle, the king called for wine; and after they had drunk, they mou^^ed
on horseback, and rode to Chester, the next day to Nantwych, then to
Newc^stle, from thence to Stafford, and then to Lichfield, and there rested
Sunday: after that, they rode forward, and lodged first at Coventry, then at
Dayntree, then at N^r^h^mpton, next day at Dunstable, then at S. Albans, and so
came to London: In all which journey they suffered not the king to change his
apparel, but made him ri^e still in one suit of raiment, and that but a simple
one, though he in his time was ^x^^eding sumptuous in apparel, having one
Coat which was valued at Thirty Thousand marks: And in this ^ort he was
brought the next way to Westminster, and from thence the next day had to the
Tower, and committed to safe Custody. After this, a Parliament was called by
the Duke of Lancaster, but in the name of ^. Richard; in which many heinous
points of Misgovernment were laid to his charge, and were engrossed up in three
and thirty Articles, the chief whereof were these: That he had wastefully
spent the Treasure of the Realm. That without Law or Justice, he had caused
the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of Arundell to be put to death. That he
had borrowed great sums of money, and given his Letters Patents to repay
the same, and yet not one Penny ever paid. That he had said, The Laws of the
Realm were in his head, and in his breast: by reason of which fantastical
opinion, he destroyed Noblemen, and impoverished the Commons. That he changed
Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament at his pleasure. That most tyrannously
he said, that the lives and goods of all his subjects were in his hands and at
his disposition. That whereas diverse Lords were by the Court of Parliament
appointed to treat of matters concerning the state of the Kingdom; they being
busied about the same Commission, ^e w^^t about to appeach them of high
Treason. That by force and threats, he enforced the Judges of the Realm, at
Shrewsbery, to condescend to his way, for the destruction of diverse of the
Lords. That he caused his fathers own brother, the Duke of Gloucester, without
Law to be attached and sent to Callis, and there without reason secretly
murdered. That notwithstanding the Earl of Arundell at his Arraignment
pleaded his Charter of Pardon, yet he could not be heard, but was shamefully
and suddenly put to death. That he ^ssembl^d certain La^cashire and C^^shire
men, to m^ke war upon his Lord and suffered them to rob and spoil, without
prohibition. That though he had made Proclamation that the Lords were not
attached for any cri^^ of Treason, yet afte^ward in the Parliament he laid
Treason to their charge. That notwit^standing his Pardon granted to them, he
enforced diverse of the Lords partak^rs to be again intolerably Fined, to their
utter undoing. That without the ^ssent of the Peers, he carried the Jewels and
Plate of this Kingdom^ into Ireland.


Upon these, and some other Articles, he was by Parliament adjudged to be
deposed from all Kingly Honor, and Princely Government. And thereupon, the
King being advised by his own servants, rather voluntarily to resign the
Crown, then by compulsion to be forced to it; on the Monday before the nine
and ^^entieth day of September, in the year 1399. he made a sol^mne
Resignation, before diver^ Lords and others, sent to him for that purpose: and
an Ins^^ume^t of hi^ R^signation being made, he would needs read it before them
all himself, and then subscribed it; and withal, made it his suit, that t^^
Duke of Lanc^ster might be his Successor, and King after him; and for a sign
of his desire hereof, he took his Signe^ Ring of Gold from his finger, and put
it upon the Duke of Lancasters; that never man who had used a Kingdom with
such violence, gave it over with such patience, or rather such willingness, that
he seemed rather to affect it, then that he was any way forced to it. This
Resignation of K. Richard being showed to the Parliament, both Houses gave
their assent; and then C^mmissioners were appointed to pronounce openly the
sentence of his deposing, which was done by the Bishop of Assaph, and all
Allegiance renounced to him.

And now it is easy to be observed, what a wonderful concurrene of fortunes,
in behalf of the Duke of Lancaster, and against K. Ri^hard, happened together,
whereof if any one had been missing, he had never been turned ^ut of his Throne
in such manner as he was: For first, if it had not happened that K. Richard had
been in Ireland at the time when the Duke began his attempt, it had ^or been
possisible for him to compass^ his design as he did: And then, if King Richard
being in Ireland, he had not by misfortune of weather been kept six weeks
from hearing of the Dukes arrival, he had not given him so large a time for
raising of Forces, and ^o more easily might have resisted him: Or after K.
Richard heard of the Dukes arrival, if he had followed the Earl of Salisbury,
and not stayed so many days longer then he promised, he had found an Army
ready to receive ^im, sufficient at least to have given a stop to the Dukes
proceedings: Or when at last he came over, and found his Army to fail him, if
withal his own courage had not failed him, but that he had manfully put it to
the hazard of a Battle, as his soldiers themselves would have had him to do,
he could not choose but have made a better end of his business then now he did.
But when all is done, there is no warding ^he blows of Fortune; or to say
better, No resisting the Decree of Heaven: but seeing that Decree is an Abyssus
to us, and may perhaps but be conditional; we shall manifestly be Traitors to
our selves, if we use not our uttermost endeavors to divert it: That it may
truly be said, King Richard lost his Crown, more by his own Treason, then by
the Treason of any other.

Of his Taxations.
IN his second year, in a Parliament held at Gloucester: was granted to be paid
by the Merchants, upon every sack of wool a Mark, for this present year; and
for every pounds worth of wares, brought from beyond Sea, and sold here, six
pence of the Buyer. In his Third year, in a Parliament of Westminster, a
Subsidy was granted to be levied of the Great men of the Realm, to the end the
Commons might be spared: The Dukes of Lancaster and Britain paid 20 marks;
every Earl 6 marns; Bishops and Abbots with Miter, as much: every Monk, three
shillings four pence: also every Justice, Sheriff, Knight, Esquire, Parson
and Vicar, were charged after a certain rate; but no Commons of the Layitie.
Also this year, in another Parliament, was granted a Tenth by the Clergy, and
a Fifteenth by the Laytie; but with this condition, That from thenceforth,
which was in March, 1380. till the Feast of S. Michael, which should be in the
year 1381. there should be no more Parliaments: but yet was not observed. In
his Fourth year, in a Parliament at Northampton, a new kind of Subsidy was
granted; of every Priest Secular or Regular, six shillings eight pence; and as
much of every Nun; and of every man or woman, married or not married, being
sixteen years of age, (beggars only excepted) four pence. In his Fifth
year, a Subsidy was granted by the Merchants, of certain Customs of their
wools which they bought and sold, called a Maletot, to endure for four years.
In his Seventh year was granted him one Moyity of a Fifteenth by the Laytie;
and shortly after, a Moyitie of a Tenth by the Clergy. In his Ninth year,
half of a Tenth, and half of a Fifteenth by the Laytie. In his Eleventh
year, there was granted him a Tenth of the Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the
Laytie. In hi^ Twelveth year, at a Parliament, was granted of every Sack of
wool, forty shillings; whereof, ten shillings to be applied presently to the
Kings use; the other thirty to remain in the hands of Treasurers, toward the
charges of wars, if any should happen. Also there was a Subsidy granted, of
six pence in the pound; whereof^ four pence to the use last mentioned; the
other two pence to be at the kings pleasure. In his Fifteenth year, at a
Parliament, was granted a Tenth of the Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the Laytie,
toward the charges of John Duke of La^caster, sent into France. In his
Eighteenth year, a Tenth was granted by the Clergy, and a Fifteenth by the
Laytie, toward his own journey into Ireland. In his Twentieth year, the
Clergy granted him a Tenth, to be paid that year. In his one and twentieth
year, upon pretense of having aided the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundell and Warwick against him, he caused blanke Charters to be made, which
he compelled both Citizens and Gentlemen in the Country to seal, whereby he
might charge them afterward to pay whatsoever he required. In his two and
twentieth year, a Fifteenth and a half was granted; and for the Customs of
wools, fifty shillings upon every Sack, of Englishmen borne, and three pounds
of Strangers.

Of Laws and Ordinances in his time.
IN his second year, in a Parliament at Gloucester, it was enacted, That
Merchant-strangers might buy and sell in Gross, or by Retaile, within this
Realm. In his Third year, in a Parliament at Westminster, It was Ordained,
that the Privileges and Immunities of the Abbey of Westminster should remain
inviolate; but with this Proviso, against those that took Sanctuary with
pu^pose to defraud their Creditours, That their lands and goods should be
liable to their debts. In his Sixth year, a Parliament was holden, in which
the Major of London, upon suggestion that the Fishmongers used great deceit in
uttering of their Fish, obtained to have it Enacted, That from thenceforth,
none of that Company, nor of the Vintners, Grocers, Butchers, or other that
sold any provision of Victuals, should be admitted Major of the City: but in
the Parliament next following, were restored to their liberty again, saving
that they might not keep Courts among themselves, but that all transgressions
of their Customs should be tried at the Majors Court. In his Eleventh year,
K. Richard created John Beauchamp of Holt, Baron of Kedermister, by his Letters
Patents; the first that was so made; for before this time, Barons were always
made by calling them to Parliaments by the Kings Writ.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN the second year of this Kings Reign, there came messengers from the
new-elected Pope Urban, to require the Kings aid against such Cardinals as he
named Schism^ticks, that had elected another Pope, whom they named Clem^nt:
which Cardinals sent messengers likewi^e to crave his aid for them, but
through persuasion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Vrbans request was granted,
and Clement rejected. In his fourth year, John Wickliffe set forth his opinion
touching the Sacrament of the Altar, denying the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, in such sort, as the Church of Rome did then teach. In his
sixth year, Henry Spencer Bishop of No^wi^h received Bulls from Pope Vrb^n, to
grant all privileges of the Crusado to all such as would come over and assist
him against the Antipope Clement; which being debated in Parliament, It was
after much opposition, agreed that it should go forward; and thereupon, the
Bishop not only gathered much money from such as would contribute to the
expedition, but drew many great Captains to go themselves in person; as
namely, Sir Hugh Calverley, sir William Farington, the Lord Henry Beau^^^t, sir
William Elmham, sir Tho^as Tryvet, and diverse others. The money raised by
contribution, came to 25000 Franks, and the Army to 3000 Horse, and 15000 Foot;
with which Forces, the Bishop passing over into Flanders, won the Towns of
Graveling, Dunkirke, and Newport; but at last encountered by a mighty Army of
the French, he was put to the worse, and returned into England. In the twelveth
year of this Kings Reign, an Act was made that none should pass the Seas to
purchase promotions or provisions (as they termed them) in any Church or
Churches. Also in this year Thomas late Earl of Lancaster, by reason of
miracles reported to be done by him, was Canonized for a Saint. At this time
also, the Wickliffs mervelously increased, Preaching against Pilgrimages and
Images, whose greatest opposer was the Bishop of Norwich. In his thirteenth
year, Proclamation was made, that all Beneficed men abiding in the Court of
Rome, should return into England by a certain day, under pain of forfeiting
their Benefices; and all other not Beneficed, under a certain pain likewise.
Also about this time a Statute was made, that no Ecclesiastical person should
possess Manours, Houses, Lands, Revenues, or Rents whatsoever at the hands of
the Feoffee, without the Kings License, and the chief Lords. In his eighteenth
year, the Wickliffs were persecuted, and excommunication pronounced against
them by the Archbishop of Canterbury. In this Schism of the two Popes, the
French Clergy wrote in behalf of Clement their Pope, and sent it into England;
the Clergy of England on the contrary, wrote in behalf of Pope Urban, and so
nothing was agreed.

Works of Piety in his time.
IN the 20th year of this Kings Reign, William B^teman Bishop of Norwich
builded Trinity Hall in Cambridge. In the third year of his Reign, John
Philpot Major of London, gave to the City certain Tenements, for the which the
Chamberlain pays yearly to thirteen poor people, to every of them seven
pence the week for ever; and as any of those thirteen persons dies, the Major
appoints one to succeed, and the Recorder another. In the one and twentieth
year of his Reign, King Richard caused the great Hall at Westminster to be
repaired, both the Walls, Windows, and Roof. In his time, Si^^^ Archbishop of
Canterbury, slain by the Rebels upon Tower hill, built the West-gate of
Canterbury, and from thence to the North-gate, commonly called the long wall.
Thomas Fits-Ala^ or Arundell, being Bishop of Ely, built the great Gatehouse of
Ely house in Holborne; and being after Bishop of Canterbury, he built a fair
spire steeple at the West End of his Church there, called to this day, Arundell
steeple, and bestowed a tuneable ring of five Bells upon the same.

Of Casualties happening in his time.
IN his third year, so great a mortality afflicted the North parts of England,
that the Country became almost desolate. In his sixth year, on the 24 day of
May, there happened so great an earthquake, or (as some write) a watershake,
that it made Ships in the Havens to beat one against the other. In July, in the
year 1389. whilst the King was at Sheene; there swarmed in his Court such
multitudes of Flies and Gnats, skirmishing with one another; that in the end
they were swept away with brooms by heaps, and bushels were filled with them.
In his twelveth year, in March, first there were terrible Winds; afterward
followed a great mortality, and after that a great dearth; that a bushel^ of
wheat was sold for thirteen pence, which was then thought a great price; for
the years before it was sold for six pence, and Wool was sold for two
shillings a stone. In his fourteenth year, on Christmas day, a Dolphin was
taken at London Bridge, being ten foot long, and a monstrous grown fish. Ind
his eighteenth year, an Exhalation, in likeness of fire appeared in the night
in many places of England; which when a man went alone, went as he went, and
stayed as he stayed; sometimes like a wheel, sometimes like a Barrel,
sometimes like a timberlogge; but when many went together, it appeared to be
far off. Also in a Parliament time, there was a certain Image of wax made by
Necromancie (as was said) which at an hour appointed, uttered these words:

The Head shall be cut off; the Head shall be lift up aloft; the feet shall be
lift up above the Head: and then spoke no more. This happened in the
Parliament, called the Mavelous Parliament, not long before the Parliament
that wrought wonders. In his one and thirtieth year, a River not far from
Bedford, suddenly ceased his course, so as the channel remained dry by the
space of three miles; which was judged to signify, the Revolting of the
Subjects from their natural Prince. In his two and twentieth year, almost
through all England, old Bay-trees withered, and afterward grew green again;
which was supposed to import some strange event. About the year 1380. the
making of Gunnes was found by a Germa^e, which may well be reckoned amongst
casualties, seeing it was found by casualty; for this Germane having beaten
Brimstone in a mortar to powder, and covered it with a stone; it happened, that
as he struck fire, a spark chanced to fall into the powder; which caused such
a flame out of the mortar, that it raised the stone a great height; which after
he perceived, he made a Pipe of iron, and tempered the powder with some other
ingredients, and so finished that deadly Engine. The first that used it, were
the Venetians against the inhabitans of Geneva.

Of his Wives.
KING Richard in his time had two Wives; the first was Anne Daughter to the
Emperor Charles the Fourth, and Sister to the Emperor Wenceslaus; who lived
his wife ten years, and dyed without issue at Sheene in Surry, in the year
1392; whose death King Richard took so heavily, that he caused the buildings
of that Palace to be thrown down and defaced, as though to revenge himself
upon the place, could ease his mind, and mitigate his sorrow. His second Wife
was Isabel Daughter to Charles the Sixth King of France; She was married to him
at eight years of age, and therefore never co-habited. After King Richards
death she was sent home, and married afterward to Charles Son and heir to the
Duke of Orleance.

Of his Personage and conditions.
HE was the goodliest personage of all the Kings that had been since the
conquest; tall of stature, of straight and strong limbs, fair and amiable of
countenance; and such a one as might well be the Son of a most beautiful
mother. Concerning his Conditions, there was more to be blamed in his
Education, than in his Nature; for there appeared in him many good
inclinations, which would have grown to be abilities, if they had not been
perverted by corrupt flatterers in his youth. He was of a credulous
disposition, apt to believe, and therefore easy to be abused. His greatest
transgression was, that he went with his friends ultra aras, where he should
have gone but usque ad aras. His greatest imbecilitie, that he could not
distinguish between a flatterer and a friend. He seemed to have in him both a
French nature and an English; violent at the first apprehension, calm upon
deliberation; He never showed himself more worthy of the Government, than when
he was deposed as unworthy to Govern; for it appeared, that his Regality was
not so dear unto him, as a private quiet lif^^ which if he might have enjoyed,
he would never have complained that Fortune had done him wrong.

Of his Death and Burial.
KIng Richard, shortly after his Resignation, was conveyed to the Castle of
Leeds in Kent, and from thence to Pomfret; where the common fame is, that he
was served with costly meat, like a King, but not suffered once to touch it,
and so dyed of forced famine. But Thomas Walsingham refers it altogether to
a voluntary pining of himself, through grief of his misfortunes. But one
Writer, well acquainted with king Richards doings, says, that king Henry
sitting one day at his Table, said sighing, Have I no faithful friend that
will deliver me of him who will be my death^ This speech was specially noted by
one Sir Piers of Ex^on; who presently, with eight persons in his company, went
to Pomfret, commanding the Esquire that took the Assay before king Richard, to
do so no more, saying, Let him eat now, for he shall not eat long. King
Richard sitting down to dinner, was served without Assay; whereat marvelling,
he demanded of his Esquire, why he did not his duty? Sir (said he) I am
otherwise commanded by Sir Piers of Ex^on, who is newly come from king Henry.
When king Richard heard that word, he took the Carving knife in his hand, and
stroke the Squire on the head, saying, The Devil take Henry of Lancaster and
thee together: And with that word, Sir Piers entered the Chamber, with eight
armed men, every of them having a Bill in his hand. King Richard perceiving
this, put the Table from him, and stepping to the foremost man, wrung the bill
out of his hands, and slew four of those that thus came to assail him; but in
conclusion, was felled with a stroke of a Poll-axe, which Sir Piers gave him
upon the head, with which blow he fell down dead^ though it be scarce credible,
that ^ man upon his bare word, and without showing any warrant, should be
admitted to do such a fact. Sir Piers having thus slain him, wept bitterly: a
poor amends for so heinous a trespass. King Richard thus dead, his body was
embalmed, and covered with Lead, all save the face, and then brought to London,
where it lay at Paul's three days together, that all men might behold it, to
see he was dead: The corpse was after had to Langley in Buckinghamshire, and
there buried in the Church of the Friars Preachers: but afterward, by k. Henry
the Fifth, it was removed to Westminster, and there honorably entombed, with
Queen Anne his wife; and that beautiful picture of a King, sitting crowned in
a Chair of State, at the upper end of the Quire in S. Peter's at Westminster,
is said to be of him: although the Scots untruly write, that he escaped out of
Prison, and led a solitary and virtuous life in Scotland, and there dyed, and
is buried (as they hold) in the Blackfriars at Sterling. He lived three and
thirty years, Reigned two and twenty and three months.

Men of Note in this Kings time.
MEn of Valor in his time were so many, that to reckon them all, would be a
hard task; and to leave out any, would be an injury: yet to give an instance
in one, we may take John of Gaunt Duke of Lanca^ter, whose valor was no less
seen abroad then at home: In France, in Germany, in Spain; in all which places
he left Trophies of his Victories. But of learned men, we may name these:
William Thorn an Augustine Friar of Canterbury, an Historiographer: Adam
Merimouth, a Canon of Paul's Church in London, who wrote two Historical
Treatises; one entitled Chronicon 40. annoru^; another, Chr^nicon 60. ^nnorum.
William Packington sometime Secretary to the Black Prince, an excellent
Historiographer: William Badbye a Carmelite Friar, Bishop of Worcester, and
Confessor to the Duke of Lancaster: John ^ourg, Chancellor of the University
of Cambridge: William Sc^ade, a Monk of Buck^ast Abbey in Devonshire: John
Th^risbye Archbishop of York, Lord Chancellor of England, and a Cardinal:
Willi^m Berton Chancellor of Oxford, an Adversary to Wickliffe: Philip
Repington Abbot of Leicester, a Defender of Wickliffe: Walter Brit, a Scholar
of Wickliffs, a writer both in Divinity and other Arguments: John Sharp, a
great adversary to Wickliffe, who wrote many Treatises: Peter Pateshall, a
great favourer of Wickliffe: Marcell Ingelno, an excellent Divine, one of the
first Teachers in the University of Heydelberg: Richard Withee a learned
Priest, and an earnest follower of Wickliffe: John Swasham Bishop of Bangor, a
great adversary to the Wickliffs: Adam Eston, a great Linguist, and a
Cardinal: John Trevise, a Cornish man, and a secular Priest, who translated
the Bible, Bartholmew, De Proprietatibus Rerum; Polichronicon of Ranulph
Higden, and diverse other Treatises: John Moon, an English man, but a Student
in Paris; who compiled in the French tongue, The Romant of the Rose; translated
into English by Geoffry Ch^wcer, and diverse others.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH.
Of his coming to the Crown.
AFter the Resignation of King Richard, and the sentence of his Deposing openly
read in Parliament; Henry Duke of Lancaster rises up from his seat; and first,
making the Sign of the Cross upon his forehead and breast, he said: In the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: I Henry of Lancaster claim
the Crown of England, as descended by right line from King Henry the Third. And
having thus spoken, he sat down again. Upon this, the Archbishop conferred
with the Lords; and having heard their opinions, he ^urned to the Commons,
asking them, if they would join with the Lords, in choosing Henry of Lancaster
for their King: who all with one voice cried, Yea, Yea: whereupon going to the
Duke, he bowed his knee, and taking him by the hand, led him to the Royal
seat; and then began a Sermon, taking for his Text, out of the first Book of
the Kings, cap. 9. Vir dominabitur in populo: wherein he declared what a
happiness it is to a Nation to have a King of wisdom and valor, and showed
the Duke of La^caster to be such a one; and as much the defects in both, of the
late king Richard. The Sermon ended, the king thanked them all for his
El^ction; and testified unto them, that he meant not to take advantage against
any man's estate, a^ coming in by Conquest; but that every one should freely
enjoy his own, as in times of lawful succession. And now a time was appointed
for his Coronation; and accordingly, upon the 13th day of October following,
the very day wherein the year before he had been banished, he was Crowned at
Westminster, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, with all Rites and Ceremonies
accust^med. At his Coronation, he was anointed with an Oil which a Religious
man had given to Henry, the first Duke of Lancaster, together with this
Proph^re, That the kings anointed with this oil, should be the Champions of
the Church. This oil coming to the hands of king Richard, as he was looking
amongst his Jewels, going then into Ireland, he was desirous to be anointed
with it, but that the Archbishop of Canterbury told him, it was not lawful to
be anointed twice: whereupon putting it up again, at his coming afterward to
Fli^t, the Archbishop got it of him, and kept it till ^he Coronation of king
Henry, who was the first king of the Realm that was anointed with it. The day
before the Coronation, the king in the Tower made one and ^orty, some say but
twelve, knights of the Bathe, whereof four were his own sons, Henry^
Thomas, John, and Humfry, all then alive; and with them, ^hree Earls, and five
^^rons. Upon the Feast Day, many claimed Offices, as belonging to their
Tenures, ^o which, upon showing their Right, they were admitted. And now the
King ^ade diverse new Officers: The Earl of Northumberland he made Constable of
Eng^^nd; the Earl of Westmerland was made Lord Marshall; Sir John Serle,
Chancellor; ^ohn Newbery Esquire, Treasurer; and Sir Rich^rd Clifford was made
Lord Keeper of ^he Privy Seal: The Lord Henry his eldest son, being then
about thirteen years ^f age, was created Prince of Wal^s, Duke of Cornwall, and
Earl of Chester, and ^oone after also Duke of Aquitaine: and the Crown was by
Parliament E^^ailed ^o King Henry, and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten.

After this a Parliament was holden, in which the Acts made in the Eleventh
year of King Richard were revived, and the Acts made in his one and twentieth
year were wholly repealed; and they who by that Parliament were attainted,
were re^tored to their Lands and Honors: whereupon Richard Earl of Warwick
was de^ivered out of Prison, and the Earl of Arundells son recovered his
Inheritance; and many other also that were banished, or imprisoned by King
Richard, were then ^ully restored to their liberty and estates. Also the King
gave to the Earl of West^erland the County of Richmond; and to the Earl of
Northumberland the Isle of M^n, to be holden of him by bearing the sword
wherewith he entered into England. And now was the time for showing of Spleens:
Sir John Bagot then Prisoner in the Tower, accused the Earl of A^merle for
speaking words against the Duke of Lanc^ster, now King: also the Lord Fitzwater
accused him for the death of the Duke of Gloucester: the Lord M^rley appealed
the Earl of Salisbury of Treason: and one Hall accused the Duke of Exceter,
for conspiring the death of John of Gaunt the Kings father: But King Henry
having entered the Throne in a storm, was willing now to have a Calm; and
therefore laying aside the ones Accusations, he accepted of the others Excuses,
and received the Duke of A^merle, and the Duke of Exceter into as much favor,
as if they had never been accused:

And to qualify the hard opinion which foreign Princes might conceive of
King Richards Deposing, He sent Ambassadors into diverse Countries, to make it
known, by what Title, and by what favor of the People he came to the
Kingdom. To the Court of Rome he sent John Trenevant Bishop of Hereford, Sir
John Cheyny Knight, and John Cheyny Esquire: Into France he sent Walter Sherlow
Bishop of Durham, and Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester: Into Spain he sent John
Trevor Bishop of Assaph, and Sir William Parre: and into Germany he sent the
Bishop of Bangor, and certain others. Most of these Princes seemed either not
to regard what was done, or were easily persuaded that all was done well: only
Charles King of France was so distempered with this indignity offered to his
son in Law K. Richard, that by violence of his Passion, he fell into his old
pangues of Frenzy; but somewhat recovered, he resolved to revenge it; wherein
many Lords of France showed themselves forward, but specially the Earl of S.
Paul, who had married K. Richards halfe-sister: yet having prepared an Army in
readiness, when afterward they heard of King Richards death, they dissolved it
again, as considering the time was then past. The Aquitaines also, and
specially the Citizens of Bordeaux, as being the place where K. Richard was
born, were mightily incensed: but Sir Robert Knolls Lieutenant of Guyen, and
afterward Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, being sent to them by the King, so
persuaded them, that with much ado they continued in obedience.

It was about this time, moved in Parliament, what should be done with King
Richard (for he was not as yet murdered:) Whereupon, the Bishop of Carlisle, ^
learned man and wise, and who had never given allowance to the Deposing of King
Richard; now that he was in a place of freedom of speech, he rose up, and said:

My Lords, The matter now propounded is of mavelous weight and consequence;
wherein there are two points chiefly to be considered: the first, Whether King
Richard be sufficiently put out of his Throne: the second, Whether the Duke of
Lancaster be lawfully taken in. For the first, how can that be sufficiently
done, when there is no Power sufficient to do it? The Parliament cannot, for
of the Parliament the King is the Head; and can the Body put down the He^^ You
will say, But the Head may bow it self down; and so may the King ^esign^ It
is true; but what force is in that which is done by force? and who knows (...)
that King Richards Resignation was no other. But suppose he be sufficiently ou^
yet how comes the Duke of Lancaster to be lawfully in? If you say, by Con^uest,
you speak Treason; for what Conquest without Arms? and can a subject take Ar^^
against his lawful Sovereign, and not be Treason? If you say, by El^ction of
(...) State, you speak not reason; for what power has the State to El^ct,
while any (...) living that has right to succeed? but such a Succ^s^or is not
the Earl of Lancaster, as descended from Edmund Crouchback, the elder son of
King Henry the Third, though put by the Crown for deformity of his body; For
who knows not the falsenesse of this allegation? seeing it is a thing
notorious, that this Edmund was neither the elder brother, nor yet
crooke-backr, (though called so for some other reason) but a goodly personage,
and without any deformity. And your selves cannot forget a thing so lately
done; who it was, that in the fourth year of K^^g Richard was declared by
Parliament to be Heir to the Crown, in case K. (...) should dye without
issue. But why then is not that claim made? because, Sil^^^ leges inter arma;
what disputing of Titles against the stream of Power? B^^ howsoever, it is
extreme injustice, the King Richard should be condemned, without being heard,
or once allowed to make his defense. And now, my Lords, I have spoken thus at
this time, that you may consider of it before it be too late; for as yet it is
in your power to undo that justly, which you have unjustly done.

Much to this purpose was the Bishops speech; but to as little purpose as if he
had gone about to call back Yesterday: The matter was too far gone; and
scarce a person there present, that had not a hope of either a private or a
public benefi^ by that which was done. Yet against this speech of the Bishop
there was neither Protesting nor Excepting; It passed in the House as but one
man's opinion: And as for the King, it was neither fit he should use much
severity against any Member of that Parliament which had so lately showed so
much indulgence toward him; nor indeed safe, to be too hot in his Punishment,
when he was yet scarce warm in his Government. Yet for a warning to use their
liberty of speech with more moderation hereafter, the Bishop was arrested by
the Marshall, and committed to Prison in the Abbey of S. Albans, but afterward
without further censure se^ at liberty; till upon a conspiracy of the Lords,
wherein he was a Party, he was condemned to dye, though through extremity of
grief he prevented execution. But as for King Richard, and Edmund Mortimer
Earl of March, enough was spoken by the Bishop in both their behalfes, to
undo them both: and indeed, K. Richard was soon after made away; the Earl
secured himself by retiring far off, to his Lordship of Wigmore: avoiding
the danger of Contention, by not entering the Lists of Aspiring: But although
the Divine Providence, for causes hidden from humane knowledge, gave way at
this time to the advancement of the younger, the House of Lancaster; yet in the
third Generation after, the elder, the House of Clarence recovered its Right,
in K. Edwa^^ the Fourth; that we may know, it is but staying the leisure of
Heaven, for every one to have his Right, either in Person, or by Proxy.

But whether incited by this speech of the Bishop, or otherwise out of the
ran^^ur of envy is some, and malice in others; it was not long after, before
there grew in the minds of many both Lords and other, a malignant inclination
toward King Henry; and came first to be a Conspiracy in the house of the
Abbot of Westminster. This Abbot was a kind of Booke-statesman, but better
read in the Politics of Aristotle then of Solomon; who remembering some words
of King Henry, which he had spoken long before, when he was but Earl of Darby;
That Princes had too little, and Religious men too much: and fearing, lest
being now king, he should reduce his words into act, he thought it better to
use preventing Physic beforehand, then to stand to the hazard of a curing
afterward: and thereupon invited to his house the discontented Lords ^^s
namely, John Holland Duke of Exceter, Thomas Holland hi^ brothers son, Duke
of Surry, Edward Duke of A^merle, John Montacute Earl of S^lisbury, Hugh
Spenser Earl of Gloucester, John Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Thomas Blunt, and
Ma^^lin one of King Richards Chapel: who after dinner conferring together,
and communicationg their spleenes against King Henry one with another; they
resolved at last, both to take away the Kings life, and of the way how to do
it. The device was this: They would publish a solemn Justs to be^olden at
Oxford, at a day appointed, and invite the King to honor it with his presence;
and there, in the time of acting the Justs, when all men's intentions should be
otherwise busied, they would have him be murdered. This device was resolved
on; Oaths for secrecy were taken; and Indentures sextipartite for performing
conditions agreed upon between them, sealed and delivered: The Justs are
proclaimed; the King is invited, and promises to come; secrecy of all hands
kept most firmly to the very day: But though all other kept counsel, yet
Fortune would not, but she discovered all; For it fortuned, that as the Duke of
Aumerle was riding to the Lords at Oxford, against the day appointed, he took
it in his way to go visit his father the Duke of York; and having in his
bosom the Indenture of Confederacy, his father, as they sat at dinner,
chanced to spy it, and asked what it was? to whom his son answering, It was
nothing that any way concerned him; By S. George, says his father, but I will
see it: and there withal snatching it from him, read it; and finding the
Contents, and reviling his son for being now the second time a Traitor,
before to King Richard, and now to King Henry, he commanded his horses to be
instantly made ready, and with all the speed he could make, rode to Windsor,
where the King then lay: but the younger years of his son out-rid him, and
came to the Court before him; where locking the Gates, and taking the keys
from the Po^ter, pretending some special reason, he went up to the King, and
falling on his knees, ^sked his Pardon. The king demanding, for what offense?
he then discovered the whole Plot: which he had scarce done, when his father
came rapping at the Court-gates, and coming to the king, showed him the
Indenture of Confederacy which he h^d taken from his son. This, though i^
amazed the king, yet it informed him of the truth of the matter, whereof he was
before doubtful; and thereupon lays aside his journey to see the Justings of
others in jest, and takes care that he be not justled in earnest out of his
Throne himself. In the mean time, the confederate Lords being ready at
Oxford, and hearing nothing of the Duke of Aumerle, nor seeing any preparation
for the kings coming, were certainly persuaded that their Treason was
discovered: Whereupon falling into consideration of the case they were in, they
found there was no place left for them of Mercy, and therefore were to stand
upon their Guard, and provide the best they could for their safety: To which
purpose, the first thing they did was to apparel Magdalen in Princely robes, a
man as like to king Richard in countenance and pesonage, as one man lightly can
be to another; and to give forth that he was king Richard escaped out of
Prison, thereby to countenance their proceedings: The next thing was to
dispatch me^senger^ to the king of France, and require his assistance. This
done, they set forward in Battell-array toward Windsor, against king Henry;
but finding him gone to London before they came, they then deliberate what
course to take: Some advised to set K. Richard at liberty, before their
counterfeit Richard should be discovered: Others ^hought best to follow the
king to London, and set upon him unprovided, and before he had g^thered Forces.
In this division of Advises, when they could not do both, they did neither;
but as men amazed, ma^ched on, though they knew not well whither, till they
came to Colbrooke; by which time the king had gathered an Army of twenty
thousand, and was marching toward them: but they not thinking so well of their
c^^se, that they durst put it to the trial of a battle; or perhaps staying
for aid out of France; withdrew themselves back to Sunnings near to Reading,
where the young Queen lay^ to whom their coming gave some flashes of comfort,
but quenched before they were thoroughly kindled: and from thence they march to
Cicester; where the Duke of Surry and the Earl of Salisbury ^o^ke up their
lodging in one Inn; the Duke of Exceter and the Earl of Gloucester in anoth^^:
And now a strange Accident, beyond the reach of all consultation, gave a period
to their Design; for who would think that a private company durst oppose
those Lords having their Army so near them? yet the Bailiffe of the Town,
upon intelligence (no doubt) that these Lords were up in Arme^ against the
King, taking with him a company of Townsmen, in the night assaulted the Inn
where the Duke of Surry and the Earl of Salis^ury lay; who thus assaulted,
made shift to defend themselves till three a clock in the afternoon; but then,
being in danger to be taken, a Priest, one of their company, set diverse houses
in the Town on fi^e, thinking thereby to divert the Assailants from
prosecuting the Lords, to save their houses: but this inflamed them the more;
and so hotly they pursued their as^ault, that they wounded the Duke and the
Earl to death; who dying that night; their heads were stricken off, and sent
up to London. With them also were taken, Sir Bennet Shelley, Sir Barnard
Brocas, Sir Thomas Blunt, and eight and twenty other Lords, Knights and
Gentlemen; who were sent to Oxford, where the King then lay, and there were put
to execution. The Duke of Exceter in the other Inn, hearing of this assault,
fled out of the backside toward the Camp, intending to bring the whole Army
to the rescue^ but the soldiers having heard a clamor, and seeing fire in the
Town, supposing the King had been come with all his Forces, out of a sudden
fear dispersed them selves and fled; which the Duke seeing, he also, with Sir
John Shelley, fled into Essex, where wandering and lurking in secret places, he
was at last apprehended as he sat at supper in a friends house, and led to
Plashey, and there shortly after beheaded; the place, where by his counsel and
countenance, the Duke of Gloucester formerly had been apprehended: that we may
observe, how the Divine Providence, in revenging of injuries, takes notice, and
makes use of the very circumstance of place where the injuries are ^one. The
Earl of Gloucester fled toward Wales, but was taken, and beheaded at Bristow.
Magdalen the counterfeit king Richard, was apprehended and brought to the
Tower, and afterward hanged and quartered; with Mr. Fereby, another of king
Richards Chaplains. Diverse other Lords, and Knights, and Gentlemen, and a
great number of mean persons, were in other places put to death; that so much
Noble blood, at one time, and for one cause, has scarce been heard or read of.
The Abbot of Westminster, in whose house the Plot was contrived, hearing of
these misfortunes, as he was going between the Monastery and his Mansion, fell
suddenly into a Palsy, and shortly after, without speech, ended his life.
About this time also, a strange piece of Treason is reported to have been
practiced against the kings life: that there was found in his bed-cloaths an
Iron with three sharp pikes standing upright; that when the king should have
laid him down, he might have thrust himself upon them. But seeing there is no
farther mention of inquiring after it; it seems to have been but an idle
rumor not worth believing.

But now that the hot English blood was well allayed, the Welsh blood springs
up as hot: For now, Owen Glendour an Esquire of Wales, brought up at the Innes
of Court in London; partly out of a desire to revenge a wrong done him (as he
conceived) in a suit for lands in controversy between the Lord Gray of Ruthin
and him, but chiefly out of an humor of aspiring, endeavored to draw the
Welchmen to a general defection, telling them, That the English being at
variance amongst themselves, now was the time to shake off their yoke, and to
resume their own ancient Laws and Customs. To whose persuasions the Welchmen
hearkening, made him their king and Captain; and he having gotten a competent
Army, sets first upon his old Advers^ry ^ey^old Lord Gray of Ruthin, and takes
him Prisoner; yet with promi^e of Releasement, if he would marry his daughte^;
which offer, though the Lord Gray at first not only refused, but scorned, yet
out of necessity at last he was contented to accept; when notwithstanding, his
deceitful father in Law trifled out the time of his enlargement, till he dyed.
But the Welchmen growing confident upon this success, break into the borders
of Herefordshire, making spoil and prey of the Country as freely as if they
had leave to do it; for indeed none opposed them but only the Lord Ed^^nd
Mortimer, who had formerly withdrawn himself to his Castle at Wigmore; an^ he
having assembled the Forces of the Country, and joining b^ttell with them, was
taken Prisoner, and then fettered, and cast into a deep and vile Dungeon. It
was thought if Glendour had as well known how to use his victory, as to get it;
he might at this time have put the English yoke into a great haz^rd to be
shaken off: but he having killed a thousand of the English, thought he had done
for that time, and so giving over the pursuit, retired. The inhumanity of the
Welsh women was here memorable, who fell upon the dead carcasses of the
English, first stripping them, and then cutting off their privy parts, and
noses; whereof the o^e they thrust into their mouths, the other they pressed
between their buttock^. Many noble men, specially his kinsmen the Percies,
solicited King Henry to deliver Mortimer; but the King was deaf of that ear,
he could rather have wished both him and his two Sisters in heaven, for then he
should be free from concealed competitours.

These affronts were at this time suffered in the Welsh, because the King was
now employed in a more dangerous service with the Scots; for they taking
advantage of the distraction in the kingdom (as it was always their custom
to do) had made an In-rode into the County of Northumberland, and sudden^y one
night set upon the Castle of Work; took and spoiled it, and then returned. In
revenge whereof, the English invaded and spoiled certain Islands of the Orkn^ys:
Then the Scots set forth a Fleet, under the conduct of Sir Robert Logon; but
before he came to any action, he was encountered, and the greatest part of his
Fleet taken. But these were but such affronts, as often happen between
troublesome neighbors; for all this while the Peace was still in being between
the Nations, but at last it brake out into an open war upon this occasion:
Robert King of Scots had offered to match his Son David with a D^ughter of
Geo^ge Earl of Dunbarre, and had received money of him in part of her portion;
and afterward would neither suffer the March to proceed, nor yet pay back the
money; but married his Son to a Daughter of Archibold Earl of D^^glasse: Upon
which indignity, George of Dunbarre flies into England to king Henry; and with
his aid makes diverse incursions into Sco^land: Whereupon Rober^ king of Scots
sent to king Henry, that if he would have the Truce between them to continue,
he should deliver to him George of Dunbarre. King Henry answered, that he had
given him a safe conduct, and could not now recall it with his Honor; but as
for continuing the Truce, king Robert might do in that what he thought best^
Upon this answer, the king of Scots presently proclaimed war against him; But
king Henry as ready in that matter as he, stayed not for king Roberts invading
of England; but himself with a puissant Army invaded Scotland, burning
Castles, and Cities, and not sparing Churches, and Religious Houses. About the
end of September, he besieged the Castle of Maidens in Edenbourgh, where Prince
David, and the Earl Dowglasse were: At which time, Robert Duke of Albanye, who
in the king of Scots sickness managed the business, sent an Herald to king
Henry, protesting upon his honor, that if he would stay but six days, he would
give him battle. K. Henry rewarded the Herald, and stayed; but six times six
days passed, but neither Duke of Albany, nor any other for him appeared. And
now winter came on, Victuals grew scant, and which was worst, a mortality
began in the English Camp; For which causes, king Henry removed his Siege, and
retu^ned i^t^ England. As soon as he was gone, sir Patrick Hebborne a
Scottishman, having a good opinion of his valor, thought to do great matters;
and with a competent Army of the men of L^^gh-deane, he invaded Northumberland,
making great spoil, and loading his Soul^diers with prey, and prisoners; but
in the Retreit, marching loosely and licentiously, was set upon by the Earl of
Northumberland Vice-warden, at a Town called Neshye; where Hebborne himself,
and all the flower of L^ugh-deane were flaine; sir John and William Cockburne,
sir William Busse, John and Thomas Hablington Esq^ires and a multitude of
common Soldiers taken prisoners. On the English part few sl^in^ and none of
any rank or quality: In revenge whereof, Archibold Dowglasse with an Army of
twenty thousand entered Northumberland; but at a place called Hom^ldon, were
encountered by the English, under the leading of Henry Lord Percye, surnamed
Ho^spu^^e, and George Earl of March, who put them to ^light; and after the
slau^hter of ten thousand of them, took five hundred prisoners; whereof the
chieft were Mordack Earl of Fife, (son of the General, who in the fight
lost one of his eyes) Thomas Earl of Murrey, Robert Earl of A^gus, the Earls
of Atholl and Menli^^^ and amongst the slain, were Sir John Swinton, Sir Adam
Gourdon, Sir John Leviston, Sir Alexander Ramsey, and three and twenty other
knights.

In this mean time, Glendour of Wales had solicited the king of France for
aid, who sent him twelve hundred men of quality, but the winds were so
contrary, that they lost twelve of their ships, and the rest returned home. The
English, deriding this ill success of the French, so exasperated the
French-king, that presently after he sent twelve thousand, who landed safely,
and joined with the Welsh; but as soon as they heard of the English armies
approach, whether mistrusting their own strength, or suspecting the Welch-mens
faithfulness, they ran to their ships and disgracefully went home.

King Henry's Ambassadors lately sent into Britain to fetch the Lady Jane de
Navarre Duchess of Britiane, the relict of John de Montford surnamed the
Conquerour^ with whom the king by Procurators had contracted Matrimony; in the
beginning of February returned with her in safety: The king met her at
Winchester, where the seventh of February the marriage was solemnized.

About this time some affronts were offered by the French: Valerian Earl of S.
Paul, with seventeene hundred men, landed in the Isle of Wight, where he burnt
two Villages and some few Cottages; but hearing the people of the Island to
have assembled, he made haste to his ships, and returned home. Also John Earl
of Clermont (the heir of Bourbon) won from the English the Castles of S.
Peter, S. Mary, and the New Castle: The Lord de la Brett, won the Castle of
Cal^^in; places of great consequence to the English.

And now to make k. Henry sensible that a Crown can hardly ever sit easy upon
the head, if it be not set on right at first; a new Conspiracy is hatching
against him: The Percies, Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, with Henry
Hotspur, began about thi^ time to fall off from king Henry; their reason was,
First, because the king at their request refused to redeem their kinsman
Mortimer from Glendours slavery; and then because he denied them the benefit of
such prisoners as they had taken of the Scots, at Homildon or N^shye: whereupon
they went of themselves, and procured Mortimer's delivery, and then entered into
a League offensive and defensive with Glendour, and by their Proxies, in the
house of the Archdeacon of Bangor, they agreed upon a Tripartite Indenture
under their hands and seals, to divide the kingdom into three parts; whereby
all England from Sever^ and Trent, South and Eastward, was assigned for the
portion of the Earl of March: All Wales and the Lands beyond Sever^ VVestward,
were assigned to Owen Glendour: And all the remainder of land from Trent
Northward, to be the portion of the Lord Percy. In this, as Glendour persuaded
them, they thought they should accomplish a Prophecy; as though king Henry
were the Mouldwarp cursed of Gods own mouth; and they three were the Lion the
Dragon and the Wolf which should divide the Land among them. In this mean
time king Henry, not acquainted with this Conspiracy, caused a Proclamation to
be made, intimating that the Earl of March had voluntarily caused himself to
be taken prisoner, to the end, the Rebels having him in their custody, might
pretend some color for their Conspiracy; and therefore he had small reason to
take care for his deliverance. Hereupon the Percies assisted with a company of
Scots, and drawing to their party the Earl of Stafford, and Richard Scroope
Archbishop of York and many other, purposed to join with the Captain of the
Welsh, but first they framed certain Articles against the king, and sent them
to him in writing. That he had falsified his Oath given at his landing,
swearing that he came but only to recover his Inheritance, and would not meddle
with the King, or with the Crown. That most traitorously he had taken Arms
against his Sovereign Lord, Imprisoned him, and then most barbarouusly caused
him to be murdered. That ever since the death of king ^ichard, he had unjustly
kept the Crown from his kinsman Edmund M^rtimer Earl of March, to whom of right
it belonged. That upon no occasion, he had imposed diverse Taxes upon the
people. That by his Letters he procured Burgesses and Knights of the
Parliament to be chosen; for which causes and many other, they defied him, and
vowed his destruction, and the restoring of the Earl of March to his right.
King Henry could not but know that all these Articles against him were true,
yet seeing the knowing it hindered him not from seeking to get the Crown when
he had it not; it could less hinder him from seeking to keep it now that he
had it; and if he were able, being a private man, to get it from a King, he was
likely to be more able, being now a king, to keep it from privat^ men; and as
for any objections that Conscience could make, he had enough to answer them
all: For, if his Title were good against king Richard, by his Resignation, it
was as good against Mortimer by his swearing Allegiance; and upon these
grounds, with a mind as confident as if all cyrcumstances were of his side, he
raised an Army, and marched toward the Lords, taking care they might by no
means join with the Welsh; and about Shrewsbury, on Saturday S. Mary
Magdalens Eve, he encountered them, in which fight though the Scots and Henry
Hotspur showed much valor, yet the victory rested on the kings side; Hotspur
himself was slain, the Earl of Worcester was taken prisoner, together with
Sir Richard Vernon, Sir Theobald Trussel, the Baron of Kinderton; and the rest
fled. On the kings part (besides the Earl of Stafford, who had that morning
revolted from the Conspirators) were slain Sir Hugh Sherley, Sir John Clifton^
Sir John Cockayn, Sir Nicholas Gausell, Sir Walter Blunt, Sir John Calverley,
Sir John Massy of Puddingtr^, Sir Hugh Mortimer and Sir Robert Gausell, all
which had been but that morning dubbed knights, with Sir Thomas Wendsley, who
died afterward of his wounds; of common Soldiers about sixteen hundred, but
of the Conspirators above six thousand, whereof 36 the king slew with his own
hand, but was once unhorsed by Dowglasse, who in his presence slew Sir Walter
Blunt, with diverse others, that day in all things attired like to the king; for
which exployt, Dowglasse (being after by the fall of his horse taken prisoner)
was by the kings command, carefully attended, and without Ransom set at
liberty: In this batttell, the young Prince Henry, though wounded in the face
with an Arrow, yet was not wounded in his courage, but continued fighting
still. After this victory the king caused public thanks to be given to God,
and then caused the Earl of Worcester to be beheaded, and many others of that
Rebellion to be drawn hanged and quartered, and their heads placed on London
Bridge: And then the king sent his son Henry Prince of Wales, with his whole
Army into that Country; but before his coming, Owen Glendour was abandoned by
all his Company, and lurking in the woods was there famished; many of his
associats were taken and put to death. Whilst the Prince was in Wales, Henry
Percy Earl of Northumberland, of his own accord, came and submitted himself
to the king, protesting his innocence, a^ not being once acquainted with any
intent of Treason and Rebellion; whose excuse the king received for the present
with gentle language, the rather for that he had the possession of Barwick
Castle and other places of strength in his power, but yet he wiped not off the
score of his misdemeanors out of his mind.

And now with the fourth year of his Reign ended all the great Troubles of
this k. Henry the fourth: those that follow are but such accidents as are
frequent in all times both abroad and at home. The Britans under the leading of
the Lord of Castiles, spoiled the Town of Plymouth; In revenge whereof, the
Western-men, under the command of William Wilford, set forth ^ Fleet, which
arriving in Britain, took forty ships laden with Oil and Wines, and burnt
forty more. Again the French landed a thousand men in the Isle of Wight^ where
they got together a great booty of Cattle, but the Islanders coming upon them
took away their booty, and made many of them leave their Carkases for a booty
to the ^sland. Yet the French would not leave so, but a while after, as having
gotten new spirits, they cast Anchor before the Isle of Wight, and require no
less then to have the Island into their possession, but a resolute answer of
the Islanders frighted them away, and made them glad they were gone. Soon
after this the Duke of Orleance, brother to the French king, in a vaunting
style, sent a challenge to king Henry to meet him in the field, each of them
to have a hundred in his Company; to which the king answered, That for his own
valor it had sufficiently been tried, and for this challenge of the Dukes,
neither the Person nor the Cause were worthy of his undertaking. Upon this
refusal of the kings, diverse taunts and jeeres were bandied be^weene them,
till at last the Duke, in great passion, falls upon Vergie a Town in Guyen,
but after three months assaulting it, being valiantly defended by Sir Robert
An^field and three hundred Englishmen, he was glad to give over with loss, and
return into France. Presently upon this, the Admiral of Britain, accompanied
with the Lord du Castile, and thirty sail of ships, attempted to land at
Dertmouth in Devonshire, but were repelled, and the Lord du Castile, and two of
his brothers, and four hundred of his men were slain, besides two hundred
taken Prisoners; of whom, the Lord Baquevile Marshall of Britain, was one.
After this, five hundred men of arms, five hundred Crosse-bowes, and a
thousand Flemmings, under the conduct of the Earl of S. Paul, laid siege to
the Castle of Mar^k, three leagues from C^llice; but first by Sir Philip Hall
Captain of Callice, and after by Sir Richard Aston Lieutenant of the English
pale, they were forced to retire and fly: The Earl of S. Paul escaped to S.
Omers, but left many of his men of quality behind him, and more taken
Prisoners. After this, Thomas Duke of Clarence, the Kings second son, and the
Earl of Kent, with competent Forces entered the Haven of Sluice, where they
burnt four ships riding at anchour, and then returned to the relief of
Callis, besieged at that time by the French; and in the way took three
Carricks of G^noua richly laden, and brought them into the Chamber of Rye. And
these were the troubles of this King abroad: But now at home, the Relics of
the former Northern Rebellion began to revive; for now, Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, Thomas Mowbray Earl
Marshall, the Lords, Hastings, Fawconbridge, and Bardolfe, with diverse others,
conspired, at a time appointed, to meet upon Yorkswould-Downes, and there to
bid defiance to king Henry. Articles of Grievances were framed, and set up in
all public places, which drew multitudes to be partakers of the enterprise.
But now, Ralph Nevill Earl of Westme^land, with the Lord John the Kings third
son, the Lords Henry Fitz-Hughes, Ralph Evers, and Robert Vmphrevile, make
head against them; and coming into a Plain in the Forests of Galltree, they
sat down right against the Archbishop and his Forces, which were twenty
thousand; and Westmerland perceiving the Enemies forces to be far more than
theirs, he used this policy: he sent to the Archbishop, demanding the reason
why he would raise Forces against the king? who answering, that his Arms were
not against the king, but for his own defense, whom the king, upon the
instigation of Sycophants, had threatened; withal he sent him a scrowle of
their grievances, which Westmerland read, and seemed to approve, and thereupon
desired a conference with him: The Archbishop more credulous then wise,
persuaded the Earl Marshall to go with him to the place appointed to
confer: the Articles are read and allowed of; and thereupon Westmerland
seeming to commiserate the souldiers^ having been in armor all day, and
weary, wished the Archbishop to acquaint his Party, as he would his, with this
their mutual agreement; and so shaking hands, in most Courtly friendship
drank unto him; whereupon the soldiers were willed to disband, and repair
home: which they had no sooner done, but a Tro^p of horse, which in a
colorable manner had made a show to depart, wheeled about, and afterward
returned; and being come in ^ight, the Earl of Westmerland arrested both the
Arcbishop and the Earl Marshall, and brought them both Prisoners to the king
at Po^fret; who passing from thence to York, the Prisoners likewise were
carried thither, and the next day both of them beheaded. At Durham, the Lords
Hastings and F^wconbridge, with two knights, were executed. Northumberland,
with the Lord Bardolfe, fled first to Barwick, and after into Scotland, where
they were entertained by David Lord Flemming: whereupon the king gave summons
to the Castle of Barwick, which at first they refused to obey, but upon the
planting and discharging of a Piece, they presently yielded without
composition: and here William Greystock, Henry Baynton, and John Blink^nsop,
knights, and five other were presently put to execution, and many others
committed to several Prisons. About this time, James son and heir of Robert
king of Scotland, a child of nine years old, attended by the Earl of Orkney,
as he was sailing into France, was taken by certain Mariners of Norfolk, who
brought him to the King at Windsor, the 30. of March, 1408. and the King sent
them to the Tower of London.

Northumberland and Bardolfe, after they had been in Wales, France, and
Flanders, to raise a Power against King Henry, returned back into Scotland, and
after a year with a great Power of Scots entered England, and came into
Yorkshire, making great spoil and waste as they passed: but Sir Thomas Rokesby
Sheriff of York, levying the forces of the County, upon Bramham-moore gave
them battle; in which Northumberland was slain, Bardolfe taken, but wounded
to death, and the rest put to flight. About this time also, Sir Robert
Vmphrevile Vice Admiral of England, with ten men of war entered Scotland,
burnt their Gally^t, and many other ships over against Lies, and brought away
with him fourteen tall ships laden with corn and other staple commodities,
which at his return he sent into the Markets round about, and thereby brought
down the prizes of all things, and purchased to himself the name of
Mend-market.

The Prince had been a Student In Queens College in Oxford, under the tuition
of his Uncle Henry Beaufort, Chancellor of that University, afterward Bishop
of Lincol^e and Winchester, and lastly made a Cardinal, by the title of
Eusebius. From Oxford, the Prince was called to Court, and the Lord Thomas
Percy Earl of Worcester was made his Governor: but coming afterward to be at
his own disposing, whether being by nature valorous, and not yet well stayed
by time and experience; o^ whether incited by ill companions, and emboldened by
the opinion of his own greatness; he ran into many courses so unworthy of a
Prince, that it was much doubted what he would prove when he came to be Prince.
Once, it is said, he lay in wait for the Receivers of his fathers Rents, and in
the person of a Thief set upon them and robbed them. Another time, when one of
his companions was arraigned for felony before the Lord Chief Justice, he went
to the Kings Bench bar, and offered to take the Prisoner away by force; but
being withstood by the Lord Chief Justice, he stepped to him, and struck him
over the face: whereat the Judge nothing abashed, rose up and told him, that he
did not this affront to him, but to the King his father, in whose place he
sat; and therefore to make him know his fault, he commanded him to be
committed to the Fleet. You would have wondered to see how calm the Prince was
in his own cause, who in the cause of his companion had been so violent: for he
quietly obeyed the Judges sentence, and suffered himself to be led to Prison.
This passage was not a little pleasing to the King, to think that he had a
Judge of such courage, and a Son of such submission: but yet for these and
such other pranks, he removed him from being President of the Council, and
placed in it his third son John. This made the Prince so sensible of his
fathers displeasure, that he thought it necessary to seek by all means to
recover his ^ood opinion; which he endeavored to do by a way as strange as
that by which he lost it: for, attiring himself in a garment of blew Satin,
wrought all with Eylet-holes of black silk, at every hole the needle hanging
by which it was sowed, and about his arm a thing in fashion of a hounds
collar, studded with SS. of gold, he came to the Court at Westminster: to whom,
the King (though not well in health) caused himself, in a Chair, to be
brought into his Privy Chamber; where, in presence of but three of four of his
Privy Council, he demanded of the Prince the cause of his unwonted habit and
coming? who answered, That being not only his subject but his son, and a
son so tenderly always regarded by him, he were worthy of a thousand deaths,
if he should intend or but imagine the least offense to his sacred Majesty,
and therefore had fitted himself to be made a sacrifice; and therewithal
reached his dagger, holding it by the point to his father, For (said he) I
desire not to live longer, than I may be thought to be, what I am and shall
ever be, Your faithful and obedient Vassal. With this or the like Answer, the
King was so moved, that he fell upon his sons neck, and with many tears
embracing him, confessed that his ears had been too open to receive reports
against him, and promising faithfully, that from thenceforth no reports should
cause any disaffection toward him^ The king about this time, made his Son John
Duke of Bedford, and his Son Humphe^ Duke of Gloucester; he made also sir Thomas
Beauford Earl of Dorset, and the Earl of Arundel he created Duke of York.

The rest of king Henry's days, from this time forward, being scarce a year,
was free from all trouble both abroad and at home; unless perhaps he might be
troubled in mind: for having shed so much English and Noblebloud; for
expiation whereof, or else to the end he might join Valor and Devotion in one
action together, which hitherto he but used singly; he took upon him the
Crusado, and at a Council in White-Friars, order was taken, and great
preparation was made for his journey to Jerusalem: But it was otherwise Decreed
in Heaven; and yet not so otherwise, but that he ended his life in Jerusalem,
as shall be showed hereafter.

Of his Taxations.
IN the very beginning of his Reign, it might pass instead of a Taxation, that
he found in king Richards Coffers, in money and jewels, to the value of seven
hundred thousand pounds. In his fourth year, an extraordinary Subsidy was
granted him; Twenty shillings of every knights Fee, and of every one that had
twenty shillings a year in land, twelve pence and upward, according to that
rate; and of every one that had twenty pounds in goods, twelve pence, and
upward according to that rate; but with this caution and protestation, that it
should not hereafter be drawn for a President, and that no Record thereof
should be made. In his sixth year, the Clergy granted to the king a Tenth. In
his seventh year, the Clergy granted a Tenth and a half, and the Commons two
Fifteens. In a Parliament holden the ninth year of his Reign, the king moved
to have allowed him in every year wherein there was no Parliament kept^ a
Tenth of the Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the Layity; to which demands the
Bishops assented, but the Commons would not. In his seventh year, a Parliament
began which lasted almost a whole year, in which a Subsidy was at last
granted; so sharp, that even Priests and Friars who lived of Alms, were forced
every one to pay a noble.

Of Laws and Ordinances made in his time.
IN this kings days, burning and execution by fire for controversies in
Religion was first put in practice.

Also in the first year of his Reign an Act was made, that no person of what
degree soever, should after that day allege for his excuse, any constraint or
coa^cting of his Prince^ for doing of any unlawful act; and that such excuse
after that day, should stand him in no stead.

Also an Act was made, that no Lord, nor other, might give any Liveries to any
but their household and meniall servants. In his twelveth year, the king caused
a new coin of Nobles to be made, which was of less value than the old Noble,
by four pence.

Also that all Rypiers, and other Fishers from any of the Seacoasts, should
sell their fish in Cornhill and Cheapside themselves, and not to Fishmongers
that would buy it to sell again.

Also this king instituted the Duchy Court, which he did in honor of the
House of Lancaster; to the end, the Lands belonging to that Duchy, might in
all following times be distinguished and known from the Lands of the Crown. In
his sixth year, the king called a Parliament at Coventry, and sent Process to
the Sheriffs, that they should choose no knights nor Burgesses, that had any
knowledge in the Laws of the Realm; by reason whereof, it was called the
Laymens Parliament. In his seventh year, the Major of London for preservation
of fish; obtained, that all Weres which stood between London and seven miles
beyond Kingstone; as also, such as stood between London and Gravesend, should
be pulled up and taken away.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
BY reason of discord between John of Gaunt, and Wickham Bishop of Winchester;
the Bishop either in durance, could not, or in fear durst not come to the
Parliament House, at a time when the King required a supply of money; but the
Clergy unanimously affirming, that without their brother, the Bishop of
Winchesters presence, they neither can nor will consult of any things he is
presently sent for, and by the King secured. After this, the King called a
Parliament at Coventry, and sent Process to the Sheriffs that they should
choose no knights or Burgesses that were Lawyers, and was therefore called the
Laymens Parliament: And shortly after another Parliament was called, and named
the unlearned Parliament, either for the unlearnednesse of the persons, or for
their malice to learned men; In which the Commons presented a Petition to the
King and the upper House; desiring that the king might have the Temporal
Possessions of the Bishops and Clergy; the value whereof, they pretended would
be sufficient maintenance for a hundred and fifty Earls, one thousand five
hundred knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and a hundred Hospitals for
maimed Soldiers. They craved likewise, that Clerks convict should not be
delivered to the Bishops prison; and that the Statute made in the second year
of the king against Lollards, might be Repealed. But the king denied their
Petition; and in Person commanded them from thenceforth, not to presume to
trouble their brains about any such business, for he was resolved to leave the
Church in as good state as he found it. In the twelveth year of his Reign,
certain learned men in Oxford, and other places, in their Sermons maintained
the opinions of Wickliffe; but the Bishops and Doctors of the University,
inhibited and condemned them. In his time was a great Schism in the Church, by
reason of two Anti-Popes; but afterward in an assembly of Cardinals and
Bishops, a third man was elected, named Alexander the fifth, who had been
trained up at Oxford.

Works of Piety in his time.
KING Henry Fownded a College at Battlefield in Shropshire, where he overcame
the Lord Henry Percy. In his third year, the Conduit upon Cornhill was begun
to be built. Also in his time Sir Robert Knolls made the Stone bridge of
Rochester in Kent; and founded in the Town of Pomfret a College, and an
Hospital; he also re-edified the body of the White-Friers Church in
Fleetstreet, where he was afterward buried: Which Church was first founded by
the Ancestors of the Lord Gray of Codnor. In the eighth year of his Reign,
Richard Whittington Major of London, erected a house or Church in London, to be
a house of Prayer, and named it after his own name, Whittington College; with
lodgings, and weekly allowance for diverse poor people. He also builded the
Gate of London, called Newgate, in the year 1420, which was before a most
loathsome prison: He builded also more than half of St. Bartholmews Hospital
in West-Smithfield, and the beautiful Library in the Gray Friars in London^
now called Christ's Hospital: He also builded a great part of the east end of
Guildhall, and a Chapel adjoining to it, with a Library of stone, for the
custody of the Records of the City. But he that exceeded all at this time in
works of Piety, was William Wickham Bishop of Winchester; his first work was
the building of a Chapel at Tychfield, where his Father, Mother, and Sister
Perr^t was buried: Next, he founded at Southwick in Hampshire, near the Town
of Wickham, the place of his birth, as a supplement to the Priorie of
Sout^wicke; a Chauntry, with allowance for five Priests for ever: He bestowed
twenty thousand marks in repairing the houses belonging to the Bishopric; he
discharged out ^f Prison in all places of his Diocese, all such poor
prisoners as lay in execution for debt, under twenty pounds: he amended all the
highways from Winchester to London, on both sides the River. After all this,
on ^he fifth of March 1379, he began to lay the foundation of that magnificent
Structure in Oxford, called New-Colledge, and in person laid the first stone
thereof; in which place before, there stood Naetius-Colledge, built by Alver,
at N^tius entreaty; and for the affinity of the name, came to be called
New-Colledge. In the year 1387, on the 26 of March, he likewise in person laid
the first stone of the like foundation in Winchester, and dedica^^^ the same,
as that other in Oxford, to the memory of the Virgin Mary. The Grocer^ in
London purchased their Hall in Cu^^yhope Lane for 320 marks; and then laid the
foundation thereof on the tenth of May. King Henry founded the College of
F^^ringhey in Northampto^shire; to which King Henry the fifth gave land of the
Priories of Monks Aliens, by him suppressed.

John Gower the famous Poet, new builded a great part of St. Mary Overyes
Church in South^^rke, where he lies buried. In the second year of this king, a
new market in the Poultry, called the Stocks, was builded for the free sale of
Foreign Fishmongers and Butchers. In his twelveth year, the Guildhall of
London was begun to be new Edified; and of a little Cottage, made a goodly
house, as now it is.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN his third year, in the Month of March, appeared a Blazing-starre; first
betwixt the East and the North, and then sending forth fiery beams toward the
North; foreshewing perhaps the effusion of blood that followed after, in Wales
and Northumberland. In the same year, at Danbury in Essex, the Devil appeared
in likeness of a Gray-Frier; who entering the Church, put the people in great
fear, and the same hour, with a tempest of Whirlewinde and Thunder, the top of
the steeple was broken down, and half the Chancell scattered abroad. In his
seventh ye^re, such abundance of water brake suddenly over the Banks in Kent,
that it drowned Cattle without number. Also this year, the Town of Reystone
in Hartfordshire was burnt. In his ninth year was so sharp a winter, and such
abundanc^ of snow; continuing December, January, February, and March, that
almost all small Birds died through hunger.

Of his Wives and Children.
HE had two Wives, the first was Mary, one of the Daughters and heirs of
H^mphrey de Bo^un Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton; she died before he
come to the Crown, in the year 1394. His second Wife was Ioane, Daughter to
Charles the first king of Navarre, she being the widow of John de Montford
surnamed Strea^y, or the Conqueror, Duke of Britain; who dyed without any
issue by king Henry, at Havering in Essex, the year 1437, in the fifteenth
year of king Henry the sixth, and lies buried by her husband at Canterbury.
He had four Sons and two Daughters; Of his Sons, Henry his eldest was Prince
of Wales, and after his Father, king of England. His second Son was Thomas Duke
of Clarence, and Steward of England; who was slain at Beaufort in Anjo^, and
dyed without issue. His third Son was John Duke of Bedford; he married first
with Anne Daughter to John Duke of Burgundy; and secondly with Iacoba Daughter
of Peter of Luxenbourgh, Earl of St. Paul, but dyed also without issue. His
fourth Son was Humphry; by his brother king Henry the fifth created Duke of
Gloucester, and was generally called the good Duke; he had two Wives, but dyed
without issue, in the year 1446, and was buried at St. Albans; though the
vulgar opinion be, that he lies buried in St. Paul's Church. Of king Henry the
fourths Daughters; Blanch the elder was married to Lewis Barbatus, Palatine of
the Rhene, and Prince Elector: Philippe his younger Daughter, was married to
John king of Denmark, and Norway.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
COncerning his Body; he was of a middle stature, slender limbs, but well
proportioned. Concerning his Mind; of a serious and solid disposition, and one
that stood more upon his own legs than any of his Predecessors had done: in
cases of difficulty, not refusing, but not needing the advice of others; which
might confirm, but not better his own. He was neither merry nor sad, but both:
best pleased when he was opposed, because this was like to do him good, by
sharpening his invention: most angry when he was flattered, because this was
sure to do him hurt, by dulling his judgment. No man ever more loved, nor
less doted upon a wife, than he: a good husband, but not uxorious; that if
there be reins to that Passion, we may know he had them. It may be thought, he
affected the Crown, not so much out of Ambition as out of Compassion, because
the oppre^sions of his Country he could not so well help being a Subject, as a
King; for otherwise we may truly say, he was a loser by the Crown, being not
so great for a King, as he was before for a Subject: The Crown rather was a
gainer by him, which has ever since been the richer for his wearing it. We may
think he was either weary of his life, or longing for death; for why else
would he take upon him the Crusado, having been told by a skilfu^l Southsayer,
that he should dye in Jerusalem? but it seems, he did not believe him.

Of his Death and Burial.
IN the fortysixth year of his Age, having Peace both at home and abroad, and
being of too active a spirit to be idle, he took upon him the Crusado, and
great provision was made for his journey to Jerusalem: but alas, his journey to
Jerusalem required no such provision; for being at his prayers at S. Edwards
shrine, he was suddenly taken with an Apoplexy, and thereupon removed to the
Abbot of Westminsters house; where recovering his senses, and finding himself
in a strange place, he asked what place it was? and being told that he was in
the Abbots house, in a Chamber called Jerusalem: Well then (said he) Lord have
mercy upon me, for this is the Jerusalem where a Southsayer told me I should
dye. And here he dyed indeed, on the 20. day of March, in the year 1413. when
he had lived six and forty years, Reigned thirteen and a half. It is worth
remembering, that all the time of his sickness, his will was to have his Crown
set upon his bolster by him; and one of his fits being so strong upon him, that
all men thought him directly dead; the Prince coming in, took away the
Crown: when suddenly the king recovering his senses, missed his Crown; and
asking for it, was told, the Prince had taken it: whereupon the Prince being
called, came back with the Crown, and kneeling down, said: Sir, to all our
judgments, and to all our griefs, you seemed directly dead, and therefore I
took the Crown as being my Right: but seeing to all our comforts, you live, I
here deliver it much more joyfully than I took it, and pray God you may long
live to wear it your self. Well (says the king sighing) what right I had to
it, God knows. But (says the Prince) if you dye king, my sword shall
mai^teine it to be my Right against all Opposers. Well (says the king) I
refer all to God: but I charge thee on my Blessing, that thou administer the
Laws indifferently, avoid Flatterers, defer not to do Justice, nor be
sparing of Mercy: And then turning about, said, God bless thee, and have mercy
on me: and with those words, gave up the Ghost. His body with all Funeral pomp
was conveyed to Canterbury, and there solemnly buried.

Of men of Note in his time.
OF men of Valor in his time, of whom there was great store, I shall need to
say no more than what has already been said in the body of the story: only I
cannot but remember Sir Robert K^olls, who borne of mean parentage, made
himself famous over all Christendom; and dying at a Manor of his in Norfolk,
was brought to London, and buried in the Church of the White F^ie^s in London,
which himself had re-edified. But for men of learning, I must set in the first
place, William Wickham, a man of no learning, yet well wor^hy t^ hold the
place: In relating of whose life, I must have leave to expatiate a little. His
fathers name was John Long, or as some say, Perot; but as Campian proves,
Wickham; and not from the place of his dwelling, though he was Parish-Clerke of
Wickham in Hampshire, where he taught children to write: in which quality his
son William proved so excellent, that Nicolas Wooddall, Constable of
Winchester Castle, took him from his father, and kept him at School, first at
Winchester, afterward at Oxford, till himself being made Surveyor-generall of
the Kings works, he sent for this William to serve him as his Clerk; who in
short time grew so expert in that employment, that Adam Torleto^ Bishop of
Winche^ter, commended him to the King, who employed him presently in surveying
his Fortifications at Dover, and Quinborough Castles, and afterward made him
Surveyor of his Buildings at Windsor Castle, and his houses of Henley and
East-Hamstead. And here first, Envy rose up against him; for having caused to
be engraven on the stone of a wall in Windsor Castle, these words; This made
William VVi^kham: some that envyed his rising, complained to the King of this
insolency, as arrogating to himself, that excellent piece of Building to de
done at his charge: but Wickham called before the King about it, made answer,
that his meaning wa^ not, neither by any ind^fferent construction could it
import, that Wickham made that bui^ding, but that the same building made
VVi^kham, as being a means of the Kings great favor toward him. This answer
pacified the King, who took him daily more and more into his favor; and being
now entered into the Ministry, was first made Parson of S. Martins in the
Fields, then Minister of S. Martins le Grand. ^f^erwards Archdeacon of
Lincoln, Provost of Wells, and Rector of Manyhens in Devo^shire; so as at one
time he had in his hands so many Ecclesiastical livings, that the value of
them, in the Kings books, amounted to eight hundred seventy six pounds
thirteen shillings: besides which, he was honored with many Temporal places of
great profit and respect, as to be his principal Secretary, Keeper of the
Privy Seal, Master of the Wards and Liveries, Treasurer of the Kings Revenues
in France, and some other Offices. After which, the Bishopric of Winchester
falling void, means was made to the King to bestow that place upon him: And
here, the ^^cond time, did Envy rise up against him, informing the King that he
was a man of little or no learning, and no way sit for such a dignity:
whereupon the King made stay of granting it: but when Wickham came before the
King, and ^old him, that what he wanted in personal learning, he would supply
with being a Founder of learning; This so satisfied the King, that he bestowed
the place upon him. After this, he was made Lord Treasurer of England: and here
the third time did Envy rise up against him; for the King requiring of his
subjects a supply of money, It was answered, that he needed no other supply,
than to call his Treasurer to account: This blow struck deep upon the Bishop;
for he was presently charged to give account for eleven hundred ninety six
thousand pounds; and whilst he was busy in preparing his account, all his
Temporalties, upon importunity of John of Gaunt. were seized into the Kings
hands, and given to the Prince of Wales, and himself upon pain of the Kings
displeasure, commanded not to come within twenty miles of the Court. In this
case, he dismisseth his train, and sends copies abroad of his account, if it
might be received; but was hindered by the working of John of Gaunt against him.
Upon this ground (as was thought) Queen Philip wife to K. Edward the Third,
upon her deathbed, by way of Confession, told VVi^kham, that John of Gaunt was
not the lawful issue of king Edward, but a supposititious Son; for when she
was brought to bed at Gau^t, of a Daughter, knowing how desirous the King was
to have a Son; she exchanged that daughter, with a Dutch woman, for a Boy^
whereof she had been delivered about the same time with the Queen. Thus much
she confessed, and withal made the Bishop swear, that if the said John and
Gaunt should at any time, either directly, or indirectly attempt the Crown; or
that rightfully, through want of issue, it should devolve unto him; that then
he should discover this matter, and make it known unto the King, and Council.
Afterward the Queen being dead, and the Bishop finding John of Gaunt, as he
thought, too much aspiring, he secretly told him this relation, and this
adjuration of his supposed mother, advising him not to seek higher than a
private state; for else he was bound by oath to make it known to all the World:
Thus far the Bishop did well; but when he saw the Son of John of Gaunt not only
aspiring, but possessed of the Crown, why did he not then discover it, and join
at least with the Bishop of Ca^lile, in opposing it? Certainly, we may know,
that either the whole relation was but a Fable, or that Wickham was a
Temporizer, or that John of Gaunt was a most patient man, to suffer the affront
of such an indignity, with l^sse than the death of him that did it. But
howsoever it was, it is certain, the Duke bore a mortal grudge to the Bishop;
who had no way to withstand such an enemy, but by making Alice Pierce his
friend: by whose means, after two years, he was restored to all his livings;
and afterward K. Edward being dead, and Alice Pierce banished; by the means of
a greater friend than Alice Pierce (his full ourse) he obtained in the second
year of k. Richard, a general pardon under the Great Seal of England; and
from that time forward enjoyed a quiet life, and dyed in the fourth year of
this King Henry the fourth, being then of the age of above 80 years, and lies
buried in the Church of St. Swithen^ in Winchester, in a monument of his own
making in his life time; leaving for his heir Thomas Perrot, the son of his
sister Agnes, married to William Perrot.

Another great example of the volubility of Fortune, in Professors of learning,
was Roger Walden, who dyed in the ninth year of this King: he was at first a
poor Scholar in Oxford; and the first step of his rising, was to be a Chaplain
in the College there of St. Mary's; from thence by degrees he got to be Dean
of York; and after this, a high step, to be Treasurer of England; and yet a
higher after that, upon the banishment of Thomas Arundell, to be Archbishop of
Canterbury: But being now at the top, he came down again, for in this kings
time, Thomas Arundell being restored to the Archbishopricke, Walden was not
only put out of that place, (...) was called to account for the Treasure^ship:
and though he showed hi^ quietus est, yet all his Temporalties were seized, and
his person imprisoned, till by the mediation of the now Archbishop Arundell, he
was made Treasurer of Calice, and after promoted to be Bishop of London.

The next place after these, is justly due to Geoffry Ch^ucer, and John Gower,
two famous Poets in this time, and the Fathers of English Poets in all the
times after: Cha^cer dyed in the fourth year of this king, and lies buried at
Westminster: Gower, in this kings ninth year, and was buried in St. Mary
Overys Church in Southwarke. And now come others to be remembered, who lived and
died in this kings time: Hugh Legate, born in Hartfordshire, a Monk of St.
Albons, who wrote Scholies upon Boethius de Consolatione. Nicholas Gorham, born
also in Hartfordshire, a Dominick Friar, and the French kings Confessor, though
an Englishman. VValte^ Disse, so called of a Town in Norfolk where he was
borne, Confessor to the Duke of Lancaster. Lawrence Holbeck, a Monk of Ramsey,
who wrote an Hebrew Dictionary. John Cotton Archbishop of Armagh: Rich^rd
Scroope, brother to William Scroope Lord Treasurer of England, made Archbishop
of York; and writing an invective against King Henry, lost his head. William
Thorpe, an earnest follower of John Wickliffe, for which he was committed to
Saltwood Castle, where he dyed. Stephen Patrington, born in York^shire, and
Robert Mascall a Carmelite Friar of Ludlow; both of them Confessors to king
Henry the fifth. Boston a Monk of the Abbey of Bury in Suffolk; who wrote a
Catalogue of all the Writers of the Church, and other Treatises. John Purvey,
who was convented for teaching Doctrine contrary to the Church of Rome, and
compelled to recant. Thomas Rudburne Bishop of S. David's, who wrote a
Chronicle. Nicolas Riston, who considering the strife between the then
Anti-popes, wrote a book, De tollendo schismate. Robert Wansham a Monk in
Dar^etshire, who wrote a book in verse, Of the Original and signification of
Words. Robert Wimbledon an excellent Preacher, as app^ar^th by the Sermon he
made upon this Text, Read rationem Villicatio^is tuae.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH.
HENRY of Monmouth (so called from the place in Wales, where he was born)
eldest Son of King Henry the fourth, succeeded his Father in the kingdom of
England, to whom the Lords of the Realm swore Homage and Allegiance, before he
was yet Crowned; an honor never done before to any of his Predecessors: and
afterward, on the ninth of April, in the year 1412, he was Crowned at
Westminster, by Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury; with all Ri^es and
Solemnities in such case accustomed: And as the Scripture speaks of Saul, that
as soon as Samuel had anointed him King, he had a new heart given him, and he
became another man than he was before. So was it with this king Henry; for
presently after his Coronation, he called before him all his old Companions,
who had been fr^tres in malo with him; strictly charging them, not to pre^ume
to come within ten miles of his Court, until such time as they had given good
proof of their amendment in manners; and least any of them should pretend want
of maintenance to be any cause of their taking ill courses, he gave to every
one of them a competent means whereby to subsist. And knowing (as he did) the
fashion of the Scots and Welsh; that in times of change they would commonly
take adva^tage, to make Inroades upon the Borders; he therefore ca^sed Forts
and Bulwarks in fit places to be erected, and placed Garrisons in them, for
preventing or repelling any such incu^sions. Immediately after this, he called
a Parliament, where a Subsidy was granted without asking: and in this
Parl^ament the Commons began to harp upon their old string, of taking away the
Temporalties of the Clergy; and the Bishops fearing how it might take in the
kings ears, thought it best to divert him, by striking upon another string,
which they knew would be more pleasing to him; which was, to show him the great
right he had to the Crown of France. And hereupon Chicheley Archbishop of
C^nterbury, in a long narration, deduced the kings Right from Is^bel Daughter
to Philip the fourth, married to king Edward the second; from whom it descended
by direct line to his Majesty, and no hinderance of enjoying it, bu^ pretension
of the Sal^que laws; which (said he) was neither according to the law of God,
nor yet intended at first to that Nation; and though his Predecessors, by
reason of other encumbrances forbore to prosecute their Claim, yet he being
free from all such encumbrances, had no less power, than right to do it. This
indeed struck upon the right string of the kings inclination; for as he
affected nothing more than true glory, so in nothing more than in Warlike
actions. Hereupon, nothing was now thought of, but the Conquest of France.
First therefor he begins to alter in his Arms the bearing of Semy-de-Luces,
and quarters the three Flower Deluces, as the Kings of France then bare them;
and that he might not be thought to steal advantage, but to do it fairly, he
sent Ambassadors to Charles the sixth then king of France, requiring in
peaceable manner, the surrender of the Crown of France; which if he would yield
unto, then King Henry would take to Wife his Daughter Katherine; but if he
refused to do it, then King Henry would with fire and sword enforce it from
him, or lose his life. The Ambassador^ sent, were the Duke of Exeter, the
Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord Gray, the Lord High Admiral, and the Bishop of
Norwich, with five hundred horse: who coming to the Court of F^ance, were at
first received and feasted, with all the honor and show of kindness that ^^ght
be; but as soon as their message was delivered, and that it was known what
they come about, the copy of their entertainment was altered, and they were
sent away with as little complement, as they were before received with honor;
only told, that the king would speedily make Answer to the King their Master,
by his own Ambassadors: and speedily indeed he did it; for the Earl of
Vendosme, William B^^^tier Archbishop of Bourges, Peter Fresnel Bishop of
Lysea^x, with others, were arrived in England, as soon almost as the E^glish
were returned^ But being come, the Archbishop of Bourges made a long Oration in
the praise of Peace, concluding with the tender of the Lady K^theri^e, and
50000 Crowns with her in Dower, besides some Towns of no great importance: To
which King H^^^y, by the Archbishop of Canterbury made Answer; That these
offers were trifles, and that without yielding to his demands, he would never
desist from that he intended: and with this Answer, the French Ambassadors were
dismissed. It is said, that about this time, the D^lphi^ (who in the King of
France his sickness, managed the State) sent to King Henry a Tonne of Tennis
Balls, in derision of his youth, as fitter to play with them, then to manage
Arm^; which king Henry took in such scorn, that he promised with an oath, it
should not be long ere he would toss such iron b^lls amongst them, that the
best arms in France should not be able to hold a Racket to r^tur^e them. And
now all things are prepared and in a readiness for the kings journey into
France, his men shipped, and himself ready to go on shipb^^rd; when suddenly a
Treason was discovered against his Person, plotted by Richard Earl of
Cambridge, H^^^y Lord Scroope of Masham, Lord Treasurer, and Thomas Gray Earl
of N^^thu^berl^^d, and plotted and procured by the French Agents. These being
appreh^^ded, and upon examination confessing the Treason, and the money (which
was said to be a Million of Gold) by them for that end received; were all of
them immediately put to death. From this Richard Earl of Cambridge, second
Son of Edmund of L^^gle^, did Richard afterward Duke of York claim and
recover the Crown from the La^castrian Family. This execution done, and the
wind blowing fair, king Henry weighs Anchor; and with a Fleet of 1200 Sail,
( Grafton says, but 140 ships) but Enguerant says, 1600, attended with six
thousand spears, and 24000 Foo^, besides Engineers and laborers; he puts to
Sea, and on our Lady Eve landeth at Caux; where he made Proclamation, that no
man upon pain of death, should rob any Church, or offer violence to any that
were found ^narmed; and from thence passing on, he besieged Har^lew; which when
no succor came within certain days agreed upon, the Town was surrendered and
sacked. Of this Town he made the Duke of Exeter Captain, who left there for
his Lieutenant, Sir John F^lstoffe, with a Garrison of 1500 men. It is said
that when king Henry entered H^r^lew, he passed along the streets bare foot,
until he came to the Church of St. Martin; where, with great devotion, he gave
most humble thanks to God, for this his first achieved Enterprise. From thence
he marched forward, and coming to the River of Soame, he found all the Bridges
broken; whereupon he passed on to the bridge of Sr. Maxenae, where 30000 French
appearing, he pitched his Camp, expecting to be fought with; and the more to
encourage his men, he gave the ^rder of knighthood to John Lord Ferrers of
Groby, Reynold Graystocke, Percy Temp^s^, Christopher Morisby, Thomas
Pickering, William Huddleston, Henry Mortimer, John Hosbalton, Philip Hall, but
not perceiving the French to have any mind to figh^ he marched by the Town of
A^yens to Bow^s, and there stayed two days, expec^^ing battle, and from
thence marched to Corby; where the Peasants of the Coun^ry, with certain men of
Arms sent from the Dolphi^, charged the right wing of the English, which was
led by Hugh Stafford Lord Bo^rchier, and won away his Standard, but was
recovered again by John Bromeley of Bromeley, a Commander in the Lo^^
Staffords Regiment, who with his own hand slew him that had taken the Colo^^^^
and then taking them up, displayed the same; with sight whereof, the English
were so encouraged, that they presently ro^ted the French, and put them to
flight: which valiant exploit, the Lord Stafford recompensed, by giving to
Bromeley an A^^^ity of fifty pounds a year out of his lands in Staffordshire.
After this, the king marched toward Callice, so strictly observing his
Proclamation against Church robbing^ that when one was complained of for having
taken a silver Pyxe ^ut of a Church, he not only caused the same to be
restored, but the soldier also to be hanged: which point of Discipline, both
^ept the re^^ from offending in that kind, and drew the people of the Country,
under hand to relieve his men with all things necessary. The French king
hearing that king Henry had passed the River of S^ame; by advice of his
Council (who yet were divided in opinion) sent Montjoy the French king at Arms
to defye king Henry, and to let him know he should be fought with; which king
Henr^, though his Army was much infected with Fevers, whereof the Earl of
Stafford, the Bishop of Norwich, the Lords Molines and Burnell, were lately
dead^ yet he willingly heard, and rewarded the Herald for his me^^age: and
first having cleared a passage over a bridge, where of necessity he was to
pass, on the 22 of October he passed over with his Army: At which time the
Duke of York that led the Rereward, had discovered the Enemy to come on ^pace,
whereof he sent word to the king; who thereupon made a stand, and appointing
his Officers what course to hold, and encouraging his Soldiers, they all
attended when the battle should begin. The French Army was divided into three
battles; in the first were placed eight thousand men at Arms, four thousand
Archers, and fifteen hundred Crosse-bowes, the wings consisting of two thousand
two hundred men at Arms; this battle, was led by the Constable of France
himself, the Dukes of Orleance and Bourbon, the Earls of Ewe, Richmond, and
Va^dosme, the Lord Dempier, the Lord Admiral of France, the Marshall
Bouciquale, and others. The middle Battle, wherein were more men at Arms, was
commanded by the Dukes of Bar, and Al^^so^, and by the Earls of V^^mon^,
Salings, Blamont Grantpee, and Rusey. In the Rereward, we^e all the remainder
of the French forces, guided by the Earls of M^rle, Dampmartin, Fauco^bridge,
and the Lord Lo^rey, Captain of Ardy. The Frenchmen thus ordered, being six
times, some say ten times as many as the English, (who were not above nine
thousand) thought of nothing, but of the booty they should get: In the mean
time king Henry having made choice of a piece of ground half fen^ed on his
back with the Village, wherein they had rested the night before, on both sides
having strong hedges and ditches, begun there to order his battle; but first
he appointed an ambush of two hundred Archers, which upon a watchword given,
should discharge their whole flight upon the flank of the Enemies horse: The
Vauntguard consisting of Archers only, was conducted by the Duke of York; who
out of an heroicke courage made su^e for that place, with whom were joined the
Lords Beaumont, Willoughby, and F^^hope. The maine Battle was led by the king
himself, which consisted of Bill-men, and some Bow-men; with him were the Duke
of Gloucester his Brother, the Earl Marshall, Oxford, and Suff^lke. The
Rereward was led by Thomas Duke of Exeter, the kings Uncle, consisting of all
sorts of weapons; the horsemen as wings guarded the companies on both sides.
The king to prevent the fury of the French Cavallery, by the direction of the
Duke of York, appointed diverse stakes studded with iron at both ends, of six
foot long, to be pitched behind the Archers, and appointed Pyoners to attend
to remove them, as they should be directed: These things thus ordered, public
Prayers were humbly made, and the onset was presently given by the French
horsemen; whereupon Sir Walter Orpington, according to direction, caused the
Bow-men behind the ^^dges, to let fly their arrows; which so galled the
French horses, that either they cast their Riders, or through their unrulinesse
so opened their Ranks, that the right wing of the English horse had way to come
in upon the French foot; and withal, the French horse disorderly retiring,
they were miserably trodden down and disranked by their own company. Upon which,
the King with his Main-battell came on with such (...), that himself in person
charged the Duke of Ala^son, by whom he was well near unhorsed; but afterward,
having first slain two of the Dukes men, he ch^^ged the Duke again, and with
his sword beat him from his horse; whom the Kings Guard, notwithstanding the
King cried out to the contrary, slew outright: and with his fall, the
maine-battell of the French first gave ground, then turned their backs, and
lastly cast away their weapons and fled. But then certain of the
French-horsemen that first ran away, led on by Robert Bondile and the Captain
of Agincourt, meaning to wipe away the blot of running away from soldiers, by
fighting with boys, set upon the Pages and Laundresses that were left in the
Camp; who gave such a lamentable shreeke, that king Henry verily thought some
fresh forces had been come: whereupon he caused all the arrows that were
sticking in the field, to be g^^hered, and the stakes to be plucked up, and
made ready to be again used; amongst which the Duke of Yorks body was found,
miserably hacked and defaced: the fight whereof, together with danger of a
second Charge, made king Henry give o^der, the Prisoners should be all slain,
except only some principal men, whom ^e caused to be bound back to back, and
so left. For which fact, though done in cold blood, yet the King could not
justly be taxed with cruelty, seeing the number of the prisoners was more than
of his own soldiers; and nothing could give assurance of safety, but their
slaughter. But all was not yet done: for the Earls of Marle and F^^co^bridge,
with six hundred men at Arms, who had stood still all day, began now to stir,
and gave a brave Charge upon King Henry's Army: but being but few, and their
horses galled with the stakes, they had only the honor to dye bravely; and
indeed, they slew more of the English, than the whole Army had done before. And
now at last, the King being satisfied by the Scouts, that no Enemy was more to
be seen, he asked what the place was called? and being told, Agincourt; Well
then (said he) this shall be from henceforth called the Battle of Agincourt:
and presently he c^^sed the whole Army, in their array as they were, to give
God thanks; causing the Clergy there present, to sing the Psalm of David, In
exitu Israel de Aegypto; and made Proclamation, that every one, at the verse,
Non nobis Domine, sed nomini tu^ d^ gloriam, should kneel down, and the
horsemen bow their bodies: and then singing Te Deum and other holy Hymns,
they marched to the Enemies Camp, where the soldiers had liberty given them to
take the spoil.

A great Victory no doubt, but yet a Victory by which the English gained not
one foot of ground in France, more then they had before; and which ^o^shelet
attributes not so much to the valor of the English, as to the indiscretion of
the French, who had so straightened the vantguard of their Army, and pent them
up so close together, that they had not room to draw out their swords; so true
is that saying, Quos Deus vult perdere, dementat. The next day after the
Battle French He^^uld^ came to ask leave to bury their dead, and had it; and
the English Hera^lds, appointed to make search, made return that there were
slain of the French above ten thousand, whereof a hundred twenty six were of
the Nobility bearing (...); of Knights and Gentlemen of Coat Armor, seven
thousand eight hundred seventy four, whereof five hundred were knigh^ed the
night before the Battle: and of common soldiers, about sixteen hundred.
Amongst the slain of the Nobility, were Charles le Brets High Constable, Jacques
of Chatillon Admir(...), the great Master of France, the Master of the
Crossebowes, the Dukes o^ ^^a^son, Bra^^^^, and Bar; the Earls of Nevers,
Marle, Vaudemont, Beaumont, Gra^^^ee, Rousey, F^uconbridge, F^ys, and
Lestreuck: There was taken Prisoners, Charles Duke of Orleance, John Duke of
Bourbon, the Lords Danvert, Fosseux, Humiers, Roy, C^wn^, ^^^court, No^ll,
Bonciqualt; to the number in all of fifteen hundred. On the English part were
slain, Edward Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk, and not full six hundred
in all; but (says C^xt^n) not above six and twenty in all; and Paulu^ Aemilius
says, besides the two Lords, only two Knights, and but ten private soldiers
in all: a Miracle rather then a Victory. But not only K. Henry was the death
of the French Lords before-named, in the field with his sword; but of another
great Prince, at home, with his Victory; for Lewis the Dolphin, eldest son of
Ch^rles the sixth, king of France, presently upon it, without any other cause
apparent, fell sick and dyed. Yet king Henry, to make his enemies the better
contented with their overthrow, and to take away the envy of his Victory; at
his return into England with his Prisoners, which was on the sixth of November
following, he presently gave straight order, that no Ballad or Song should be
made or sung, more then of Thanksgiving to God for his happy Victory and safe
Return; but without words of either disgracing the French, or extolling the
English. At his entrance into London, the City presented him with a thousand
pounds, and two Basins of Gold worth five hundred pounds more. The bodies of
the Duke of York and the Earl of Suffolk were brought into England, and the
Dukes buried at Fodringhey in Northamptonshire, the Earls at New-Elm^ in
Oxfordshire.

About this time, the Emperor Sigismond Cosin-german to king Henry, having
been first in France, came accompanid with the Archbishop of Rhemes, Ambassador
from the French king, into England; for whom there were thirty great ships sent
from the King to waft him over: but approaching to land at Dover, the Duke of
Gloucester, with a company of Gentlemen, having their swords drawn, s^ept up to
the knees in water, saying to him, That if he came as the Kings friend, he
should be welcome; but if as claiming any jurisdiction, they would resist him:
whereupon the Emperor renounceth all Imperial Authority; and is thereupon
admitted to land, and received with as much honor as could be done him; and
afterward, together with Albert Duke of Holland, who was lately likewise
arrived at Winchester, is elected Companion of the Order of the Garter, and
sa^e in their Cells at the solemnity of the Feast. A principal cause of the
Emperors coming, was to mediate a Peace between England and France; wherein he
had brought king Henry to a good degree of inclination; till news came of the
besieging of Harflew by the French, and of the Earl of Armi^iacks setting upon
the Duke of Exceter, being Governor there: and then he presently grew so
averse from Peace, that he would hearken no more to any Treaty of it; Not that
he misliked they should treat of Peace with their swords in their hands, as all
wise men would do; but that to treat of Peace, and in the time of the Treaty
to do^ acts of Hostility, was an affront to all honesty, and not to be
tolerated with any patience.

And now the Earl of Arminiack having set down before the Town, the
Vice Admiral of France brought up the whole Navy of the French, with intent
whilst the Earl should assail it by land, to have entered the Town by the
waters side: but of this purpose, the valor and diligence of the Duke of
Exce^er prevented them. A^^oone as king Henry had intelligence hereof, he would
presently have gone himself; but being dissuaded by the Emperor, he sent his
brother the Duke of Bedford, with the Earls of March, Oxford, Huntington,
Warwick, Arundell, Salisbury, De^^^shire, and diverse others, with two hundred
Sail, to the rescue of Harflew; who upon the Feast of the Assumption of our
Lady, came to the mouth of the River Seyne: whereupon, Norbo^ the French
Admiral set forward, and got the mouth of the Haven: and here began a Fight,
which was resolutely maintained on both sides, until the English having sunk
five hundred Vessels one and other of the French, and taken three great
Carricks of Genoua, won the harbor, and at last, though with some opposition
made by their Galleys, relieved Har^lew, and made the Earl of Arminiack glad
to raise his Siege. Upon the news hereof, the Emperor desisted from mediating
any further for Peace with France; and entering into a League defensive and
offensive with king Henry, wherein only the Pope was excepted, on the 19 of
October he departed toward Germany, whom king Henry accompanied to Callis;
whither the Duke of Burgundy came, to confirm the League concluded on before
by the Earl of Warwick and him, concerning Flanders and Arthois only. In the
mean time the French had hired diverse Carracks and other great ships of the
Geno^aes and Italians, which joining with the french-fleete, lay at the mouth
of the River of Seyne, under the command of Jacques Bastard of Bourbon, to
hinder all succors from coming to Har^lew; but John Earl of Huntington (son
to the Duke of Exeter beheaded at Cicester) being sent to s^oure the coasts,
encountered with him, and after a long fight took him Prisoner, and three of
his great Carricks, with all the money for the half years pay of the fleet,
and sinking three other of his Carricks, and dispersing the rest, cleared the
mouth of the River and then returned to the king at Southampton. And now upon
the twenty third of July, in the ^ourth year of his Reign, the king himself,
with the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, the Earls of Huntington, Warwick,
Devo^shire, Salisbury, Suffolk and Somerset, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby,
Fits-hugh, Clynton, Scroope, Matrevers, Bourch^er, Ferrers of Groby, Ferrers of
Chartley, Fa^hope, Gray of Codnor, Sir Gilbert Vmphrevile, Sir Gylbert Talbot,
and an Army consisting of twenty five thousand five hundred twenty eight
fighting men, besides a thousand Artificers and Pyoners, took shipping at
Portsmouth, and upon the first of August landed in Normandy near to the Castle
of Tonque, which he presently besieged, and upon the ninth of August had it
yielded to him, at which time the Earl of Salisbury took the Castle of
Albervilliers which the king gave him, to him and his heirs, being the first
land given by the king in France.

At the winning of Tonque, the king made eight and twenty Knights; and from
thence marched with his Army to Caen; where to prevent the Citizens from
sallying out, he cast up a Mount; and then making many assaults, but finding
them to do little good, he caused his Pyoners to undermine the walls: which
being done, upon the fourth of September he offered the Besieged their lives,
if they would submit: which they refusing, he thereupon made a show of a
general assault, whilst many of his men entered the City under the foundation,
of whom the Duke of Clarence with his Company was the first: and they coming
upon the backs of those that defended the walls, easily overcame them; and then
the whole Army entered without resistance. The next day, the King caused all the
principal men of the Town to come before him at their Senate house; where
some of them, for their stubborn refusing the grace he had offered them, were
adjudged to death, and the rest fined: the spoil of the Town was distributed
amongst the soldiers. The Captain of the Castle stood out a while; but being
advertised that the king had sworn to show no mercy, if he did not surrender;
he gave twelve Hostages, that if it were not relieved before the twentieth of
September, he would then give it up; which not coming, he performed: and so
the king had possession both of C^en and the Castle.

And now Charles the new Dolphin, being but seventeene years of age and bare
of money, had got into his possession all the jewels, plate and money of the
Queen his mother; which so incensed her against him, that to do him a spite,
she placed the Duke of Burgundy in chief authority about the king, who by
reason of his infirmity was u^able himself to manage the State; and the Duke
having now the sword in his hands, meant first ^o repress the growing
boldness of the Dolphyn, and afterward to repel the common Enemy: and the
Dolphyn likewise, envying the Dukes advancement above him, meant first to take
down his swelling greatness, and afterward to fall upon the foreign adversary;
and thus while private respects were preferred before public, whilst the
Duke and the Dolphyn had their first intentions against one another, not
looking afte^ king Henry, but in the second place, after their own turns
served, an easy way was left for king Henry's proceedings, and he went on at
his pleasure with small opposition. He sent the Duke of Clarence, who took in
the City of Bayeux, as likewise the Duke of Glo^cester the City of Lyse^x;
whilst himself remaining still at Caen, put out of the city the natives that
were impotent or young infants to the number of fifteen hundred, and in their
places put English people, and finding a great mass of money and plate,
deposited by the Citizens in the Castle, ^e caused the same, upon proof, to
be respectively delivered to the right owners^ upon condition they would
acknowledge him for their Sovereign; which moderate and just dealing won him
more hearts then the force of his Arms had won him knees, specially with the
Normans, who are easier to be drawn with gentleness and love, then forced by
violence and compulsion. From hence the king marched the first of October to
Corfye Castle, which within three days yielded. The fourth of October he came
to Argenton, which not relieved by a day agreed upon, was likewise surrendered.
The Town of Al^nson endured eight days siege, but in the end did as other
their neighbor Towns had done. From Alanson the Earl of S^lisbury was sent
to Faleys, to view the strength thereof, whom the king presently followed,
where the besieged concluded, if it were not relieved before the second of
January, then to yield up the Town: No relief coming, the Town was yielded
up, and soon after upon the like terms, the Castle. From hence the king
returned to Caen, to put in execution a Proclamation he had formerly made; That
if the inhabitants of Normandy that were fled, returned not by a day assigned,
he would then grant their Lands to his soldiers: and thereupon he gave to the
duke of Clarence during life, the Vicounties of A^ge, Or^er and Pon^i^^, with
all the Lands of those that were not returned according to the Proclamation.
All the Lent the king lay at Bayeux, whilst his Navy still kept the Seas, and
daily took many French ships, but upon the sixteenth of July such a Tempest
took them, that they were driven to fall in with Southampton; and yet, with all
their diligence, could not so save themselves, but that two Ballingers, and two
great Carricks laden with merchandise, were in the very Haven drowned. In the
mean time the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Talbot besieged the strong Castle
of D^mfront: The Duke of Cl^rence took Court^n and Burney; and many other
being taken, as Cha^bois, Bechelouyn, H^rcourt, Fantgernon, Cre^en^r,
Anvyll^ers, B^gles, in all of them he placed Captains and Garrisons, and
particularly in Fres^y, Sir Robert Brent, lately made Viscount. The Duke of
Glo^cester also, with the Earl of March, and the Lord of Codnor, took in all
the Isle of Co^st^^ti^e, except Chereburg, and then returned to the king, but
was sent back to take in that City also: which after some time, when no relief
came, was, together with the Castle, likewise surrendered; although by this time
the Duke of Burg^^di^ and the Dolphyn, by mediation of the Pope, were
reconciled, and began to join their Forces to make resistance. And now the
Duke of Exeter the kings Uncle, with a supply of fifteen thousand men out of
England, came to the king, who presently took in the City of Eureux; and the
Earl of Ryme, the strong Cast^e of Mill^y le Vesco.

The next thing attempted, was the siege of Ro^^, a City strongly fortified,
both with walls and di^ches, and to which there was no convenient passage, but
by the City of Lovie^; to this City therefore he first lays ^iege, which
when no relief came within a time agreed on, was surrendered; and yet there was
another impediment to be removed, a stone bridge, which hindered the approach to
Roan, being exceeding strongly guarded: For this, King Henry devised floats of
wicke^, covered with be^sts hides, by which the Duke of Cl^rence with his
quarter passed the River, and then laid siege to the Town on that side; and
for the other side, he had other devises made with hogsheads and pipes, fastened
to ^irrepoles and Barges, with which he passed his men over at pleasure; and in
the mean time he caused diverse of his Soldiers that could swim, to make
show of passing the River three miles off another way; with which the
Frenchmen being deluded, drew all their forces thither, and by this means the
Fort being left unfurnished of sufficient guard, was presently forced to
surrender, and the Soldiers were taken to the Kings grace; The bridge being
thus gained, the Duke of Exeter was sent, and with him Windsor the Herald, to
summon the Citizens to surrender the Town; who not only gave proud answers,
but also made a sallye forth, though with the loss of thirty of their men.
Upon this obstinacy of theirs, the King presently orders his siege; his own
quarter was the Ch^rteux, the Duke of Clar^nce at St. Gervays, the Duke of
Exeter at Port St. Dennis, and every great Commander had his quarter assigned,
so as the City was begirt round, and a great chain of iron set upon piles,
and a strong wooden bridge for passage from one Camp to the other, was made
over the River. At this time the Earl of Kilmayne with sixteen hundred Irish
came to the King, and had their quarter assigned them, who behaved themselves
with great valor: The Kings Cosen Germane the King of Portugal, sent likewise
a Navy of Ships to the mouth of the River of Seyne, which stopped all passage
of succor to Roan; many policies and practices were used against the City,
but none prevailed, till famine forced it; for there being in Roan 210000
persons at the beginning of the Siege, and the Siege continuing long, it grew to
that extremity, that the Citizens drank no thing but vinegar and water, and
had little to eat, but Rats and Mice, Cats and dogs, and such like: Great
numbers of the poorer sort were thrust out of the City, who not suffered to
pass the English Army, miserably perished; only upon Christmas Day, in honor
of Christ's birth, the King relieved and suffered to pass as many as were at
first put out, but not others that were put out the second time, but suffered
them to perish.

In this distress, a Parley is required by the Citizens; who notwithstanding
their misery, yet stood upon such high terms, that nothing was concluded, only
a truce for eight days was granted them; the eight days ended, and nothing
yet agreed upon amongst themselves, they crave one day longer, and neither in
that day could any thing be agreed on; then they crave four days more, in
which the multitude and common people so pressed the Magistrates and Governors
of the City, that on the fourth day, being about the nineteenth of January,
the City was surrendered, and the Inhabitants themselves, and all their goods
were yielded to the Kings mercy; the Duke of Exeter was appointed to take
possession, who accordingly entered with his Soldiers. The next day after,
being Friday the twentieth of January, the King himself made his entry, with
four Dukes, ten Earls, eight Bishops, sixteen Barons, and others, and was by
the Clergy conducted to our Lady Church; where after public thanksgiving, he
took Homage and fealty of the Burgesses and Inhabitants; making Proclamation,
that all that would come and acknowledge him to be their Sovereign, should
enjoy the benefit of his Protection, and retain their possessions, whereupon
many came in, and many Towns were surrendered. In this time of the Kings lying
at Roan, the Earl of Salisbury took in Hunflew, Munster de Villiers, Ewe, and
Newcastle; the Duke of Clarence took Vernon, and Naunt; and the Earl of
Warwick la Roche Guyon.

And now the Duke of Burgundy seeing the great successes of King Henry, could
think of no better way for his own safety, then to make a reconciliation
between the two Kings; to which end, Ambassadors are sent to procure their
meeting; at which time, King Henry for their service already performed, and in
hope of more here^fter, made the valiant Gascoigne Captain le Beuff, Earl of
Longuevyle, Sir John Gra^ Earl of T^nkevyle, and the Lord Bo^rch^er Earl of
E^^. Upon the l^st of May, King Henry accompanied with the Dukes of Clarence,
Gloucester, and Exeter, his Uncle Beaufort, the Bishop of Winchester, with the
Earls of March, and Salisb^ry, and a thousand men at Arms, entered the place
appointed for the meeting of the two Kings. The French Queen (her Husband
being taken with hi^ (...)) with the Duke of Burg^igne, and the Earl of St.
Paul, and a company of Ladies^ amongst whom, as a bait to entangle the Kings
affection, was the kings D^ughter, the beautiful Lady Katherine; with whose
sight, though the King was marvellously taken, yet he made no show thereof,
till other things should be agreed upon; but the Dolphin having made means to
the Duke of Burgoigne to hinder all agreement, nothing was effected; whereupon
at their parting, the King told the Duke, that he would have both the Lady, and
all his other Demands, or else drive the King of France out of his kingdom,
and him out of his Dukedom: Upon thi^, the Duke thought it best to agree with
the Dolphin, and upon the sixth of July, Articles of their reconcilement are
signed and sealed; In the mean time, the Ea^le of Long^^vyle surprised the
Town of Ponthoyse, but had scarce been able to make good the surprise, if the
Duke of Clarence had not come to his ^uc^^ur; (...) thence the Duke marched to
Paris, and there stayed two days, but pe^ceivi^^ no show of sallye to be made,
he returned to Ponth^yse, whither the King himself came; and from thence
marching on, took in the Castle of Vanyon Villeirs; and on the last of August,
the Castles of Gysors, and Galyard, and Dumall; so that now all Normandy (
Mount St. Michael only excepted) was reduced to the possession of the King of
England, which had been wrongfully detained from him, ever since the year
1207.

The Dolphin all this while, though having outwardly made a reconcilement with
the Duke of Burgoigne, yet inwardly bearing a spleen against him, intended
nothing so much as his destruction; which to e^^ect, he procured a meeting
between the Duke and him, and all the Peers of the Realm at Mountstrew; where
the Duke though humbling himself in reverence to the Dolphin on his knee, was
most barbarously murdered; which act, was so much the less to be pitied in
the Duke, by how much he in the like kind, upon the like enterview, had caused
Lewis the Duke of Orleance to be murdered. But though this barbarous act might
justly incens^ Philip Earl of Carolois the Duke of Burgoig^es heir to seek
revenge; yet as a wise and and politic Prince, he forbore for the present to
make show of choler or distemperature, and considering with himself, that
difference between the Dolphin and him, would but give King Henry the greater
advantage, he endeavored to propose an overture of peace between the two
Kings; And to that end Ambassadors are sent from the King of France, and the
young Duke of Burgoig^^, whom the King kindly entertained, but seemed to
intimate unto them, that he could give no great credit to their propositions,
unless the Lady Katherine would join in them, whose innocence he knew would
never abuse him. Whilst these things are in agitation, the Earl of Salisbury
took in Fres^^y, and the Earls Marshall and Huntington entered into Mayn, who
approaching Ments, were encountered by the forces of the Dolphin, whereof they
slew five thousand, and took two hundred prisoners; for which, news being
brought to Roan, whither King Henry was come to solemnize the Feast of Christ's
Birth, thanksgiving to God were publicly made; and in the instant thereof,
arrived other Ambassadors from the King and Queen of France, and a letter from
the Lady Katherine to King Henry, was secretly by the Bishop of Arr^s
delivered; The conclusion of all was, that the king of England should speed
himself to Troyes, there to be Espoused to the Lady Ka^herine, and to have
assurance of the Crown of France, after the decease of the present king
Charles: Whereupon, with a Guard of fifteen thousand choice Soldiers,
accompanied with the Duke of Clare^ce and Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick,
Salisbury, Huntington, Lo^g^evile, Tankervile and Ewe; the king of England came
to Troyes in Champaign, upon the eighteenth day of May, where he was met by the
Duke of Burgoign^, and diverse of the French Nobility, who attended him to the
Palace, where the Queen with her Daughters, the Duchess of Burgoigne, and
the Lady Katherine gave him Princely entertainment; and after some intercourse
of complement between the Princes and the Ladies, K. Henry tendered to the Lady
Katherine a Ring of great value, which she (not without some blushing)
received; and afterward, upon the twentieth day of May, she was affianced to
him in St. Peter's Church, and on the third of June following, the marriage was
solemnized; and therewithal king Henry was published to be the only Regent of
the Realm, and Heir apparent to the Crown of France; the Articles whereof,
with all convenient expedition were Proclaimed both in England and in France,
and the two kings, and all their Nobles, and other Subjects of account, were
sworn to observe them; and in particular the Duke of Burgoigne.

And thus was the Salique Law violated, and the heir Male put by his Sucession
in the Crown, which the Genius of France will not long endure, a while it
must; and therefore the maine endeavor of both kings now is, to keep him down,
whom they had put down; and thereupon, on the fourth day of June, king Henry
with the French king, James king of Scots, who was newly arrived, the Duke of
Burgoig^e^ the Prince of Orange, one and twenty Earls, five and forty Barons,
with many Knights and Gentlemen, and an Army consisting of French, English,
Scottish, Irish, and Dutch, to the number of six hundred thousand, marched
toward the Dolphin; and upon the seventh day, laid siege to the Town of
Se^^s, which sided with the Dolphin, which after four days siege was yielded
up. From thence they removed, having the Duke of Bedford in their company, who
was newly come out of E^gla^d, with large supplies of men and money to
Monst^^^^, which was taken by Escalado, only the Castle held out still; during
the siege whereof, king Henry cre^^ed an Officer of Arms, to be king of
Heralds over the Englishmen, and entitled him Garter; whom he sent with offers
of mercy to the Castle, but was by the Captain thereof reproachfully
upbraided: for punishment of which his presumption, ^ Gibbet was erected, and
in view of Mounsieur Guitry the said Captain, twelve of his friends were
executed: whereupon those of the Castle treated for peace; but the king, in
eight days together, would not grant so much as a parley^ so that after six
weeks siege, they were enforced (their lives saved) simply to yield. From
thence the king marched to Melun upon Sein, and besieged it the thirtieth of
July; the Captain whereof was Barbason a Gascoigne, no less politic than
valiant, who countermined some, and stopped other Mines made by the English, and
fo^ght hand to hand in the Barriers with king Henry; yet at last, through
Famine and Pestilence was forced to yield; but being suspected to have had a
hand in the murder of the Duke of Burgoigne, he was sent prisoner to Paris;
and presently thereupon, both the kings with their Queens, the Duke of
Burgoigne and his Duchess, with a Royal Train came thither; where the
French king was lodged in the House of S. Paul, and the king of England in the
Castle of Lo^vre. And here the three States of France anew under their hands
and Seals in most a^thenticke manner Ratified the former Articles of king
Henry's Succession in the Crown of France; the Instruments whereof were
delivered to the king of England, who sent them to be kept in his Treasury at
Westminster.

And now King Henry began to exercise his Regency, and as a badge of his
Authority; he caused a new Coin which was called a Salute, to be made, whereon
the Arms of France and England were quarterly stamped; he placed and displaced
diverse Officers, and appointed the Duke of Exeter with five hundred men, to the
Guard of Paris: He awarded out Process against the Dolphin, to appear at the
Marble-Table at Paris, which he not obeying, Sentence was denounced against
him, as guilty of the murder of the Duke of Burgoigne; and by the sentence of
the Parliament, he was banished the Realm.

After this, the King making Thomas Duke of Clarence his Lieutenant General
of France and Normandy; on the 6th of January, with his beloved Queen Katherine
he left Pari^, and went to Amyens, and from thence to Calli^, and thence
landing at Dover, came to Canterbury, and afterward through London to
Westminster; where the Queen upon St. Matthews day, the fourth of Febru^ry was
Crowned; the King of Scots sitting at dinner in his State, but on the left hand
of the Queen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Kings Uncle the Bishop of
Winchester being on the right hand, All were served with covered messes of
silver, but all the Feast was Fish, in observation of the Lent season.

After this, the king took his Progress through the Land, hearing the
complaints of his poor Subjects, and taking order for the administering of
Justice to high and low; and then met the Queen at Leicester, where they kept
their Easter.

In the mean time, the Duke of Clarence making a Road into A^jo^, came to the
City of Ampers, where he knighted Sir William Rosse, Sir Henry G^d^ard, Sir
Rowla^d Vyder, Sir Thomas Beauford his natural Son; and returning home laden
with prey, was advertised that the Duke of Alanson intended to intercept his
passage; whereupon, he sent the Scout-master, Andrew Fogosa ^ Lombard, to
discover the face of the Enemy; who being corrupted, brought report that their
number was but small, and those but ill ordered, that if he presently charged,
there could be no resistance. The Dukes credulity caused him to draw all his
horses together, and leaving his bows and bill^ behind which were his
chief^st strength, with his (...) only he makes toward the Enemy; but the
Traitor leading to a straight, where by his appointment an ambush was laid,
tha^ the Duke could neither retreat, nor flee; he soon perceived the
Trea^chery, but finding no remedy, he manfully set sp^^ to his horse, and
charged upon the Enemy; but over-layd with multitude, and wearied with fight,
was himself, with the Earl of Ta^kervile, the Lord Rosse, the Ea^le of Angus,
Sir John (...), and Sir John Vere^d, and above two thousand English slain; The
Earls of S^^erset, Suffolk and Perch, Sir John Berkl^y, Sir Ralph Nevill, Sir
Willi^^ B^wes, and 60 Gentlemen were taken prisoners: The body of the Duke of
Cl^rence, was by Sir John Beauford his base Son, (the D. dying without other
issue) conveyed to England, and buried at Canterbury besides his Father: and
this disaster happened upon ^aster-Eve. The King was at Beverley when he heard
of his brothers death, and presently thereupon, dispatched away Edmund Earl of
M^rt^^gne into Nor^^^dy, making hi^ Lieutenant thereof; and then calls his high
Court of Parliament to Westminster, requiring aid by money to revenge his
br^thers death, which was readily granted; and the king thus provided, sent his
brother the Duke of Bedford with an Army to C^lli^, consisting of four
thousand men at Arms, and four and twenty thousand Archers, whom about the
middle of May he follows himself, and saf^ly a^riving at C^lli^, hasted to
relieve Charters, which the Dolphin with seven thousand men had besieged; but
hearing of the kings coming, was retired to Tours. The king of Scots, with the
Duke of Gloucester, about the eighth of July besieged Dreux; which agreed, if it
were not relieved by the twentieth of that month, then to surrender it; no
relief coming, it was surrendered. The king pursu^d the Dolphin from place to
place, but could not overtake him, but in the way, surprised the Town of
B^wg^^cy, where all that craved it, he ^ooke to mercy, as likewise he did at
Ro^gemo^t; from thence he went to Orleance, and from thence to Vigne^ St. To^,
and from thence to Paris; where having fitted himself with supplies, he went
and sat down before Menixe in Brye, which after some opposition, he also
took; and thereby had possession of all the Fortresses in the Isle of France,
in (...), in ^rye, and in Champaigne.

Upon St. Nicholas day, in the year 1422, Queen Katherine was brought to bed
of a Son at Windsor, who was by the Duke of Bedford, and Henry Bishop of
Winchester, and the Countess of Holland Christened by the name of Henry;
whereof, when the king had notice, out of a Propheticke rapture he said; Good
Lord, I Henry of Monmouth shall small time Reign and much get, and Henry borne
at Windsor, shall long time Reign and lose all, but Gods will be done.

About this time the Dolphin laid siege to Cosney, which the king was intentive
to relieve, as being a Town of the Duke of Burgoignes; and therefore tendredit
more than if it had been hi^ own; and making overhasty journeys, he
over-heat himself with travel; and coming to S^^lys, found himself so ill
at ease, that he was forced to remain there, and to send his brother the Duke
of Bedford to prosecute his design, which the Duke performed, and the Dolphin
upon his approach, retired into Berry; whereof, in mockage he was after called
the king of Berry. But the kings Fever and fl^^ increasing, he was removed to
Boys de Vincens; where growing worse and worse, within a few days he dyed. But
somewhat before his departure, he had made his Brother the Duke of Bedford
Lieutenant General of Nor^^^dy, and Regent of the kingdom of France, and his
Brother the Duke of Gloucester, he had made Protector of England, and of his
Sons Person: Exhorting all to be true and faithful to the Duke of ^urgo^g^e,
to be at unity amongst themselves, to be loyal to their young Prince, to be
serviceable to his dearly beloved Queen, to hold and preserve what he by his
valor, and Gods assistance had won; and never to conclude contract of amity
with the Dolphin, or Duke of Alanson, until they had submitted themselves to
the kings Grace. And so giving God thanks for all his favors and blessings
bestowed upon him, in the midst of saying a Psalm of David, he departed this
life; who might justly have prayed God with David, Take me ^ot away in the
midst of my days, for he dyed about the age of five or six and thirty years,
which in David's account is the midst of the number of the days of man's life:
but though he dyed in the midst of his days, yet he dyed in the fullness of
his Glory; and of whom it may he said, -- Iamque arce potitus, Ridet anhel^^tes
dur^ ad fastig^^ montis. When he had Reigned nine years and five months.

Of his Taxations.
IN his first year an incredible sum of money was given him by the Clergy, to
di^ert him from a motion propounded to take away their Temporalties. And in the
same year a Subsidy was granted him both by the Clergy and the Laity. In his
fourth year was granted him, toward his wars in France, two whole Tenths of
the Clergy, and a fifteenth of the Laity; which being far too short to defray
his great charge, he was forced to pawn his Crown to the Bishop of Beauford
his Uncle for a great sum of money, as also certain Jewels to the Lord Major of
London, for ten thousand marks. In his ninth year in a Parliament at
We^^minster, for revenge of the Duke of Clarence death, two tenths of the
Clergy, and one fifteenth by the Laity, which because the haste of the
business could not stay the usual course of collection, the Bishop of
Winchester brought in presently twenty thousand pounds, to receive it again
when the Subsidy should be gathered. The same year also, the Duke of Bedford
in the kings absence called a Parliament, wherein was granted toward his
wars, one fifteenth to be paid in such money as was at that time current.
These are all the Subsidies that were given him, notwithstanding his many and
great achievements, by which it appears what great matters a moderate Prince
may do, and yet not grieve his subjects with Taxations.

Of Laws and Ordinances made by him, or in his ^ime.
HE ordained the king of Heralds over the English, which is called G^rter.

In his ninth year, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, It was ordained,
that no man should offer Gold in payment, unless it were weight; and thereupon
were appointed balances and weights.

An act made in the thirteenth year of king Richard the Second, which disabled
the Alien Religious to enjoy any B^nefices within England, was in the beginning
of this kings Reign put in execution: and further, this king excluded also the
French from all preferments Ecclesiastical; and those Priors Aliens
Conventuall, who had institution and induction, were bound to put in security,
not to disclose or cause to be disclosed, the Counsel and secre^s of the
Realm.

Affairs of the Church in his ti^e.
IN the beginning of his Reign, the Wickliffs increased greatly, of whom Sir
John Oldcastle was a Chief; who by marriage of a kinswoman of the Lord Cobham^
of C^^ling in Kent, obtained that Title: This knight, being very valorous, and
in great favor with the king, was in a Synod at London accused for maintaining
of Wickliff^ doctrine: whereof the king being informed, sent for him, and
instantly dealt with him to submit himself to the censure of the Church: But
Sir John Oldcastle told the King, that he owed his subjection only to his
Majesty; and as for others, he would stand for the truth against them, to the
uttermost of his life. Upon this, he was served by Process, to appear in the
Archbishops Court; and not appea^ing, was condemned of Contumacy, and
afterward in a Synod at Rochester, was by the Archbishop pronounced to be an
Heretic; who then enacted that Decree, That the Holy Scriptures ought not to
be translated into the English tongue: But mark the judgment that fell upon
his own tongue, who^e roots and blade shortly after (as is recorded) grew so
big in his mouth and throat, that he could neither speak, nor swallow down
meat, but in horror lay languishing, till at last ^^^^ved by famine, he so
dyed. In the mean time, Sir John Oldcastle wrote his Belief, and presented it
himself to the King; which the King would in no wise receive, but suffered
him, in his presence, and Privy chamber, to be summoned; who appearing before
the Archbishop, after diverse examinations, he was condemned of Heresy, and
committed to the Tower of London, from whence shortly after he escaped, and got
into Wales. The king, by his Proclamation, promised a thousand Marks to any
that should bring him in: but so much was his doctrine generally favored, that
the kings offer was not much regarded, but he continued four years after
undiscovered: At last he was taken in the borders of Wales, within a Lordship
belonging to the Lord Powes, who brought him to London, before the Duke of
Bedford Regent of the Realm; where in the end he was condemned, and finally
was drawn from the Tower to S. Giles field, and there hanged in a chain by the
middle, and after consumed with fire, the gallows and all. At the time of his
first conviction, four years before, it was rumored, that twenty thousand
men in arms were assembled in S. Giles field: whereupon, the king, at
midnight, himself in person went thither, where he found many indeed, who upon
examination confessed, that they came to meet their Captain Sir John
Oldcastle, but without any intent against the king: yet was Sir Roger Acto^,
and eight and twenty others of them apprehended, and executed in Smithfield;
and all the Prisons in and about London were filled with them.

In his third year, the order of Church service throughout England, was
changed from the use of Paul's to the use of S^lisbury, to the great disliking
of many in those days.

In his fourth year, a Council was holden at Constance, whither he sent
Ambassadors, the Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath, and
Hereford; the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of Worcester: In which
Council it was decreed, that England should have the title of the English
Nation, and should be accounted one of the five principal Nations in rank
before Spain; which often before had been moved, but never granted till then.
And herein were all Wickliffs positions condemned: also John Husse, and Hierome
of Prague (notwithstanding the Emperors safe conduct) were both of them
burned. In this Council, the Schism of Anti-popes, which had continued the
space of nine and twenty years, was reformed: ^e^edict the 13. had been
elected by the Spaniard; Gregory the 1^. by the French; John the 24. by the
Italians: And now in this Council, begun in February 1414, and continued above
three yea^es; wherein were assembled, besides the Emperor, the Pope, and the
Palsgrave of R^^ime, four Patriarks, twenty seven Cardinals, seven and forty
Archbishops, one hundred and threescore Bishop^, Princes and Barons with their
attendants, above thirty thousand; The foresaid elected Popes were all put
down, or else resigned; and in the place, as legitimate Pope, was elected Otho
Lolo^na, by the name of Marti^ the fifth.

In this year also, fell out an Accident, which shows the strict observance of
Ecclesiastical censures in those days. The wives of the Lord Strange, and Sir
John Trussell of War^ington in Cheshire, striving for place at a Sermon in S.
Dunst^^s Church in the East, their husbands being present, fell themselves to
striving in their wives behalf^, and great part-taking there was on both sides,
some slain, and many wounded: The delinquents were committed to the Counter,
the Church suspended, and upon examination, the Lord Strange being found
guilty, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury adjudged to this Penance, which was
accordingly performed: The Parson of S. Dunst^^s went before, after whom
followed all the Lords servants in their shirts; after them went the Lord
himself, bare-headed, with a wax taper in his hand; then followed the Lady,
barefooted; and then last came the Archdeacon Reynold R^^^ood: in which order
they went from Paul's where the sentence was given, to S. Dunst^^s Church; where
at the rehallowing thereof, the Lady filled all the Vessels with water, and
according to the sentence, offered to the Altaran ornament of the value of ten
pounds; and the Lord, a Pixe of silver, of five pounds A Penance, no doubt,
which the Lord and the Lady would have redeemed with a great deal of money, if
the discipline of the Church had in those days allowed it: but it seems, the
commutation of Penance was not as yet come in use.

In his ninth year, in a Parliament at Leicester, a hundred and ten Priories
alient were suppressed, because they spoke ill of his Conquests in France; and
their possessions were given to the King: but by him, and King Henry the sixth,
were afterward given to other Monasteries, and Colleges o^ learned men.

Works of Piety by him, or others in his time.
THis King re-edified his Royal Manor, which was then called Sheene, now
Richmond, and founded two Monasteries not far from it; the one of
Carthusians, which he named Bethelem; the other of Religious men and women of
the Order of S. Bridget, which he named Syon: He also founded the Brotherhood
of Saint Giles without Cripplegate in London. In the second year of his
Reign, Mooregate near to Colemanstreet was first made, by Thomas Fawkener
Major of London, who caused also the ditches of the City to be cleansed, and a
common Privy that was on the Moore without the wall, to be taken down, and
another to be made within the City upon Wallbrooke, into the which brook he
caused the water of the City to be turned by grates of iron in diverse places.
In his sixth year, William of Sevenoak Major of London, founded in the Town of
Sevenoak a Free school and thirteen Almshouses. This man was found at Sevenoak
in Kent, anew-borne infant of unknown Parents, but by charitable people was
Christened and brought up, bound prentise in London, and came at last to be
Major of the City. Also Robert Chic^ely Major of London gave liberally to the
Almshouses founded by his brother Henry Chiche^^y Archbishop of Canterbury, at
Higham-Ferrers in Northamptonshire, where they were born. But Henry Chicheley
the Archbishop founded two Colleges in Oxford; one called Bernard College,
renewed by Sir Thomas White, and named S. John's College; the other called
All-Soules, which continues at this day as he left it. Also John Kempe
Archbishop of Canterbur^, converted the Parish Church of Wye in Kent where he
was borne, into a College of Secular Priests.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN the fifth year of his Reign a great part of the City of Norwich was burnt,
with all the house of the Friars Preachers, and two friars of that Order. In
his third year, on the feast of the Purification, seven Dolphins came up the
River of Th^mes, whereof four were taken.

Of his Wife and issue.
HE married Catherine the daughter of king Charles the sixth of France, who was
his Queen two years and about three months, married at Troyes in Champaigne
the third day of June 1420. and afterward February the foureteenth crowned at
Westminster: She surviving king Henry, was re-married to Owen Teu^^^ an
Esquire of Wales, who pretended to be descended from Cadwallade^ the antien^
king of Wales, though some write him to be the son of a Brewer, whose
meannesse of estate was recompensed by the delicacy of his personage; so
absolute in all the lineaments of his body, that the only contemplation of it
might well make her forget all other circumstances; by him she had three
sons, Edmond, I^sper, and Owen, and a daughter that lived but a while. Her
son Owen took the habit of Religion at Westminster, the other two were by
king Henry the sixth (their half brother) advanced in honor: Edmond was created
Earl of Richmond, and marrying the sole heir of John Beaufort Duke of
Somerset, was Father, by her, unto Henry the s^aventh, king of England, the
only heir of the house of Lancaster. Jasper her second son was first created
Earl of Pembroke, and after Duke of Bedford, but dyed without lawful issue.
This Queen^, either for devotion or her own safety, ^oke into the Monastery of
Bermo^dsey in Southwarke, who dying the second o^ January 1436. she was buried
in our Ladies Chapel within St. Peter's Church at Westminster, whose corpse
taken up in the Reign of king Henry the s^aventh, her Grandchild (when he
laid the foundation of that admirable structure) and her Coffin placed by king
Henry her husbands Tomb, has ever since so remained, and never since
re-buried, where it stands (the cover being loose) to be seen and handled
of any that will. By her king Henry had only one son, named Henry, who
succeeded him in the Kingdom.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was tall of stature, lean of body, and his bones small but strongly made,
somewhat long necked, black haired, and very beautiful of face, swift in
running, so as he with two of his Lords, without bow or other engine, would
take a wild Buck or Do in a large Park: He delighted in songs and musical
Instruments, insomuch that in his Chapel amongst his private prayers, he used
certain Psalms of D^vid, translated into English meeter by John Lydgate Monk
of Bury. And indeed it may be truly said of him as was said of Aenae^s: Quo
justior alter; Nec pi^tate fuit, nec bello major and ar^i^, for he seldom
fought ba^^ell where he got not the victory, and never got victory whereof he
gave not the glory to God, with public Thanksgiving. He was a better man, a
King then a Subject; for till then he was not in his right Orb, and therefore
no mervaile if he were something exorbitant. He was of a merciful disposition,
but not to the prejudice of wisdom; as thinking wise cruelty to be better then
foolish pity. He was no less politic then valian^, for he never fought
battle, nor won Town, wherein he prevailed not as much by stratagem as by
force. He was so temperate in his diet, and so free from vainglory, that we
may truly say, he had something in him of Caesar which Alexander the Gre^^ had
not, that he would not be drunk; and som^hing of Alexander the Great, which
Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered. He was indeed a great affector
of Glory, but not of glory the bl^st of men's mouths, but of the Glory that
fills the sails of Time. He dyed of full years, though not full of years: if
he had lived longer he might have gone over the same again, but could not have
gone further. If his love were great to Military men, it was not small to
Clergy men, insomuch as by many he was called the Prince of Priests.

Of his Death and Burial.
SOme say he was poisoned, which Polydore Virgill says was much suspected: The
Scots write that he died of the disease called St. Fi^cre, which is a Palsy
and a Crampe: E^guerant says that he died of St. Anthonies fire: But Peter
Basset Esquire, who at the time of his death was his Chamberlain, affirms
that he died of a Pleurisy, which at that time was a sickness strange and
but little known. Being dead his body was embalmed and closed in lead; and laid
in a Chariot-Royall richly apparelled in cloth of Gold, was conveyed from Boys
de Vin^^n^es to Paris, and so to Roa^, to A^bevyle, to C^llys, to D^ver, and
from thence through London to Westminster, where it was interred next beneath
King Edward the Confessor; upon whose Tomb Queen Katherine caused a Royal
picture to be laid, covered all over with silver plate gilt, but the head
thereof altogether of massy silver; all which at that Abbeys suppression were
sacrilegiously broken off and transferred to p^ophaner uses. He dyed the last
day of August, in the year one thousand four hundred twenty two, when he had
reigned nine years and five Months, lived eight and thirty years.

Of men of Note in his time.
MEN of valor in his time were so frequent, that we may know it to be a true
saying, Regis ad exemplu^; and men of learning likewise in such numbers, that
we may know the Prince to have been their Patron. First Alayn de Lyn, a
Carmelite Friar in that Town, who wrote many Treatises; Then Thomas Otterborne
a Franciscan friar who wrote an History of England; Then John Seguerd, who kept
a School in Norwich, and wrote sundry Treatises, reproving as well the Monks
and Priests as Poets for writing of filthy verses. Robert Ros^ a Carmelite
friar in Norwich; who writing many Treatises, yet said nothing against the
Wickle^ists. Richard C^yster borne ^o Nofolke, a man of great holiness of
life, favoring (though secretly) the doctrine of VVickliff^; William Wallis a
Black friar in Li^, who made a book of Moralizations upon Ovids Metamorphosis^
William Tailor a Priest and a Master of Art in Oxford, a steadfast follower of
Wickliffes doctrine, and burnt for the same at Smithfield in London the last
year of this ^ings reign. Bartholomew Florarius, called so of a Treatise
which he wrote called Florarium, who writ also another Treatise of Abstinence,
wherein he reproves the corrupt manners of the Clergy, and the p^ofession of
the Friars Men^icants. Als^ Titus Livi^^ de Fo^^ L^vis^is an It^lian born^, but
seeing he ^as r^siant here, and w^ote the life of this King, it is not unfit to
make mention of him in this place: also many others.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH.
THere had been a Race of Princes, of which for three generations together, it
might be rightly said; Pulcherrima proles; Magnanimi Heroes nati melioribus
Annis. For King Edward the Third had many Sons, not inferior in valor to the
many Sons of King Pri^^^s, not excepting his valiant Son Hector, having so
equal a match for him, as Edward the black Prince, who wanted but an Homer,
to have been an Achilles. Then John of G^un^ likewise had diverse Sons, men as
valorous as any that Age afforded. Then Henry the Fourth had four Sons, o^ so
heroical disposition all, that you might know them all to be his Sons, only
King Henry the Fifth to be his eldest. And now that in him the heroical nature
was come to the height, it degenerated again in King Henry the Sixth, which
must needs be attributed to the mothers side; who though in her self she were
a Princess of a noble spirit, yet being the issue of a crazie father, what
marvel, if she proved the mother of a crazie issue! and yet even this issue of
hers, a Prince no doubt, of excellent parts in their kind, though not of parts
kindly for a Princ^; in a private man praiseworthy enough, but the sword of a
King required a harder metal than the soft temper of King Henry the sixth was
made of: and in him we may see the fulfilling of the Text; Vae genti cujus Rex
est puer; Woe to that Nation whose King is a Child; for he was not above eight
months old, when he succeeded his father in the Kingdom; although that Text
perhaps is not meant so much of a child in years, for which there may be helps
by good Protectors; as of a child in abilities of ruling, whereof, though
possibly there may, yet probably there can be no sufficient supply, of which,
in this King we have a pregnant example; for as long as he continued a child
in years, so long his Kingdoms were kept flourishing by the Providence of his
careful Uncles; but as soon as he left being a Child in years, and yet
continued a child in ability of Ruling, then presently began all things I^
pejus ruere, and retro sublapsa referri, all things went to wrack both in
France and England. And thus much was necessary to be said by way of a Preface
to that great fall as it were of Nilus, in King Henry the Sixth.

Henry called of Windsor, because borne there, the only child of King Henry
the Fifth, as yet scarce nine months old, succeeded his Father, and was
Proclaimed King of England on the last of August, in the year 1422; by reason
of whose infancy, King Henry his Father had before by his Will appointed, and
now the Lords by their consent confirmed, the Regency of France to John Duke of
Bedford, the Government of England, to Humphry Duke of Gloucester, the Guard of
his Person to Thomas Duke of Exeter, and H^nry Beauford Bishop of Winchester,
and Lord Chancellor, wherein it was wisely provided that one man should not
rule all, lest it should prove a spur to aspiring; and withal stay them from
envying one another, when many were alike placed in the highest form of
authori^y: and indeed they all carried themselves so uprightly and carefully in
their places, that it well appeared the trust reposed in them by the dying
King, had made a strong impression of love and loyalty toward his Son.

The Duke of Bedford Regent of France, was to keep that by the sword, which
King Henry the Fifth by his sword had gotten, wherein he had many and great
assistants, specially the two terrors of France, Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, and John Lord Talbot; and amongst the French themselves, the Duke of
Burgoigne, a friend no less powerful, than firm unto him. The Dolphin also
(now crowned king at Poytiers, and called Charles the seventh of France, his
father being newly dead, within little more than a month after king Henry) had
likewise great assistants, the Duke of Alanson, and many other Peers of France,
and of the Sco^s many, and some perhaps of the English that took part with
him; by means whereof, the game of Fortune was a long time played between
them with great variety. The first act of the Duke of Bedfords Regency, was an
Oration which he made to the French in Paris, which wrought this good effect;
that king Henry is Proclaimed king of England and of France, and such French
Lords as were present did their Homages, and took their oaths to be true unto
him. The first act of hostility was performed by the new king of France, who
sends the Lord Granvile to Pont Meulan, who surprised it, putting all the
English Soldiers to the sword; but the Regent sending thither Thomas Montacute
Earl of Salisbury, so strongly beleaguered it, that the Lord Granvile not only
surrendered it, but swore allegiance (though he kept it not) to the king of
England, From thence the Earl marched to Seyne, which he took by assault,
and put all the Soldiers (except the Captain Sir William Maryn) to the sword.

At this time the Regent, the Duke of Burgoigne, John Duke of Britain, and
his brother in law the Earl of R^chmond, (who revolted afterward to the new
king of France, and was by him made Constable of France) met at Amyens; and
there not only renewed the old League, but further enlarged it; to be offensive
and defensive respectively: and to make the friendship the more firm, the
Regent married Anne the Sister of the Duke of Burgoigne at Troys. In this mean
time the Parisians taking advantage of the Regents absence, conspired to have
let in the new king into Paris; but the day before the night appointed for his
admission, the Regent with his power entered, apprehended the Conspirators, and
put them to public execution. That done, he furnished all the Forts and
places of strength with Englishmen, and sent Sir John Falstaff, who took in
Pacye, and Coursay, two strong Castles; whilst himself with his forces took
in Tray^els, and Br^y upon Seyne.

The Constable of France the mean while with the new kings forces, laid siege
to Cravant in Burgoigne; but the Regent sent thither the Earl of Salisbury,
who set upon the French, and after a long fight, putting them to flight, slew
about 1800 knights and gentlemen of note^ and three thousand common Soldiers,
Scots, and French, took prisoners the Constable himself, the Earl of
Ventadour, Sir Alex^^der Alerdyn, Sir Lewis Ferignye, and two and twenty
hundred Gentlemen. Of the English part, were slain Sir John Gray, Sir William
Hall, Sir Gilbert Halsall, Richard ^p Maddocke, and one and twenty hundred
Soldiers. From thence the E^rle led his forces to Montaguillon, and sat down
before it, which after five months Siege he took, whilst the Duke of Suffolk
took in the two strong Castles of Cowcye, and le Roche.

Whilst these things are done in France; in England the Protector Ransomed
and enlarged the young king of Scots, James the first; (who by the space of
eighteen years had been kept a Prisoner) which he did out of opinion, that he
might withdraw the Scots out of France, taking Hom^ge and fealty of him for the
Crown of Scotland, in these words; I ^ames S^eward, King of Scot^, shall be
true and faithful to you Lord Henry, King of England and France, the Superior
Lord of Scotland^ and to you I make my fidelity for the said Kingdom, which I
hold and claim of you, and shall do you service for the same, so God me help,
and these holy Evangelists; and therewithal, with consent of all the Nobility,
the Protector gave him to Wife, Jane Daughter to the deceased Duke of Somerset,
and Cosen Germane to the King, with a large Dowry, and married them at St.
Mary-Overys in Southwarke; yet all this courtesy could not keep him afterward
from being unfaithful, and unthankful.

And now the Protector sent over to the Regent ten thousand well furnished
Soldiers, with which fresh succor he won many Towns and places of
strength; which the French seeing, and finding themselves too weak by plain
force to withstand the English, they sought by subtilty to compass their ends;
and first, they work upon the inconstancy of the Duke of Britain, and his
brother Arthur, by King Henry the fifth created Earl of Yewry, whom by gifts
and promises they suborned, perfidiously to deliver over into their possession,
the Castles of Crotoye, and Yerney; but the English before the French Garrisons
were settled, fell upon Crotoye and recovered it; and that done, the Regent
besieged Yerney, and by secret mining, and violent Batteries so shook the
Walls, that they agreed to yield it up, if not relieved by a certain time:
whereupon the Duke of Ala^son, with sixteen thousand French came to the
rescue, but perceiving the English to be prepared to receive them, he wheeled
about to Ver^oyle, and swore to the Townsmen that he had put the Regent to
flight, and rescued Yerney; which they believing, rendr^d up Vernoyle to him:
but the Regent followed him thither, when by the encouragement of some fresh
Companies of Scots come to his succor, he came to a battle in the field,
where the English, with the loss of two thousand one hundred common Soldiers,
and two of the Nobility, the Lord Dudley, and the Lord Charleton; got the honor
of the day, and slew of their enemies, five Earls, two Viscounts, twenty
Barons, and above seven thousand other of the French, besides two thousand
seven hundred Scots lately arrived, and took Prisoners the Duke of Alanson
himself, the Lord of Her^ys, and diverse other French, and Sir John Tour^^ull,
and two hundred Gentlemen, besides common Soldiers. This battle was fought
the eight and twentieth day of August, in the year 14^4, and thereupon
Vernoyle was presently redelivered. After this, the Earl of Salisbury with ten
thousand men, takes in the strong Town of M^^^ts, the Town of St. Susan, the
Fort S^. Bernard, and others; from thence he went to A^jou, where he performed
such heroicke Acts, that his very name grew terrible in all France; as for
instance, the new High-Constable perfidious Richmond, with forty thousand men
laid Siege to the good Town of St. James in Benyo^, the Garrison whereof
consisted but of six hundred English, who being driven to some extremity,
sallied forth, crying Sa^nt George, a Salisbury; which word of Salisbury so
frighted the French, thinking he had been come to rescue them, that casting
away their weapons, they ran all away, saving some few that yielded themselves
prisoners, leaving all their Tents, fourteen Pieces of Ordnance, forty Barrels
of Powder, three hundred Pipes of Wine, much Armor, and some treasure behind
them. After which, other Castles, as that of Beam^^t, of Vicount, Tenney,
Gilly, Osce, Rusey, Vasicke, and many more were taken in by Sir John
Mon^gomery, and Sir John Falstaff; so as once again the French are glad to
betake themselves to their old course of fraud; they compounded with a
Gascoigne Captain for delivery of Al^^son to them; whereof the Regent having
notice, he sent the Lord Willoughby, and Sir John Falstaff to prevent it, who
encountering with Charles de Villiers, that with two hundred horse, and three
hundred foot, was come to the place appointed for entry, took and slew them
all, except some few horse, which saved themselves by flying. After which, the
Earl of Salisbury took in and demolished above forty Castles and strong
Piles, for which there was public thanksgiving to God in London.

Whilst these things were done in France, an unkind variance fell out
between the Protector, and his brother the Bishop of Winchester, Lord
Chancellor: for appeasing whereof, the Regent having substituted the Earl of
Warwick Lieutenant General in his absence, came into England, where in a
Parliament he compounded all differences between them: in honor whereof, king
Henry kept a solemn feast; at which time the Regent dubbed the King knight,
not yet above four years old; and then the King presently invested with that
dignity many of his servants: and Edmund Mortimer the last Earl of March, at
this time dying, his Inheritance descended to Richard Plantagenet son and
heir to Richard Earl of Cambridge beheaded at Southampton, who was now
created Duke of York, and was afterward father to king Edward the fou^h: and at
this time also, John Mowbray son and heir to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
banished before by king Richard the second, was restored to the Title of Duke
of Norfolk. And now, all things peaceably settled in England, the Regent, with
the Bishop of Winchester, returned into France; where, at the intercession of
the Duke of Burgoigne, the Duke of Alanson was ransomed, for two hundred
thousand Crowns: and the Bishop of Winchester returned to Callice, where he
was invested with the dignity and Hat of a Cardinal, which his brother the
Regent put upon his head.

About this time, the Duke of Gloucester, Protector, took some blemish in his
honor, by marying another man's wife, I^queline Countess of Haynoult, Holland
and Zealand, who was married before to John Duke of Brabant yet living, and had
lived with him ten months as his lawful wife, but at that time upon some
discontent gone from him, intending to be divorced: at which injury offered to
the Duke of Braba^t, the Duke of Burgoigne, being his Cousin, took so great
offense, that first by friendly letters he admonished the Duke of Gloucester of
it, and that not prevailing, they grew to terms of challenge, and a Combat
between them was appointed; but in the mean time, the Lady betrayed, was
carried to the Duke of Burgoigne, who conveyed her to Gaunt; from whence, by
friendship of a Burgonian knight, in man's apparel she escaped into Holland,
and there made a defensive war against her husband the Duke of Brabant, and
the Duke of Burgoigne. To her aid, the Duke of Gloucester sent the Lord
Fitzwater, with a Power of a thousand men: but she being discomfited by the
Duke of Brabant, and the Pope also pronouncing the first marriage legal, the
Duke of Gloucester deserted her, and then took for a second wife Eleanor
daughter of the Lord Cobham of Sterborough, his old mistress: and the Lady
Iaqueline, after the death of John Duke of Brabant, married a mean Gentleman;
whom the Duke of Burgoigne imprisoned, and brought herself to live in much
trouble.

And now in France, the Constable with forty thousand men besieged the Town of
S. James de Benuron; and having made a breach fit for assault, whilst his
Captains stood streining of courtesy, which of them should first enter, Sir
Nicolas Burdet with all his forces sallied forth, crying aloud, A Salisbury, a
Suffolk; whose names struck such a terror into the besiegers, that they stood
like men amazed, of whom six hundred were slain, two hundred drowned in the
ditches, fifty taken prisoners, with eighteen Standards, and the Constable was
glad to quit the place, and give over the Siege.

At the same time also, the Earl of Warwick and the L. Scales, with seven
thousand besieged Ponterson many weeks together; but Pov^sion waxing scant,
the Lord Scales with three thousand men went a forraging into the Enemies
Country; and in his return with plenty of provision, was encountered with six
thousand French, of whom he slew many hundreds, took above a thousand
prisoners, and then returned safe into the Camp.

About this time also, Sir John Falstaff besieged the strong Town of Gravile,
which after twelve days, offered to render it self by a day, if it were not
relieved. The offer was taken, and Pledges delivered: but before the day came,
they within ^he Town had victualled and manned the place, and thereupon
neglecting their Pledges, refused to render the Castle according to agreement:
whereupon the Pledges were brought before the sight of them within the Castle,
and there openly put to death.

And now a conspiracy of the Clergy and Magistrates in Maunts so prevailed,
that the Marshals of France with five hundred men, about midnight came to the
Townwalls; where the Guard of the English, by those that seemed their friends,
were suddenly massac^ed, and setting open the Gates, made way for the Enemy to
enter: whereupon, the Alarm given, the Earl of Suffolk with the surviving
English withdrew to the Castle, wherein they were sharply assailed by the
French, who yet had more mind to ransack houses, and to make good cheer:
whereof the Lord T^lbot having intelligence by Captain Goffe, whom he had sent
to discover the state of the French, he secretly gave notice to the Earl of
Suffolk, who thereupon sallied forth of the Castle at a time when the Lord
T^lbot was ready with his Troops, and on both sides crying, St. George, a
T^lbot, they fell upon the careless French, who lost four hundred of their
best men, the rest were all taken, the Town re-gained, and the Conspiratours,
thirty Citizens, twenty Priests, and fifteen Friars, condemned and put to
execution.

Whilst these things went on prosperously in France, a great disaster fell out
in England; for the right Noble Thomas Beauford (son of John of G^u^t, and
Katherine Swi^ford) Duke of Exeter, and Guardian of the King, makes king Henry
his heir, and at East-Greenwich in Kent ended his life; whose place was
presently supplied by the Earl of Warwick, and the Earls place in France, by
the Earl of Salisbury; who thereupon with five thousand men came to Orlea^ce,
and besieged the City, and won from the French the great fort. But here
happened another great disaster: for from an high tower in this fort, the
Besiegers observed the passages of the Townsmen; when the Noble Earl of
Salisbury, intending to inform himself of the state of the Town,
unfortunately looking out at a window of the fort, with Sir Th^^^^ G^rgrave; a
great shot from the Town striking the bars of the window, the splinters
thereof were driven into his head and face; of which wounds, within eight days
he died. This was now a second weakening to the English party: but in his place
the Earl of Suffolk succeeded; to whom the Regent sends Sir John Fals^^^^^
with fresh supplies, whom the Lord de la Brets, nine thousand strong,
endeavors to intercept: but Sir John resolving to abide the charge, places
his cariages behind, the horse next, and the foot before, lining his bows with
bill-men, and pitching stakes behind the Archers, who having discharged their
first volley, retired behind the stakes: on which the French, forgetting their
former defeats by that course, ran and goared their horses; by which their
Vaward being disordered, the Battle made a stand: which Sir John perceiving,
cries out, St. George! They^^ie! at which words they fled indeed, and lost two
thousand five hundred of their men, with the Lords de la Brets, and William
Steward; eleven hundred were taken Prisoners: with whom, and a rich booty, they
came to the Camp before Orleance. Hereof the besieged having notice, they
offered to submit themselves to the Duke of Burg^igne, who was contented to
receive them, so as the Regent would consent: But the Regent consented not; and
therefore in the mean time, the besieged made means to the Duke of Al^^so^,
who furnished the Town with fresh Forces and Provision; which put such spirits
into the Citizens, that they made a sally out, slew six hundred English, and
adventured upon the Bastile, where the Lord T^lbot commanded, who repelled them
with great slaughter of their men; but yet the next day the Earl of Suffolk
gave over his siege, and dispersed his Army into their Garrisons.

And now the wheel of Fortune began to turn to the French against the English,
which once set a going, was not easy to be stayed. And first, the Duke of
Al^^so^ took by assault the Town of Iargeux, and in it the Earl of Suffolk
and one of his brothers, and slew Sir Alexander Pole another of his brothers,
and many other Prisoners in cold blood, by reason of a contention amongst the
French, to whom the Prisoners should belong. Presently upon this, another great
blow was given the English: for the Lords Talbot, Scale^, and Hungerford, going
to fo^tifie the Town of S. Meu^, were encountered by the said Duke of Al^^son,
and Arthur of Britain, with three and twenty thousand men: with whom the
English Lords interchanged some blows; but oppressed with multitude, were all
three taken prisoners, all sore wounded, twelve hundred of their company
slain, and the rest hardly escaping to Me^^, where they fortified themselves
the best they could against future assaults.

These were great blows given to the English fortune in France; Salisbury
slain, and now Talbot taken prisoner: which though they made her a little to
totter, yet there must be greater blows given before she will fall. And
indeed, these disasters were seconded by the perfidous surrender of many Towns
and strong Holds to the French king; who now encouraged by these successes,
marches into Champaigne, where by composition he took Troyes the chief City
of that Province; Chalto^s rebelleth, and enforces their Captain to yield it
up: by whose example the Citizens of Rhemes do the like, where the French king
is anew Proclaimed, and with accustomed ceremonies Anointed and Crowned;
whereupon many Towns submit themselves to him, and revolt from the English.
Upon this, the Duke of Bedford (to make the French know, that all the English
strength consisted not in only Salisbury and Talbot) with ten thousand
English, besides Normans, marched out of Pa^is, and sent letters of defiance to
the French king, affirming, that deceitfully and by unjust means he had stolen
many Cities and places of importance belonging to the Crown of England; which
he was come to justify by battle, if he would appoint a time and place. To
which the King of France making a slight answer, the Regent marches apace
toward him, and as fast the King of France marches away: The Regent followed
him, but could not overtake him, till he came near Se^lys: there both the
Armies encamped and embattelled, yet only some light skirmishes p^^^ed between
them; and a night or two after, the French king fled with his Army to Br^y:
which the Duke thinking to be but a plot to draw him further off from Paris, of
whose fidelity he had no great assurance, followed him no further, but returned
thither. At which time, the Regents brother the Cardinal, having prepared
forces to assist Pope Martin in Bohemia, the Regent borrowed them of him for a
present expedition, and with them marched into Champaigne, where he found the
French king encamped upon the Mount Pihall; whose number being twice as many as
the Regents, yet by no provocations could he be drawn to battle, but secretly
fled to Crispis; whereupon the Regent also returned to Paris.

Whil^st these things are done in France, In England, upon St. Leonards day the
6. of November 1429, King Henry not yet eight years old, was with great
solemnity Crowned at Westminster: at whose Coronation were made six and thirty
Knights of the Bathe, and after the solemnity, a feast; and if any man desire
to know so much Cookery, he may read in Fabian, all the dishes of meat that
were served at that feast.

About this time, in France, a strange Impostor arises; a maid called la
Pucelle, taking upon her to be sent from God, for the good of France, and to
expel the English: and some good indeed she did; for by her subtle working,
the King was received into Champaigne, and many Towns were rendered to him;
whilst the Lord L^nguevile took by surprise the Castle of Aumarle, and slew
all the English that were in it. But all these were but petty acquests to the
king of France: there is a knot of friendship between the Dukes of Bedford and
Burgoigne, which must be broken, or he will never be able to compass his
designs. He therefore labors by all means possible to disunite them; wherein
he so little prevailed, that the Duke of Burg^ig^e acquaints the Regent with
all the practices; who thereupon, with many thanks, exhorts him to continue
fi^me, of which he should never have cause to repent him: And because Normandy
was a principal part of the English strength in France, he goes thither, and
by many reasons persuades them, as their Ancestors had always been, to be
faithful to the Crown of England.

In this time of the Regents absence from Paris, the King of France drew all
his forces thither, using all means possible, by Escalado, Battery, and
burning the gates, to enter the City; but was so withstood by the vigilance of
the Citizens, that he was glad to sound Retreat, leaving his slain and maimed
soldiers behind him, all but the Pucelle, who being hurt in the leg, and
almost stifled with mire in the ditch, was by a servant of the Duke of Alanson
drawn up, and conveyed after the King to Berry, who by the way received the
submission of the Inhabitants of L^ig^ye. Some other services were performed on
both sides, by the Duke of Suffolk and Sir Thomas Kyriell, for the English; by
the Bastard of Orleance and Sir Stephen le Hye, for the French; but of no great
importance: till at last, the Pucelle (who a little before had caused an
English Captains head to be cut off, because he would not humble himself to
her upon his knee) was by Sir John of Lu^zemburgh taken, and presented to the
Duke of Burgoigne, who sent her to the Regent, and he to the Bishop of the
Diocese, who judicially proceeding against her as a Sorceresse, and deceiver
of the King and his subjects, she was (after many delays of promise to
discover secret practices, and lastly of her feigning to be with child)
publicly burnt at Roan.

And now, the Regent finding how much the Crowning of the French king had
furthered his designs, he made account the like effect would follow the
Crowning of King Henry in France: whereupon he is sent for to come over; and
coming to Paris, was, by his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester and Cardinal of
Eusebius, not yet above nine years old, with all usual ceremonies Crowned
King of France, receiving the oaths of Homage and Fealty of all the French
Nobility that were present, and of all the Inhabitants of Paris, and of the
places adjacent. Upon this, Pope Eugenius labored a Reconcilement between the
two Kings, but could effect nothing, but only a Truce for six years: which
agreed upon, King Henry re^urn^ into England, and landeth at Dover, the
eleventh of February. But the six-yeares^ Truce was scarce openly Proclaimed,
when the French had cunningly possessed themselves of diverse Castles and places
of strength, justifying their actions, affirming^ That what was politickly
obtained without blows, was no infringement of the Truce: and afterward they
perfidiously conveyed two hundred men into the Castle of Roan, with intent to
have surprised it; but being discovered, they were all taken, and either
ransomed, or put to execution. Upon this, the Regent (whose wife, the Sister of
the Duke of Burgoig^e, being lately dead, and he married again to Iaquelin^ the
Earl of S. Paul's daughter, with whom he went over into England) returned
again to Paris; to whom the Lord Talbot, having now paid his ransom, comes,
bringing with him seven hundred tried soldiers; and with them the Regent takes
the field, where the French Army lay; but the French slun^ away in the dark, as
not daring to abide the hazard of a battle.

About this time, the Duke of Bourbon, taken at the battle of Agincourt, after
eighteen years imprisonment, paying eighteen thousand pounds for his Ransom,
the same day he was enlarged, dyed at London.

And now a very great effect was produced out of a very small cause: There had
been sparks of unkindnesse between the two great Dukes of Bedford and
Burgoig^^, which brake out into a flame upon this occasion: A time and place
was appointed, where they should meet to compound some differences that were
between them; The place agreed upon, was St. Omers, a Town in Burgoigne: When
the time came, they stood upon this nice point, Which of them should first come
to the place; as thinking that he which did so, should thereby acknowledge
himself to be the meaner person. The Duke of Bedford thought he had no reason
to do it, seeing he was Regent of France, and therefore superior to any
subject in the Kingdom: And the Duke of Burgoigne thought he had no reason to
do it, seeing it was to be done in his own Dominions, where he was himself
the Sovereign Lord. Upon this nice point they parted without meeting; and the
unkindnesse grew afterward to so great hatred, that the Duke of Burgoigne chose
rather to be friends with him that had murdered his father, than ever to have
any more commerce with the Duke of Bedford. Thus was one great branch of
assistance lopt off from the English, which had been a great means before to
make it flourish: and it was not so much, that the assistance was taken from
the English, as that it was added to the French; for after this, the Duke of
Burgoig^e brought more assistance to the new king of France, than ever he had
done before to the King of England. By which we may see, when the Divine
Providence has a work to effect, what slight occasions it oftentimes takes to
effect the work.

Great blows had been given before in France, to the English fortune by the
enemy, but now a blow was given to it by Destiny, which made the Enemies
blows the more incurable; for now the wise, valiant, faithful Regent of
France, Duke of ^^^ford, Anjou, and Alans^n, Earl of Main, Harcourt, Drieux,
Richmond, and Carlisle, and Viscount Be^mont; upon the fourteenth of September
1435, ended his life at P^ris, which was in a manner the ending the life of the
English fortune in France: all former blows had been upon inferior members,
but this was a blow upon the head, and therefore mortal, and indeed the
English fortune in France, never (...) li^^ed up its head, but very weakly. He
was buried in our Ladies Church at (...), whereat the Nobility of Normandy much
repined, who would have had their own Territory honored with his Sepulcher:
yet see the levity of these men, who a few years after, in the Reign of Lewis
the Son of Charles, would have had his Monument to have been demolished, as
being dishonorable, such an Arch enemy to France, should be Interred in the
Metropolitan City of that Province: But (...) answered, God forbid, I should
give way to so dishonorable an act, to disquiet his dead bones, who living
would have disquieted us all, and it savours of too much baseness to insult
upon a dead Lion.

But yet in these disasters, there might have been some reparation by a good
Succe^^or, had not Envy and Ambition bred disturbance; the Duke of Somerset
desired the Succession, but the Duke of York obtained it; which bred such an
envy in the Duke of Somerset toward him, that he labored nothing so much as
to cross his designs, and was a means to hinder the Duke of Yorkes going to
his charge so long, th^^ the P^risians had time to think of freeing themselves
from the English servi^^de; and thereupon the City after it had remained
seventeen years in the posses^^^^ o^ the English, yields to the Constable, and
upon composition expels all the English; and which was worse, many other Towns
followed this example of Paris, for what Town would not willingly do as Paris
did, the epitome as it were of all France? and which they stick not to call Le
Monde de Paris, as though there were upon earth no o^h^r world but Paris. Even
the Normans, who had always been most firm to the English, y^^ had run the
^ame course, if the Lord Talbot had not kept them in awe, with the ^laughter of
five thousand of them that way inclined. And now after these great losses, we
must be content to play smaller game, cast at Castles and Forts, and some small
Towns, like the struggling of dying men, doing acts of life, till there be no
more life remaining; And this was now our case in France. The new Regent with
eight thousand Soldiers arrived at Harfl^w, and from thence marches to (...),
where he won the reputation of justice and uprightness, notwithstanding all
the calumniations of the Duke of Somerset: when the revolted Duke of (...)
pretending title to the Town of Callis, approaches it with an Army of forty
thousand men, takes the poor ^^stile of Oy^, and slaughters and hangs many of
the ^^fendants. The ^^xards besieged the Castle of St. Mark^, took it, and
demolished it^ from thence they begirt Callis with a ^iege, but were repelled:
Then the Duke of B^rgoig^e sent the Lord Croy to besiege the Castle of Guysnes^
but were repelled th^r^ also: In the mean time Pembroke the Herald brought a
defiance to the Duke of ^urgoigne from the Duke of Gloucester the Protector,
that he would give him battle if he would abide it; to whom the Duke of
Burgoigne answered, he should be (...) to find him where he now was: Whereupon
he calls a Council, and whilst they are debating what is best to be done,
the Calliciens make a sallye, take the Ba^^^^^ which they had builded, by
force, and slew eight score of the Burgoig^ians, which so terrified them, that
they upbraid the Duke of Burgoigne, and make both him, and the Lord Croy to
quit their quarters, and in such haste to be gone, that they left ^ ^reat part
of their best Ordnance, and all their Provision for the relief and help of
the besieged; and it seems they had reason so to do, for the next day being
the s^ven and twentieth of July, the Duke of Gloucester landed at Callis, with
five and twenty thousand good fighting men, who finding the enemy recolled,
forraged all the Country thereabout, and for the space of six weeks ^arrowed
all the parts of Fl^^ders, Arthol^, and Hainault; and then returning by St.
Omers, Arde, and G^^s^es, arrived at Callis.

And now we must look a little home, for the D. of York returning into^
E^gl^n^ finds the Castle of Roksborough be^ieged by the King of Scots, with
thirty th^usand men; but he hearing of the Earl of Northumberlands app^o^ch,
and the Dukes return, incontinently fled. And now again to France, where the
Town of H^rflew was sold to the French, but the Duke of Somerset, and the Lord
Talbot besetting it both by sea and land; though the Earl of Ewe, and the
Bastard of Orleance and Bourbon, wi^h four thousand men came to relieve it,
yet upon composition, it was surrendered.

And here we may have leave to speak of a private matter; for about this time
the Duchess of Bedford married Sir Richard Woodvile, a gallant young
Gentleman, but of small means, which though it offended her friends, yet it
seems offended not God, who made her mother of many children by him; and
amongst the rest, of the Lady Elizabeth, afterward married to King Edward the
fourth. Also about this time James King of Scots, who before had been
eighteen years Prisoner in England, and afterward released, with a wife of a
noble house, a great Dowre, and many honorable Presents, yet proved
ungrateful, was murdered in his bedchamber by night, whose murderers being
found out, were cruelly tortured. And now again to France; when the Duke of
Burgoigne could neither by force nor policy take C^llice, he attempted a
ridiculous practice, to cut a ditch that should drow^ both the Town and
Country; but after much labor and expense, his design like a vapor vanished
into air. The Lord Talbot besieged Tankervile, and after four months siege,
has it rendered to him: In revenge whereof, the French King in his own person
lays siege to Monstreau; which whilst the Duke of York was providing to
rescue, he was discharged of his office, done of purpose by his enemies, to lay
a blot upon him: A lamentable thing in a State, when private envy shall be
suffered to undermine the public safety; and by this means Sir Thomas G^rard
had the more opportunity to sell the Town, for which, if he were a gainer in
money, he was yet a loser in reputation, and hated both of French and English,
in much discontent dyed. Arthur Constable of France, and John Duke of Alanson
besieged the Town of Auranc^es, but were with dishonor repelled by the Lord
Talbot: After this, Le Hyre sent Letters to them, that he had a promise from
diverse Burgers of Ro^^ to let them in at any time appointed, against which time
they came to R^ze, within four leagues of Roan; but the Lord Talbot having
notice hereof, marched covertly to Roa^, and from thence before day to Ryze,
where he surprizeth the French, takes the Lord Fountains, Sir Allan Geron, and
many others, and with a rich booty returns to Roan. The sixth day of November,
in the sixteenth year of the Kings Reign, the Earl of Warwick having
oftentimes been aboard, and still beaten back by tempest, landed at Harfl^w
with a thousand fresh Soldiers, and from thence came to Roa^; but in the mean
time the Duke of Burgoigne seeing no new Regent yet come, besieg^th the Town
of Cro^^y, to the relief whereof, the new Regent now come, sent the Lord
Talbot with five thousand men, whose approach the Duke not enduring, retired to
Ab^evyle, leaving only four hundred, with whom he had manned the ^^style by
him there erected, which was soon gained, and all the soldiers either taken
or slain. And here the valiant Talbot sent word to the Duke, that if he would
save his Country from vastation, he should come to a battle; but the Duke not
liking the match, conveighs himself to A^ye^s: Twenty days together did the
Lord Talbo^ with fire and sword pass through Piccardie, and Artho^s without
opposition, and then returned: Sir Th^m^^ Kyriell seized upon the Dukes
Carriages and Ordnance; and having left in Crotoy victual enough for six
hundred men for a whole year, he brought the rest to the Earl of Warwick.
And now Henry Earl of Mortaig^e, Son to Edmund Duke of Somerset, arrived with
two hundred Archers, and three hundred Spears, took the Castle of St. A^yo^,
wherein were three hundred Scots and French; the Scots he flew all, and hanged
the French, because they had sworn fealty to England, and broke it; he took
likewise the Castle of Algarche, and by means of an ambush, takes the Lord
Camerois, coming to the rescue thereof. On the other side, the Towns of Neux
in Brye, and Susan were sold and delivered to the French by the treacherous
Burgers. In June, the Earl of Huntingt^^ with two thousand Archers, and four
thousand Spears was sent into Gascoigne, whither the Earl of Danois was
lately come to buy Towns and Castles, but the Earl of Huntington upon his
coming thither, changed all the Captains and Officers, whereby he prevented
all such bargains; and so far had bribery spread it self at this time, that
even in Normandy, the English Captains ^ad but small confidence in the
Natives, and not much in some of their own Nation; whereupon Sir Richard
Wo^dvile, Sir William Chamberlain, and sir William Pe^o were sent thither to
stop the current of that corruption.

At this time, the Council of France procured a reconcilement between the king
and the Dolphin, who had been long in jealousies and dissension; which if ^t
had not been done, the kingdom had been torn with Factions, and never been
able to subsist.

And now in a great frost and snow, the English under the conduct of Sir John
Clifford, having covered their Armor with white shirts, and their heads with
white Alm^^ skulls, came to Ponthois by night, and undiscovered past the
ditches, scaled the walls, slew the Guards, and took the Town; but this good
luck was accompanied with a bad of more importance, for presently upon it, the
Earl of Warwick dyed in the Castle of Roan, and conveyed into England, was
buried in his Castle of W^rwicke. To reduce Pont^ois, the French King in person
lays siege unto it; when Richard Duke of York being the second time made
Regent, having with him the Earl of Oxford, and the Earl of Ewe, levyes a
power to raise the Siege; and arriving there, sends word to the King, that the
next morning he would give him battle; but the King liked not his bidding, but
leaving his Ordnance, at midnight stole away to Poyssy; thither also the Regent
follows him, but with no provocations could draw him to fight.

About this time, a treaty for Peace between the two Kings is appointed to be
held at Callis, by the mediation of the Duchess of Burgoigne, a Portugal
Lady; Commissioners meet of both sides, but nothing concluded, only the Duke of
Orleance who had been prisoner to the English five and twenty years, is by the
Duchess med^ation, ransomed with three hundred thousand Crowns of the Duke of
Burgoignes money. The Lord Willoughby besieges Deep, which the Dolphin with
sixteen thousand men comes to raise; and there young Talbot is taken
prisoner, with Sir John Peto, and sir John Repley, but are shortly after
redeemed by exchange. And now another weakening happened to the English party,
the Earl of St. Paul forsakes them, and is reconciled to the King of France.
The English lay siege to Tartus, for the raising whereof, the French King
marches thither with 60000 men, relieveth the Town, and then marches to
Saveryne, which he takes in, and in it, Sir John Rampston; after which, he
took in Arques, but then the English cutting off all convoyes of victuals
from coming to him, he is forced to return; after whose departure, the
English recover all that he had taken; and to boot, take his Lie^tenant
prisoner, slaying or hanging all his Soldiers. In this mean while the Lord
Talbot takes in Conquet, and drives the Bastard of Orleance from the siege of
Gagli^rd^; but the French in the Castle of Cornhill detained many English
prisoners^ for redeeming of whom, Sir Francis the Aragonist used this
stratagem; he apparelled half a dozen lusty fellows like Peasants^ carrying
baskets with corn and victuals, and sends them to the Castle, while he with
his company lies in ambush, in a Valley near the Castle; the six unsuspected
are admitted, and coming to the Captains chamber, seize upon him, and withal
give the sign to the ambush, who coming readily on, entered the Castle, put
the Soldiers to the sword, set the prisoners at liberty, burnt down the
Castle, and with the booty and Captain of the Castle, returned to Roan.

Whilst these alternations passed in France, a more unnatural passed in
Eng^and, the Uncle rises against the Nephew, the Nephew against the Uncle; The
Duke of Gloucester Articles against the Cardinal, charging him with affecting
Pre-eminence, to the derogation of the Kings Prerogative, and contempt of his
Laws; which Articles are delivered to the King, and by him to his Council,
who being most of the Clergy, durst not meddle in them, for offending ^he
Cardinal. On the other side, the Cardinal finding nothing whereof directly to
accuse the Duke of Gloucester himself, accuses his or her self, the Lady
Eleanor Cotham ^he Dukes wife, of Treason, for attempting by sorcery and
witchcraft the death of the King, and advancement of her husband to the Crown:
for which, though acqui^ed of the Treason, she is adjudged to open Penance,
namely, to go with a wax taper in her hand, hoodlesse (save a kerchiffe)
through London, diverse days together, and after to remain in perpetual
imprisonment in the Isle of Man. The crime objected against her, was procuring
Thomas Southwell, John Hunne Priests, Roger Bollingbrock^ a supposed
Necromancer, and Margery Iourdan called the Witch of Eye in Suffolke^ to devise
a picture of wax in proportion of the king, in such sort by sorcery, that as
the picture consumed, so the kings body should consume: for which they were all
condemned; the witch was burnt in Smithfield; Bollingbrooke was hanged,
constantly affirming upon his death, that neither the Duchess, nor any other
from her did ever require more of him, than only to know by his art, how long
the king should live: John Hunne had his pardon; and Southwell dyed the night
before he should have been executed.

About this time, the Countess of Cominges being dead, the king of France and
the Earl of Arminiack are Competitors for the Inheritance: The Earl takes
possession; but fearing the King of France his greatness, makes offer of his
daughter in marriage to the King of England, with a large portion in money, and
besides, to deliver full possession of all such Towns and Castles as were by
him or his Ancestors detained in Aquitaine, and had been formerly by the
Progenitors of the King of England, conquered. The Ambassadors for this
business, were by King Henry graciously heard, and honorably returned: after
whom were sent Sir Edward Hall, Sir Robert Rose and others, to conclude all
things, and the young Lady is by Proxy affianced to king Henry. But the king of
France not liking the proceeding of the match, sende^h the Dolphin with a
puissant Army, who took the Earl, with his youngest son, and both his
daughters, and gained the Counties of Arminiack, Louverne, Rouergue,
Moulessenois, with the Cities of Sever^e and Cadeack, chasing the Bastard of
Arminiack out of ^he Country; by means whereof, the marriage was then deferred,
and left in suspense.

In this distraction of Christendom, many Princes, the kings of Spain,
Denmark, and Hungary, became Mediators for a Peace between the two kings of
France and England: Ambassadors of both sides are sent, many meetings were had,
many motions made, but in conclusion, only a Truce for eighteen months is
agreed upon. In the mean time, the Earl of Suffolk one of the Commissioners
for the Peace, takes upon him beyond his Commssion, and without acquainting his
fellows, to treat of a marriage between the king of England, and a kinswoman of
the king of France, Niece to the French Queen, daughter to Rayn^r Duke of
Anjou, stiling himself king of Sicilie and Naples: In which business he was
so intentive, that it brought an aspersion upon him of being bribed: but
howsoever, an Enterview betwixt the two kings is appointed, without any warrant
of king Henry's part, to be between Charter^ and Roan. The Commissioners
return; the Earl of Suffolk sets forth the beauty of the proposed Bride, and
the great benefits that would redound to the kingdom by this match. The king
was easily induced to credit the relation; but diverse of the kings Council,
especially the Duke of Gloucester, opposed it; partly for the meannesse of the
match, her father being only a Titular Prince, and withal but poor, unable
to give any portion at all; and partly, for the wrong which should hereby be
offered to the Duke of Arminiacks daughter, to whom the king had been in
solemn manner publicly affianced. But Reasons could not prevail against
favor: the Earl of Suffolks affirmation must not be undervalued. And
hereupon, a new creation of Lords first made; ( John Beaufort Earl of
Somerset, made Duke of Somerset; John Lord Talbot made Earl of Shrewsbury;
John Holland Earl of Huntington, made Duke of Exeter; Humfry Earl of
Stafford, made Duke of Buckingham; Henry (...) Earl of Warwick, made Duke of
Warwick; Edmund Beaufo^t Earl of Dorset, made Marquess Dorset; and William de
la Poole Earl of Suffolk, made Marquess of Suffolk:) this new Marquess
honorably accompanied, is sent into France to fetch the Lady Margaret the
proposed Bride; who shortly after is married at Southwick in Hampshire, and
crowned Queen of England at Westminster, on the 30 day of May 1444, in the
three and twentieth year of king Henry's Reign. And now in stead of benefits
by this marriage, there presently followed great inconveniences: for first, in
exchange of her person, the Duchy of Anjou, the City of (...), with the whole
County of Main, (the best props of the Duchy of Normandy) are agreed to be
surrendered into the hands of the French: and then the Duke of Arminiack, to
revenge the injury offered to his daughter, is a means to expel the English
^ut of all Aquitaine.

At this time, the Duke of Somersets spleen against the Duke of York, not
only is revived, but is grown stronger; for the Duke of York, who was now
after the death of the Earl of Warwick, made the second time Regent of France,
is so undermined by him, through assistance of the new Marquess of Suffolk,
who bore now all the sway with the King and Queen; that not only he supplanted
him in his place, but planted himself in it, to the great heart-burning of the
Duke of York and his friends; but he wisely dissembled his anger, and for the
present passed it ove^. And now is no man in grace, but the new Marquess of
Suffolk; all favors from the King and Queen must pass by him, and the extent
of his power over-r^acheth all the Council: He gets of the King the wardship
of the body and lands of the Countess of Warwick, and of the Lady Margaret,
sole daughter and heir of John Duke of Somerset, afterward mother to king
Henry the seventh. And now, the kings weakness in judgment grows every day
more apparent then other, whilst governed by no counsel, but of his Queen;
and she by no counsel but her own will, and the new Marquess of Suffolk.
King Henry is himself the least part of the king, and serves but to countenance
the devices of others, whereof he little understands the drifts; and which,
proving ill, the blame must be his; if well, the benefit and honor, others.
For by instigation of the Queen, he suffers the Duke of Gloucester, for his
care of the Commonwealth called the good Duke, to be excluded not only from
Command, but from the Counsell-Table; and permits Informers, s^t on by the
Marquess of Suffolk, the Duke of Buckingham, the Cardinal Bishop of
Winchester, and the Archbishop of York, to come aganst him; who lay to his
charge, that he had caused diverse persons to be executed contrary to Law:
wherein though he justified himself, yet no justification would be heard; but
to avoid tumultuary part-taking, it was concluded, he should be privately
convicted and condemned: and to this end, a Parliament by the procurement of
his enemies, unwitting to the king, is called at Bury; to which the Duke of
Gloucester resorting, is, on the second day of the Session, by the Lord Beamont
L. High Constable (abetted by the Duke of Buckingham) arrested and put in Ward,
all his followers sequestered from him, whereof two and thirty are committed to
several prisons; and the next day after his imprisonment, he is found in his
bed, murdered; yet showed the same day, as though he had dyed of an
Imposthume; though all that saw his body, saw plainly that he dyed of a violent
and unnatural cause: some say, strangled; some, that a hot spit was put up at
his fundament; and some, that he was stifled between two featherbeds. His corpse
the same day was conveyed to St. Albans, and there buried. Five of his meniall
servants, Sir Roger Chamberlain knight, Middleton, Herbert, Arizis, Esquires,
and John Needham Gentleman, were condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered;
and hanged they were at Tiburne, let down quick, stripped naked, marked with a
knife to be quartered; but then the Marquess of Suffolk, to make a show as
though he had no hand in the business, brought their Pardon, and delivered it
at the place of Execution, and so their lives were saved. It is no unmemorable
thing which Sir Thomas Moore writes of the pregnancy of this Duke of Gloucester:
It happened, the King coming one time in Progress to St. Albans, a Beggar
borne blind, as he said, at the Shrine of St. Alban obtained his sight: which
miracle being noised in the Town, the Duke of Gloucester being there with the
King, d^sired to see him, whom being brought unto him, he asked if he were
borne blind, who told him, yes truly; and can you now see (says the Earl)
yes I thank God, and St. Albon, says the beggar; then tell me says the Earl,
what color is my gown? the beggar readily told him the color; and what color
says the Earl is such a man's gown? the beggar likewise told him presently,
and so of diverse others. Then says the Earl, go you counterfeit knave, if you
had been borne blind, and could never see till now, how come you so suddenly
to know this difference of colors? and thereupon, instead of an Alms, caused
him to be set in the Stocks. But in the death of this Duke, the Queen who had
a special hand in it, was either not so intelligent, or no^ so provident as
she might have been; for as long as he had lived, his Primogeniture would have
kept back the Duke of Yorkes claim to the Crown, being but descended from the
fifth Son of Edward the third, where this Duke Humphrey was descended from
the fourth. And here were the first seeds sown between the two houses of
La^caster, whose badge was the Red-rose, and York, whose badge was the
White-rose. And now upon the death of this Duke of Gloucester, the Duke of York
began amongst his familiars privily to whisper his right and title to the
Crown; but so politickly carried his intent, that all things were provided to
further his project, before his purpose was any whit discovered.

And in this time the rich Cardinal and Bishop of Winchester dies, who lying
on his death bed, as Doctor John Baker his privy Counselor and his Chaplain
writes, used such like words; why should I dye, says he, having so much
riches? If the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to
get it, or by money to buy it: Fie, will not death be hired? will money do
nothing? and other words to such purpose. But he being dead, there succeeded in
his Bishopric a more deserving Prelate; William Wa^^le^e, called so of the
place in Lincolneshire where he was borne, though his name was Pattern, of the
worshipful family whereof he was descended. And now to the end the Marquess
of Suffolk might not come behind them in dignity, whom he went before in
power, he is about this time made Duke of Suffolk.

In France about this time a victory was gotten, which proved no better than an
overthrow; Before the Truce was expired, Sir Francis Sur^ens an Aragonois, a
man thought worthy to be admitted into the honorable Order of the ^arter;
taking advantage of the security of the French Garrisons, suddenly surprizeth a
Frontier Town called Fougiers, belonging to the Duke of Britain; the Duke
advertiseth the French King thereof, who by his Ambassadors complains both to
the King of England, and to the Duke of Somerset then Regent in France: Answer
was made, it was the fault of the Aragonois, who did it without warrant from
either the King, or the Council; nevertheless Commissioners are appointed to
meet at Louviers, to treat of some course for satisfaction; but in the time of
the Treaty, news is brought to the Regent, that the French by a stratagem of a
Carter that with a load of Hey coming over the Drawbridge, caused the
Axletree to break; and whilst the Porter was ready to help the Carter, the
Porters brains were beaten out, the Town of Ardes surprised, and the Lord
Fawco^bridg^ Captain thereof was taken prisoner. Restitution being required by
the English, answer is made them in their own language, it was done without
warrant from either the French King, or any of his Council, so it was but one
for another; and from thence forward the Truce is broken of both sides, and all
things grow worse and worse. The French King by composition takes Louviers,
Gerbury, and Ver^oyle, whilst the Regent stands demurring what were best to be
done; If he command, not obeyed, If he counsel, not followed, as it happens to
men once blemished in Reputation, to have an ill construction made of all their
actions; by which means the French go on without resistance, get Con^^^^ce,
Guisard, Gatiard, St. Lo, Festampe, and many other pieces in Normandy; upon
notice whereof, Maulesson in Guyen surrenders to the Earl of Foi^, and by
their example the City of Ro^n it self takes composition to surrender, where
the E. of Shr^wsbury, and the Lord Butler, heir to the E. of Ormond, were kept
pledges till it was performed. It is true, succors were provided to be sent
out of England, under the conduct of the Duke of York; but a Rebellion
happening in Ireland, which was thought of more importance to be speedily
suppressed, diverted him and his forces thither, where not only he suppressed
the Rebels, but so won the hearts of that people, that it was no small
furtherance to his proceedings afterward. A fresh supply indeed of fif^eene
hundred men, under the command of sir Thom^s Kyriell is sent over; but what
could a handful of men do against such multitudes as opposed them? for he
marching with the rest of the Army toward Baugeux, was encountered by the Earl
of Clermont, with seven thousand French and Scots, whom yet at first he made to
recoyle, till the Constable of France with four hundred men at Arms, and
eight hundred Archers came to the rescue, and then fresh men coming upon them
that were already tired, the English lost three thousand and above seven
hundred, besides diverse that were taken prisoners. After this loss of men,
follows presently a loss of Towns; Harflew is assaulted, and though valiantly
for a while defended by Sir Robert Curson, yet surrendered at last upon
composition: Then the French King with an Army royal besieges Caen in
Normandy, a Town belonging to the Duke of York, defended in his absence by
his Lieutenant Sir David Hall; but the Duke of Somerset being Regent, in
commiseration of his Duchess being in the Town, notwithstanding the s^out
opposition of Sir David Hall, surrenders it upon composition to the French;
whereof Sir David giving notice to the Duke of York, it bred such a deadly
quarrel between the two Dukes, that they were never after thoroughly
reconciled. And thus is all Normandy recovered from the English, after it had
been in their possession a hundred years; and finally, all France is reduced to
the obedience of Charles the French King.

And now hereafter there will be little to do abroad, but there will be the
more to do at home, and more blood will be shed in England by civil
dissentions, then was shed before in all the Wars of France. This loss of
Normandy and other parts in France, is imputed much to the Duke of Somerset, at
that time Regent; but the Duke of Suffolk must bear a great part of the
blame, partly for having been the cause of the surrender of Anjou and Main,
and the chief procurer of the Duke of Glocesters death, and partly for having
wilfully wasted the Kings treasure, and been a means to remove the ablest men
from the Council Board; of all which aspersions the Queen takes notice, and
knowing how far they trenched upon the Dukes destruction, and her own; She so
wrought, that the Parliament assembled at the Blackfriars, is adjourned to
Leicester, and from thence to Westminster; but though all means were used to
stop these accusations against the Duke, yet the lower House would not be taken
off, but exhibited their Bill of Grievances against him: That he had
traitorously incited the Bastard of Orleance, the Lord Presigny and others to
levy war against the King, to the end that thereby the King might be
destroyed; and his Son John, who had married Margaret Daughter and sole Heir
of Io^n Duke of So^^^set, whose title to the Crown the said Duke had often
declared, in case king Henry should dye without issue, might come to be King;
That through his treachery the French King had gotten possession of the Duchy
of Normandy, and had taken prisoners the valiant Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord
Fawc^^bridge and others: but to these accus^tions, he peremptorily affirmed
himself not guilty, so much as in thought. Then were further allegations made
against him, that being with others sent Ambassador into France, he had
transcended his Commission, and without privity of his fellow Commissioners,
had presumed to promise the surrender of Anjou, and the delivery of the County
of Mau^ts to Duke Rayner, which accordingly was ^erformed, to the great
dishonor of the King, and detriment of the Crown; That he had traitorously
acquainted the French King with all the affairs of State, and passages of
secrecy, by which the enemy, was thoroughly instructed in all the designs of
the King and Council: That he had received rewards from the French king, to
divert and disappoint all succors sent to the kings friends in France. Upon
these and diverse other accusations brought against him, to bleare the peop^es
eyes, he is committed to the Tower; but the Parliament was no sooner dissolved,
but he was set at liberty; which so incensed the common people, that they made
an Insurrection; and under the leading of a desperate fellow, styling himself
Blewbeard, they committed many outrages; but by the diligence of the Gentlemen
of the Country, the Captain was apprehended, and the Rebellion ceased. And now
another Parl^ament is called, where great care is taken in choosing of
Burgesses, presuming thereby to stop any further proceeding against the Duke of
Suffolk; but his personal appearance at the Parliament gave such a general
distaste to the House, though he came in the company of the king and Queen,
that they forbore not to begin the Assembly, with Petitioning the king, for
punishment to be inflicted upon such as had plotted or consented to the
resignation of A^jo^, and Main, whereof by name they instanced in the Duke of
Suffolk, John Bishop of Salisbury, Sir Iame^ Fynes, Lord Say and others. This
Petition was seconded by the Lords of the upper House: whereupon, to give some
satisfaction to the Houses, the Lord Say Lord Treasurer, is sequestered from his
place, the Dukes Officers are all discarded, and himself formally banished for
five years, but with an intent after the multitude had put out of mind their
hatred against him, to have revoked him: but God did otherwise dispose of him,
for when he was shipped in Suffolk, with intent to have passed over into
France; he was met by an Englishman of War, taken and carried to Dover sands,
and there had his head chopped off, on the side of the long-boate, which together
with the body was left there on the sands, as a pledge of some satisfaction for
the death of Duke H^^phry.

Whil^st these things are done in England, the Duke of York in Ireland began
to make his way to the Crown, as descended from Philippe daughter and heir of
George Duke of Clarence, elder brother to John of Gaunt, great Grandfather to
the present king Henry the sixth. And for a beginning, it is privately
whispered, that king H^nry was of a weak capacity, and easily abused; the
Queen of a malignant spirit, and bloudily ambitious, the Privy Council, if
wise enough, yet not honest enough, regarding more their private profit, then
the public good, that through their delinquencies all Fr^^ce was lost, and
that God would not bless the usurped possession of king Henry: with these
suggestions the Kentishmen seemed to be taken; which being observed by an
instrument of the Duke of York, called Mortimer, he takes his time, and tells
the multitude, that if they will be ruled by him, he will put them in a course
to work a general Reformation, and free them for ever from those
insupportable burdens of taxations, so often, upon every slight occasion
obtruded upon them. These promises of Reformation and freedom from
impositions, so wrought with the people, that they drew to a head; and make
Mortimer, otherwise Jack Cade their leader, who stiling himself Captain
Mend-all, marches with no great number, but those well ordered, to
Bl^ck-heath, where between Eltha^ and Greenwich, he lay by the space of a
month, exercising his men, and sending for whom he pleased, and for what he
pleased: Then he presents to the Parliament the complaints of the Common^: That
the Queens favorites share amongst them the Revenews of the Crown, whereby
the king is enforced for the supportation of his present estate to tax and
burden the Commons, to their utter undoing, and to the general impoverishment
of the kingdom: That the Commons have their commodities daily taken from them,
for the purveyance of the kings Household, for which they are not paid, nor any
assurance for payment thereof given, but only Court promises: That upon the
apprehension of any man for treason or felony, the kings meniall servants,
before conviction, b^gge the goods and lands of the impeached; whereupon
indirect and unlawful proceedings are used by subornation of witnesses,
embracery of jurors, and great men's letters to the Judges; whereby Justice is
perverted, and the innocent after attainted, if not executed, yet at least
imprisoned to their undoing: That the Commons have no legal proceedings in
their Lawsuits, so as the rightful owners of Inheritance, dare not (if
opposed by any Courtier) maintain their Titles, or attempt the recovery of
their interest, how just so ever: That the kings Collectors and other
Accomptants are much troubled in passing their Accounts, by new extorted Fees,
and by being enforced to procure a late invented Writ of Quorum nomina for
allowance of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and their suing out their Quietu^
at their own charge, without allowance from the King: That the Bailiffs of
Sheriffs under color of the green wax out of the Exchequer, do levy greater
sums than are by the Record justifiable, yet maintained; That they cannot
have the freedom of electing knights and Burgesses for the Parliament; but by
letters from the Favorites of the Court, to their friends and Retainers, the
Knights and Burgesses are commonly chosen: That they are too much troubled with
too often coming to attend the general Sessions, being enforced in many
places to make five days journey to the place where they are kept. These and
some other, were the complaints of the Commons; but the Captain for his own
particular (after protestation made to live and dye in the quarrel of the
King) required, that his Majesty would be pleased to receive again into favor,
the truly noble Prince the Duke of York, and with him the Right Honorable the
Dukes of Exeter, Buckingham, and Norfolk, and the ancient Noblemen of the
Realm; by the undue practices of Suffolk, and his accomplices, commanded from
his presence, and that all their opposites might be banished the Court, and put
from their Offices: That there might be a general amotion of corrupt Officers,
an abolition of the Green wax, and other instruments of Extortion out of the
Exchequer; a qualification of the rigor of proceeding in the King's Bench; an
inhibition of unequal purveyance of provision for the Kings household, and a
present execution of the Promoters, Slegge, Cr^mer, Isell, and East, whom he
pretended by wrongful information to have abused the king, and wronged his
Subjects. These Petitions are sent from the Lower House to the Upper, and from
thence committed to the Lords of the Kings Privy Council, who having examined
the particulars, explode them as frivilous, and the Authors thereof to be
presumptuous Rebels. Whereupon the king is solicited by his Privy Council, to
prosecute them by force rather than intreary; which advise is seconded by the
Queen as conceiving they secretly aimed at her: and hereupon the king draws
his Forces to Greenwich, and appoints diverse Lords to assail the Rebels; but
the Lords could get no followers to fight against them who sought only for
reformation of abuses; and for punishment of such Traitors as the Lord Say the
kings Chamberlane was: whereupon the Lord Say is presently committed to the
Tower, the king and Queen retire to London, from whence within two days, the
king being now fifteen thousand strong, marche^h in Person toward Captain
Mend-all, who politickly withdraws his forces into Seven^ake wood; upon
notice whereof, the king retireth again to London, but the Queen longing for
dispatch, send^ the two Staffords, Sir Humphrey, and William, with many
hot-spurs of the Court to follow the Rebels, who were soon cooled; for they
found Captain Mend-all in good order, ready to receive them, and in the first
encounter, slew Sir Humphry, and afterward his brother, and put all the rest
to flight; the k. Forces being at Black^eath, could neither by threats nor
entreaties be gotten to go to the rescue, but rather wished the Queen and her
favorites in the Staffords case, or that the Duke of York were in England, to
aid his Cosen Mortimer, (now first acknowledged to be of his kindred) and many
of them stole away to the Rebels, whose number from Sussex and Surrey daily
increased, whom yet their Captain restrains from forraging or taking away any
thing by force, and so returns again to Black^eath, where the kings Army lay
the night before, but was now fallen down to Greenwich. And now the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Duke of Buckingham are sent to expostulate with the
Rebels about their demands; to whom Jack Cade gave very good language, but
directly affirming no cessation from Arms, unless the king in Person would
hear the grievances of the Subject, and pass his Princely word for
reformation of their wrongs. This resolution of his made known to the king, who
was not sure of his own Soldiers faith, made him march presently away to
Killingworth Castle in Warwickeshire, where he fortified himself, as expecting
a siege, having left the Lord Scales only to Guard the Tower. Jack Cade
taking advantage of the kings departure, comes to South^^rke, where he
quarters his men, straightly charging them to commit no outrage, nor do wrong
^o any; which was duly ob^erved. The next morning ^e marches to London Bridge,
where he caused his men to cut the ropes of the Drawbridge, no resistance being
made against him; and so in good order marches up by Londonstone, upon which
he struck his sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of London. The Major of
London, Sir Thomas Chalton, standing upon the threshold of his door bade him
take heed he attempted nothing against the quiet of the City: To whom ^e made
answer, Let the world take notice of our honest intention by our actions. And
indeed this orderly carriage of himself and his company, won him a good
opinion amongst the common sort of people: And now ass^ming to himself the
place of Chief, he sends o^^ his letters of safe^conduct, to such whom he
pleased to make use of: amongst other, he wrote this letter to Thomas Co^k
Draper of London.

By this our writing ensealed, we grant, that Thomas Cock of London Draper,
shall safely come into our presence, and avoid from us again at his pleasure,
with all other persons coming in his company. Subscribed thus:

His Majesty's loyal Subject, John Mortimer, Captain Mend-all.


Upon Cocks admission, he had private conference with three other that came
with him; to whom, at their departure, he gave these instructions in writing:
You shall charge all Lombards and Merchant-strangers, Genona's, Venetians,
Florentines, and others, this day to draw themselves together, and to ordain
for us the Captain, twelve Harness complete of the best fashion, four and
twenty Brigandi^es, twelve Battell-axes, twelve Glaves, six horses with saddle
and bridle completely furnished, and a thousand ma^ks in ready money: and if
they shall fail herein, we shall strike off the heads of as many as we can
get. But they failed not, but sent him what he had demanded: who thereupon the
next morning, being the third of July, returns to London; and presently sends
to the Lord Scales, to bring his Prisoner the Lord Say to the Guildhall,
whither he had called the Lord Major with his brethren; before whom he caused
the Lord Say to be arraigned, who craving to be tried by his Peers, was
forthwith taken from his keeper, carried to the Standard in Cheap, and there had
his head chopped off, which being pitched upon a Pike, was borne before him to
Mile-end, whither he went to have conference with the Rebels of Essex; and by
the way meeting with Sir James Cromer High-sheriffe of Kent, who had lately
married the Lord Says daughter, he caused his head also to be stricken off, and
carried likewise before him in de^ision. The next morning he came again to
London; where, after public execution done upon some of his fellows, and
particularly upon a petty Cap^aine of his, named Paris, that had done things
contrary to his Proclamation; upon a displeasure taken against Alderman Malpas,
he sent and seized upon all his wares and goods, and fined Alderman Horn in
five hundred marks: whereupon, the Citizens finding him to grow every day more
insolent than other, they send to the Lord Scales for assistance, who sends
Matthew Gough an old soldier to them, with some forces and furnitures out of
the Tower; who presently make a stand at the Bridge, where Cade notwithstanding
forces his passage, and then began to set fire on houses where many aged and
impotent people miserably perished; Captain Bough Alderman, Sutton and Robert
Hayson, valiantly fighting, were slain: yet upon a fresh supply, the Londoners
recovered the bridge again, and drove the Rebels beyond the Stoop in
South-warke; at which time, both sides being weary, agreed of a Truce, till the
next day. After the Retreat, Cade finding he had lost many of his best men, was
driven for supply, to set at liberty all the Prisoners in Southwarke, as well
Felons as Debtors: when now his company entering into consideration of their
danger, and of the desperate services their Captain had brought them to, began
to discover by their countenances their willingness to leave this course:
whereof the Archbishop of Canterbury having notice, he with the Bishop of
Winchester came from the Tower by water to Southwarke, and there showed the
Kings Generall-Pardon under the Great Seal of England; which was so welcome to
the Rebels, that without taking leave of their Captain, they withdrew
themselves that night to their several habitations. Jack Cade with some few
followers bent his journey to Quinborough Castle, where being denied entrance,
he disguised himself, and privily fled: but upon Proclamation, with promise of
a thousand marks to any that should bring him dead or alive; he was afterward,
by one Alexander Eden Gentleman, attached; and making resistance, in a Garden
at Hothfield in Sussex, was there slain; his body was brought to London,
beheaded and quartered, his head set upon London bridge, his quarters dispersed
in diverse places in Kent. Upon the news whereof, the King sends Commissioners
into Kent, to enquire of the abettours of this Rebellion: whither he follows
himself in person, and though five hundred were found guilty, yet eight only
were executed. Though London were the chief stage of this Rebelion, yet other
Countries were not free; especially Wil^shire, for the Rebels there, upon the
nine and twentieth day of June, drew William Askot Bishop of Salisbury, from
the High Altar, where he was saying Mass in Edington Church, to the top of the
hill; and there in his Priestly roabes, most inhumanely murdered him.

This Insurrection was not unknown to the King of France, who taking advantage
thereof, seizes upon all places which the English had in France, leaving them
nothing but only Callice, and the Castles of Hames and Guisnes; and this was
the issue of the Duke of Somersets Regency in France: whereupon coming into
England, at a P^^liament holden at Westminster, the sixth of November, in the
nine and twentieth year of the Kings r^igne, he was put under Arrest; upon
notice whereof, the Commons of London despoiled his house at Blackfriers, and
ceased not, till Proclamation was made to inhibite them: for disobeying
whereof, there was one man beheaded, at the Standard in Cheap.

At this time, the Duke of York, under pretense of coming to the Parliament,
comes out of Ireland; and at London had private conference with John Duke of
Norfolk, Richard Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Devonshire and other his
assured friends; where it was resolved, to keep the chief purpose, (the claim
to the Crown) secret; and only to make show, that his endeavors were but to
remove ill Counselors from the King; of whom they instanced in the Duke of
Somerset as chief; and hereof, the Duke sent diverse letters to the King,
complaining of the wrongs the Duke of Somerset had done him, but withal making
Protestation of his own loyalty. To which the King makes answer, that he would
take his complaints into consideration; but somewhat blames him for the death
of the Bishop of Chester, by his means suspected to be slaughtered, and for
dangerous speeches uttered by his servants, tending to Rebellion: concluding,
that notwithstanding any thing said or done to the contrary, he took and
esteemed him a faithful subject, and a loving kinsman. But the Duke of York,
not herewith satisfied, departs into Wales, and there levi^^h men, making his
color for the good of the Common wealth: and the reremoving of bad
Counselors. The King advertised hereof, presently raises an Army; and with
the Duke of Somerset (now enlarged) marches toward Wales: while the Duke of
York, having notice which way the King came, by another way marches toward
London; but being told, the Londoners would not admit him entrance; he passed
the river Thames at Knightbridge, marched into Kent, and encamped at
Burnt-heath. The King in his pursuit, came to Blacke-heathe, and there pitched
his Tents, from whence he sent the Bishops of Winchester and Ely, the Lord
Rivers, and Richard Andrews Keeper of the Privy Seal, to know the cause of
this commotion, and to make offer of reconcilement, if the Dukes Demands were
not unreasonable. The Duke made Answer, that nothing was intended against the
Kings person, his Crown or Dignity: All that was sought, was to remove ill
Counselors from about the King, but especially Edmund Duke of Somerset; whom
if the King would be pleased to commit toward, till his legal trial might be
had in Parliament, he would then not only dismiss his army, but come unto his
presence as a loyal subject. Hereupon the Duke of Somerset is committed to
prison: The Duke of York dismisseth his army, and comes in person to the
King: in whose presence, (contrary to his expectation) he found the Duke of
Somerset, which so moved him, that he could not hold, but presently charged him
with Treason: which the Duke of Somerset, not only denies, but (...) a^re the
Duke of York, to have conspired ^he kings death, and the usu^pation of the
Crown: whereupon, the king removes to London, the Duke o^ York as a prisoner
ryding before him, and the Duke of Somerset at liberty, which was not a little
mervailed at by many. And now the king calls a Council at Westminster, where
the two Dukes are earnest in accusing each other; but while the Counsel are
debating of the matter, there comes a flash of lightning out of France, which
diverted them; for the Earl of Kendall, and the L' Espar, come Ambassadors
from Bordeaux, offering their obedience to the Crown of England, if they might
but be assured to be defended by it: but withal, at the same time there came a
report, that Edward Earl of March, son and heir to the Duke of York, with
a great power was marching toward London. Here was matter for a double
consultation: and for this latter, it was resolved on, that the Duke of York,
should in the presence of the king and his Nobility, at the high Altar in
Paul^, take his Oath of submission and Allegiance to king Henry: which he
accordingly did, and then had liberty to depart to his Castle of Wigmore. And
for the former, the Earl of Shrewsbury with about three thousand men was sent
into Gascoigne, who ariving in the Isle of Madre, passed forth with his power,
and took Fro^sack and other pieces, but having received in the night
instructions from Bordeaux of certain conspiratours, he makes all the speed he
can thither; and was entered the Town before the French had notice of his
coming: so that many of them were slain by the Lord L' Espar in their beds.
Shortly after there arrived, the Earl of Shrewsbury's son, Sir John Talbot,
with the bastard of Somerset, and two and twenty hundred men, by whose means
Bordeaux is well manned with English: in which time the Earl was not idle, but
went from place to place, to receive the offered submission of all places where
he came: and having taken Chatillo^, he strongly fortified it, whereupon the
French king raises an army, and besieges Chatillon, to the rescue whereof,
the Earl makes all possible speed with eight hundred horse, appointing the
Earl of Kendall, and the Lord L' Espar to follow with the foot: In his way he
surprised a Tower the French had taken, and put all within it to the sword; and
meeting five hundred French men, that had been forraging; many of them he slew,
and the rest he chased to their Camp. Upon whose approach, the French left the
siege, and retired to a place which they had formerly fortified; whither the
Earl follows them, and resolutely charge them so home, that he got the
entry of the Camp: where being shot through the thigh with an Harquebuse, and
his horse slain under him; his son desirous to relieve his father, lost his
own life, and therein was accompanied with his bastard brother Henry Talbot,
Sir Edward Hall, and thirty other Gentlemen of name. The Lord Nolius with
threesco^^ other were taken prisoners, the rest fled to Bordeaux, but in the
way a thousand of them were slain. And thus on the last day of July, in the
year 1453. at Chatillo^, the most valourous Earl of Shrewsbury, the first of
that name; after four and twenty years service beyond the seas, ended his
life, and was buried at Roa^ in Normandy; with this Inscription upon his
Tomb: Here lies the right Noble knight John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury,
Weshford, Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchenfield, Lord
Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Acto^, Lord Cromwell of Winkfield, Lord
Lovet^ft of Worsoppe, Lord Furnivall of Sh^ffield, knight of the Noble Orders
of St. George, St. Michael, and the golden fleece, great Marshall to King Henry
the sixth, of his Realm of France. The Earl of Kendall, the Lords Montserat,
Rosaine and D^^gledas entered the Castle of Chatillon, and made it good against
the French the space of ten days; but then having no hope of succor, they
delivered it, upon composition to have liberty to depart to Bordeaux: and now
the Gascoig^^s were as ready to open their gates to the French, as they were
before to the English; by means whereof, in short time, the French recovered
again all Gascoig^e except Bordeaux, and that also at length, upon condition
that both garrisons and inhabitants with all their substance, might safely
depart for England or Callice, and that the Lords L' Espar and Durant, with
thirty others, upon pain of death should never after be found in the
Territories of France.

At this time upon St. Bartholomews day, an ancient custom being, that the
Major of London, and the Sheriffs should be present in giving prizes to the
best wrestlers; It h^ppened that at the wrestling place near Moore-fields, the
Prior of S. John's was there to see the sports, when a servant of his, not
brooking the disgrace to be foiled before his Master, against the custom of
the place would have wrestled again, which the Major denied, whereupon the
Prior fetched Bowmen from Clark^^^ell, to resist the Major, and some slaughter
was committed; the Majors Cap was shot through with an Arrow, he nevertheless
would have had the spo^t go on, bu^ no wrestlers came, yet the Major Sr. John
Norman told his brethren, he would stay awhile, to make trial of the Citizens
respect toward him: which he had no sooner said, but the Citizens with Banners
displayed came in great numbers to him, and fetched him home in great triumph.
Upon the neck of this, began the quarrel in Holborne, between the Gentlemen of
the Inns of Chancery and some Citizens, in appeasing whereof, the Queens
Attorney and three more were slain.

And now the Duke of York, by all means labors to stir up the hatred of
the Commons against the Duke of Somerset, repeating often, what dishonor
England sustained by Somersets giving up the strong Towns of Normandy, and how
he abuses the Kings and Queens favor to his own gain, and the Commons
grievance, then he addresseth himself to those of the Nobility that could not
well brook his too much commanding over the Kings and Queens affection: amongst
others he fasteneth upon the two Nevils, both Richards, the father and the
son, the one Earl of Salisbury, the other of Warwick; with whom he deals so
effectually, that an indissoluble knot of friendship is knit betwixt them; by
whose assistance, (the King lying dangerously sick at Claringdon) the Duke of
Somerset is arrested in the Queens great Chamber, and sent to the Tower; and in
a Parliament now convoked, appe^ched of Treason, and many heinous crimes
objected against him: whereupon, the King though weak is brought to London, of
purpose to dissolve the Parliament, and that di^solved, the Duke of Somerset is
presently set at liberty again, and not only so, but is made Captain of
Callice and Guysnes, the only remainder the English had in France. Upon this,
the Duke of York and his party, with a great power march toward London:
against whom, the King attended with the Duke of Somerset, the Duke of
Buckingham and his son, both named Humfry, Henry Earl of Northumberland,
James Earl of Wiltshire, Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, and two thous^nd men,
marches forwards; at S. Albans both armies meet: the Duke in the morning send^
a letter to the King, protesting his fidelity and synderity; only he desires,
the Duke of Somerset may be delivered, to stand or fall by the Judgment of his
Peers; and this he would have, or dye in the pursuit. The King for answer,
Commands him to disband, and submit to his mercy; and not expect, that he will
deliver any in his Army, who have showed their loves in standing to him.
Herewith the Duke acquaints his friends, who hereupon fall every one to his
quarter: The Earl of Warwick fell upon the Lord Cliffords quarter, where the
Duke of Somerset, h^sting to the rescue, was slain, and with him the Earl of
Northumberland, Humfry Earl of Stafford, the Lord Clifford, and about five
thousand others, besides many that were hurt; the King himself shot in the
neck with an arrow; the Duke of B^ckingham and the Lord Scales, in the faces;
the Earl of Dorset so hurt, that he was feign to be carried home in a Cart:
The Kings army had been increased after his coming forth, to eight thousand;
but now they are all dispersed or slain, and the King unguarded, is left in a
poor thatcht house; whither, to be freed from the danger of arrows, he had
withdrawn himself. The Duke of York having notice where the King was, goes
with Wa^wick and Salisbury, who all three upon their knees present themselves
before him, making humble petition to him, for pardon of what was past: and
now, seeing the common Enemy was slain, they had what they aimed at. To whom
the King thoroughly affrighted, said: Let there be no more killing then, and I
will do what you will have me. This first battle of S. Albans was fought upon
the three and twentieth day of May, in the three and thirtieth year of King
Henry's reign. The bodies of the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland
and the Lord Glifford, were buried in the Chapel there. And now the Duke of
York, in the kings name, commands a surcease from ^^rther hostility: and in all
reverent manner conveyeth the king to London; where they keep the feast of
Pentecost together; at which time, a Parliament is summoned to begin at
Westminster, the ninth day of July; and therein it is enacted, that the Duke of
Glo^cester should be decl^red publicly a loyal Subject, and that none should
misreport or dispute the actions of the Duke of York, or of any in his
company; and moreover, the Duke of York is m^de Protector of the kings Person,
and of the Realm, the Earl of Sali^bury is made Lord Chancellor, and the
Earl of Warwick Captain of Callis, wherein they all carried themselves with
unblameable demeanor.

In this mean time, the Queen not well pleased with these proceedings, s^ekes
all me^ns to incite the Lords of her party, and they as much seek to incite
her to make opposition; she puts the Duke of Buckingham in mind that these
Traitors had slain his hopeful Son at S. Albans; she tells the now Duke of
Somerset, that by them his dear Father lost his life: And they again put the
Queen in mind of the unsufferable indignity done to her, in making her Husband
only a king in name, setting a Tutor over him, as though he were a child,
whilst the Duke of York and his accomplices manage all: Upon which incitation,
all the enemies of the Yorkshire Faction are assembled by the Queen at
Greenwich; where it is debated of some course to be taken for restoring the
king to his former liber^y and Government; at length it is concluded, that the
duke of York should be commanded to give over his place of Protectorship, for
that the king was of years and discretion sufficient to Rule of himself
without a Guardian, and the Earl of Salisbury to surrender his place of being
Lord Chancellor, for that the great Seal was never delivered him, seeing that
which was now used, was made since the kings restraint, and therefore not
sufficient; to which conclusion of theirs, the king easy to be wrought upon,
yields his consent, and thereupon they are both discharged from their Offices,
and summoned to appear at the Council Table at Gr^enwich; but the Lords were
wiser than to put themselves into their hands, and therefore make answer, that
none had power to displace them, nor to command their appearance in any place,
but in Parliament, and so they continued about Lond^n, placing and displacing
whom they pleased, and by their triumvirat authority, took John Holland Earl
of Exeter out of Sanctuary, and sent him prisoner to Po^f^et Castle. These
proceedings gave occasion to the licentious multitude to raise commotions, and
the Prentices of London upon a very slight occasion, fall upon outlandish
Merchants, rifle and rob their houses; and the Major assembling a company of
substantial Citizens to suppress them, the Ringleader of the disorder flies
to Sanctuary; Commissioners are sent to enquire and punish the offense, but
when the Major and Commissioners were set, tidings came that the Commons were
up in Arms; whereupon the Commissioners left the business to be proceeded in by
the Major, who so discreetly ordered the matter, that many of the offenders
were punished, some by death, others by fine, and all things were quieted and
appeased.

At this time the French having little to do against the English in France,
would needs be doing something against them in England: They set out two
Fleets, one under the conduct of William Lord Pomyers, the other of Sir Peter
Bressy; the Lord fell upon Fulney in the West-Country, the knight upon S^^dwich
in Kent, where some hurt they did, but not of importance to countervaile their
Voyage.

And now the Queen finding the little respect the Londoners bore to her party
or the kings, persuades the king, as for his health and recreation, to make a
Progress into Warwickeshire, which he did, by the way hunting and hawking, and
the Queen making show of minding nothing but pastimes; and this she did, with a
purpose the easier to entrap the three Lords, of York, Salisbury, and
Warwick, to whom she writ most loving letters, earnestly inviting them to be
at Coventry by an hour appointed; which they, not doubting any fraud, intended
to have done, but hearing by the way of the mischief plotted against them,
they caused their Retinue to go on-ward the way to the Court, as though
themselves were coming after; but they provided otherwise for their safety,
the duke of York with a Groom and a Page getting him to Wigmore Castle, the
Ea^le of Salisbury to his Castle of Middleham in the North, and the Earl of
Warwick to the Sea side, and so to Callis; but before they parted, they agreed
upon an Alphabet, by which they might have intercourse of letters, yet their
intentions kept undiscovered.

The king unwitting of this mischief intended against the duke of York and
his friends, returns to London, where he calls a Council; and therein of
his own accord desires that some course might be invented for a perfect
reconcilement of all parties; promising upon his salvation (an asseveration not
usu^ll with him) so to entertain the duke of York and his friend^, that all
discontents should be removed, and a perfect amity on all parts ^stablished: to
which end messengers are dispatched to the duke of York, and all other of his
party, commanding them upon urgent affairs of the Realm, and upon Royal
promise of safe conduct, to repair to his Court at London, at a day appointed.
The duke of York accordingly came, and with 400 men well apparelled, lodged at
his house called Baynards Castle; The Earl of S^lisbury with 500 men, lodged
likewise at his house called the Herbour; The duke of Exeter (lately released)
and the Duke of Somerset with 800 men, were lodged within Temple-Barre; The
Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Egremont, and the Lord Clifford, with 1500
men, were lodged in Holborne; The Earl of Warwick with 600 in red jackets
with ragged staves embroydered behind and before, were lodged at the Gray
Friars in London. Upon the seventeenth of March the King and the Queen came to
London, and were lodged at the Bishops Palace; the Major having five hundred
well appointed men in readiness, rode with a competent number all day long
round the City, for preservation of the Kings Peace: The Lords lodging within
the City, held their Council at Blackfriars; the other, at the Chapterhouse
at Westminster: Between both, the Reverend Archbishop of Canterb^ry, the Son of
Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, with some other of the most able Prelates
interceded so, that by their mediation it was at last concluded, that all
wrongs and misdemeanors on every side should ^e forgotten and forgiven, that
each side should be friends to the other, and both be obedient to the commands
of the king. Besides this in general, there were some particular Articles to
be performed by the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury, and Warwick, which
afterward was ratified under the great Seal of England, the 24 day of March,
in the 36 year of the Reign of king Henry the Sixth. Upon the publication
whereof, a solemn Procession was made in Paul's Church, at which the king was
present with his Cr^wn on his head; before him, hand in hand went the Duke of
Somerset, and the Earl of Salisbury, the Duke of Exeter, and the Earl of
Warwick, and so one of the one, and another of the other part, till they were
all Marshalled; behind the king came the Queen, the Duke of York leading her
by the hand, who in going made show of favorable countenance toward him:
Divine Service ended, they return to the Court, in all outward appearance
truly reconciled; but all was dissembled, as will presently appear; for
presently upon this, an affray fell out between a servant of the Earl of
Warwick, and a Courtier, who in the encounter is dangerously wounded, the
Earls man flies; the kings servants seeing their fellow hurt, and the
offender escaped, watch the Earls coming from the Council Table, and assail
him; many are hurt, but the Earl gets a Wherry, and so escapes to London;
the Queen incontinently commands the Earl to be committed to the Tower, but
he foreseeing the danger, posts to Yorkshire, where he acquaints the Duke of
York, and his father the Earl of Salisbury of all the occurrence, with the
palpable discovery of the Queens cankered disposition, advising them to stand
upon their Guard, and to provide against the approaching storm. Himself
speeds to Callis, and being then Lord Admiral, takes with him all the kings
ships that were in readiness, and scouring the Seas, meets with five great
Carricks, three of Geno^a, and two of Spain; and after two days fight, takes
two of them, with which he returned to Callis where he unloaded their freight,
and found it worth ten thousand pounds in Staple commodities, besides the Ships
and Prisoners.

In the mean time, the Earl of Salisbury with about five thousand men
marches through Lanc^shire, to pass that way to the king, with a purpose to
acquaint him with the affront offered to his Son, and the inveterate malice
discovered in the Queen against him: The Queen with the Dukes of Buckingham
and Som^rset, hearing of his coming, gave order to the Lord Audley to use
means to apprehend him; who thereupon levyeth ten thousand men in Cheshire and
Shropshire, and with them about a mile from Drayton, in a plain called
Bloreheath he attended the Earl, there being but a small brook of no great
depth between them. Early in the morning the Earl made a seeming Retreat,
which the Lord Talbot observing, presently causes his Troops to pass the
River, but before they could be reduced again into order, the Earl with his
whole strength falls upon them, and with the slaughter of the Lord Audley, and
most of them that had passed the River, he discomfited the rest, and slew about
24. hundred of them; Sir John and sir Thomas Nevill knights the Earl^ Sons were
sorely wounded, who with Sir Thomas Harrington traveling into the North
Country, were apprehended and sent as Prisoners toward Chester, but upon a
message from the Marchmen were presently released.

And now the Duke of York thinking fit no longer to conceal his design,
make^ preparation to take the Field, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick do the
like; and amongst others of approved valor, whom the Earl of Warwick had
brought from Callis with him, were two principal noted men, John Blunt, and
Andrew Trolloppe. Likewise the King, with the Dukes of Somerset, and Exeter,
draws his Forces to Worcester, from whence Richard Beauchamp Bishop of
Salisbury, is sent to offer the Yorkists a full and general Pardon, if they
would lay down Arms, and become loyal Subjects. Whereunto they answered, that
there was no trust to the Kings Pardons, as long as the Queen had a Predominant
power; but if they might have assurance of safety, they would express their
loyalty, and humbly render themselves at his service. Hereupon the King
advances nearer, and approaching the Lords Army, caused Proclamation to be
made, that whosoever would abandon the Duke of York, should be received to
mercy, and have Pardon. Upon this, the night following, Andrew Trolloppe, with
all the Callicians submit to the King, and by him are all the counsels of the
Duke of York discovered; which so much discouraged him, that he with his young
Son, the Earl of Rutland, fled first into Wales, and then into Ireland: The
Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwick got into Devonshire, where by the
means of John Dynh^m Esquire (the same man that afterward by king Henry the
Seventh was made Lord Treasurer of England) they were shipped from Exmouth, to
Gernsey, and so to Callis. All the common soldiers the king Pardons, only
makes exemplary punishment of some few Captains, sends the Duchess of York,
and her two younger children, to the Duchess of Buckingham her Sister to be
^afely kept; and then having spoiled the Town and Castle of Ludlow, he dismissed
his Army. And now a Parliament is called at Coventry, wherein the Duke of
York, Edward Earl of March his Son, Richard Earl of Salisbury, Richard ^arle
of Warwicke^ John Lord Clifford, and many other the confederates of the Duke of
York, are convict of Treason, and all their lands and goods seized on to the
kings use. Henry D. of Somerset by the Queens means is made Captain of Callis,
whither coming to take possession, he was, by reason of Ordnance shot at him
from Rice-banke forced to Retire; which the Queen hearing, was so incensed,
that in great passion she gave order to make ready all the kings Ships lying at
Sandwich, to give assistance to the Duke of Somerset: but the forementioned
John Dynham, out of love to the Earl of March, boorded those ships in the
harbor, and took the Lord Rivers designed Admiral for that service, and
carried both him and the Ships to Callice, from whence the Earl sailed to
Ireland, to the Duke of York, who having conferred and concluded what course
to take, he returned to Callice, the new Admiral the Duke of Exeter not daring
to stop his course. Sir Simon Montford was appointed ^o guard the Cinque Ports,
having diverse ships under his command to bar the Earl of Warwick^s entrance;
but the Earl by his espyalls having perfect intelligence of all passages, fell
suddenly upon Sir Simon before his ships were ready, took him prisoner,
ransackt the Town of Sandwich, and carried his prisoner and the ships to
Callice: By the way he understood how much the kentishmen desired his return
and longed for his coming; whereupon he came the second time to Sandwich, to
whom presently resorted the Lord Cobham and very many Gentlemen of the Country:
so as now his army was five and twenty thousand strong; with which he marched
toward London, against whom the Lord Scales was appointed to go, and with
some convenient troops to assure London: but the Major directly refused to
admit him; whereupon he resorted to the Tower, from whence afterward he did
the Londoners no small displeasure. The Earl of Warwick having notice, that
his father the Earl of Salisbury was upon march to meet him: passes over his
men; and without impeachment, joined with him and his friends near Exeter.

The King with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham with a great Army marches
toward them, and near to the Town of Northampton both Armies meet: The Earl
of March with the advice of the Earl of Warwick prepares for the fight: The
Queen (the King more intentive to devotion then fighting) did the like, the
fight continued about two hours, wherein were slain of both sides above ^en
thousand men; but upon the fall of Humfry Duke of Buckingham, the Kings side
was discomfited, and John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, Thomas L. Egremont, John
L. Beaumont and some other of account were slain: The Queen with the Duke of
Somers^t, taking with them the young Prince, fled to the Bishopric of Durham:
The King himself was taken, and as a prisoner conveyed to London: where the
Tower is yielded to the Earl of Warwick; The Lord Scales in disguised apparel
endeavoring to escape, is taken by the watermen, and by them beheaded, and
his Corpse carelessly left upon the sands. Thomas Thorpe one of the Barons of
the Exchequer, in the habit of a Monk, his Crown shorn, purposing to fly to
the Queen, is taken and committed prisoner to the Tower, and after by the
Commons beheaded at Highgate. The Duke of York being advertised of this good
success, leaves Ireland and posts to London, where in the kings name he
summoneth a Parliament, which being assembled, he in the presence of the Lords
in the upper House, places himself in the Imperial Seat, and with great
boldness lays open his rightful claim to the Crown of England, as being
the Son and heir of Anne daughter and heir of Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, Son and heir of Philip the sole daughter and heir of Lyonel Duke of
Clarence, the third son of Edward the third, and elder brother of John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Father of the usurper Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to
Henry the Fifth, who was Father to him that at this time untruly styles
himself king Henry the sixth. And after relating the many miseries that had
befallen the Realm since the time of this Usurpation, he concluded, that he
would not expect nor desire possession of the Crown, except his descent were
undisputable, and his title without exception. This being a business of
importance, required deliberation: but in conclusion, the Duke having before
hand prepared the Lords Spiritual; and few of the Nobility being present, that
were not of his part, the Burgesses were easily persuaded: and it was generally
resolved, and enacted accordingly, that king Henry during his life, should
retain the name and honor of a king; that the Duke of York should be
Proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, and Protector of the kings Person, his
lands and dominions; and that if at any time, any of king Henry's friends,
allies or favorites, in his behalf should attempt the disa^^lling of this
Act, that then the Duke should have present possession of the Crown. It is not
unworthy the noting, that while the Earl of March was declaring his title in
the upper house, it happened in the nether house, that a Crown which hung in
the middle of the house, to garnish a branch to set lights upon, without touch
or wind, fell suddenly down: as likewise at the same time, fell down the Crown
which stood on the top of Dover Castle: a sign as some thought, that the
Crown of the Realm should be changed. As Soon as the Parliament was
dissolved; the Duke dispatcheth letters into Scotland; requiring in the kings
name, the Queen, the Dukes of Somerset and Exeter, and all other of the
Nobility, that remained in that kingdom, with all speed to repair to his
presence in London: but they had other work in hand; for having gotten together
of English and Scots, to the number of eighteen thousand, they came ma^ching
into England^ against whom went the Duke of York, with his younger son the
Earl of Rutland, and the Earl of Salisbury, (leaving the king in the custody
of the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Warwick;) and approaching near the
Que^ns A^my, he was certified by his sc^uts, that the Enemy far exceeded his
power, both in number and in all warlike preparation, (he not having in his
Army above five thousand men) and thereupon the Earl of Salisbury advised him
to rety^e, and to attend the coming of the Earl of March, who was gone into
Wales to raise the March men; but the pride of his former victory made him
deal to all Counsel of declining the battle; and so hastened on by his
destiny, from S^nd^ll Castle he marched on to Wakefield green; where the Lord
Clifford on the one side, and the Earl of Wiltshire on the other were placed
in ambuscado; The Duke of York supposing that the Duke of Somerset who led the
battle, had no more forces then what were with him, undauntedly marches
toward him: but being entered within their danger, the ambushes on both sides
brake out upon him, and slew him, with three thousand of his men, the rest
fled; the Earl of Salisbury is taken prisoner; and harmless Rutland, not
above twelve years old, who came thither but to see fashions, is made a
sacrifice for his Fathers transgression, who kneeling upon his knees, with
tears begging life, is unmercifully stabbed to the heart by the Lord Clifford,
in part of revenge (as he swore) of his Fathers death; and the Queen most
unwomanly in cold blood, caused the Earl of Salisbury, and as many as were
taken prisoners, to be beheaded at P^mfret Castle, and to have their heads
placed on poles about the walls of York. Thus dyed Richard Plantagenet Duke of
York, who had taken to wife Cicely daughter of Ralph Nevyll, the first Earl
of Westmerland, by whom he had issue, eight sons and four daughters; his
eldest son Henry dyed young, his second son Edward was afterward king of
England; his third Edmund Earl of Rutland, was slain with his father^ John,
Thomas and William died young, his seventh son George, was after Duke of
Clarence, his youngest son Richard, surnamed Crouchb^ck, was after king of
England. Anne his eldest daughter was married to Henry Holland Duke of Exeter,
his second daughter Elizabeth was married to John de la P^ole Earl of Suffolk,
his third Margaret to Charles Duke of Burgoigne, his fourth Vrsula dyed young.
This Duke being dead, had his head crowned with a paper Crown, together with
many circumstances of disgracing him: but this act of spite was fully
afterward recompensed upon their heads that did it.

The Earl of March hearing of his fathers death, labored now so much the more
earnestly, in that he labored for himself; and parting from Shrewsbury, whose
Inhabitants were most firm unto him, he increased his army to the number of
three and twenty thousand, and presently took the field; and having
advertisment, that Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, with the Earl of Ormond and
Wiltshire followed after him with a great power of Welsh and Irish: he suddenly
marches back again, and in a plain near Mortimers Cross, on Candlemas day
in the morning gave them battle, wherewith the slaughter of three thousand and
eight hundred, he put the Earls to flight. Owen Tewther who had married Queen
Catherine, Mother to king Henry the sixth, and diverse Welsh Gentlemen were
taken, and at Hereford beheaded. Before the battle, it is said, the Sun
appeared to the Earl of March like three suns, and suddenly it joined all
together in one; for which cause, some imagine, that he gave the sun in its
full brightness, for his badge or Cognizance.

The Queen in the mean time encouraged by the death of the Duke of York, with
a power of Northern men marches toward London: but when her soldiers were
once South of Trent, as if that river were the utmost limit of their good
behavior, they fell to forage the Country in most babarous manner:
Approaching S. Albans, they were advertised that the Duke of Norfolk and the
Earl of Warwick were ready to give them battle; whereupon the Queens Vaward
hastes to pass through St. Alb^^s; but being not suffered to pass, they
encountered with their Enemies in the field called Barnard heath; who perceiving
the maine battle to stand still, and not to move; which was done by the
treachery of Lovelace, who with the kentish men had the leading of it; they
soon made the Southern men to turn their backs and f^y; upon whose flight,
the rest in doubt of each others well meaning, shifted away; and the Lords
about the King perceiving the danger, withdrew themselves: Only the Lord
B^nvile com^ing in a complementall manner to the King, and saying it grieved
him to leave his Majesty, but that necessity for safeguard of his life,
enforced it^ was importuned, and Sir Tho^as Kyriell a knight of Kent likewise,
by the king to stay; he passing his Royal word, that their stay should be no
danger to them; upon which promise they stayed, but to their cost: for the
Queen hearing that the Commo^s had beheaded Baron Tho^pe at High-gate; ^he in
revenge thereof, caused both their heads to be stricken off at S. Alb^^s: so as
there were slaughtered at this battle the full number of three and twenty
hundred, but no man of name, but only Sir John Gray, who the same day was made
knight, with twelve other at the village of Colney.

And now the King was advised, to send one Thom^s Hoe, (tha^ had been a
Barrister) to the Victors, to tell them; that he would gladly come to them, if
with conveyance it might be done: whereupon the Earl of Northumberland,
appointed diverse Lords to attend him to the L. Cl^ffords Tent, where the Queen
and the young Prince met to their great joy: but it was now observed, as it
were in the destiny of King Henry, that although he were a most Piousman, yet
no enterprise of war did ever prosper, where he was present; that we may know
the prosperity of the world to be no inseparable companion to men of Piety. At
the Queens request, the king honored with knighthood thirty gentlemen, who the
day before had fought against the part where he was; the Prince likewise was by
him dubbed knight, and then they went to the Abbey, where they were received
with Anthems, and withal an humble petition, to be protected from the outrage
of the loose souldiers^ which was promised, and Proclamation made to that
purpose, but to small purpose; for the Northern men said, It was their bargain
to have all the spoil in every place, after they had passed Trent: and so they
robbed and spoiled whatsoever they could come at. The Lond^ners hearing of this
disorder, were resolved, seeing there was no more assurance in the Kings
promise, to keep the Northern men out of their gates; insomuch that when they
were sent to, to send over to the Camp certain Cartloads of Lenton provision;
which the Major accordingly provided: the Commons rose about Cripplegate, and
by strong hand kept the Carts from going out of the City. Hereupon, the Major
sends the Recorder to the Kings Counsell^ and withal entreats the Duchess of
Bedford, and the Lady Scole^, to intercede for him to the Queen; and to excuse
his not using force, considering how dangerous it might be in these doubtful
times, to stir their fury, that would not easily be a^layed. It was well
advised to send women to entreat a woman, for by this means they prevailed,
that some of the Lords of the Counsel, with a guard of four hundred good
soldiers, were appointed to go for London, to enquire and certify of these
things: when suddenly news was brought, that the Earl of March with a great
Ar^y was marching toward them: for the Earl of Warwick having gathered
together his scattered troops, and joined with the Earl of March, they hasted
toward London, and were joyfully received upon the eight and twentieth day of
February, and upon Sunday, the second of March, the Earl of Warwick mustred
all his army in S. John's field, and having cast them into a ring, read unto
them the agreement of the last P^^liament, and then demanded, whether they
would have King Henry to reign still who all cried, no, no: then he asked them,
whether they would have the Earl of March eldest son of the Duke of York
(by that Parliament proclaimed King) to reign over them? who with a great
clamor cried, yea, yea^ Then went there certain Captains, and others of the
City, to the Earl of March at Baynards Castle, to acquaint him with what was
passed; who at first seemed to excuse himself, a^ unable to exec^^e so great a
charge: but animated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London,
and Exeter, and the Earl of Warwick, he at last consented to take it upon
him; and thereupon, the next morning he wept in Procession at Paul's, and
offered there, and after Te Deum sung, he was in great state conveyed to
Westminster, and there in the great Hall, seated in the Kings seat, with the
Scepter of St. Edw^^d in his hand; and then again the people, of whom there was
a great concourse, were aloud demanded, if they would acknowledge him to be
their King? to which with great willingness they all cried, yea, yea. Then
taking homage of diverse Noblemen there present, he was with Procession and
great solemnity conveyed to the Abbey, and placed in the Qui^e as King, whilst
Te Deum was singing: That done, he offered at St. Ed^ards Shrine, and then
returned by water to Paul's, and was lodged in the Bishops Palace, and upon the
fou^th of March he was generally Proclaimed King, by the name of Edward the
Fo^r^h. And here in the course of all Writers, ends the Reign of King Henry
the Sixth; that it may be truly said, never any came to be King so soon after
his birth, nor left to be King so long before his death; for he came to be King
at eight mon^ths old, and he left to be King, living twelve years after. There
was indeed in that space of time, a certain Vicissitude, sometimes a King, and
sometimes no King; the passages where of must be related in the following Kings
Reign.

Of hi^ Taxatio^s.
IN the first year of his Reign, a Parliament was holden at London, where the
Queen Mother, with the young king in her lap came and sat amongst the Lords;
and there was then granted a Subsidy of five Nobles upon every sack of wool
that should pass out of the Land, for three years, but if carried out by
Merchant strangers, then to pay three and forty shillings for every sack. In
the third year of his Reign, a Parliament was holden at Westminster, wherein
was granted a Subsidy of twelve pence in the pound of all Merchandise coming
in, or passing out of the Realm, and three shillings of a Tonne of Wine, for
the term of three years. In his sixth year in a Parliament at Wes^^inster was
granted a Subsidy, of every Tonne of Wine three shillings^ and of other
Merchandise except Wool, Fell, and Cloth, twelve pence in the pound: Also of
every Parish through the Realm (except Cities and Boroughes) the Benefice
being in value ten Marks; Ten of that Parish shall pay six shillings eight
pence; and of every Benefice of the value of ten pounds, ten Parishioners
should pay thirteen shillings four pe^ce, and so rateably of every Benefice,
from the lowest to the highest. And for the Inhabitants of Cities and
Boroughes, every man being worth twenty shillings above his housholdstuffe, and
the apparel of him and his wife, should pay four pence, and so after that
rate to the richest.

Of L^wes and Ordi^ances in his time.
IN this kings time, the Lord Major of Lond^^ first began to go by water ^o
London, where before they used to go by land. Also in this Kings Reign the Art
of Printing wa^ first found at Mog^^ce in Germa^y, by a knight called John
Cuttenberghe^, and brought into England by William Caxton of London Mercer, who
first practiced the same in the Abbey at Westminster, in the year 1471. In the
23 year of his Reign, in a Parliament then holden, it was Enacted, that when
Wheat was so^d for six shillings eight pence the quarter, Rye for fo^^e
shillings, and Barley for three shillings; It should be lawful for any man to
carry the said kinds of Corn, into the parts beyond the Sea without license,
so it were not to the kings enemies or Rebel^; which Act was afterward
confirmed by king Edward the Fourth.

Affa^^es of the Church in his time.
A Great Schism was in the Church in this kings time by reason of Anti-popes;
for remedy whereof, a Council is called at Co^sta^ce, to which the Emperors of
Constanti^ople and Trabiz^nd send their Amba^^adors. In this Council John the
three and twentieth is convented, condemned, deposed, and imprisoned: Gr^gory
the twelveth, and Benedict the thirteenth are deprived, and Otho Colonn^, by
the name of Martin the fifth, is chosen Pope. During these confusions in the
Western Church, the Christians in the Eastern Church are utterly ruinated:
The Emperor smothered to death in a prease of people, and the great City of
Constantinople won by the Turk, made ever since the seat of his Empire. In
the six^ and thirtieth year of this king, Reynold Peacocke Bishop of
Chichester, who had labored many years in Translating the holy Scripture into
English, was accused and convicted, for holding and publishing certain
opinions at that time held Heretical; which at last, openly at Paul's Cross he
revoked; That he had held there was no necessity to believe that Christ
descended into Hell; also, no necessity to believe in the communion of Saints,
or that the Universal Church cannot err in matters of Faith, or that it is
necessary to believe and hold whatsoever a General Council shall determine:
Also that he had held, that spiritual persons ought to have no Temporal
Possessions, and that personal Tithes were not due by Gods Law: these Points
he openly renounced, but was notwithstanding deprived of his Bishopric; only
a certain Pension was assigned him to live on in an Abbey, where soon after
he dyed.

Works of Piety done by him, or others in his time.
THe King himself Founded two famous Colleges, the one in Cambridge, to our
Lady and St. Nichol^s, called the College Royal, or the kings College; the
other of Eaten besides Windsor, called of our blessed Lady; to the maintenance
whereof, he gave 3400 pounds by year. In the 28 year of his Reign, his Queen
Margaret began the Foundation of Queens College in Cambridge. In the time of
his Reign also, Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury Founded two Colleges
in Oxford; one called All-Soules College, the other Bernard College. In his
time also, H^mp^ry Duke of Gloucester (but others say, Thomas Kempe Archbishop
of Ca^ter^^ry) built the Divinity School in Oxford; also the said Archbishop
built Pauls-Crosse in form as now it stands; and William W^ynflete Bishop of
Winchester, and Lord Chancellor of England Founded Mary Magdalen College in
Oxford. In his seventeenth year, Ralph Lord Cromwell, builded the College of
Tatshall in Linc^l^shire. Also this year, William ^^stfield Major of London,
caused to be builded at his own charge the Water-Conduict in Fleetstreet. In
his ninth year, John Wells Major of London, caused the Cond^ict commonly
called the Standard in Cheap, to be builded. In his first year, the West Gate
of London, sometime called Chamberlain gate, and now Newgate, was begun to be
new builded by the Executors of Sir Richard VVhittington Lord Major of London.
In his fifth year, John Reynwell Major of London, gave certain lands to the
City of London, for which the City is bound to pay for ever, all Fif^eens
that shall be granted to the King, (so as it pass ^ot three Fifteens in one
year) for three Wards in London; namely, Dowg^te-Ward, Billi^gsgate-Ward, and
Aldgate. Also this year, the Tower at the Drawbridge of London was begun by
the same Major. In his four and twentieth year, Simon Air Lord Major of
L^ndon builded the Leaden Hall in London, to be a Storeho^se for Grain and
Fuel for the poor of the City, and fair Chapel at the East end of the
same, leaving in stock a thousand pounds, which a^terward King Edward the
Fourth borrowed and never paid it again. Also in this kings time, William de la
Poole Duke of Suffolk, and Alice his wife, Daughter to Thomas Ch^^cer, Son of
Geoffry Chawcer the famous Poet; translated and increased the Manor place of
Ewelme in Oxfordshire, and builded new the Parish Church of Ewelme, and an
Hospital or Almeshouse for two Priests, and thirteen poor men, to which he
gave three Manours, Ramruge in Hampshire, Co^ocke in Wiltshire, and Me^sh in
Buckingh^mshire: They also founded the Hospital of Do^nington Castle.

Of Casualtie^ happening in his time.
In his Fifth year was ^o unseasonable weather, that it rained almost
continually, from Easter to Michaelmasse. In his seventh year, the eight of
November, the Duke of Norfolk was like to have been drowned passing through
London Bridge, hi^ Barge being set upon the piles, overwhelmed, so that thirty
persons were drowned, and the Duke with others that escaped, were fain to be
drawn up with ropes. In his 18 year, all the Lions in the Tower dyed: Also this
year, the 18 day of July, the Postern-Gates of London by E^st-Smithfield
against the Tower of London, sanke by night more than seven foot into the
earth. In his two and twentieth year, on Newyears day, near unto Bedford, a
very deep water, which ran betwixt the Towns o^ Swelstone and Harleswood, stood
suddenly still, and divided it self, so that by the sp^ce of three miles the
bottom remained dry; which wonder, many thought to signify the division of
the people, and falling away from the king, which happened shortly after. In
the three and thirtieth year of his Reign, besides a great Blazing Star,
there happened a strange sight, a monstrous Cock came out of the Sea, and in
the presence of a multitude of people at Portland, made a hideous crowing three
times, each time turning about clapping his wings, and beckning toward the
North, the South, and the West; as also many prodigious births. In his six and
thirtieth year, in a little Town in Bedfordshire, it rained blood, whereof the
red drops appeared in sheets hung out to dry.

Of his Wife and issue.
HE married Margaret Daughter of Rayner Duke of Anjou, and Ti^ular king of
Jerusalem, Sicilie, and Arragon; by whom he had small Portion, and little
strength of Alliance; yet might have been a good match, if they could have
changed conditions with one another, that he might have had her active and
stirring spirit, and she his softly and mild disposition; She was his wife six
and twenty years, and after her husbands depulsion from the Regal Throne, his
Forces being vanquished at the Battle of Tewkesberry, in a poor Religious
house, where she had fled for safety of her life, was taken prisoner and
carried captive to London, where she remained in durance, till Duke Rayner her
Father purchased her liberty, unto whom she returned, and lastly dyed in her
native Country. By her, king Henry had issue only one Son named Edw^rd, who
when the day was lost at T^wkesberry, sought to escape by flight, but being
taken, was brought into the presence of king Edward; whose r^solute answers
provoked king Edward so much, that he dashed him on the mouth with his Gantlet,
and then Richard the Crouchback ran him into the heart with his Dagger; his
body wa^ buried amongst the poor persons there slain, in the Monastical
Church of the Blackfriars in Tewkesberry.

Of his Death and Burial.
UPon King Edwards recovering the Crown, he was committed to the Tower; where
the 21 of May, in the year 147^, he was murdered by the bloody hand of
^ichard Duke of Gloucester: the day after he was brought to Paul's Church in an
open Coffin barefaced, where he bled; thence carried to the Blackfriars,
where ^e ^lso bled; from thence in a Boat to Chersey Abbey, without Priest or
Clerk, ^orch or taper, saying or singing, and there buried; but afterward at
the appointment of King Edward, was removed to Windsor, and there interred, and
a fair Monument made ov^r him.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
He was tall of statu^e, spare and slender of body, of a comely countenance,
and all parts well proportioned. For endowments of his mind, he had virtues
enough to make him a Saint, but not to make him a God, as kings are said to be
gods; for of that commanding power there being two parts, Parcere subjectis and
debellare ^uperbos; he wanted the latter. He was not sensible of that which the
world calls Honor, accounting the greatest honor to consist in humility; His
greatest imperfection was, that he had in him too much of the Logge, and too
little of the Storke; for he would not move, but as he was moved, and had
rather be devoured, than he would devour. He was not so stupid, not to know
prosperity from adversity; but he was so devout, to think nothing adversity,
which was not a hinderance to Devotion: He was fitter for a Priest than a King,
and for a sacrifice than a Priest; and he could not choose but dye a Martyr,
who all his life had been a Confessor. He had one immunity peculiar to
himself, that no man could ever be revenged of him, seeing he never offered any
man injury. By being innocent as a Dove, he kept his Crown upon his head so
long; but if he had been wise as a Serpent, he might have kept it on longer.
But all this is not sufficient, if we express not in particular his several
virtues: So modest, that when in a Christmas, a show of women was presented
before him with their breasts laid out, he presently departed; saying, fie, fie
for shame, forsooth you be to blame. So pitiful, that when he saw the quarter
of a Traitor over Cripplegate, he caused it to be taken down; saying, I will
not have any Christian so cruelly handled for my sake. So free from swearing,
that he never used other oath, but forsooth, and verily: So patient, that to
one who struck him when he was taken prisoner; he only said, forsooth you
wrong yourselfe more than me, to strike the Lords anointed: So devout, that on
principal Holy Days he used to wear sackcloth next his skin: Once for all,
let his Confe^^or be heard speak, who in ten years confession never found that
he had done or said any thing, for which he might justly be enjoined Penance.
For which causes, King Henry the Seventh would have procured him to be
Cannonized for a Saint, but that he was prevented by death^ or perhaps because
the charge would have been too great, the Canonization of a king being much
more costly than of a private person.

Of men of Note in his time.
THere were men of valor in this Kings Reign, of extraordinary eminency; as
first, John Duke of Bedford Regent of France, whom when a French Lord
upbraided, that his sword was of lead; he made him answer, and made him feel
that it was of steel. Next him was Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, whose
very name was a sufficient charm to daunt a whole French Army. Then the next
was John Lord Talbot, so great a terror to the French, that when the women
would still their children from crying, they would use to say, Talbot comes.
Then was Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick, so much greater than a king; as that
which makes, is greater than that it makes, and such a one was he. Many other
besides these, not much inferior to these; that we may truly say, there never
was a more heroical King of England than Henry the Fifth; nor ever a King of
England that had more heroical Subjects, than Henry the Sixth. And though Arms
and Letters seem to be of different conditions, yet they commonly grow up and
flourish together; as in this kings Reign, were John Leland surnamed the
Elder, who wrote diverse Treatises for instruction of Gramarians: William White
a Priest of Kent, professing the Doctrine of Wickliffe, for which he suffered
Martyrdom by fire: Alexander Carpenter, who wrote a book called Destructorium
vitiorum, against the Prelates of that time: Peter Basset Esquire of the Privy
Chamber to king Henry the Fifth, whose life he wrote: John Pole a Priest, who
wrote the life of St. Walhorayle an English woman: Also, Thom^s Walden, alias
Netter, who wrote diverse Treatises against the Wickliffifts: Pe^er Clerk a
Student in Oxford, and a defender of Wickliffes doctrine; for which he fled,
and was put to death beyond Sea: Thomas Walsingham born in Norfolk a diligen^
Historiographer: Thomas Ringstead the younger, an excellent Preacher, who wrote
diverse Treatises: Thomas Rudborn a Monk of Winchester, and an Historiographer:
Peter P^yne an earnest professor of Wickliffes doctrine, for which he fled into
^^be^^^: Nicholas Vpton a Civilian, who wrote of Heraldry, of colors in
Armory, and of the duty of Chivalry: John Capgr^ve born in Kent, an Augustine
Friar, who wrote many excellent Treatises, particularly the Legend of English
Saints: Humphry Duke of Gloucester, Protector of the Realm, well learned in
Astrology, whereof he wrote a special Treatise, inti^u^ed Tabula Directionum:
John Whethamstead, otherwise called Fr^mentariu^, Abbot of St. Alb^ns, who
wrote diverse Treatises; and amongst others, a book of the Records of things
happening whiles he was Abbot, which book Holinshead had seen, and in some
passages of his time followed: Roger O^l^y accused of Treason, for practicing
with the Lady El^^nor Cobham by sorcery to make the king away; and thereof
condemned, and dyed for it: he wrote one Treatise entitled Contra ^^lgi
superstitiones; and another, De sua Innocentia: Henry Walsingham a Carmelite
Friar o^ Norwich, who wrote sundry Treatises in Divinity: John Lidgate ^ Monk
of Bury, who had traveled France and Italy to learn languages, and wrote many
works in Poetry: Thomas Beckington Bishop of Bath, who wrote against the Law
Salique of France: Michael Trigurie born in Cornw^ll, whom for his excellent
learning king Henry the Fifth made Governor of the Universitie of Ca^n in
Normandy, after he had conquered it: Reynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester, who
wrote many Treatises touching Christian Religion: Robert Fleming, who wrote a
D^ctionary in Greek ^^d Latin, and a work in verse of sundry kinds:
Nicholas M^ntacute an Historiographer: John Stow a Monk of Norwich, and Doctor
of Divinity in Oxf^rd: Nich^l^^ Bu^geie, born in a Town of Norfolk, of that
name, who wrote an History called Ad^^^ti^nes Chronicorum: Robert ^als^cke, who
wrote a book De ^e Milit^ri: Thomas D^^d^ a Carmelite Friar of M^rleborough,
who wrote the life of Alphred king of the West Saxons: Robert B^le, ^irnamed
the Elder, Recorder of London, who gathered a Chronicle of the Customs, Laws,
Foundations, Changes, Offices, Orders, and public Assemblies of the City of
London, with other matters touching the perfect description of the same City;
he wrote other works also touching the state of the same City, and the Acts
of King Edward the third.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE FOURTH.
EDWARD Earl of March, born at Roane in Normandy, son and heir of Richard
Plantagenet Duke of York, slain in the battle at Wakefield, succ^eded his
Father in the Right, but exceeded him in the possession of the Crown of
England; and that by virtue of an act of Parliament lately made; wherein the
said Duke of York not only was declared heir apparent to the Crown, and
appointed Protector of the King and Kingdom; but it was further enacted, that
if King Henry, or any in his behalf, should attempt the disanulling of this
Act; that then the said Duke or his heir should have the present Possession:
which because his friends attempted to do, therefore justly does Edward Earl
of March his son, by virtue of this act, take possession of the Crown; and is
Proclaimed king of England, by the name of Edward the fourth, through the City
of London, on the fifth day of March in the year 1460. But before he could have
leisure to be Crowned, he was forced once again to try his fortune in the
field by battle: For King Henry in the North was raising a new army; against
whom King Edward, upon the twelveth of March, marched with his forces from
London, and by easy journeyes came to Pomfret Castle, from whence the Lord
Fitzwater was sent to guard the passage at Ferribridge, to stop the Enemies
approach that way; King Henry likewise advances forward, sending his power,
under the conduct of the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland and the
Lord Clifford, whilst himself with his Queen and Son stay at York. The
Lord Clifford very early on Palm sunday, with a troop of Northern men, falls
upon those that guarded Fetribridge, and defeated them with the slaughter of
the Lord Fitzwater and the bastard of Salisbury. The Earl of Warwick hearing
of this defeat, comes posting to King Edwards C^mpe, and in his presence
killing his horse, Pro^ested his resolution to stand with him to the Death.
Upon ^his Resolution of the Earls, the King made presently Proclamation, that
all who were afraid to sight, should at their pleasure depart; but to those
that would stay, he promised good reward, adding withal, that if any that
stayed, should after turn his back or flee, then he that should kill him,
should have double pay. After this, he gave order to the Lord Fawconbridge, and
Sir Walter Blunt, to lead on the Vaw^rd; who in their march about Dandingdale,
encountered with the Lord Clifford; (who formerly in cold blood had slaughtered
the young Earl of Rutland) and he being stricken into the throat with an
arrow (some say) without a head; and presently dying: the Lord Nevill Son and
heir of the Earl of Westmerland was also slain, with most of their
companies, and the rest put to flight. The next day likewise (the Duke of
Norfolk being dangerously sick, to whom that place was assigned) F^^conbridge
and Blunt continue the leading of the Vaunt-guard; and on Palm Sunday, by break
of day, they came to a plain field between Towton and Saxto^, from whence they
made a full survey of king Henry's Army, and certified king Edward, that the
Enemy was threescore thousand strong; where his Army was but forty thousand and
six hundred: whereupon a second Proclamation was made through the Camp, that
no quarter should be kept, nor prisoner taken. The Armies being both in sight,
the Lord Fauconbridge gave direction to the Archers (upon a signal by him
given) to shoot every man a flight-arrow (for that purpose provided) and then
to fall back three strides, and stand. The Northern men in the mean time plied
their bows, till all their sheaves were empty; but their arrows fell short of
the Enemy by threescore yards, and not only did no hurt to the Enemy, but did
hurt to themselves; for their arrows being spent, and coming to hand-blows,
their own arrows sticking in the ground, galled their shins, and pierced their
feet. Ten hours the battle continued doubtful; till the Earl of
Northumberland being slain, with the Lord, Beaumont, Gray, Dacres, and Wells,
Sir John Nevill, Andrew T^ollop, and many other knights and Esquires; the
Earls of Exeter and Somerset fled, leaving the Conquest to King Edward, but
the bloodiest that ever England felt, for there fell that day six and thirty
thousand seven hundred threescore and sixteen persons, no prisoner being taken
but the Earl of Devonshire. The battle ended, K. Edward hastes to York, where
he caused the heads of his father and other friends, to be taken down and
buried with their bodies, setting in their places the heads of the Earl of
Devonshire, and three other, there at that time executed. The Earl of Somerset
acquainting King Henry with this overthrow, persuades him, with his Queen and
Son, to fly to Barwick; where leaving the Duke of Somerset, they fly further
for succor to the King of Scots, who comfort them with promise of relief,
but makes a sure bargain; for in lieu of a pension to be allowed King Henry
during his abode there, the Town and Castle of Barwick were delivered to him.
Queen Margaret and her Son are sent into France, who obtained of Lewis the
Eleve^th her Cousin, that all of King Edwards friends were prohibited Stay or
Traffic in the French kings Dominions: but all King Henry's friends might live
there freely. After this, king Edward comes to London; and upon his entrance to
the Tower, makes four and twenty knights, and the next day four more; and
upon the 28 day of June, in the year 1461. he rode from the T^wer to
Westminster, and was there Crowned in the Abby-Church.

Shortly after, a Parliament is summoned, which began at Westminster the fourth
of November; In which, all Acts of king Henry the Sixth, prejudicial to king
Edwards Title, are repealed: and therein, John Earl of Oxford, a valiant and
wise man, (he who in a former Parliament had disputed the question concerning
the precedence of Temporal and Spiritual Barons; a bold attempt in those
days; and by force of whose Arguments, Judgment was given for the Lords
Temporal) with his Son Aubry de Veer, Sir Thomas Tiddingham knight, William
Tyrrell and Walter Montgomery Esquires, were, without answer, convicted of
Treason, and beheaded. And to encourage others to well-deserving, king Edward
at this time advanced many in honor: his brother George he created Duke of
Clarence; his brother Richard, Duke of Gloucester; John Lord Nevill brother to
the Earl of Warwick, he made first Viscount, then Marquess Montacu^e; Henry
Bourchier brother to the Archbishop of Canterbury, is made Earl of Essex; and
William Lord Fauconbridge, Earl of Kent. And now their new honors are
presently put into imploiment; the Earls of Essex and Kent, accompaneid with
the Lords Audeley and Clinton, Sir John Howard, Sir Richard Walgrave and
others, to the number of ten thousand, are appointed to scowre the Seas, who
landing in Britain, took the town of Conque^, and the Isle of Ree, and then
returned. At this time Henry Duke of Somerset, Ralph Percy and diverse others
came in, and humbly submitted themselves to king Edwards mercy; who protested
his propension of freely pardoning them, and as many other that would submit
themselves as they did.

All this time King Henry was in Scotland, and Queen Margaret in France; where
she obtained of the French King, a company of five hundred men; with whom she
sailed toward Newcastle, and landed at Tinmouth, but suddenly again returned,
and was herself by tempest beaten to Barwick, but her company was driven on
the shore before Bamburg Castle; where they set their Ships on fire, and fled
to an Isl^nd called Holy Island, but were so assailed there by the bastard Ogle
and John Manners Esqu^re, that many of them were slain, and almost four
hundred taken prisoners, only their Coronell Peter Bressie h^ppened upon a
Fisherman, who brought him to ^^^wick to Queen Margaret, and by her was made
Captain of the Castle of Alnewick, which he with his Frenchmen kept, till
they were resc^ed. Shortly after^ Queen Margaret having gotten together a great
company of Scots, and other of her friends bringing her husband with her, and
leaving her Son at Barwick, entered Northumberland, took the Castle of
Bamburg, made Captain thereof Sir Ralph Gray; and then came forward to the
Bishopprick of Durham: whither resorted to her the lately Reconciled, and now
again revolted Duke of Somerset; Sir Ralph Percy and diverse others, who
altogether made a competent army. King Edward hearing hereof, makes preparation
both by sea and land; and first he sends Viscount Montacute with some Companies
into Northumberland; whom he in person follows with his whole power: The
Viscount marches toward king Henry, and by the way encountreth the Lord
Hungerford at Hegley-moore; but he, with Lord Basse, upon the first charge, ran
away, leaving Sir Ralph Darcy alone with his own Regiment, who there valiantly
fighting, dyed. After this the Viscount understanding that king Henry was
encamped in Levels plain, near the river of Dowell in Hexamshire, marches
thither by night, and set upon him in his Camp, whose charge the Northern men
receive with a desperate resolution, but were in the end with great slaughter
overcome. Henry Beaufort Duke of Somerset, the Lords Basse, Molins, Hungerford,
Wen^worth, Hussy and Sir John Finderne knight, with many others are taken
prisoners: king Henry himself by the swiftnes of his horse escaped, but very
hardly; for one of his Hench-men that followed him was taken, who had on his
head king Henry's Helmet, or as some say, his high Cap of Estate, called
Abacot, garnished with two rich Crowns, which was presented to king Edward at
York the fourth of May. The Duke of Somerset was beheaded presently at Exam;
the other Lords and knights were had to Newcastle, and there, after a little
respite, were likewise put to death. Besides these, diverse others, to the
number of five and twenty, were executed at York and in other places. This
Duke of Somerset was never married, but had a natural Son named Charles
Somerset, who was afterward created Earl of Worcester. Sir Humfry Nevill, and
William Tailbois calling himself Earl of Kyme, Sir Ralph Gray and Richard
Tunstall with diverse others that escaped from this battle, hid themselves in
secret places; but yet not so closely, but that they were espied and taken^ The
Earl of Kyme was apprehended in Riddesdale, and brought to Newcastle, and
there beheaded, Sir Humfry Nevill was taken in Holdernesse, and at York lost
his head. After this battle, called Exam-field, king Edward came to the City
of Durham, and sent from thence into Northumberland, the Earl of Warwick, the
Lord Montacute, the Lords Fawconbridge and Scroope, to recover such Castles as
his Enemies there held; which they effected; and taking in the Castle of
Dunstanburg, they found in it John Gois servant to the Duke of Somerset, who
was brought to York and there beheaded: and taking in the Castle of Bamburg,
they found in it Sir Ralph Gray, whom because he had sworn to be true to king
Edward, and was now revolted to king Henry^ they degraded from his Order of
knighthood at Doncaster, by cutting of his gil^ Spurs, renting his Coat of
Arms, and breaking his sword over his head, and then beheaded him.

In this mean time, king Henry (upon what occasion, no man knows; but only led
by the left hand of destiny) ventring in disguise to come into England, and
shifting from place to place, was at length discovered, and taken by one
C^ntlow, or as others say, by Thomas Talbot son to Sir Edward Talbot of
Bashall, who deceived him being at his dinner at VVaddington Hall in
Lincolnshire, and brought him toward London, with his legs tied under the
horse belly; in whose company were also taken Doctor Han^ing Deane of Windsor,
D. B^dle, and one Ell^rton, whom the Earl of Warwick met by the way, and
brought them all to the Tower of London; whils^ the distressed Queen with her
son once again is driven to fly for shelter into France; whither the new Duke
of Somerse^ and his brother John sailed also, where they lived in great misery;
and the Earl of Pembr^^ke went from Country to Country little better then a
Vagabond.

At this time, king Edward, to reward his followers, distributeth the Lands and
Possessions of those that held with king Henry amongst them, but first made
Proclamation that whosoever of the contrary faction would come in and submit,
should be received to grace and restored to their Patrimonies.

In the fourth year of king Edward, in Michaelmas Term were made eight
Sergeants at Law, Thomas Young, Nicholas Geney, Richard Neale, Thomas Brian,
Richard Pigot, John Catesby and Guy Fairfax; who held their feast in the Bishop
of Elyes place in Holborn, where the Lord Gray of Ruthin then Lord Treasurer of
England, was placed before the Lord Major of London, being invited to the
feast, which gave such a distaste to the Major, that he presently departed with
the Aldermen and Sheriff^, without tasting of their feast: and it was Registered
to be a president in time to come.

And now king Edward no less intentive to perform the Office of a king in
peace, then he had been before of a Captain in warr^, considering with
himself that seditious and civil dissensions must needs breed disorders in a
state, and that disorders bred by troubled times, are not like troubled waters,
that will in time settle of themselves and recover cleernesse; but are rather
like weeds, which once springing up and let alone, will in time over run the
whole gro^nd where they grow: He like a good Gardener seeks to weed them out
before they grow too rank, and endeavors to make a general reformation of
abuses; and to that end in Michaelmas Term in the second year of his Reign,
Three days together he sat publicly with his Judges in Westminster Hall on
the Kings Bench, to acquaint himself with the Orders of that Court, and to
observe what needed Reformation in it, either at Bench or ^t Bar: as likewise
he ordered the officers of his Exchequer, to take more moderate Fees; and to be
more intentive to the benefit of the Subject, than to their own unjust gain:
He also daily frequented the Council Table; which he furnished for the most
part, with such as were gracious amongst the Citizens, whom he imployes about
references and businesses of private consequence; whilst mysteries o^ State
were intimated only to such whom he selected to be of his more private Cabinet
Counsel; by whom, he being now of the age of three and twenty years, w^^
advised that it was now time to provide for posterity, by taking a wife, and to
provide also for the present time, by taking a fit wife, which they conceived
to be no where so fitly found as in France; both thereby to bury old grudges
between the two Nations, and also to avert assistance from Queen M^rg^ret, the
only disturber of the State; and this being concluded, it only remained to
make choice of a fit man for that employment, for which none was thought so fit
as Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick; he therefore is presently sent into France,
to treat of a Marriage to be had between king Edward and the Lady Bon^,
daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, and Sister to the Lady Carlote then Queen of
France: a Lady, no less for beauty and virtuous qualities, then for Nobility
of blood, worthy to be a Queen. The Proposition is in France readily embraced,
and willingly assented unto on all parts. But in the mean time king Edward
being hunting in Witchwood Forest besides Stonystratford; he chanced to come
to the Manor of Grafton, where the Duchess of Bedford then lay, and where
her daughter by Sir Richard Woodvile, the Lady Elizabeth Gr^y widow of Sir
John Gr^y of Gr^vy, slain at the last battle of St. Albans; became a suitour
to him for some lands which her ^usband had given her in Jointure; with whose
beauty and gr^cefull behavior, king Edward was so taken, that he presently
became a Suitor to her; and when he could not obtain his suit by terms of
wanton love, he was forced to s^eke it by terms of Marriage.

And here we may well think there was no small c^fl^ct in King Edwards mind,
between the two great commanders, Love and Honor, which of them should be most
potent; Honor put him in mind, that it was against his Law to take to wife a
meaner person than himself; but Love would take no notice of any difference of
degrees, but took it for his Prerogative to make all persons equal; Honor
pe^swaded him that it stood him much upon to make good the Embassage, in which
he had sent the Earl of Warwick to a great Prince; but Love perswad^d him
that it stood him more upon, to make good the Embassage sent to himself from a
greater Prince: In conclusion, it appeared to be true which one observes,
Improbe ^mor quid non mortalia pectora cogis? what is it that love will not
make a man to do? Whether it be, that love brings upon the mind a
forgetfulness of all circumstances but such as tend to its own satisfaction;
or whether it be that love is amongst passions, as oil amongst liquors, which
will always be supreme and at the top; Honor may be honored, but love will
be obeyed: And therefore king Edward, though he knew no Superior upon Earth,
yet he obeys the summons of Love; and upon the first day of May, marries the
said Lady Gray at Grafton; the first of our kings since the Conquest that
married his Subject: At which marriage none was present but the Duchess of
Bedford, the Priest, two Gentlewoman, and a young man to help the Priest at
Mass: the year after, with great solemnity she was Crowned Queen at
Westminster. It is not unworthy the relating the Speech which king Edward had
with his Mother, who sought to cross this ma^ch: Where you say (says he) that
she is a widow, and has already children; by Gods blessed Lady, I am a
Batchelour, and have some too, and so each of us has a proof, that nether of
us is like to be barren; And as for your objection of Bigamy, (for his mother
had charged him with being contracted to the Lady Elizabeth Lucie) Let the
Bishop (says he) lay it to my charge when I come to take Orders, for I
understand it is forbidden a Priest, but I never wist it was forbidden a
Prince. Upon this marriage, the Queens Father was created Earl Rivers, and
made High-Constable of England; her brother the Lord Anthony, was married to
the sole Heir of the Lord Scales, and by her had that Barony; her Son sir
Thomas Gray was created Marquess Dorset, and married Cicelie, heir to the
Lord Bonvile. It may be thought a h^ppy fortune for this Lady to be thus
marched; but let all things be considered, and the miseries accruing to her by
it, will be found equivalent, if not over-weighing all the benefits: For first,
by this match she drew upon her self the envy of many, and was cause that her
Husband fled the Realm, and her self in his absence glad to take Sanctuary,
and in that place to be delivered of a Prince, in a most unprincely m^nner.
After which, surviving her husband, she lived to see her two Sons most
cruelly murdered; and for a conclusion of all, she lived to see her self
confined to the Monastery of Berdmondsey in Southwarke, and all her goods
confiscate by her own Son in Law.

And n^w the Earl of Warwick at his return, found that knot tied in England,
which he had labored to tie in France: His Embassage frustrated, the Lady Bona
deluded, the king of France abused, and himself made a stale, and the
disgraceful instrument of all this; which although he resented in a high
degree, yet he had not been a Courtier so long, but in that time he had
sufficiently learned the Art of dissembling; he passed it over lightly for the
present, but yet carried it in his mind till a fit opportunity; and thereupon
procures leave to retire himself to his Castle of Warwick.

King Edward in the mean time, having just cause to suspect he had made the
French his enemies, seeks to make other Princes his friends: He enters into a
League with John king of Aragon; to whom he sent for a Present a score of
Cotsall Ews, and ^ive Rams, a small Present in show, but great in the event;
for it proved of more benefit to Spain, and of more detriment to England than
could at first sight have been imagined. And to secure himself at home, he
took truce with the king of Scots for fifteen years. And where he had married
before his two Sisters, Anne the eldest to Henry Holland Earl of Exeter; and
Elizabeth to John de la Poole Duke of Suffolk; he now matched Margaret his
third Sister, to Charles Duke of Burgoigne; which proved a greater assistance
to him, than that which he had lost in France.

By this time the Earl of Warwickes spleen began so to swell within him, that
he could no longer contain it; and having with much ado drawn to his party
his two brothers, the Archbishop of York, and the Marquess Montacute; he
seek^ also to draw in the kings two brothers, the Duke of Clarence, and the
Duke of Gloucester; but he found Gloucester so reserved, that he durst not close
with him; the Duke of Clarence he found more open, and to him he addresseth
himself, complaining of the disgrace he had sustained by the king, in his
employment into France, and other wrongs: to whom the Duke presently made
answer, in as great complaint of his brothers unkindnesse to himself; saying,
he had married his Wives brother Anthony to the heir of the Lord Scales, and
her Son Thomas to the heir of the Lord Bo^vile, but could find no match of
preferment for him being his own brother: And upon this agreement in
complaints, they agree to join against king Edward; and to make the knot the
firmer, the Duke of Clarence takes to wife Isabel the Earl o^ Warwicks
Daughter, and with her has assured unto him half of the Lands the E^^l held
in right of his Wife, the Lady Anne, Daughter of Richard Beauchamp Earl of
W^rwicke deceased. Upon this marriage, the Earl of Warwick discovered to hi^
what hitherto he had concealed; concerning his project for the restoring of k.
H^nry; to which Clarence gave approbation, with promise to assist him in it to
his uttermo^^.

At this time, Sir Thomas Cook late Major of London, was by one Hawkins
appeached of Treason, for the which he was sent to the Tower, and his place in
London seized by the Lord Rivers. The case was this; the said Hawkins came to
Sir Thomas, requesting him to lend a thousand Marks upon good surety; who
answered, he would first know for whom it should be, and for what intent; and
understanding it should be for the use of Queen Margaret, he refused to lend a
penny. The matter rested two or three years, till the said Hawkins was laid in
the Tower, and brought to the Brake, called the Duke of Exeters Daughter; by
means of which pain, he confessed amongst other things, the motion he had
made to Sir Thomas Cook^, and accused himself so far, that he was put
death. Sir Thomas Cook lying in the Tower from Whitsuntide till Michaelmas,
had his place in Essex named Gyddihall, spoiled, his Dear in his Park
destroyed; and though arraigned upon life and death, he were acquitted of the
Indictment; yet could not be delivered till he had paid eight thousand pounds
to the king, and eight hundred to the Queen.

And now the Earl of Warwick sends to his brothers the Arcbbishop and the
Marquess, to prepare all things ready to set on foot the intended revolt from
king Edward, and to procure some rebellious commotion in the North, whilst he
and his new Son in law would provide to go forward with the work; which they
accordingly did in Yorkshire, an occasion being taken for the breach of an
ancient custom there, to give to the poor people of St. Leonards in the City
of York, certain quantities of Corn and Grain. This commotion the Archbishop
and the Marqu^sse underhand fomented; yet to color the matter, the Marquess
opposed the Rebels, and cut off the head of Robert Huldorne their Captain; but
his head being cut off, the Rebels got them other Captains; Henry, Son and heir
to the Lord Fi^zhugh, and sir Henry Nevill Son to the Lord Latimer; the one the
Neph^w, the other ^ Cozen-germane to the Earl of Warwick, with whom they
join the valiant Captain Sir John Conyers: These when they could not enter
York, came marching toward London, all the way exclaiming against king Edward
as an unjust Prince, and an usurper. King Edward hearing of this commotion,
sends Sir William Herbert, whom of a mean Gentleman, two years before, he had
made Earl of Pembrooke, and his brother sir Richard Herbert, together with the
Lord Stafford of Southwick to suppress the Rebels; and they with an Army of
seven thousand, most Welchmen, march toward them; but the Lord Stafford being
put from his Inn where he used ^o lodge, by the Earl of Pe^brooke, took such
a distaste at it, that he withdrew his Arche^s, and gave over the business;
yet the Earl of Pemb^ooke though thus for^^^en, with his own Regiment
encountered the Rebels, slew Sir Henry Nevill, and diverse others^ when being
upon the point of victory, one John Clappa^ a servant of the E^rle of
Warwick, coming in with five hundred rascally fellows, and crying aloud, a
W^rwicke, a Warwick; the Welchmen supposing the Earl had been (...), turned
presently their backs and fled; five thousand of them were slain, the E^^le of
Pembr^^ke himself, and his much lamented brother Sir Richard Herbert, a most
goodly personage, were taken prisoners, brought to Banbury, where both o^ th^^,
with ten other Gentlemen were put to death. And now the Northamptonshire men
joining with the Rebels, in this fury, made them a Captain named Robert
Hilla^d, but they named him Robin of Riddesdale, and suddenly came to Grafton,
where they took the Earl Rivers father to the Queen, and his son Sir John
Woodvile; brought them to Northampton, and there without Judgment beheaded
them. King Edward advertised of these mischances, wrote to the Sheriffs of
Somersetshire and D^v^^-shire to apprehend the Lord Stafford of Southwick,
(who had treacherously ^^^saken the Earl of Pembrooke) and if they could take
him, to put him to death; who being soon after found in a Village within
Brentmarsh, was brought to Bridge^a^er, and there beheaded. After this battle
fought at Hedgecote, commonly called B^^bury field, the Northern men resorted
to Warwick, where the Earl with great joy received them; and hearing that king
Edward with a great army was coming thither, he sent for his son in Law the
Duke of Clare^ce, with all speed to repair ^^to him; who joining together, and
using means cunningly, by having some co^^^nication of Peace, to make the king
secure, and to take little heed of himself^^ they took advantage of his
security, and in the dead of night set on his Camp, and killing the watch,
before the king was aware, at a place called Wolney four miles from Barwick,
they took him prisoner in his bed, and presently conveyed him to Middleham
Castle in Yorkshire, to be there in safe custody with the Archbishop of York.
And now they had the Prey in their hand, if they had as well looked to ke^p it,
as they had done to get it: but king Edward, whether bribing his Keepers, or
otherwise winning them by fair promises, got so much liberty, sometimes for
his re^reation to go a hunting; by which he caused Sir William Stanley, Sir
Thomas of (...) and diverse of his friends, at a certain time to meet him, who
took him from hi^ Keepers, and set him again at liberty: whilst the Earl of
Warwick nothing doubting his brother the Archbishops care in safe keeping him,
and thinking the brunt of the wars to be now past, dismissed his Army, and
intended only to find out King Henry^ who was kept a prisoner, but few men
knew where.

King Edward being now at liberty, posteth to York, and from thence to
Lanca^^e^; where his Chamberlain the Lord Hastings had raised some forces,
with which he marches to London, and is there joyfully received: The Earl of
Warwick likewise sends to his friends, and makes preparation for a new army;
whilst in the me^n time, by mediation of diverse Lords, an enterview in
Westminster Hall is agreed upon; and solemn Oath taken on both sides for
safety, between King Edward, the Duke of Clarence, and the Earl of Warwick;
but each party standing strictly upon terms tending to their own ends; they
parted as great Enemies as they met: and so from thence the K. went to
Canterbury, the Duke and the E. to Lincoln: whither they had preappointed
their forces to repair, under the Conduct of Sir Robert W^l^, Son and heir of
the L. Wels, a man of great valor and experience in the wars: K. E^^^rd, to
take off so able a man from the Earls part, sends for his Father the L. Wels
to come unto him; who taking with him, his Son in Law Sir Thomas Dymock, and
coming to attend the Kings pleasure, was told by his friends how wonderfully
the King was incensed against them: whereupon for their safety, they take
Sanctuary at Westmi^ster. But upon the Kings Princely word, they come unto him,
who comm^ndeth the Lord Wells to write to his Son, to desist from adhering to
the Ea^le of Warwick, which the Lord Wells accordingly did: but Sir Robert
Wells notwiths^^nding his Fathers letters, continuing firm to ^he Earl still,
so much incensed King Edward, that he caused both his Father and Sir (...)
Dymock to be behe^ded. He supposed perhaps, that the Lord W^lls was himself
underhand a friend to the Earl, and had not dealt sincerely with him, in
procuring his Son to leave that party. But now Sir Robert Wells seeing the
King draw near to Stamford, where he had pitched his Tents, and hearing of his
Fathers beheading, was much distracted what to do: to decline b^ttell with the
King, he thought would show too much fear; and ^o give him battle before the
E^rle of Warwick were come with his forces, would show too much boldness; But
his Veins were so filled with a desire of revengi^^ his Fathers death, that he
thought he could never show boldness enough; and thereupon encountering with
the Kings Army, far greater ^hen his own, oppressed with multitude was taken
prisoner, together with Sir Thomas de L^^d and diverse others; who presently in
the place were put to execution: as soon as Sir Robert W^ll^ was taken, the
Lincolneshir^ men to make themselves the lighter to run away, threw off their
Coats, for which cause, this battle was afterward called L^se-^oate-field, in
which, it is reported, were slain above ten thousand men.

The Earl of Warwick (...) of this De^eate, and not having present (...) raise
an army sufficient to oppose king Edward^ when he could by no means dr^^ the
Lord Stanley to his party, he determined to sail into Fr^^c^, and hyring ships
at Dartmouth in Dev^^^^ire, he with his son in Law the Duke of Clarence,
(...) their wives, took to Sea; and thinking to land at C^lli^e, of which Town
he hims^^^^ was Captain, he was by the Lord V^^cleere a Gascoigne, whom he had
left his Deputy there, repelled; and with so great inhumanity, that the
Duchess of Clar^^^^ who was then in labor, was feign to be delivered in the
ship, (all the courtesy (...) th^^ distress showed, was only to send a
flaggon or two of wine,) which fact of V^^cleeres when king Edward heard of, he
was so well pleased with it, that he presently sent him a Patent to be Captain
of the Town himself: and the Duke of (...) for the same service, sent unto him
Philip de Comi^es (who has written the History of these times) with a grant of
one thousand Crowns pension during his life. Never man was beter paid for one
act of di^sembling; for the truth was, Prae (...) excl^sit for^^, it was out of
his love, that he suffered him not to enter the Town, for he knew there were
many great ones in it so addicted to king Edward, and so maliciously bent
against the Earl, that if he or any of his company should have come, they
would in all likelihood have done them some mischief: And hereof he made a
good proof soon after: for when the Earl took to sea again, the Lord (...)
sent him word, he should take heed where he landed; for that the Duke of (...)
lay in wait to take him; which advertisement did the Earl more good, then the
keeping him out of Callice did him hurt. The Earl upon this advertisement,
^^^ded at D^epe in Nor^a^die, whereof when king Lewis heard, he sent and
invited him to come to his Court at Amboi^, where he received him with no less
honor, than ^f he had been a king. In the mean time king E^^ard made enquiry
for all such as were ayders to the Earl of Warwick^ of whom some were
apprehended as guilty, some fled to Sanctuary, and some submitted to the kings
mercy; as John Marquess Mo^^^cute, whom he courteously received. Queen
Margare^, who at this time sojourned with Duke Rayner her father, hearing of
the Earl of Warwicks arrival, with her Son Prince Edward, came to Ambois, and
with her also came Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, and John Earl of Oxford, lately
escaped out of prison and fled into France; between whom a new Combination is
made; and for a foundation of firm ami^ie, king He^ries son Prince Edward,
marries Anne the Earl of Warwicks second daughter: after which marriage, the
Duke of Clarence and the Earls took a solemn Oath, never to leave the war
till either king Henry or his sonnne Prince Edward were restored to the Crown^
But notwithstanding this Oath, this marriage put new thoughts into the Duke of
Clarence his mind, casting with himself that the issue of it could be no
less then the utter extirpation of the house of York: whereupon, making fair
show still to his Father in Law the Earl of Warwick, he underhand falls off,
and secretly gives advertisement to his brother king Edward of all their
proceedings. And now the Earl of Warwick having been six months in France;
in this time he had (...) from the king of France, both ships, and men, and
money, and receiving (...) out of England, that many Lords and others were
ready to adventu^e their lives in his qua^rell, if he would come, (for the
people generally held him in such (...), that they thought the Sun was taken
from the world, when he was (...) and this in great part for his great
Hospi^ality, who it is said, used to spend ^spam^ a breakf^st) he with the
Earls of Oxford and Pembrooke took to (...); and though the Duke of B^rgoigne
had a Fle^^ at sea, to in^ercept him; ye^ his Fleet be^^g by ^empest scattered,
and king Edw^rd ^rusting to that Flee^, having provided no other^ the Earl had
a quiet passage to land at Dar^mouth in Devonshire, where being landed, he made
Proclamation in king Henry the six^h^ name, that all good Subj^ct^ should
prep^re to fight against king Edward, who contrary to Right had usurpe^ ^he
Crown: Upon which Proclamation, it is scarce to be believed, how many tho^^^nds
of men resorted to him; with which fo^ces, he made towar^s London: upon notice
of whose approach, on the Sunday next after (...) day, one Doctor G^ddard a
Chaplain of Hi^, preaching at Paul^ Cross^, did so s^t fo^th his Earls pious
intention, that many of his auditory were moved to favor the Earl:
proceeding: insomuch, that the M^rquesse Montacu^e, who had in king Edwards
beh^lf, (...) six thousand men about London, found them all inclinable to go
with him (...) the Earl of Warwick, and accordingly w^nt and joined with him.
King Ed^^rd h^^ring of the great flocking of people to the Earl, sent forth
letters into all parts of the Realm for raising an army; but few came, and
those few, with no great good will: which when he perceived, he began to doubt
his case; and thereupon ^^co^panied with the Duke of Gloucester his brother, the
L. Hastings his Chamber^^^^^, (who having married the Earl of VVarwick^
sister, yet continued ever true to (...) Edward) and the Lord Scales brother to
the Queen; he departed into Li^col^shire, and c^mming to Lyn, he found there an
English Ship, and two Hul^s of Holland ready to make sail: whereupon he, with
the forenamed Lords, and about seven or (...) hundred persons entered the Ship,
having no provision with him but only the apparel they wore; and so bare of
money, that he was feign to reward the Master of (...) Ship with one of his
Garments: and thus making course toward the Duke of (...) Country, they were
presently chased by eight great Ships of Easterlings, op^n Enemies both to
England and France; which drove him before a Town in the Country called
Alquemare, belonging to the Duke of Burgoigne: where by ch^nce, the Lord
Grunture Governor of that Country, at that time was, who defended them from
the Easterlings, and brought them to the H^ge in Holland, where they had all
things ministered to them, by order from the Duke of Burgoigne.

At this time, upon news of the Earl of VVarwick^ approach, Queen Eliz^beth
fo^saketh the Tower, and secretly takes sanctuary at Westminster, where in
great p^nury forsaken of all her friends, she was brought a bed of a son
called Edward, who like a poor man's child was Christened; the Godfathers
being the Abbot and P^y^r of Westminster, and the Lady Scroope Godmother.

And now the Earl of Warwick entering the Tower, removes king Henry out of his
hold of durance, where he had been almost nine years, into his own lodging,
where he was served according to his Estate; which the Ear^e did more
congratulate, then the king himself. Upon this sixth day of October, king
Henry accompanied with ^he Archbishop of York, the Pryor of S. John's, the
Bishop of London, the Duke of Cl^rence, the Earl of Warwick and other
Noblemen, apparelled in a long gown of ^lew Velvet, was conducted through
London, ^o the Bishops Palace where he rested ^ill the thirteenth of that
month, on which day he went in solemn proces^^^^ about Paul^ Church, wearing
his Imperial Crown; the Earl of War^ick bearing up his train; and the Earl
o^ Oxford the sword before him. The next day, in all usual places about
London, king Edward was Proclaimed an Usurper, (...) all his partakers Traitors
to God and the king; whereof John Lord Tip^of^ Earl of Worcester, as a
partaker with king Edward, was made the first example. Thi^ Lord had been
Lieutenant for King Ed^ard in Ireland, where having done something (...) which
he fled, he was afterward found on the top of a high Tree, in the Forres^ of
VV^^bridge, in the County of (...) and being there taken, was brought to
London, Attain^ed, and (...) the Tower hill, and after buried at the
Blackfry^rs.

About this time happen^^ (...) to be related: Sir Willi^^ H^^kesford knight^
one of (...) Jus^i^^s ^t the L^w^ who dwelt at Anno^y in D^vo^s^ire, a man of
great (...), and ^^ving no son, ^he Lord Fitz^a^re^, Si^ Io^^ S^^^^eger, and
Sir Willi^^ (...) m^rried his d^ughte^^, and were his heires^ This m^n grew
into such ^ deg^^^ of Melancholy^ that one (...) he called to him the Keeper of
hi^ Part, ch^^ging him (...) n^gligence, in suffering his Dear to be stolen:
and thereupon comm^nded him, that if he met any man in his circuit in the
nighttime, that would not stand or (...) he should not spar^ to kill him
whatsoever he were^ The knight having th^^ la^d hi^ found^tion, and meaning to
end his doleful days; in ^ certain dark night se^^^^ly conveyed himself out
of his house, and walked alone in his P^r^. The Keeper in hi^ night-walk
^e^ring one stirring, and coming towa^ds him, asked, who was there? but no
answer being made, he willed him to stand^ which when he would not do, the
Keeper shot and k^lled him, and coming to see who he was, fo^^d him to be hi^
Master.

On the twentieth d^y of (...), a P^rli^ment is held at VVestmi^ster, wherein
King Edward and all his p^rtak^^^ ^re ^ttain^ed of high Treason, and al^ their
Lands and Goods seized on to King (...) use. Ge^^ge Pl^^t^gene^ Duke of
Clarence, is by authority of this Parliament, adjudged heir to Richard Duke of
York his father, and that Duchy settled upon him and his heirs,
notwithstanding the Primogeniture of Edward: upon him also wa^ entailed the
Crown of England, in case heirs males of the body of King Henry f^iled. Jasper
Earl of Pembrooke, and John Earl of Oxford, are fully restored ^o their Lands
and Honour^ and VVa^wick and Cl^rence are made Governors of the King and
kingdome^ To this Parliament came the M^rquesse Montacute, e^cusing himself,
that ^or ^eare of death he had taken King Edwards part, which excuse was
accepted. Que^n Margaret i^ sent for into France, but by reason of contrary
winds was kept back all that Winter.

About this time, Jasper Earl of Pembrooke going into Wales to view his lands
in Pembrookeshire, found there the Lord Henry, borne of Margaret the only
daughter and heir of John the first Duke of Som^rset, not being then full ten
years of age, kept in manner like a captive, but honorably brought up by the
Lady Herbert; him he brings with him to London, and p^esents him to King Henry;
whom when the King had a good while beheld, he said to the Lords about him:
Lo, this is he, to whom both we and our adversaries, leaving the possession of
all things, shall hereafter give place. Which if it be true, It shows a very
Prophetical Spirit to have been in King Henry; that could so long before^
foretell a thing so unlikely to happen: for this was he, that was afterward
King H^^ry the Seventh, before whom at that time there were many lives in
being, of both the hous^^ of York and L^ncaster.

Shortly after this, by the Duke of Burgoignes means, King Edward is furnished
with eighteen tall ships, two thousand Dutchmen, and fifty thousand florens of
gold; and thus furnished, he took to Sea, and landed at Ravenspurre in
Yorkshire, where he found but cold entertainment; nevertheless he made a wary
march to York, where likewise he found no great expression of welcome, so as
he was forced to change his pretense, swearing deeply and receiving the
Sacrament upon it, that he came not to disturb King Henry, but only to recover
his own inheritance; and for the more show thereof, wearing an Estrich^
feather, Prince Edwards livery; which ^roposition seemed so ^easonable, that
many who resisted him before, were as ready to assist him now: and if he be
blamed for breaking his Oath; it must be considered, It was Reg^i causa, to
recover his Kingdom, which perhaps was the Inheritance he meant, when he took
his Oath, that he intended nothing, but to recover his Inheritance: and so he
brake not his Oath neither. From York he marched toward Wakefi^ld and
Sendall, leaving the Castle of Pomfret upon his left hand^ where the Marquess
Montacute with his Army lay, but did not offer to stop him: From Wakefield he
came to Do^caster, and from thence to Nottingham, where there came to him Sir
William Parre and Sir James Harrington with six hundred men; also Sir Thomas
Burgh and Thomas Montgomery with their aids, who caused him to make
Proclamation in his own name: affirming ^hey would serve no man but a King.
From Nottingham he came to Leicester, where three thousand able men, and well
armed came unto him: From Leicester he came before the walls of Coventry; into
which City the Earl of Warwick had withdrawn himself, keeping himself close
therein, with his people, being about six or seven thousand men; three days
together king Edward provoked him to come forth to battle; but he stayed for
more forces, and would not do it: whereupon King Edward marched forward to
Warwick eight miles from Coventry, thinking thither at least he should have
drawn the Earl of Warwick, but neither would that do it: Indeed the Earl
looked for the coming of the Duke of Clarence, with twelve thousand men to
join with him, but that expectation proved vain, for the Duke was now fully
reconciled to his Brother King Edward, and brought all his forces to join with
him; only he sought to make amity between King Edward and the Earl: but
though King Edward offered general Pardon, and other fair conditions; yet
none would please the Earl, without restoring of King Henry. But now to
repair the defection of the Duke of Clarence, there came to the Earl of
Warwick at Coventry; the Earl of Oxford, the Duke of Exceter, and the
Marquess Montacute, by whose coming that side was not a little strengthened;
yet all this aid would not make the Earl of Warwick to come to battle:
whereupon King Edward marched forward toward London: Both sides seek to make
London their friend; the Earl of Warwick sends to his brother the Archbishop
of York to labor in it; who thereupon caused king Henry to mount on h^^seback,
and to ride from Pa^ls through Cheap down Walbrooke, supposing that this
showing of the king, would have allured the Citizens to assist him: but this
device prevailed little, brought not in above seven or eight thousand men, a
small proportion to withstand king Edward; and when the Archbishop of York saw
this backwardnes in the Citizens, or rather indeed an inclination to king
Edward, he secretly sent to him, to receive him into grace; which upon Promise
to continue faithful hereafter, he obtained. The eleventh of April in the year
1471, and the eleventh of his Reign, king Edward made his entry into the City
of London, ryding first to Paul's Church, and from thence to the Bishops Palace,
where the Archbishop of York presented himself unto him, and having king Henry
by the hand, delivered him to king Edw^rd (six months after his readeption of
the Crown) and then king Edward being seized of his person, went from Paul's to
Westminster, and there gave God most hearty thanks for his safe return. The
reasons alleged hereby Philip Comines for the Citizens receiving of king
Edward, seem scarce worthy of so good an Author: one cause (says he) was,
because king Edward being extremely indebted in the City, if they had not
received him, they should have lost their debt; another, because he had won the
love of many Citizens wives, who importuned their husbands to receive him.

The Earl of Warwick having intelligence that king Edward was received into
London, and king Henry delivered into his hands; marched out and encamped at
St. Alban^, and after some refreshing of his Army, removed toward Barnet, and
in a large plain there, called Gl^dmore heath, pitched his Camp; which king
Edward hearing, on Easter Eve the thirteenth of April, he marched forth, and
came that evening to Barnet, where he would not suffer a man of his Army to
stay in the town, but commanded them all to the field, and lodged with his Army
more near to the Enemy then he was aware, by reason of a Mist, (raised some
say, by one Bungey a Conjurer) which made it so dark, that it could not be
well observed where they were encamped. In taking his ground, he caused his
people to keep as much ^i^ence as was possible, thereby to keep the enemy from
knowing of their approach^ Great Artillery they had on both parts, but the
Earl more then the King; and therefore in the night time, they shot from his
Camp almost continually, but did little hurt, because they still overshot
them, as lying nearer then was conceived. On Easter Day, ^arly in the Morning,
both Armies are ordered for battle; The Earl of Warwick appointed the
Command of the Right wing, which consisted of Horse, to his brother the
Marquess Montacute, and the Earl of Oxford; The Left wing consisting likewise
of horse, was led by himself and the Duke of Exceter; and the main Battle
consisting of Bills and Bows, was conducted by the Duke of Somerset. On the
kings part, the Vaward was commanded by the Duke of Gloucester; the battle (in
which was king Henry) was led by king Edward himself; and the Lord H^stings
brought on the Reere. After exhortations for encouragement of their S^uldiers,
the fight began; which with great valor was maintained by the space of six
hour^s, without any apparent disadvantage on either side; only the Earls
Vaward, by the valiancy of the Earl of Oxford, seemed somewhat to over-match
the kings; which made some flying toward London to carry news, that the Earl
of Warwick had won the field; and he had perhaps done so indeed, but for a
strange misfortune which happened to the Earl of Oxford and his men; for they
having a Star with streams on their liveries, as king Edwards men had the
Sun, the Earl of Warwicks men, by reason of the Mist, not well discerning
the badges so like, shot at ^he Earl of Oxfords men, that were on their part:
whereupon the Earl of Oxford cried, Treason! and fled with eight hundred men.
At length after great slaughter made on both side^, king Edward having the
greater number of men, (as some write, though other say the contrary) caused a
new power of fresh men (which he had kept of purpos^) to come on: which the
Earl of Warwick observing, being a man of an invincible courage, nothing
dismayed, rushed into the midst of his enemies, where he adventured so ^arre,
that amongst the preasse he was stricken down and slain. (Though some write,
that the Earl seeing the desperate estate of his Army, leapt on a horse to
fly; and coming to a Wood where was no passage, one of king Edwards men came
to him, killed him, and spoiled him to the naked skin.) The Marquess
Montacute, thinking to succor his brother, lost likewise his life, and left
the Victory to king Edward. On both sid^s were slain, as Hall says, ten
thousand at the least; Fabian says, but fifteen hundred, but then he means
only of the kings side. Upon the kings part were slain the Lord Cromwell, the
Lord Say, the Lord Montjoyes Son and heir, Sir Humfry Bo^rchier son and
heir to the Lord Berners, and diverse other knights and gentlemen. On the Earls
part were slain, the Earl himself, the Marqu^ss^ Montacute, and three and
twenty knights, of whom Sir William Tyrrell was one. The Duke of Somerset, and
the Earl of Oxford fled into Wales, to Jasper Earl of Pembro^ke. The Duke of
Exceter being stricken down, and so wounded that he was left for dead, amongst
other the dead bodies, because he was not k^own; but coming to himself, he
got up, and escaped to Westminster, and there took Sanctuary. The dead bodies
of the Earl and Marquess were brought to London in a Coffin, and by the space
of three days lay open-faced in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, and then
buried with their Ancestors, in the Priory of Bissam. This Earl of Warwick
was Richard Nevill, son and heir of Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury, who
married the daughter of Richard Beauchamp the sixth Earl of Warwick, and in
her right was Earl of Warwick, in his own, of Sali^bury: he was also Lord
Monthermer, great Chamberlain, and high Admiral of England, Lord Warden of
the North Marches toward Scotland, and high Steward of the Duchy of
La^caster: he had issue two Daughters, Isabell married to George Duke of
Clarence; and Ann^, ^^rst married to Prince Edward king Henry the sixths Son,
and after to Richard Duke of Gloucester.

We may here observe a Constellation of disastrous influences, concurring all
to the overthrow of this great Warwick; whereof, if any one had been missing,
the wheel of his fortune had perhaps not turned: For if the City of York had
not too credulously believed king Edwards Oath, not to d^sturbe king Henry; or
if the Marquess Mo^tacute had stopped (as he might) his passage at Pomfret; or
if the Duke of Clarence had not at the very point of the battle at St. Albans,
deserted his party and joined with king Edwards^ or if Qu^en Margaret had not
by tempest been kept from coming into E^gla^d in time; or if the Londoners had
not been retrograde and deceived his expectation, he had never perhaps been
overthrown as he was: But Fata viam invenient; destiny will find ways that
were never thought of, will make way where it finds none; and that which is
ordained in heaven, shall be effected by means of which Earth can take no
notice.

Queen Margaret, when it was too late, accompanied with John Longstrother Prior
of Saint John's, and the Lord Wenlock, with diverse Knights and Esquires took
shipping at Harflew, the four and twentieth of March, but by tempest was kept
back till the thirteenth of April; and then with her son Prince Edward, she
landed at Weymouth, and from thence went to an Abbey hard by called Ceern, and
then to Bewly in Hampshire, whither there came unto her Edmund Duke of
Somerset, and Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire, with diverse others; amongst
whom, it is resolved once more to try their fortune in the field; but then the
Queen would have had her son Prince Edward to be sent into France, there to
remain in safety, till the next battle were tried; but they being of a
contrary mind, and specially the Duke of Somerset, she at length consented,
though afterward she repented it. From Bewly she with her son and the Earl
of Somerset passes on to Bristow, intending with what power they could raise
in Glocestershire, to march into Wales, to join with I^sper Earl of Pembrooke,
who was there making preparation of more forces. King E^ward hearing of these
things, resolves to cross this Conjunction, and follows Queen Margaret with a
great Power so close, that near Tewkesbury in Glocestershire he overtakes her
forces, who resolutely turn and make head against him; where Somerset, on the
Queens part, leading the Vaunt-guard, performed the part of a valiant
Commander; but finding his soldiers thro^gh wearines begin to faint, and that
the Lord Wenlock, who had the conduct of the battle on the Queens part, moved
no, the rode unto him, and upbrayding him with cowardice or treachery, never
staid, but with his Pollaxe beat out his brains; and now before he could bring
in his men to the rescue, their Vaward was routed, and John Earl of
Devonshire, with above three thousand of the Queens part were slain: The Queen
her self, John Beaufort the Duke of Somersets brother, the Prior of Saint
John's, Sir Gervis Clifton and diverse others were taken prisoners; all which
except the Queen, were the next day beheaded. At which time Sir Richard Crofts
presented to king Edward king Henry's Son Edward, whom he had taken prisoner;
to whom king Edward at first showed no uncourteous countenance; but demanding
of him, how he durst so presumptuously enter into his Realm with Arms? and he
answering, though truly, yet unseasonably, To recover my Fathers Kingdom and
Heritage; King Edward with his hand thrust him from him, or (as some say)
struck him with his Gantlet, and then presently George Duke of Clarence,
Richard Duke of Gloucester, Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset, and William Lord
Hastings standing by, fell upon him in the plac^, and murdered him. His body was
homely interred with other ordinary Corpses, in the Church of the Monastery of
the Blackfriars in Tewkesbury. After the Victory thus obtained, king Edward
repaired to the Abbey Church of Tewkesbury, to give God thanks for his good
success; and finding there a great number of his enemies, that were fled
thither to save themselves, he gave them all free Pardon; only Edmuud Duke of
Somerset, (...) Longstrother Pryor of Saint John's, Sir Thomas Tressham, Sir
Gervi^ Clifton and diverse other Knights and Esquires, who were apprehended
there, and brought before the Duke of Gloucester, sitting that day as Constable
of England, and the Duke of Norfolk as Marshall, were all arraigned, condemned
and judged to Dye, and accordingly upon the Tuesday being the seventh of May,
they were all, and twelve other knights more, on a Scaffold set up in the
middle of the Town, beheaded, but not dismembred^ and permitted to be buried.
The same day Queen Margaret was found in a poor house of Religion, not far
from thence, into which she was fled for safeguard of her life; but she was
after brought to London, and there kept a Prisoner, till her Father ransomed
her with great sums of money. This was the last pitched battle that was
fought in England, in king Edward the fourths days, which happened on the
fourth of May, being Saturday, in the Eleventh year of his reign, and in the
year of our Lord 1471.

King Edward being assured, that as long as any partakers of king Henry lived
and were at liberty, he should never be free from plots against his life; sent
Roger Vaugha^, a Gentleman much reckoned of in his own Country, to entrape
Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, who had escaped from the last encounter: but he
having notice of the plot before, prevented it by striking off Vaughans head.

After these great Clouds were thus dispersed, there arose a little Cloud,
which gave the Realm, at least the City of London no small disquiet. For now,
Thomas bastard Fa^conbridge, who had been employed by the Earl of Warwick to
scowre the Seas, hearing of these defeats; having enriched himself by Piracy,
gathered together an Army of seventeen thousand men, and coming to London,
imp^riously commanded admission into the City, and releasement of King Henry
out of prison: but being denied entrance, and hearing that king Edward with a
great power was coming toward him, he brings up his shipping to Saint
Katherines, and taking with him his most desperate men, with them he marches
to Kingston-bridge, but finding that bridge broken down, and all the places of
passage guarded, he withdrew his forces into Saint Georges field, from whence
he prepared to assault the City of London; for the effecting whereof, he landed
all his ship Ordinance, and planted them all along the Banks-side, with which
he battered down many houses, and much annoyed the City; but the Citizens on
the other side, lodged their great Artillery against their Adversaries, with
which they so galled them, that they durst not abide in any pla^e along the
water side, but were driven even from their own Ordinance: Then he appointed
his men to set fire on the bridge, and withal caused three thousand to pass
over the Thames, and some of them to assault Aldgate, and some Bishopsgate, but
were in all places, by the industry of the Citizens repelled, and chiefly by
Robert Basset and Ralph Iocelyne Aldermen: Upon this he retired to Black Heath
and there encamped by the space of three days; but then hearing that king
Edward was commming with a great Army, he got him to his ship, but the rest
fled some one way, some another. The one and twentieth of May, the king coming
to London, thanked the Citizens for their pains and care, and dubbed the Major,
the Recorde^ Vrsewicke, and B^sset and Iocelyne Aldermen, Knights.

And now the time was come for king Henry to be delivered out of all his
troubles; for the bloody Duke of Gloucester entering the Tower, where he found
king Henry, nothing at all troubled with all his Crosses, struck him into the
heart with his Dagger and there slew him. And now we have had within the space
of half a year, one Parliament Proclaming king Edward an Usurper, and king
Henry a lawful king; and another Proclaming king Edward a lawful king, and
king Henry an Usurper: that we may know in humane affairs, there is nothing
certain, but uncertainty; nothing stable, but instability.

King Edward presently after the inte^rment of king Henry, draws his forces
toward ^andwich in Kent, where some of the followers of F^uconbridge, to the
number of eight or nine hundred, had in the Castle there strongly fortified
themselves, but upon their asking Pardon and submitting themselves to the king,
with promise to be faithful Subjects ever after, they had their Pardon granted
them, and then they delivered up both Castle and Ships to the number of
thirteen, to the kings use. But how this Composition was observed, may be
imagined; when Fauconbridge who was comprised in the same Pardon, was afterward
taken and executed at Southampton Spicing and Quintine the Captains that
affailed Aldgate and Bishopsgate, and were in Sandwich Castle, at the surrender
thereof; were presently beheaded at Canterbury, and their heads placed on
poles, upon those gates: and by a Commission of Oyre and Te^miner, many both in
Essex and Kent, were arraigned and condemned for this Rebellion, and more fined.

And now king Edward, desiring to be secured from all suspected persons, sent
the Archbishop of York, brother to the Earl of Warwick, over to Guisnes,
there to be kept in safe custody; and there he remained a long time, till at
length by friendship he was delivered, and shortly after dyed. Likewise John
Earl of Oxford, who after Barnet Field yielded himself to king Edward, had
his life pardoned; but yet was sent over sea to the Castle of H^mmes, where for
the space of twelve years he was shut up in strong prison, and narrowly looked
too. As for the Earls of Pembrooke and Richmond, who were fled out of the
Realm, to the Duke of Britain, king Edward sent to the Duke, requiring to
have them delivered up unto him, upon promise of great rewards; to which the
Duke made answer, that he could no^ with his honor deliver them up, whom he
had taken into his Protection; but that for king Edwards sake, he would take
such care of them, that he should need to take no care for them; and to that
end, he sequestered their own servants from them, and appointed Britains to
attend upon them.

It was now the thirteenth year of king Edwards reign; in which a Parliament
was called at Westminster: wherein all acts formerly made by him, are confirmed
or revived; and all their Lands and Goods confiscated, that had taken part
against him and were fled and all their lands and goods restored to such as had
taken part with him.

King Edward being destined to be always in troubles; now that he had
quietness at home, was drawn into new broils abroad; for the Duke of
Burgoigne at this time having wars with France, thought he could no way make
a better harvest to himself, then by sowing seeds of dissension between France
and England; and to this end, he sends Ambassadors to king Edward, to
solicit him to set on foot his Title to the Crown of France; making great
offers, with Protestation to assist him in it, both with Purse and Person. This
proposition being seriously debated by the Kings Privy Counsel, is at last
approved of, as being both lawful and behovefull, for the honor of the King,
and good of the kingdom. Only means to bear the charges of the war, were
wanting; to supply which by a Parliamentary course, would ask too much time: a
new course therefore is devised, to procure money from the Subject by way of
Benevolence; and this course was taken.

About this time, Henry Holland Duke of Exceter and Earl of Huntington,
dis-inherited by Act of Parliament, in the fourth year of this King, (though he
had married King Edwards Sister; yet grew to so great misery, that passing over
into Flanders, he was there forced all ragged and barefoot to beg his bread:)
was found dead, and stripped naked, between Dover and Callice: but how he came to
his death, no enquiry could bring to light.

Provision for this French expedition being thoroughly made; and order taken for
the quiet government of the kingdom in his absence, and the stop of
incursions, if any by the Scots should be made: King Edward with an Army of
fifteen hundred men at arms, all of the Nobility and Gentry, fifteen thousand
Archers on horseback, eight thousand Common soldiers, and three thousand
Pioners, came down to Dover; whither the Duke of Burgoigne had sent five
hundred flat bottomed boats, to transport the Horse to Callice; yet for all
that help, it was two and twenty days before the kings forces were all past
over. Before the kings departure from Dover, (to the end he might not seem to
surprise him) he sent an Herald named Garter, a Norman by birth, with a letter
of Defiance to the French king, (so well written, says Co^^^^s, that he
thought it not of any English man's enditing; as though Englishmen could not
endite as well as the French) Requiring him to yield unto him the Crown of
F^^^ce, his unquestionable Inheritance; which if he should dare to deny, ^e
(...) then endeavor to recover it by the Sword. This letter the French king
read and thereupon withdrawing himself, caused the Herald to be brought to
his presence^ to whom in private he gave this answer: That the Duke of
Burgoigne and the Earl of Saint Paul the Constable, (by whose instigation, he
knew the king of E^gland was drawn to this Design) would but delude him, for
that they were Dissembler^ and Impostors; and therefore said, It would conduce
more to the honor of the king of (...) to continue in League with him, though
an old Adversary; then to hazard the fortune of the wars, upon the promised
assistance of new-come Dec^ivers^ and so commend me (says he) to the king thy
Master, and say what I have told ^he^; and then with an honorable reward of
three hundred Crowns, dismissed him: The Herald promised to do all that in him
lay, and (beyond his Commission) shew^d the French king ways, (by working upon
the Lords Howard and Stanley) by which he might enter into a Treaty for Peace,
which he doubted not, would sort to a good Conclusion. The French king glad to
he^r it, gave the Herald, besides the other reward, ^ piece of Crimson Velvet
of thirty yards long; and withal sent to king E^ward the goodliest Horse he
had in his Stable, as also an A^^e, a Wolph, and a wild^ ^ore, bea^ts at that
time rare in England: and then the Herald returning to Callice, delivered to
king Edward the French kings ^nswer.

And now to make good the French kings a^^egation to the Herald; the Duke o^
Burgoigne, who had promised in the word of a Prince, to bring to Callice by
this time, two thousand Lances and four thousand Seradiots or ^ight horse,
failed to come: whereupon the Lord Scales is by king E^ward sent to the Duke,
to put him in mind of his promise, and to ha^ten his coming with his promised
forces: But the journey was to little purpose; only it occasioned the Duke
with a small ^roop of horse to come to ^he king, formally to excuse himself
for having been so backward; but the cause (he said) was, for that having been
imbroiled in the siege of N^z, he could not depart thence without infinite
disgrace, if neither composition nor submission were enforced; which now
notwithst^nding^ because he would not too much trespass upon his pat^ence, he
was enforced to do, by the ob^t^nacy of the besieged: but promised to supply
all defects, both with his presence and power, and that speedily. The Constable
likewise by his letter persuades the king of England to proceed in the action,
and not to doubt both from the Duke and himself, to be sufficiently every way
accommodated.

King Edward thus encouraged, passes on, but in his way found no performance
of promises, either on the Dukes or Constables part; for the Duke did not
accommodate the soldiers at their coming to Pero^^^, with victuals or lodging
in such manner as was requisite and expected; and the Constable in stead of
surrendering up Saint (...) according to agreement, made a sa^ly out upon such
as were sent from the king of E^gla^d to take possession, and played upon them
with his great Ordinance; whereupon k. Ed^ard began to suspect the truth of the
French k. description of the Dukes and Constables conditions; and from thence
forward stood upon his own guard, and gave no further credit to their
Protestation; which the Duke of Burgoig^e resenting, pretended occasions for
the hasting forward his forces^ and promising speedy return together with them,
takes his leave and departs, which did not a little increa^e the kings
suspicion.

The French king having intelligence of the Duke of Burgoignes departure,
forecasting the danger, if they should unite their forces; resolved with
himself, to (...) what might be done to mediate a Peace in the Dukes absence;
and yet so to (...), that if it took not effect, he might disclaim the
knowledge of the overture: whereupon he privately dispatcheth a messenger, in
show an Herald; but was indeed^ fellow of no o^^ice or estimation, and not
known to any of the Kings household, but to Villiers the Master of the Horse,
who only was acquainted with the plot and party. This counterfeit Pursuivant at
Arm^, with a coat made of a Trumpets Banne^towle, addressed himself to the
king of E^gla^d, and upon admission to his pesence, insinuates the French Kings
desire, which was, to have Commissioners on both parts assigned, to confer of
the means to reconcile the differences between the two Kings; or at least to
conclude a cessation from arms for some time: And so well this Messenger
delivered his errand, that it was credited, and the kings request grant^d; and
thereupon letters of safe conduct, are sent of both sides, for such
Commissioners as to this purpose should meet at A^ye^s. For king Edward, came
the Lord Ho^^^d, Sir A^tho^y Se^tleger, and Doctor Mor^on, after made Lord
Chancelour of E^gla^d. For king Lewis, came the Admiral of France, the Lord
Saint Piers, and Heberg ^^shop of E^reux. After long Conference, Articles of
Peace were concluded on ^o this effect: That the French king should pay
presently to the king of E^gla^d, threescore and fifteen thousand Crowns, and
from thence forth, annually, fifty thous^nd Crowns, during the life of king
Edward: That within one year, the French king should send for the Lady (...)
the king of Englands daughter, and join her in marriage to the Dolphin: That
the Lord How^rd, and Sir John Cheyney Master of the Horse, should remain in
hostage there, till the English army had quitted France, and ^ general peace
for nine yeer^; wherein the Dukes of Burgoigne and Britt^^^e, are ^^cluded, if
they will accept thereof: This Conclusion was the more easily compassed, by the
king of France his following the Herauld^ Counsel; for he distributed sixteen
thousand Crowns amongst king Edwards Counselors and Favorites; two thousand
Crowns to the Lord Hastings the kings Chamberlain, and to the Lord (...), Sir
John Cheyn^y, Sir Anthony Sentleger, and Mo^^gomery, the residue; besides great
store of Plate and Jewels, distributed amongst inferior Officers of the Court.
The Duke of Gloucester only opposed this accord, as not suiting with his
design; Nevertheless it proceeded, and not^ce thereof is presently sent to
the Duke of (...); who thereupon only with fifteen horse, comes posting to the
English Camp, whom king Edward persuades to enter into the peace, according to
the reservation; but he in a great chafe, reproacheth king Edward for entering
into it himself; saying, that his predecessors had by many brave exploits
gotten fame and rep^tation upon the French; and now he had brought his
soldiers only to show them the Country, and return as they came; adding
withal, that to make it appe^^e he was able without help of the English to
subsist of himselfe^ he utterly discl^^med any benefit by that Truce, until
three months after the English were re^^^ned to their own Country; and so in a
great snuff returned home.

For the better Confirmation of what wa^ agreed upon between the two kings, an
(...) is desired; but before the same is e^^ectua^ed, the French king sends to
the Eng^^sh army an hundred Tonne of Gascoigne wine, to be drunk out amongst
the priv^^e ^ouldiers, and therewithal, free license for Commanders and
Gentlemen to recreate themselves in Amye^s, where they were lovingly
entertained by the Burgers of the Town, by the kings express command. The
place of enterview of these two (...) is agreed on to be at Picquency, a Town
three miles distant from Am^e^s, seated in ^ ^ottome, through which the river
of Some runs, over which a strong bridge was bu^^t, and in the midst thereof
a gra^e made overthwart with ^artes, no wider (...) than a man might well
thrust in his arm; covered with boardes overhead^ to avoid the rain^foure of
the Bedchamber on both sides, are appointed to search the room^, to prevent
traps of instrumen^^ of treachery: and being by them certified that ^ll as was
clear, the kings advance themselves. King Edward being come in sight of the
place, made a stand; being told, that the circumstance of coming f^r^t to the
place, was a matter of great disparagement in point of State: but the French
king ^o^e regarding subst^nce then circumstance, gave the king of England the
advan^^^^ to come at hi^ pleasure, and went first to the bar appointed for
conference, (...) the^e did attend king Edwards leisure. He had in his Company,
John Duke of (...), with his brother the Cardinal, and eight hundred m^n at
Arms. King Ed^^^^ h^d with him, his brother the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of
Northumberland, ^he Lords Chamberlain and Chancellor, and at his back his
whole Army in b^t^e^^. The kings lovingly salute each other, and complements of
courtesy re^ipro(...) which finished, They with their Noblemen there present,
take all their (...) upon the holy Evangelists, in all to their ^ower, to
observe the Articles o^ (...) agre^d on. After which, In private the French
king impor^u^es king Ed^^^^, that the Duke of Britain might be left out of
these Articles: but after much (...) to that purpose, king Edward gave his
resolute answer^ that if king Lewis (...) the friendship of Engl^nd, he should
not molest the Duke of Brittaine^ for that he was resolved, at any time to come
in person to relieve him^ if he were distu^^ed: King Edward pretended the many
kindness he had forme^ly rec^ived of the Duke of Britain: but it was
conceived, that the desire of compassing the Ea^les o^ (...) and Pembrooke, now
in the Duke of Britains Country, were the greatest (...) of his standing ^o
^irmely for him. The money to be paid to king Ed^^rd (...) the Articles, is
accordingly paid; and thereupon the French Hostages are delivered, and the
Englis^ Army re^^res to Callice, and from thenc^ is transported into (...) and
then the English Hostages are likewise delivered. This Peace was (...) ^o be
made only by the holy Ghost; because on the day of mee^ing, a white Dove came
and sat upon the king of Englands Tent: though the Dukes of Gloucester and
Burgoig^e thought it was made by no good spirit.

King Edward being returned into England, had his mind running still upon the
dange^ that might grow from the Earl of Richmond: he therefore dispatched D.
Stillington and two other his Ambassadors to the Duke of Bri^aine, to send him
over to him, under this subtle pretense, that he meant to match him in marriage
with the Lady Cicill^ his younger daughter; and withal, sent also no small
store of Angels to speak for him: which so prevailed with the Duke, that he
delivered the Earl o^ Richmond to the Ambassadors, who conducted him thence to
Saint Malo^, where whilst they stayed for a wind, the young Earl, by the
cunning plotting of Peter Landoi^ the Dukes Treasurer (more out of scorn that
he was not gratified by the English Ambassador to the proportion of his place,
than for any love to the Earl) escapes into Sanctuary; from whence neither
prayers nor promises could get him cut: Nevertheless, upon Peter Landois his
promise he should be safely kept there, the Ambassadors departed, and returned
home, acquainted K. Edward with the Duke of B^^goig^^s courtesy in delivering
him, and their own negligence in suffering him to escape, only making amends
with the promise of Peter Landois; which might be to K. Edward some
contentment, but was no satisfaction.

At Christmas following, being the sixteenth year of his Reign, he created
his eldest son Edward, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cor^wall, and Earl of
Chester: his second son he made Duke of York; giving the order of knighthood
to the son and heir of the Earl of Li^col^e, and many others. He created
also four and twenty knights of the Bath, whereof Brian Chief Justice, and
Littleton a Judge of the Common Pleas, were two.

About this time, there were two examples of severity seen; not unworthy the
relating, if but only to make us see how dangerous a thing it is Ludere cum
sancti^, to speak words that may be taken as reflecting upon the king. The
first was of one Walter Walker, a wealthy Citizen, dwelling at the sign of the
Crown in Cheapside: This man one day when his child cried, bid him be quiet,
and he would make him heir of the Crown: which words being subject to
interpretation, he was called in question about them, arraigned, condemned, and
put to death. The other was of Thomas Burdet of Arrow in Warwickeshire Esquire:
It happened that K. Edward hunted in his Park, he being from home; and there
killed a white Buck, whereof Mr. Burden made special account: so as coming
home, and finding that Buck killed, he wished it horns and all in his belly
that had counseled the king to kill it: and because none counseled the King
to kill it but himself; it was thought those words were not spoken without a
malignant reflecting upon the King: and thereupon Burdet was arraigned and
condemned, drawn to Tiburne, and there beheaded: though M^rkh^^ then Chief
Justice, chose rather to lose his place, than assent to the Judgment.

And now began ambition to boil in Richard Duke of Gloucester; whereof the
first heat fell upon his brother the Duke of Clarence, how to rid him out of
the way; to which end, he seeks to raise Jealousies in King Edwards head
against him, telling him, that some of Clare^ce his followers were Sorcere^s
and Necromancers, and had given forth speeches, that one whose name begun with
G. should disinherit his Children and get the Crown: and for a color of this
suggestion, one of the Duke of Clar^^ce his servants, who came with him out of
Ireland, from Dublin, where the Duke was born; is in his Masters absence, by
the procurement underhand of the Duke of Gloucester, indicted, ^rraigned,
condemned and executed at Tyburne for a Conjurer, and all within the space of
two days: and the Duke of Gloucester, to make show that he had no hand in this
fellows death, set on the Duke of Clarence to complain of it to King Edward;
and in the mean time finds matter, at least color of matter, to make him be
committed to the Tower; and then again, to make show he had no hand in his
imprisonment, bids him be of good cheer, for it should not be long ere he
would see him released: and he kept his word; for not long after, by his
procurement, he was drowned in a But of Malmesey, (and this was his
releasement) and then laid in his bed, to make the people believe that he died
of discontent; whose death, King Edward though perhaps consenting to it, so
much resented, that afterward when he was sued unto for any man's Pardon, he
would ^ighing break out into such words: Oh unfortunate brother^ for whose life
not one man would open his mouth. Being dead, he was buried at Tewkesbury in
Glocestershire, by the body of his Duchess, who great with child, dyed of
Poison a little before.

It was now the two and twentieth year of King Edwards Reign, when James King
of Scotland sent Ambassadors to treat of a Marriage between his eldest son
James Duke of Rothsay, and Cicely king Edwards second daughter. This overture
for a March, was by the king and his Council readily embraced, and a great
part of the Portion was delivered to the Scots, with this Proviso, That if the
marriage di^ not proceed, the Provost and Merchants of Edenbourgh should be
bound to rep^y it again. But the Scottish king, who had other fantasies in his
head, and would take counsel of none but his own will, and diverted also
perhaps by the king of France; not only dallyed the proceeding in the ma^ch,
but affronted those of the Nobility that persuaded him to it; in so much that
his Brother the Duke of Albany was enforced to abandon the Country, and to fly
for refuge into England: by whom king Edward being informed of king James his
fickle disposition, was so much incensed, that under the conduct of the Duke of
Gloucester, accompanied with the Duke of Albany, he sent an Army of twenty
thousand against Scotland; who in their way took in Barwick, and besieged the
Castle; which being resolutely defended by the Earl Bothwell, the Duke left
the Lord Stanley to continue the siege, whilst he, wi^h the rest of the Army,
marched toward Edenbourgh; where within the Castle of Maidens, king James had
immured himself. But the Nobility of Scotland, seeing the danger they were in,
endeavored by humble submission, to procure a peace, at least a cessation from
war; which with much importunity they obtained, upon these Conditions: That
full satisfaction should be presently given, for all damages sustained by the
late incursions: That the Duke of Albany should be fully restored to grace and
place, with an abolition of all discontents between his brother king James and
him: That the Castle of Barwicke, (which had been now out of the Possession of
the English, one and twenty years) should immediately be surrendered into the
Generals hands; and from thence no reduction of that or the Town attempted:
That all such sums of money as upon the proposition of the marriage, had been
delivered, should be repaid. All which, except the first Article, were
accordingly p^^formed.

When this business with Scotland was indifferently accomodated; King Edward
receiv^s intelligence from his Ambassadour-Leidger in France, that the French
King not only denied the payment of the annual Tribute of fifty thousand
crowns, agreed upon and sworn to upon the ratification of the late concluded
Peace; but had also married the Dolphin of France to the Lady Margaret,
daughter of Maximill^n Son of the Emperor; which so much incensed K. Edward,
that he resolves to revenge it; and by the advice of his Counsel, open war
was presently Proclaimed against France: but whilst King Edward is making
preparation, and intentive to the business, he is attached by the hand of death;
and upon the ninth of April, in the year 1483, at Westminster ended this
mortal life.

Of his Taxations.
IN his second year, he sent his Privy Seal through England, to move men to
give him a certain sum of money toward resisting the Scots, which was
granted and given liberal^y. In his seventh year, in a Parliament at
Westminster, were ^^sumed all manner of gifts, which the King had given, from
the first day he took possession of the Realm, to that time. In his eighth
year, at a Parliament, were grant^d two Fifteens and a Demi. In his thirteenth
year, a Parliament was holden, wherein, a Sub^idie was granted; and the year
following, toward war to be undertaken in France, a new way of raising money
is devised, called a Benevolence, by which great sums of money were gotten of
the Subject: and it is not unworthy the relating, what an old rich Widow at
this time did; whom King Edward, amonstothers having called before him, merrily
asked, what she would willingly give him toward his great charges? By my troth
(quoth she) for thy lovely countenance, thou shall have even twenty pounds.
The King looking scarce for half that sum, thanked her, and lovingly kissed
her; which so wrought with the old widow, that she presently swore, he should
have twenty pound more; and paid it willingly. No^ long before his death, he
was by ill Counselors put upon a distastefull course for raising of money;
which was, by fining men for delinquencies against Penal Statures by which
course some money was gathered; but before it came to full execution, he dying,
that also dyed with him.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
IN his fourth year, he newly devised the Coin both of Gold and Silver, as a^
this day it is; the Gold, he named Royals and Nobles; the Silver, Groats and
(...) Groats: the new Groate weighing scantly three pence; and the Noble of six
shillings eight pence, appointed to go for eight shillings four pence. In his
fifth year, it was Proclaimed in England, that the Beakes or Pykes of Shoes and
Boots, should not pass two Inches, upon pain of Cursing by the Clergy, and
forfeiting twenty shillings, to be paid one noble to the King, another to the
Cordwayners of London, and the third to the Chamber of London; and for other
Countries and Towns the like order was taken. Before this time, and since the
year 1382. the Pykes of Shoes and Boots were of such length, that they were
feign to be tied up to the Knees with chains of Silver and gilt, or at least
with silken laces.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN this Kings time, the Jubilee which was before but every fiftieth year, was
by Pope Six^^^ the fourth, brought to be every five and twenty year. Also,
where before this time, the Scottish Bishops had no Metropolitan, but the
Bishop of York was Metropolitan and Primate of Scotland; now in this Kings
time, Pope Six^^^ appointed the Bishop of Saint Andrews to be Metropolitan of
Scotland, who had twelve Bishops under his obedience.

Of Works of Piety done in his time.
THIS King laid the foundation of the new Chapel at Windso^, and his Queen
Elizabeth founded the Queens College in Cambridge, and endowed it with large
Possessions. About his fifteenth year, Doctor Woodlarke Provost of Kings
College in Cambridge, Founded Katherine-hall there. In his seventeenth year,
the Wall of the City of London, from Cripplegate to Bishopsgate, was builded at
the charges of the Citizens, also Bishopsgate it self was new built by the
Merchants (...) of the Styliard. Also in this year dyed Sir John Crosby
Knight, late Major of London; who gave to the repairing of the Parish Church of
St. Helens in Bishopsgatestreet, where he was buried, 500 Marks: to the
repairing of the parish Church of He^w^rth in Middlesex, forty pounds: to the
repairing of London-wall, an hundred pounds: to the repairing of
Rochester-bridge, ten pounds: to the Wardens and Commonalty of the Grocers in
London, two large Pots of silver chased half gilt, and other Legacies. About
this time also, Richard Rawson one of the Sheriffs of London, caused an house
to be builded in the Churchyard of St. Mary Hospitalll without Bishopsgate,
where the Major and Aldermen use to sit and hear the Sermons in
Easterholy-daies. In his nineteenth year, William Tailour Major of London,
gave to the City certain Tenements; for the which the City is bound to pay for
ever, at every Fifteen granted to the King, for all such as shall dwell in
Cordwainers-street-ward, sessed at twelve-pence apiece, or under. And about the
same time, one Thomas (...) Sheriff of London, builded at his own costs the
great Conduit in Che^pside. In his three and twentieth year, Edmund Shaw
Goldsmith, who had been Major of London, at his own costs re-edified
Cripplegate in London, which gate in old time had been a Prison.

Of Casualties happening in his time.
IN his third year, the Minster of York, and the Steeple of Christ's Church in
Norwich were burnt. In his seventeenth year, so great a Pestilence reigned in
England, that it swept away more people in four months, than the Wars had
done in fifteen years past. Also in his nineteenth year was another
Pes^^lence; which beginning in the later end of September, continued till the
beginning of November twelve-moneth following; in which space of time
innumerable people dyed.

Of his wife and issue.
KIng Edward had been contracted to Eleanor daughter of John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, married after to Sir Thomas Butler Baron of S^dely: but he married
Elizabeth the widow of Sir John Gray, daughter of Richard Woodvile by his wife
Iaqueline Duchess of Bedford: she lived his wife eighteen years and eleven
months; by whom he had three sons and seven daughters. Edward his eldest
son, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster: Richard his second son, borne
at Shrewsbury: George his third son, borne also at Shrewsbury, but dyed a
child. Elizabeth his eldest daughter, promised in marriage to Charles Dolphin
of France; but married afterward to King Henry the Seventh: Cicely his second
daughter, promised in marriage to James Duke of ^othsay, Prince of Scotland; but
was married afterward to John Viscount Wells, whom she outlived, and was again
re-maried, but by neither husband had any issue: she lies buried at Quarena in
the Isle of Wight. Anne his third daughter was married to Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshall, and High Treasurer of England; by whom she had two
sons, both dying without issue: she lies buried at Framingham in Norfolk.
Bridget his fourth daughter, borne at Eltham in Kent, became a Nun in the
Nunnery of Dartford in Kent, which king Edward had founded. Mary his fifth
daughter, was promised in marriage to the King of Denmark, but dyed in the
Tower of Greenwich, before it could be solemnized: she lies buried at Windsor.
Margaret his sixth daughter, dyed an Infant. Katherine his seventh daughter,
was married to William Courtney Earl of Devo^shire; to whom she bare Lord
Henry, who by King Henry the eighth was created Marquess of Exeter.

Concubines he had many, but three specially; and would use to say, that he had
three Concubines, who in their several properties excelled: One, the merriest;
another, the wyliest; the third, the holiest harlot in his Realm; as one whom
no man could lightly get out of the Church to any place, unless it were to his
bed; The other two were greater personages than are sit to be named: but the
merriest was Shores wife; in whom therefore he took special pleasure: This
woman was borne in London, worshipfully descended. and well married: but when
the King had abused her, anon her husband (as he was an honest man, and did
know his good, not presuming to touch a Kings Concubine) left her up to him
altogether.

By these he had natural issue; Arthur surnamed Plantagenet, (whose mother, as
is supposed, was the Lady Elizabeth Lucy) created Viscount Lisle, by King Henry
the Eight, at Bridewell in London: And Elizabeth, who was married to Sir Thomas
Lumley knight; to whom she bare Richard, afterward Lord Lumley, from whom the
late Lord Lumley did descend.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was (says Comines) the goodliest Personage that ever mine eyes beheld;
exceeding tall of statu^e, fair of complexion, and of most Princely presence:
and we may truly say, he was of full age before he came to one and twenty; for
being but eighteen years old when his Father dyed, he sued out his livery
presently: so as he began the race of his for^^ne just like Augustus Caesar,
each of them at the same age succeeding an Ancestour after a violent death; and
each of them left to set on a roof, where but only a fo^^^^tion was laid
before. For his conditions, he was of an erected composure both of body and
mind, but something sagging on the Fleshes side; and never any man that did
marry for Love, did so little love Marriage; for he took as much pleasure in
other men's wives as in his own. He was never more confident, than when he was
in danger; nor ever more doubtful, than when he was s^^ure. Of the four
Cardinal virtues, For^^nde and Prudence were in him naturally; Temperance ^^d
Justice, but to serve his turn. He was politic even to irreligion; for to
compass his ends, he would not stick to swear what he never meant. Yet he was
Religious beyond Policy; for before Battles, he used to make his Prayers to
God; after Victories, to give him Thanks. He was far from being proud, yet
very ambitious; and could use familiarity, and yet retain Majesty. He was a
great Briber; and wha^ he could not get by force, he would by Rewards; as much
as what he could not get by Battery, he would by Mines. H^ was too credulous of
Reports, which made him be in error, sometimes to the h^rt of himself,
oftentimes of others. He had made the White Rose to flourish as long as Henry
the Fourth made the Red, if he had not made it change color with too much
blood. He had been fortunate in his children, if he had not been unfortunate in
a brother: but he was well enough served, that would think a Wolf could ever
be a good Shepherd. He had an excellent art in improving his favors; for he
could do as much with a small courtesy, as other men with a great benefit:
And that which was more, he could make advantage of disadvantages; for he got
the love of the Londoners by owing them money; and the good will of the
Citizens by lying with their wives.

Of his Death and Burial.
WHether it began from his mind, being extremely troubled with the injurious
dealing of ^he King of France; or from his body, by intemperance of diet, to
which he was much given; he fell into a sickness, (some say a Catarche, some a
Fever) but into a sickness whereof he dyed. In the time of which sickness,
and at the very point of his death, Sir Thomas Moore makes him to make a speech
to his Lords; which I might think to be the speech of a sick man, if it were
not so sound, and of a weak man, if it were not so long: but it seems, Sir
Thomas Moore delivers rather what was fit for him to say, than what he said;
the Contents being only, to exhort his Lords, whom he knew to be at variance,
to be in love and concord amongst themselves; for that, the welfare of his
children, whom he must now leave to their care, could not otherwise be
preserved but by their agreement. And having spoken to this purpose as much as
his weakness would suffer him, he found himself sleepy; and turning on one
side, he fell into his long sleep, the ninth of April, in the year 1483. when
he had lived one and forty years, Reigned two and twenty and one mo^eth; and
was buried at Windsor, in the new Chapel, whose foundation himself had laid.

Of men of Note in his time.
MEN of valor in his time were many, but himself the chiefest, the rest may
be observed in reading his story. For men of letters, we may have leave at this
time to speak of some strangers, having been men of extraordinary fame; as
Ioha^nes de Monte Regi^, Purbachiu^ and Bl^^chinu^, all great Astronomers;
Ludovicus Pontanus, Paulus Castrensis, and A^thonius Rossellanus, all great
Lawyers; Servisanus, Sava^arola, and Barzizius, all great Physicians; Bessarion
and Cusanus, both great Cardinals; Argyr^pole, Philelphus, Datus, Leonardus
Aretinus, and Poggius, all great men in humane lit^rature. And of our own
Countrymen; John Harding an E^quire, borne in the North parts, who wrote a
Chronicle in English verse, and among other special points therein touched,
has gathered all the Submissions and Homages made by the Scottish kings, even
from the days of King Athelstan: whereby it may evide^^^y appear, how the
Scottish kingdom, even in manner, from the first Establish^ng thereof here in
Britain, has been appertaining unto the kings of England, and holden of them
as their chief and superior Lords. Julian Bemes, a Gentlewoman of excellent
gifts, who wrote certain Treatises of Hawking and Hunting; also a book of the
L^wes of Arms, and knowledge pertaining to Hera^lds. John For^^scue a Judge,
and Chancellor of England, who wrote diverse Treatises concerning the Law and
Politic Government. Rochus a Charterhouse-Monk born in London, who wrote
diverse Epigrams. Walter H^nt a Carmelite Friar, who for his excellent learning,
was sent from the whole body of the Realm, to the General Counsel h^ld^^
fir^^ at Ferr^ra, and after at Florence, by Pope E^genius the fourth; where ^e
am^ngs^ others dis^uted with the Greeks i^ defense of the Order and Ceremo^^es
o^ the Latin Church. William Caxton, who wrote a Chronicle called Fructu^
Temporum, and an Appendix unto Trevisa besides diverse other books and
translations. John Milverton, a Carmelit^ Friar of Bristow, and provincial of
his Order, who because he defended such of his Order as preached against
endowments of the Church with Temporal possessions, was committed to prison in
the Castle of Saint Angel^ in Rome, where he continued three years. David
Morgan a Welshman, who wrote of the Antiquities of Wales, and a description of
the Country. John Tiptoft, a nobleman born, who wrote diverse Treatises, but
lost of his head in the year 1471. Robert Huggon born in Norfolk, who wrote
certain vain Prophesies. Thomas Norto^ born in Bristow, an Alchymist^ Scoga^^
a learned Gentleman, and a Student for a time in Oxford; who for his pleasant
wit and merry conceits, was called to Court. But most worthy of all to be
remembered, Thomas Littleton a reverend Judge of the Common Ple^s, who brought a
great part of the Law into a Method, which lay before confusedly dispersed; and
his book called Littletons Tenures.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE FIFTH.
KING Edward the Fourth being dead, his eldest Son Edw^^^, scarce yet eleven
yee^^ old, succeeded in the kingdom, but not in the Crown; for he was
Proclaimed king, but never Crowned: and indeed it may not so properly be called
the Reign of E^^^^d ^he fifth, as the Tyranny of Richard the Third; for from
the time of king Edward^ death, though not in Name, yet in effect^ he not only
ruled as king, but raged as a Tyrant. Prince Edwa^^ when his Father dyed, was
at Ludlow in Wales, where he had lived some time before, the better by his
presence, to keep the Welsh in awe; He had about him of his Mothers kindred
many; but Sir Anthony Woodvile, the Earl Rivers his Uncle, was appointed his
chief Counselor and directour. The Duke of Gloucester was at this time in the
North, but had word presently sent him, from the Lord Hastings Lord
Chamberlain, of his brother king Edwards death; who acquainted him withal,
that by his Will, he had committed the young king, his Queen and other
children, to his care and government; and thereupon putting him in mind, (...)
necessary it was for him speed^ly to rep^ir^ to London: But the Duke of
Gloce^^er needed no spur to set him forward, who was already in a full
cariere; for he had long before projected in his mind, how he might come to
attain the Crown; and now he thought the way was made him. For as it is said,
the very night in which king Edward dyed, one Misselbrooke, long ere morning,
came in great haste to the house of one Potter dwelling in Red-crosse-streete
without Cripplegate; where he showed unto Potter, that king Edward was
departed: to whom Potter answered, By my troth man, then will my Master the
Duke of Gloucester be king: what cause he had so to think, is hard to say; but
surely it is not likely he spoke it of naught. And now the young king was
coming up to London with a strong guard; partly to make a first expression of
his greatness, and partly to oppose any disorders that might be offered. But
the Duke of Gloucester finding this proceeding like to be a rub in his way, at
least not fit for his designs, he presently falls to undermining; writes most
loving letters to the Queen, protesting all humble and faithful service to the
king and her, but withal persuading her, that this great guard about the king
might be presently dismissed; which did but minister matter of suspicion, and
would be apt to breed new jealousies in them who were now thoroughly reconciled.
The Queen of a nature easy to be wrought upon, gives credit to his glozing
letters; and thereupon sends in all haste to her Son, and to her brother the
Lord Ri^ers; requiring them by all means, for some causes to her known, to
dismiss their g^^^d, (not ^en^^oning by whose advice she writ them; which if
she had done, they would never have done) but now upon her letters, they
presently did; and came forward with o^^ly a sober company. And now is
Glocesters first work (...) but he knowing that the work yet behind was too
great to be done by himself ^^one, gets the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord
Hastings; two of the greatest men of power at that time in the kingdom, to
join with him in opinion, that it was not fit ^he (...) kindred should be so
wholly about the king; and others of better blood and d^^^rt, to be estranged
from him; and therefore by all means, fi^ ^o endeavor to ^emove them: to which
the Duke of Buckingham is easily wrought, upon a promise to have the Earldom
of Hartford conferred upon him: and the Lord Hasting^ not hardly, upon a hope
by this means to cut off many, whom in king Edwards days (...) ^ustly
offended. And now another great work was done; It remains in (...) place, to
put it in execution, which was presently this e^fected: The (...) king had been
at Northampton, and from thence was gone to Stonystratford, (...) the two Dukes
of Gloucester and Buckingham a^rived; but pretending the Town to be too little
for the entertainment of their Comp^nies, they went back to ^^^thampton, and
alighted at the same In^e where the Earl Ryver^ had taken up h^s lodging for
that night, intending the next morning early to overtake the king. Upon this
their accidental meeting, great shows of courtesy passed between them; and
supper ended, the Dukes pretending wearines, retire to their lodgings, the
Earl to his; but the Dukes being entered into their Chambers, enter into
consultation (...) their private friends, in which they spent a great part of
the night, and then secretly get the keys of the Inn gates, suffering none to
pass either in or out; whereof the Earl having notice by his Host, though he
suspected the worst, yet setting a good countenance upon the matter, and
trusting to his own Innocence, he bold^y went to the Duke of Glocesters
Chamber, where he found the Duke of Buckingham and the rest closely set in
counsel; with whom he expostulates the reason of this co^^se, to imprison him
in his Inn against his will? b^t they in stead of answer, c^mmand presently to
lay hands on him, charging him with many crimes, whereof themselves were only
guilty: And then taking order for his safe imprisonment, they speedily took
horse, and came to Stonistratford, at such time as the king was taking horse,
whom in all reverent manner they saluted: but presently in the kings presence,
a quarrel is picked against the Lord Richard Gray, the kings half brother: The
Duke of Buckingham making relation to the king, that he and the Marquess his
brother, with the Earl Rivers the Queens brother, had endeavored and almost
e^fected to draw to themselves the whole mannaging the affairs of the
kingdom^, and to set variance between the Peers of the Realm: and
particularly, that the L^^d Marquess without any warrant, had taken out of the
Tower of London both Treasure and Armor, to a great quantity; but to what
purpose, though they were ignorant, yet there was just cause to suspect it was
to no good end: And therefore it was thought expedient by the advice of the
Nobility, to attach him at Northamp^^^, to have him forth-comming to make his
answer for these and many other his ev^^-b^ld actions; The king unable to sound
the depth of these plots, mildly said (...) him: What my brother Marquess has
done, I cannot say; but for my Uncle (...) Brother here, I dare answer, that
they are innocent of any unlawful practices (...) against me or you. Oh (says
the Duke of Buckingham) that has been their (...), to keep their treachery
from your ^races knowledge: and thereupon ^n^an^^y in the kings presence, they
arrested the Lord Richard, Sir Thomas Vanghan, Sir Richard Hall, and brought
the king and all his company back to Northampton, p^^^ing away a^l his old
servants, and placing in their room^ creatures of their own, whom they had
power to command. At which ^ealing, the young king wept, but it (...) nothing;
and to color the matter, the Duke of Gloucester at dinner, sent a dish from his
own table to the Lord Rivers, bidding him ^e of good cheer, for all (...)
should be well: but the Lord Rivers thanking the Duke, prayed the Messenger to
carry it to the Lord Richard, with the same message for his comfort, as one to
whom such adversity was strange; but as for himself, he had all his days been
acquainted with it, and therefore could the better bear it. But for all this
comfortable courtesy of the Duke of Gloucester, he sent the Lord Rivers, and
the Lord Richard, with Sir Thomas Va^g^^^ into the North Country, into diverse
places to prison, and afterward to Po^fres, where in Conclusion they were all
beheaded.

And now the Duke of Gloucester having thus gotten the custody of the King, set
forwards toward London, giving out by the way, that the Marquess and the
Queens kindred had plotted the destruction of the king, and of all the ancient
Nobility of the Realm, and to alter the Government of the Commonwealth; and
that they were only imprisoned to be brought to their trial according to Law:
and the better to settle these suggestions in the apprehension of the Vulgar,
they brought along with them diverse Carts laden with Armor, (of their own
providing) with Dryfats and great Chests, wherein they reported to be treasure
for the payment of soldiers; with which they so possessed the common people,
that all was believed for truth which was thus rumored: But the finest devise
of all was, to have five of the Duke of Glocesters instruments manacled and
pinioned like Traitors; and these in every place where the King lodged^ to be
dispersed and given out to be men of great birth, drawn into this vile plot of
Treason by the Queens brother; who must seem to be penitent for their offense,
and to confess their own guilt: and this devise continued acting till the king
came to L^ndon, where their visards were pulled off, and the disguise was soon
discovered.

The Queen in the mean time having intelligence of these doleful accidents,
and fearing there were worse to follow, with her second Son and five D^ughters
takes Sanctuary at Westminster: and the young king hearing of these things,
with tears and sighs expressed his grief; but the Dukes making Protestation
of their fidelity, and care of his safety, seemed only to mervaile why he
should be melancholy.

At this time a messenger came from the Lord Chamberlain, to the Archbishop of
York Lord Chancellor of England, to signify to him, that there was no fear
of any thing, for that he assured him all should be well. Well (quoth the
Archbishop) be it as well as it will; I assure him, It will never be so well as
we have seen it. And thereupon, presently after the messengers departure, he
calls up his servants (being then in the night) and taking the great Seal
with him, came before day to the Queen, whom he found sitting alone aloe on the
Rushes, all desolate and dismayed; whom he comforted the best he could,
a^^uring her that if they Crowned any king but her Son whom they had with
them, he would presently after Crown his brother whom she had with her; and
therewithal delivering to her the great Seal, departed: but soon after,
bethinking himself better, he thought he had done too rashly, to deliver the
great Seal to the Queen; and therefore sent for it again, and had it
delivered him; yet shortly after reproved for delivering it, by the Counsel
Table, he had it taken from him, which was then delivered to Doctor Russell
Bishop of Lincoln, the most learned man of that time.

And now the Duke of Gloucester so respectively carries himself toward the
King, with so much show of care and faithfulness, that by a general consent of
the Counsel he is appointed and established Protector of the king and
kingdom; and by this means he has the king in his custody: It remains now how
to get his brother the Duke of York, for without having both, he were as good
(as to his purpose) have neither: and to effect this, he makes the Effect to
become a Cause: for where by his undue dealing^ he had made the king
Melancholy, he now makes that Melancholy a cause to require his brothers
company to make him merry; and therefore wishes some course may be taken,
either by persuasion or otherwise, to procure the Queen to send the Duke of
York to keep his brother the king company: Here the Archbishop of York the
Lord Cardinal, the man thought most fit to be sent in this employment, rises
up and faith, He would do his best endeavor to persuade her; but if he could
not, he then thought it was not to be attempted against her will, for that it
would turn to the high displeasure of God, if the privilege of that holy place
should now be broken, which had so many years inviolably been kept, which (...)
Kings and Popes so good had granted, so many had confirmed; and which holy
ground was more then five hundred years ago, by Saint Peter in his own person,
ac^ompani^d with great numbers of Angels, by night so specially hallowed and
dedicated to God; and for proof whereof, there is yet in the Abbey Saint Peter's
Cope (...) show: that from that time hitherward, there never was so undevo^^ a
King that durst violate the sacred place, nor so holy a Bishop that durst
presume to Consecrate it ^ and therefore (says he) God forbid, that any man
for any earthly thing, should enterprise to break the immunity and liberty of
that sacred Sanctuary; and I trust w^^h Gods grace, we shall not need it, at
least my endeavors shall not be wanting; if the Moth^rs dread and womanish
fear be not the let. Womanish fear, nay womanish frowardnes (quoth the Duke
of Buckingham) for I dare take it upon my Soul, she well knows there is no
need of any fear, either for her son or for herselfe^ and prosecuting his
discourse, declares at large, that as there was no just (...) for the Queen to
keep her Son, so there was great cause for them to require him; and that for
breach of Sanctuary in this case there could be none; for that he had often
heard of Sanctuary men, but never heard of Sanctuary children. And to this
purpose having spoken much, It was all assented to by the Lords that were
present, and with this Instruction is the Archbishop (upon whom the Queen
specially relied) sent unto her; who after humble salutations, acquaints her
with his message, earne^^ly persuading her not to oppose the Lord Protectours
request, and giving her many reasons, first that she ought not, and then that
she could not keep him in Sanctuary: she answered all his reasons, though with
great mildness, yet with great earnestnes; so as the Archbishop finding
little hope to prevail with her by persuasion, turns the tenor of his speech
another way; telling her plainly, that if she did not consent to send her
Son, he doubted some sharper course would speed^ly be taken. This warning
sank so deep into the Queens mind, that after a little pausing, taking her
Son by the hand, she said, My Lord Archbishop, here he is, for my own part I
will never deliver him; but if you will needs have him, Take him, and at your
hands I will require him; and therewith weeping bitterly, Deer child (says
she) let me kiss thee before we part, God knows whether ever we shall meet
again; and so the child weeping as fast as she, went along with the
Archbishop to the Starchamber, where the Lord Protector and other Lords had
staid all the while looking for his coming back: and as soon as he was entered
the room, the Protector spying the child, rises up and embraces him
saying, Dear Nephew, Now welcome with all my heart: next to my Sovereign Lord
your brother, nothing gives me so much contentment as your Presence: and we may
believe him, he spoke as he thought; for now he had the prey which he so much
desired. A few days after, pretending to have them lodged in a place of more
security, until the distempers of the Commonwealth might better be quieted; he
caused them in great pomp and state to be conveyed through London to the
Tower, there at pleasure to remain, till the time of Coronation; whereof there
was great show of preparation made.

But now the great work is to be done; the Princes are to be made away: and how
to have it done, Hoc opus, hic labor est: there must be potent Instruments; and
none so potent as the Duke of Buckingham; and he, by a match to be concluded
betwixt their children, and an equal partition of the Treasure of the Realm
betwixt them two; not only is drawn to condescend, but is most forward to
contrive and plot stratagems to effect it. The first rub in the way was the
Lord Hastings; who being sound so firm to his old Masters King Edwards sons,
that nothing could remove him, it was fit to remove him out of the way; which
was done in this manner: All the Lords of the Privy Council, in the Protectors
name, are convoked to the Tower; where ^itting preparations for the Coronation
of the young King are proposed, until the Protector came in; who taking his
chair, very affably saluted them, merrily jesting with some, and more than
ordinarily ple^sant with them all: when after a little talk, he said to the
Bishop of Ely; My Lord, I hear you have very good Strawberries at your Garden
in Holborne; I pray let us have a mess of them. Most gladly (said the Bishop)
and presently sent for some: and then the Protector rising up, prayed the
Lords to spare his absence a little; and so departed. Within the sp^ce of an
hour he returned; but so changed in countenance, and with such inward
perturbations, which with sighings and other passionate gestures he expressed
so, that it made them all to mervaile. After long silence (the better to
prepare them to the more attention) he confusedly interrogates^ What they
deserved that ne^ariously had pr^ctised his destruction? This unexpected
interrogation struck such ama^ement amongst the Lords, that they all sat
gazing on one another, and were, as ^t were, stricken dumb: At length the Lord
Hastings, by Buckinghams instigatio^, as one presuming of his intimacy with the
Protector, boldly answered, That they deserved the punishment of Traitors;
which all the rest by their silence approved: whereat the Protector rises up,
and with a stern look upon the Lord Hastings, replied: Why it is the old
sorceresse my brothers widow, and her partner that common Strumpet Jane Shore,
that have by incantation conspired to be^eave me of my life; and though by Gods
grace I have escaped the end of their malice, yet see the mischief they have
done me; for behold (and then he bared his left arm to the elbow, and showed
it) how they have caused this dear limb of mine to wither, an^ grow useless;
and so should all my body have been served, if they might have had their will a
little longer. Those to whom the Queens religious courses were not unknown,
and who knew his withered arm to have been such from his birth, ^at^ gazing
one upon another, not knowing what to think or say; until the Lord Hastings,
thinking thereby to leave all blame upon the Queen, and excuse his Paramour
Mistress Shore, (whom ever since the death of King Edward, he had entertained
for his bedfellow, and had but that morning parted from her) with a sober
look submissely said, If the Queen have conspired --: which word was no
sooner cut of the Lord Hastings mouth, when the Protector clapping his hand
upon the board, and frowningly looking upon him, said: Tellest thou me of If
and And? I tell thee, They, and none but they have done it; and thou thy self
art partaker of the villainy. Who I my Lord, quoth he? yea Thou traitor, quoth
the Protector; and therewith, upon a watchword given, those prepared before
for that purpose, in the outer Chamber, cried, Treason, Treason! when presently
a great number of men in arm^ came rushing in as it were to guard the
Protector; one of which with a Pollax struck a maine blow at the Lord St^nley
and wounded him on the head; and had slain him outright, if he had not avoided
the stroke by slipping backward, and falling down to the ground. Forthwith the
Protector arrested the Lord Hastings of high Treason; and wished him to make
haste to be Confessed, for he swore by S. Paul (his usual Oath) that he would
not touch bread nor drink till his head were off. It booted no^ to ask, why?
for he knew the Protectours actions were not to be examined. So he was led
forth unto the Green before the Chapel within the Tower, where his head was
laid down upon a long logge of Timber, and there stricken off. His body
afterward with his head were interred at Windsor, beside the body of King
Edward. In this man's death we may see how inevitable the blows of Destiny are:
for the very night before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a secret messenger
to him at midnight, in all the haste, to acquaint him with a Dream he had, in
which he thought that a Bore with his tusks so goared them both by the heads,
that the blood ran about their shoulders: and for-as-much as the Protector
gave the Bore for his Cognizance, this Dream made so fearful an impression
in his heart, that he was thoroughly resolved to stay no longer; and had made
his horse ready, requiring the Lord Hastings to go with him, and that
presently, to be out of danger, before it should be day. But the Lord Hastings
answered the messenger: Good Lord! leans your Master so much to such trifles,
to put such faith in dreams, which either his own fear fanta^ieth, or else
do rise in the nights rest, by reason of the days thoughts: Go back
therefore to thy Master, and commend me to him, and pray him to be merry, and
have no fear; for I assure him, I am as sure of the man he wo^^eth of, as of
my own hand. The man he meant, was one Catesby, well learned in the Laws of
the Land; who by his favor was grown into good authority in Leicestershire,
where the Lord Hastings Estate lay. Of this man he m^de himself so sure, that
he thought nothing could be plotted against him, which he would not presently
reveal unto him. But this man deceived him; and was grown so inward with the
Protector, that being set by the Protector to draw him to be a party in his
designs, and finding he could not do it, was himself the first mover to rid
him out of the way. Another warning the Lord Hastings had: the same morning in
which he was beheaded, his horse twice or thrice stumbled with him, almost to
falling; which though it often happen to such to whom no mischance is toward,
yet has it of old been observed as a token foregoing some great misfortune.
Also at the Tower-wharfe, near to the place where his head soon after was
stricken off, he met with one Hastings a Pursuivant of his own name; to whom he
said: Ah Hastings, do thou remember I met thee here once with a heavy heart!
Yea my Lord, says he, I remember it well; and God be thanked, that time is
past. In faith, man, said the Lord Hastings, I never stood in so great dread of
my life, as I did when thou and I met here: and lo how the world is changed!
now stand my Enemies in the danger, as thou may hap to hear hereafter; (for
the Enemies he meant were the Lord Rivers, and other of the Queens kindred, who
that very day were beheaded at Pomfret) and I never so merry, nor in so good
surety as now I am. That we may know, there is not a greater Omen or sign of
ill fortune, than to presume of good. And indeed, such is the uncertainty of
our estate in this life, that we seldom know when we are in a Tempest at Sea,
nor when we are in a Calm on shore; thinking ourselves oftentimes most safe,
when we are most in danger; and oftentimes to be in danger, when we are most
safe: He only is in the true Haven, that can say as Christ teaches us, Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

But this Lord being thus put to death; the Lord Protector, to color the
matter, immediately after dinner, in all haste sent for many substantial
Citizens; at whose coming, himself with the Duke of Buckingham stood
harnessed in old rusty Brigandines, to make a show they were forced by the
sudden danger to take such as they could first come by: and withal, a Herald
of Arms is sent with a Proclamation in the Kings name, signifying, that the
Lord Hastings with some others had conspired the same day to have slain the
Lord Protector and the Duke of Buckingham, as they sat in Counsel; and after
to have taken upon them to rule the King and Kingdom at their own pleasures.
Now was this Proclamation made within two hours after the Lord Hastings was
beheaded; and was so curiously indicted, and so so fair written in Parchment,
and withal so long, that every child might perceive it was prepared before:
which made one that was Schoolmaster of Paul's, standing by when the
Proclamation was read, to say, Here is a gay goodly Cast, foul cast away for
haste: To whom a Merchant answered, It was written by Prophecy. And now by and
by, as it were in revenge of her offense, the Protector sent the Sheriffs of
London into the house of Shores wife, and spoiled her of all her goods, above
the value of three thousand marks; and then conveying her through London to
the Tower, there left her Prisoner: where he laid to her charge, that she went
about to bewitch him, and was of counsel with the Lord Hastings to destroy
him. In conclusion, she was laid into Ludgate, and by the Bishop of London put
to open Penance for incontinency; going before the Cross in Procession, upon a
Sunday, with a Taper in her hand: in which, although she were out of all array,
save her ki^tle only; yet went she so fair and lovely, and withal so womanly
and demurely, that many who hated her course of life, yet pitied her course
usage, and were not a little grieved to see her misery. And indeed, this may be
said in her behalf: that being in extraordinary favor with King Edward, yet
she never used it to the hurt of any, but to the relief of many: and was ever
a Mediator, an Oppressor never.

Now it was so contrived by the Protector, that the very day in which ^he Lord
Hastings was beheaded at London, and about the very same hour, there were
beheaded at Pomfret, the Lord Rivers and the other Lords and Knights that were
taken from the King at Northampton and Stonistratford; which was done in the
presence, and by the order of Sir Richard Ratcliffe knight, whose service the
Protector specially used in that business; who bringing them to the Scaffold,
and not suffering them to declare their innocence, lest their words might have
inclined men to hate the Protector, caused them hastily without Judgment or
Order of Process to be beheaded.

When these were thus rid out of the way, then thought the Protector that now
was the time to put himself in possession of the Crown: but all the study was,
by what means this matter being so hein^us in it self, might be broken to the
people, in such wise, as that it might be well taken: for which purpose, It was
thought fit to call to this Counsel Ed^^^d Sh^^ knight the then Major of
London; who upon promise of advancement, should frame the peoples inclination
to it. And because Spiritual men are best hearkened to for matters of
Conscience, some of them were used also; amongst whom, choice was made of John
Shaw Clerk, brother to the Major; Friar Penker, Provincial of the Order of the
Augustine Friars: both great P^^achers, both of more learning then virtue, of
more fame then learning. These two were appointed to preach, the one at Paul's
Cross, the other at the Spittle, in praise of the Protector: Penker in his
Sermon so lost his voice, that he was saine to leave off and come down in the
midst: Shaw by his Sermon lost his reputation, and soon after his life, for he
never after durst come abroad, for very shame of the world.

But now was all the labor and study, to find out some convenient pretext,
for which the people should be content to have the Prince deposed, and the
Protector be received for King; to which purpose many things were devised; the
chief was to allege bastardy either in King Edward himself, or in his
children, or in both^ To ^ay bastardy to King Edward, sounded openly to the
reproach of the Protectours own Mother, who was Mother to them both; he would
therefore that point should more favorably be handled: but the other point
concerning the bastardy of his children, he would have enforced to the
uttermost: The ground whereof was, that King Edward had been formerly
contracted to the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, by whom he had a child; though the
said Lady, having been examined about it, confessed plainly, they were never
assured. Yet upon this pretext, Doctor Shaw taking for his Text, Bastard Plants
shall take no deep root; in his Sermon declared, that King Edward was never
lawfully married to the Queen, but was before God, husband to the Lady
Elizabeth Lucie, and so his children bastards. And besides that, neither King
Edward himself, nor the Duke of Clarence were reckoned very sure for the
children of the noble Duke Richard, as those that by their favors more
resembled other known men; but the Lord Protector (says he) is the fathers
own figure^ his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the plain
express likeness of that noble Duke. Now, It was before devised, that just at
the speaking of these words, the Protector should have come, to the end that
th^se words meeting with his presence, might be taken among the hearers, as
though the Holy Ghost had put them in the Preachers mo^th, and so should move
the poeple even then to cry, King Richard, King Richard that it might be after
said, he was specially chosen by God, and in a manner by Miracle: but this
devise failed; for whither by the Protectours slacknes in coming, or the
Doctors haste in Preaching, he had passed those words, and was gone to clean
another matter, before the Protector came; so as afterward seeing him come, he
was ^aine to leave the matter, he had in hand, and out of all order and frame
begin to repeat those words again: This is the very noble Prince, the Fathers
own figure, his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the plain
express likeness of that noble Duke. While these words were in speaking, the
Pro^e^tour accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, passed through the people
into the place where the Doctors sit; and there sat to hear the Sermon: but
the people were ^o far from crying King Richard, that they cried shame on the
Preacher, for abusing his sacred function with so shameful a Sermon.

The Tuesday following this Sermon, the Duke of Buckingham with diverse Lords
and Knights came to the Guildhall in London; and there before the Major and
whole assembly of Citizens, made a very solemn and long Oration, wherein he
recited many grievances of the late King Edwards Government, his many
unnecessary Taxations and unjust severities; thereby to bring his children into
hatred: and then re^embred them of the late Sermon made at Paul's Cross, by a
learned Doctor; who clearly showed the bastardy of King Edwards children; and
that Richard Duke of Gloucester was the only rightful and indubitate heir to
the Crown of England: which the Lords of the Kingdom having taken into their
consideration, had thereupon agreed to accept him for their King; and now
himself was come to acquaint them with it, and to require their consents.
Which Oration ended, all men stood wondering at the motion, but no man offered
to speak a word. At which the Duke marvelling, as supposing the Major had
prepared them before; he asked the Major privately, what this silence meant?
who answered, that perhaps they had not heard or understood what it was he
said. Whereupon the Duke with a more a^dible voice repeated the same matter
again, in a more earnest and plain expression; yet neither did that move them
to show any inclination to the motion. Then the Duke whispering with the Major,
It was thought, that the Citizens being used to have such motions made them by
their Recorder, they would better it from him; and thereupon the Recorder is
commanded to move them in it: but the Recorder (called Fitzwilliams) being an
honest man and newly come to his place; repeated only as near as he could the
words of the Duke, but added nothing of his own; so as neither did this move
the people to break their silence. At last, the Duke seeing their resolved
^ullennesse, told them plainly, that all the Nobility and Commons of the Realm
were agreed to choose the Protector for their King, as the true and undoubted
heir; so as he needed not to have moved them to it, but only for the great
respect they all bare to this honorable City; and therefore required them
plainly to speak their minds, whether they would join with them in this choice
or no. At this, certain servants of the Dukes, and other of their procuring,
standing at the lower end of the Hall, cast up their Caps, and cried aloud,
King Richard, King Richard; whereat, though the whole multitude of Citizens
marvelled what they meant; yet the Duke taking advantage of it, as of an
unanimous conset: A goodly cry (says he) and thanked them all for their
universal approbation; promising he would acquaint the Protector with the
great love they showed toward him: and then requiring the Major and chief
Citizens to meet him the next morning at Baynards Castle, where the Protector
then lay; there to join with him, in Petitioning the Protector to accept of
this their freely proffered subjection; he took his leave and so departed.

The next morning according to appointment, they all meet at Baynards Castle;
where the Duke of Buckingham sends up word to the ^. Protector, th^^ himself
with the L. Major and his Brethren, were come to present a Supplication to him,
concerning a business of great importance: but the Protector though
(preacquainted with all passages, yet made it strange what their Supplication
should be; and answered, that though he suspected nothing which the Duke of
Buckingham presented to him; yet he desired at least some some slight
in^imation to what it might tend. To this it was answered, that the business
they came about was to be made known to himself in Person; and therefore humbly
besought him of admission in his presence: Upon this, as if not yet well
assured of their well meaning toward him; he appears unto them in an upper
Gallery, making semblance as though he would prevent all danger, by standing
something aloof and in his Fort: To whom the Duke of Bucking^^^, in behalf of
the Major and Nobility there present; in most respective and re^erent manner
makes req^est, that his Grace would pardon what he should deliver to him: and
much circumstance he used, before he would discover their cause of ^omming: but
though long first, yet at last, he told it: That in respect of the urgent
nec^ss^ties of the Commonwealth, they all humbly entreated him to take upon
him the Government of the Kingdom, as in his own Right, to whom they all
tendered their Allegiance. At which words, the Protector starting back, as if
he had heard something most unpleasing to him, passionately answered: I little
thought, good Cozen, that you of all men would have moved me to a matter which
of all things in the world I most decline: Far be it from to accept of that,
which without apparent wrong to my dear deceased brothers sweet children, and
my own upright Conscience, I cannot well approve of. And then being about to
proceed in his premeditated di^^imulation; the Duke in a seeming abrupt
passion, kneeling upon his knee, said; Your Grace was pleased to give me free
liberty to deliver unto you, in the name of this worthy assembly, the tender of
their ^^tifull obedience to you: but I must further add, that it is
unanimously resolved on, that your late brother King Edwards children, as being
generally known to be Illegitimate, shall never be admitted to the Crown of
England; and therefore if your Grace shall neither regard your self, nor us so
much, as to accept it, we are directly determined to confer it upon some
other of the House of L^^caster, that will be more sensible of his own and our
good. These words wrought so powerfully upon the Protectours passions; that
with some change of Countenance, and not without a seeming reluctation, he
said; Since I perceive the whole Realm is so resolved, by no mean^ to admit my
deer Nephews, being but children, to Reign over you; and seeing the Right of
succession belongs justly to me, as the indubi^ate Heir of Richard Plantagenet
Duke of York, my Illustrious Father: We are contented to condescend to your
importunities, and to accept of the Royal Government of the Kingdom, and will
to the uttermost of my power endeavor to procure and maintain the welfare
thereof. And having so said, he came down from his Gallery, and very formally
saluted them all: which so pleased the giddy multitude, that presently they
fell to acclamations, Long live King Richard our dread Sovereign Lord and
then every man departed.

THE REIGN OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
IT was now the eighteenth day of June, in the year 1483. when Richard Duke of
Gloucester took upon him the Crown: so as the imaginary Reign of Edward the
fifth, continued but just ten weeks. The next day, King Richard with a great
train went to Westminster Hall, and placed himself in the Court of the Kings
Bench, saying, he would take the Crown upon him in that place where the King
himself sits and ministers the Law; because he considered that it is the
chiefest duty of a King to administer the Laws: And here to get the love of the
people by a feigned clemency; he sent for one Fogge out of Sanctuary, who for
fear of his displeasure was fled thither; and there in the fight of all the
people, caused him to kiss his hand.

After his return home, he took to wife the Lady Anne, youngest daughter of
the great Warwick, and the relict of Prince Edward, son of Henry the sixth;
though ^hee could not be ignorant, that he had been the Author both of her
husbands and (...) death. But women's affections are Eccentrick to common
apprehension; whereof the two Poles are Passion and Inconstancy.

Against his Coronation he had sent for five thousand men out of the North; and
these being come under the leading of Robin of Riddesdale, upon the fourth of
Iuly^ together with his new bride, he went from Baynards Castle to the Tower by
wa^^^, where he created Edward his Son a child of ten years old, Prince of
Wales^ (...) Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk, his Son Sir Thomas Howard Earl of
Surry^ (...) Lord Berckley Earl of Nottingham, Francis Lord Lovell Viscount
Lovell, (...) Chamberlane, and the Lord Stanley (who had been committed
pri^oner to the ^ower, in regard his Son the Lord Strange was reported to
have levied forces (...)) not only that day was released out of prison, but was
made Lord (...) of his Househould. The Archbishop of York was likewise then
delivered; but Morton Bishop of Ely (as one that could not be drawn to the
disinheriting of (...) Edwards children) was committed to the Duke of
Buckingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecknock in Wales, there to be in
custody. The same night were made seventeen knights of the Bath, Edmund the
Duke of Suffolkes son, George Gray the Earl of Kents son, William the Lord
Zouches son, Henry Aburga^^^^ Christopher Willoughby, Henry Babington, Thomas
Arundell, Thomas Boleigne, Gerv^^ Clifton, William ^ay, Edmund Bedingfield,
William Enderly, Thomas Lewku^^, Th^m^^ of Vrmond, John Bromne, and William
Berckley. The next day, being the fifth o^ July, the King rode through the City
of London to Westminster, being accompanied with the Dukes of Norfolk,
Buckingham, and Suffolk; the Earls of Northu^b^rland, Arundell, Kent, Surrey,
VVil^shire, Huntington, Nottingh^m, Warwick, and Lincol^^ the Viscounts List
and Lovell; the Lords Stanley, A^dely, D^cres, Pe^^ers of Chartley, Powis,
Scroope of ^psale, Scroope of Bolton, Gray of Codner, Gray, of Wilton, Sturton,
Cobham, Morley, Burgeveny, Zouch, Ferrers of Croby, Wells, Lumley, Matr^vers,
Herbert and Beckham, and fourscore Knights. On the morrow, being the sixth of
July, the King with Queen An^e his wife, came down out of the White Hall,
into the Great Hall at Westminster, and went directly to the Kings Bench; and
from thence, going upon Ray-cloath, barefooted, went unto St. Edwards shrine,
all his Nobility going with him, every Lord in his degree. The Bishop of
Rochester bore the Cross before the Cardinal: Then followed the Earl of
Huntington, being a pair of gilt-spurres, signifying Knighthood: Then followed
the Earl of ^^^ford, bearing St. Edwards sta^fe, for a Relic: After him came
the Earl of ^^^thumberland bare-headed, with the pointl^sse sword naked in his
hand, signifying Mercy: The Lord Stanley bare the Mace of the Constableship:
The Earl of Ken^ bare the second sword, on the right hand of the King, naked,
with a point; which signified Justice to the Temporalty: The Lord Lovell bore
the third sword on the Kings left hand, with a point; which signified Justice
to the Clergy: The Duke of Suffolk followed with the Scepter in his hand,
which signified Peace: The Earl of Lincoln bore the Ball and Cross, which
signified Monarchy: The Earl of S^rry bore the fourth sword before the King,
in a rich scabbard; which is called the sw^^d of Estate: Then went three
together; in the midst went Gartar king of Arms, in his rich Coat; and on his
right hand went the Major of London, ^earing a Mace; and on his left hand went
the Gentleman Usher of the Privy Chamber: Then followed the Duke of Norfolk,
bearing the kings Crown between his hands: Then followed king Richard in his
roabes of Purple-velvet, and over his head a Canopy, bor^e by four Barons of
the Cinque Ports; and on each side of the king went a Bishop^ on one side, the
Bishop of Bath; on the other, of Durham: Then followed the Duke of Buckingham,
bearing the kings train, with a white staff in his hand, signifying the
office of High Steward of England. Then followed the Queens train, before
whom was borne the Scepter, the Ivory rod, with the Dove, (signifying
innocence) and the Crown: herself apparelled in roabes like the kings, under a
rich Canopy, at every corner thereof a bell of gold: On her head she wore a
circlet, set full of precious stones, the Countess of Richmond bearing her
train; the Dutchesses of Norfolk and Suffolk in their Coronets, attending;
with twenty Ladies of Estate most richly attired. In this order they passed the
Palace into the Abbey: and going up to the High Altar, there shifted their
roabes; and having other roabes open in diverse places from the middle upward,
were both of them Anointed and Crowned: and then after the Sacrament received,
(having the host divided betwixt them) they both offered at St. Edwards shrine;
where the king left St. Edwards Crown, wherewith he had been Crowned, and put
on his own: and this done, in the same order and state as they came, they
returned to Westminster Hall, and there held a most Princely feast: at the
second course whereof, there came into the Hall Sir Robert Dymock the kings
Champion, making Proclamation, that whosoever would say th^^ king Richard was
not lawful king of England, he was there ready to prove it against him; and
thereupon threw down his Gantlet: and then all the Hall cried, king Richard,
king Richard. And thus with some other Ceremonies, the Coronation ended; and
the king and Queen returned to their lodgings.

Presently after this, king Richard sent a solemn Embassage to Lewis king of
France, to conclude a Leag^e and Amity with him: but the French king so
abhorred him and his cruelty, that he would not so much as see, or hear his
^^b^ssadors; but sent them away with shame, in disgrace of their Master.

At this t^me, with his Queen, he made a Progress of Gloucester, under color
to (...) of his old Honor; but indeed, to be out of the way, having a special
(...) to be acted: for though he had satisfied his Ambition, by depriving his
(...) Nephews of their livelihoods; yet it satisfied not his Fear, if he
deprived (...) also of their lives. For effecting whereof, his old friend the
Duke of Buck^^^^^^ was no fit instrument; it must be one of a baser metal: and
to find out (...) henceded not go far; For upon inquiry, he was told of two
that lay (...) it Chamber to him; Sir Thomas and Sir James Tyrrell^ two
brothers, like (...), not more near in blood, than different in conditions; of
equal (...) of personage both, but not of equal goodness of mind; Sir
Thomas (...) of in honest and sober disposition; but Sir James of a turbulent
spirit, and one (...) after preferment, would not stick to make a fortune out
of any villainy. (...) told of this man, as he was sitting at the close-stoole,
he presently ro^e and (...) to him: where being met, the ma^ch is soon made up
between them; for he (...) Sir James more ready to undertake the work, than he
was himself to set him (...) it. It only remained, to procure him free
passage to the place where the (...) was to be done: for King Richard had
formerly sent a trusty Privado of his, (...) John Green, to Sir Robert
Brackenbury then Lieutenant of the Tower; think(...), having been raised by
him, would not have refused to do the deed himself, but when he heard how
averse he was from it, Good Lord (says he) whom (...) man trust? Once he saw
plainly, that whilst he was Lieutenant, there was (...) to effect it. To remove
therefore this Rub, he sends his Letters Man^^^^ to Br^ckenbury, to deliver
presently the keys of the Tower to Sir James (...): who being now Lieutenant
for the time, and having the two innocent (...) under his custody; gets two
other, as very villains as himself; the one (...), the other James Dighton
his horse-keeper, a big sturdy knave: and (...) makes his under-agents; who
coming into the childrens chamber in the (...), (for they were suffered to
have none about them, but one Black- Will, or (...) ^^^^ghter, a bloody
rascal) they suddenly lapped them up in their clothes, (...) down by force the
featherbed and pillowes hard unto their mouths, so (...), that their breath
failing, they gave up their innocent soul; to God: (...) when the mur^herers
perceived, first by their struggling with the pains of (...), and then by their
long lying still, to be thoroughly dead; they laid their bodies out upon the
bed, and then fetched Sir James to see them; who presently caused their bodies
to be buried under the stairs, under a heap of stones: from whence they were
afterward removed to a place of Christian burial, by a Priest of Sir Robert
(...); who dying within a few days after, and none knowing the place but
(...), was cause that it has not been known to this day; and gave occasion
afterward^^ the Imposture of Perkin Warbeck, in King Henry the Seventh's Reign.
Some (...), that king Richard caused their bodies to be taken up, and closed
them in lead, and then to be put in a Cossin full of holes, hooked at the ends
with Iron; and so (...) a place called the Black Deepes, at the Thames mouth,
to be sure they should (...) rise up, not be seen again. And now see the
Divine revenge upon the actors (...) ^^cerable murder: Miles Forest, at St.
Martins le Grand, peece-meale rot^^^ away: Dighton lived at Callice a long time
after; but detested of all men, dyed (...) misery: Sir James Tyrrell was
beheaded afterward on the Tower Hill for (...) and king Richard himself, after
this abominable fact done, never had (...) mind; troubled with fearful
dreams, and would sometimes in the night (...) of his bed, and run about the
Chamber in great fright, as if all the Furies of (...) were hanging about him:
that it was verefied in him, ^ltrix Tisiphone vocat (...) seva sororum.

Con^^deracies in evil are seldom long-lived, and commonly end in a
reciprocal (...): and so was it now with king Richard and the Duke of
Buckingham: They had confederated together to the destruction of many; and now
their confederacy dissolves in both their ruins: but what the cause was of
their dissolving, is not so certain: whether it were that the Duke thought not
himself so well rewarded, as his great services had deserved; or whether it
were, that King Richard thought not himself absolute King, as long as the
Duke, by whose means he came to be King, was in such a height of greatness; or
whether it were (as was rather thought) that the Duke being a man ambitious and
of an aspiring spirit; though he had himself been the means to bring King
Richard to the Crown; yet when the Crown was put upon his head, so envied at
it, that he turned his head another way, ^s not enduring the sight; and for the
same ca^se, was willing not to have been present at the Coronation, pretending
sickness in excuse of his absence; but that King Richard sent him a sharp
Message, requiring him to come or he would fetch him: whereupon the Duke went,
but with so ill a mind, that he bore it in mind ever after. Whatsoever it
was, certain it is, that presently after the Coronation, there grew great
jealousies between them; and the Duke retired himself to his Castle at
Brecknock, where he had the Bishop of Ely in custody. And here we may observe
the unsearchable depth of the divine Providence; the bottom whereof, the
soundest judgment of Man can never sound, as working effects by contrary
causes: for where King Richard had committed the Bishop to the Duke, as to one
that would have a most watchful eye over him; This which the King did for the
Bishops greater punishment, proved a means afterward of the Bishops greater
advancement, and a means at the present of King Richards ruin. For the Duke
being retired home, and having his head so full of thoughts, that of necessity
it required ^ent; for his own recreation, would sometimes fall in talk with
the Bishop; with whose discourse (as he was a man of great wit and solid
judgment) the Duke was so taken, tha^ he grew to delight in nothing more then
to be conferring with him. One time it happened, that the Duke had opened his
mind something freely to him; and the Bishop following him in his own way, and
cunningly working upon that humor of the Duke, which he found most working in
the Duke; which he conceived to grow out of envy to king Richard: he said to
this purpose; My Lord, you know I followed first the part of king Henry the
sixth, and if I could have had my wish, his Son should have had the Crown,
and not king Edward: But after that God had ordained king Edward to Reign; I
was never so mad, that I would with a dead man strive against the quick. And so
was I to king Edward also a faithful Chaplain, and glad would have been that
his child had succeeded him: How be it, if the s^cret Judgment of God have
otherwise provided; I purpose not to labor to set up that which God pulls
down. And as for the Lord Protector, and now King^; and even there he left:
saying, he had already meddled too much with the world; and would from that day
meddle with his Books and his Beads, and no further. Then longed the Duke
exceedingly to hear what he would have said; because he ended with the king,
and there suddenly stopped: and thereupon entreated him to be bold to say
whatsoever he thought; whereof he faithfully promised there should never come
hurt, and peradventure more good then he would think; and withal, that
himself intended to use his secret Counsel; which (he said) was the only
cause for the which he had procured of the king to have him in his custody. The
Bishop humbly thanked him, and said: In good faith my Lord, I love not to talk
much of Princes, as a thing not all out of peril, though the word be without
fault, for so much as it shall not be taken as the party meant it, but as it
pleases the Prince to construe it. And ever I think on Aesops Tale, that when
the Lion had proclaimed on pain of death, that no horned beast should abide in
a certain Wood; one that had in his forehead a bunch of flesh, fled away a
geart pace: the Fox that saw him run so fast, asked him whither he made all
that haste? who answered, in faith I neither wot nor reck, so I were once
hence, because of the Proclaimation made of horned beasts: why fool, (quoth
the Fox) thou may abide well enough, the Lion meant it not by thee, for it
is no horn that is in thy head: No mary (quoth he) that wot I well enough; but
what if he call it a horn, where am I then? The Duke laughed at the Tale, and
said; My Lord, I warrant you, neither the Lion not the Bore shall pick any
matter at any thing here spoken; for it shall never come near their ear. Then
said the Bishop, In good faith Sir, if it did, the thing I was about to say,
taken as well as a fore God I meant it, could deserve but thank; and yet taken
as I ween it would, might happen to turn me to little good, and you to les^e.
Then longed the Duke much more, to hear what it was: whereupon the Bishop
said, My Lord, as for the late Protector, since he is now king in Possession, I
purpose not to dispute his title; but for the weal of the Realm, I could wish
he had in him those excellent virtues which God has planted in the person of
your Grace: and there left again. The Duke somewhat marvelling at his sudden
pause, said, My L. I cannot but note your sudden stopping in your speech, so as
your words come not to any direct sentence, whereby I may have knowledge,
eith^r what your inward intent is now toward the king, or what your affection
is toward me: I therefore entreat you to use no more such obscurity, but
plainly to disclose your mind unto me, who upon mine honor will be as secret
in the case, as the deaf and dumb person is to the singer, or the Tree to the
Hunter. The Bp. then upon confidence of the D. promise, said^ my Lord, I
plainly perceive, the kingdom being in the case as it is, under such a King as
now we have, must needs decay and be brought to confusion; but one hope I have,
that when I consider and daily behold your noble Personage, your Justice, your
ardent love toward your Country, and in like manner the great love of your
Country toward you; I must needs think this Realm fortunate, that has such
a Prince in store, meet and apt to be a Governor; in whose person consists
the very undoubted Image of true honor. And then taxing the present king with
many cruelties and oppressions, he concluded, saying: And now my Lord, if
either you love God, your Lineage, or your native Country, you must your self
take upon you the Crown and Imperial Diadem of this Realm; but if your self
will refuse to take it upon you, I then adjure you, by the faith you owe to
God, and by the love you bear to your native Country, to devise some way, how
the Realm may by your Princely policy be reduced to some convenient Regiment,
under some good governor by you to be appointed: And if you could devise to
set up again the Lineage of Lanc^ster; or advance the eldest daughter of King
Edward to some puissant Prince: not only the new Crowned king should little
enjoy the glory of his dignity, but all Civil War should cease, and Peace
and Profit should again flourish. When the Bishop had ended his saying, the
Duke sighed, and spoke not of a good while; which sore abashed the Bishop, and
made him change color: which the Duke perceiving, he said; Be not afraid my
Lord, all promises shall be kept: so for that time they parted. The next day,
the Duke sent for the Bishop, and having rehearsed unto him the Communication
had between them the day before, he went on and said: My Lord of Ely, since I
perceive your true heart and sincere affection toward me; I will now discover
unto you, all that has passed my own imaginations. After I had found the
dissimulation and falsenesse of king Richard, and specially after I was
informed of the murder of the two young Princes, to which (God be my Judge) I
never condiscended; I so much abhorred the sight, and much more the company of
him, that I could no longer abide in his Court; but feigning a cause to depart,
I took my leave of him (he thinking nothing less, then that I was displeased)
and so returned to Brecknok to you; but in that returning, whether it were by
inspiration, or els^ through some melancholic disposition, I had diverse
imaginations how to deprive this unnatural and bloody Butcher of his Royal
seat and dignity. First^ I fantasied, that if I list to take upon me the Crown,
Now was the time, when this Tyrant was abhorred and detested of all men; and
knowing not of any that could pretend Title before me: In this imagination I
rested two days at Tewkesbury; in my journey from thence, I mused and thought,
that it was not best nor convenient to take upon me as a Conqueror, for then I
was sure that all men and specially the Nobility would oppose me; but at last
there sprung up a branch in my head, which I surely thought would have brought
forth fair flowers, but they turned indeed to dry weeds: For I suddenly
remembered that the Lord Edmund Duke of Somerset, my Grandfather, was with king
Henry the ^ixth, in two or three degrees of John of Gaunt Duke of Lanc^ster; so
that I thought certainly, my Mother being eldest Daughter to Duke Edmund, that
I was next heir to king H^nry the sixth, of the House of Lanc^ster: This Title
pleased well such as I made of my Counsel, and much more it eleva^ed my
ambitious intent; but while I was in a maze, whether I were best suddenly to
set this title open amongs^ the Common people, or else keep it secret a while,
see what chan^ed: As I ^ode between Worcester and Bridgenorth, I met with the
Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond, now wife to the Lord Stanley, who is the
daughter and sole heir to John Duke of Somers^t my Grandfathers elder brother
(which was as clean out of my mind, as if I had never seen her) so that she
and her son the Earl of Richmond h^ve both of them Titles before mine, and
then I clearly saw how I was deceived: w^^^eupon I determined, utterly to
relinquish all such fantastical imaginations concerning the obtaining the
Crown my selfe^ and found there could be no better way to settle it in a true
establishment, then that the Earl of Richmond, very heir of the house of
Lancaster; should take to wife the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to king
Edward, the very heir of the house of York; that so the two Roses may be united
in one: and now (says the Duke) I have told you my very mind. When the Duke
had said this, the Bishop was not a little glad, for this was the mark he had
himself aimed at: and thereupon, after some complements of extolling his
device, he said: Since by your Graces incomparable wisdom, this noble
conjunction is now moved; It is in the next place necessary to consider, what
friends we shall first make privy of this intention. By my truth (quoth the
Duke) we will begin with the Countess of Richmond the Earls Mother; who
knows where he is, either in captivity or at large in Britain. And thus was
the foundation laid of a league, by these two great men; by which the death of
the two young Princes was fully revenged: and it was not talk^ of only, but
presently put in execution; for now is Reynold Bray employed by the Bishop, to
his Mistress the Duchess of Richmond; Doctor Lewis the Dutchesses Physician
was employed by her to the Queen Elizabeth; Hugh Conway and Thom^^ R^me were
employed to the Earl of Richmond; to acquaint them, but in most secret manner,
with the intended plot, and to procure their promises to the propounded
marriage; which was no hard matter, to make them all willing to their own
wishes. This done, Instruments are employed, to draw in parties to the
confederacy; Bray by his credit drew in Sir Gyles Danbe^y, Sir John Cheyney,
Richard Guildford, Thomas R^me and others; Vrswick likewise drew in Hugh
Conway, Thomas Colepepper, Thomas Roper with some others; Doctor Lewis drew in
Edward Courtney and his brother Peter Bishop of Exceter. It is memorable, that
Thomas Conway being sen^ most part by Sea, and Thoma^ R^me most part by Land;
yet came to the Ea^le of Richmond in Britain, within the space of little more
then an hour; upon whose information of the plot, the Earl acquaints the Duke
of Britain with it, who, though by Hutton King Richards Ambassador, he had
by many great offers been solicited to detain him in prison; yet he both
readily promised and really performed both his advice and aid to the Earls
proceedings. In this mean time Bishop Morto^, not without asking the Dukes
leave, though without obtaining it, secretly in disguise, gets him into his
Isle of Ely; and there having done the Earl good Offices by procuring of
friends, he thence passes into Britain to him; from whence he returned no
more, till afterward the Earl being king, sent for him home and made him
Archbishop of Canterbury.

But though all these things were carried closely, and Oath taken by all for
secrecy, yet came it to King Richards knowledge; who notwithstanding
dissembling it, sends for the Duke of Buckingham to come unto him; and he
putting off his coming with pretended excuses, is at last peremptorily sent
for to come upon his Allegiance: when he returned this resolute answer, that he
owed no Allegiance to such a perjured inhumane Butcher of his own Flesh and
Blood: and so from that time, preparation for Arms is made on both sides. The
Duke had gotten a good power of Welshmen; and the Marquess Dorset having
gotten out of Sanctuary, was laboring in Yorkshire to raise forces; the like
did the two ^ourtneys in Devonshire and Cornwall, and Guilford and R^me in
Kent. King Rich^rd setting forward with (...) forces; the Duke of Buckingham
does the like, intending at Gloucester to have (...) Severn, and so to have
joined with the two Courtneys; but such abundance o^ ^aine at that time fell,
that the Severn was broken out, and impossible to be passed (...); which the
Welshme^ seeing, and taking it for an ill sign, they secretly sl^pt away: so
as the Duke le^t well near alone, without either Page or so much as a Footm^^;
repaired to the house of one Humfry Bannister near to Shre^sbury; who having
been raised by him, and his father before him; he thought himself safe under
his roof: But Bannister, upon Proclamation made by king Richard, that
whosoever could apprehend the Duke, should have a thousand pound for his
labor; like an ungrateful and perfidious wretch, discovered him to John
Milton High Sheriff of (...), who took him in a pilled black Cloak, as h^ was
walking in an Orchard behind the house; and carried him to Shrewsbury, where
king Richard then lay; and there without Arraignment or Legal proceeding, was
in the Market place beheaded. Whether Bannister received the Proclaimed reward
from the hand of the King, is uncertain; but certain it is, that he received
the reward of a Villain from the hand of Divine Justice; for himself was
afterward hanged for manslaughter, his eldest daughter was deflowred by one of
his Carters, or as some say, stricken with a foul Leprosy; his eldest Son
in a desperate Lunacy murdered himself, and was ^ound to have done so, by the
Coroners inquest; and his younger Son in a small puddle was strangled and
drowned.

Upon this disaster of the Duke of Buckingham, his accomplices shifted for
themselves; some taking Sanctuary, some keeping themselves in unknown places,
but many convayed themselves into Britain to the Earl of Richmond^ of whom
the Marquess Dorset, John Lord Wells, the Bishop of Exceter and his brother
Sir John (...), Sir Edward Woodvile brother to Queen Elizabeth, Sir Robert
Willoughby^ Sir Giles Da^beney, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir John Cheyney and his
two brethren, Sir William B^rckly, Sir William Brandon and his brother Thomas,
Sir Richard Edgecombe, Hollowell and Poynings Captains, were the chief.
Whilst these things are in doing, king Richard receives intelligence from
Hutton his Ambassador leiger in Britain; that the Duke not only refuses to
restaine the Earl of Richmond, but intends also to give him assistance:
whereupon the king ^^oke present order for preparing his Navy to stop the
Earls landing in any Port of England.

Upon the twelveth day o^ October in the year 1484. The Earl of Richmond with
forty Ships, and five thousand waged Britain tooks, to sea; but that Evening,
by tempest of weather, his whole Fleet was dispersed, so as only the Ship
wherein the Earl himself was, with one little Bark, was driven upon the
Coast of Cornw^ll; where discovering upon the shore great store of Armed
Soldiers to resist his landing; he hoysed sail, and returning toward France,
arrived in Normandy; from whence sending Messengers to Charles the Eighth King
of France, he was by him not only kindly invited to come to his Court, but
was aided also with good s^mmes of money to bear his charges. After this, the
Earl returning into Britt^i^e, received there the news of the Duke of
Buckinghams death, and the disp^r^ing of the Confederates forces; with which
though he was at first much troubled, yet was he as much comforted afterward,
when he saw the Marquess Dorset and those other Lords and Captains come unto
him: soon after whose coming, upon Christ^^sse day before the high Altar in
the great Church of Rheims, the Earl of Richmo^d gave Oath, to marry the Lady
El^zabeth, as soon as he should be quietly ^e^led in the Government of
England: and thereupon all the Lords and Knights there present, did him homage,
and in the same place, each to other Religiously Vowed, taking the Sacrament
upon it; never to cease prosecuting war against king Richard, till either his
Deposition or Destruction.

King Richard being informed of these things, makes diligent enquiry after all
such as might be suspected to be favorers of Richmonds association; of whom
Sir George Brown, and Sir Roger Clifford with four other Gentlemen are
apprehended and ex^cuted at London: Sir Thomas Sentl^ge^, whom m^rried Anne the
Duke of Excet^rs widow, this kings own sister, and Thomas Rame Esquire were
executed at Exceter. Thomas Marquess Dorset, and all such as were with the
Earl of Rich^^^d, were at a Parliament then holden att^inted of Treason, and
all their Good^ and Lands seized on to the kings use: Besides these, a poor
Gentleman called C^lli^gbor^^, for making a small ryme of th^ee of his wicked
Co^nsellours; the Lord L^^^ll, Sir Robert Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby:
which ryme was thus framed: (...) Cat, the Rat, and ^^vell the Dog; rule all
Engla^^ under a ^^og: was put to death, and his body divided into four
quarter^.

At this time, a Truce is concl^ded betwixt England and Sc^^land, for three
years^ and for a se^ling a firmer Amity between the two kingdoms, a marriage
it treated^ of between the Duke of Rothsay, eldest Son to the king of Scots;
and the Lady Anne de la Poole, daughter to John Duke of Suffolk, by Anne sister
to king Ri^hard, which sister he so much favored, that after the death of his
own son, who dyed some time before; ^e caused John Earl of Lincoln, her
son and his Nephew, to be proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown of England.

And now King Richard, to take away the Root of his fear, once again sent
Amb^^^adors to the Duke of Britain, with orde^ (besides the great gifts they
carried with them) to make offer, that king Richard should yearly pay and answer
the Duke of all the Revenues and Profits of all lands and possessions^ as well
belonging to the Earl of Richmond, as of any other Nobleman or Gentleman that
were in his company; if he after that time would keep them in continual
prison, and restrain the^ from liberty. But the Duke of Brit^ine being at that
time fallen into such infirmity, that the Ambassadors could have no audience;
they addressed themselves to ^eter Landois, the Dukes chief Treasurer: and he
taken with this golden hook, faithfully promised to satisfy their Request; and
had done so indeed, but that B. Morto^, sojourning then in Fl^^ders, had by his
friends Intelligence of his purpose, and presently informed the E. thereof. The
E. was then at Va^^e^^ who, upon the Bps. information, taking with him only
five servants, as though he went but to visit some friend; when he was five
miles forward on his way, suddenly turned into a Wood adjoining; and there
changing apparel with one of his servants, followed after as their attendant;
and never rested, till by ways unknown he came to his company abiding at
Angi^r^: yet was not his departure so secret nor so sudden, but that Peter
Landois had notice of it; who sending Posts after him, was so near overtaking
him, that he was scarce entered one hour into France, when the Posts arrived at
the Con^ines, and then durst go no further. In the mean time, Sir Edward
Woodvile and Captain P^ynings, who with their companies were left behind in
Vannes, had been in danger of Peter L^ndis his malice; but that the Duke being
informed by the Chancellor of their case, not only protected them, but
furnished them with all necessaries for their journey to the Earl: and was so
incensed against L^^dois for this action of his, that for this and some other
over-bold pre^umptions, he was afterward hanged.

The Earl having passed this danger in Britain, and being arrived in France,
addresseth himself to the French king, imploring his aid; and has it
promised and performed: and in this time John Vere Earl of Oxford, who had
long time been kept prisoner in the Castle of Hammes, so far prevailed with
James Blunt Captain of the Fortress, and Sir John Fortescue Porter of the
Town of Callice; that not only they suffered him to be at liberty, but
accompanied him also to the Earl of Richm^^^, to whom Captain Blunt gave
assurance that the Fortress remained wholly at his devotion. At this time also
there resorted to the Earl, diverse young Gentlemen that were Students in the
University of Paris, profering him their service; amongst whom was Richard Fox,
at that time famous for his learning; with whom afterward the Earl advised in
all his affairs, made him one of his most Privy Counsel, and at last Bishop
of Winchester.

But now king Richard having been disappointed of his design in Britain, has
another way in his head, to disapoint the Earl of Richmond of his marriage
with the Daughter of Queen Elizabeth: and to this end, he sent to the Queen^
(being still in Sanctuary) diverse messengers, who should first excuse and purge
him of all things formerly attempted and done against her; and then should
largely promise promotions innumerable, not only to her self, but also to her
son Lord Thomas Marquess D^r^et^ by ^or^e of which promises, the messengers
so prevailed with her, that no^ only she began ^o relent, but (...) was
content to submit her self wholly to the king^ pleasure. And thereupon putting
in oblivion the murder of her inno^^^^ Children, the butchering of her own
Brother and Son, the infamy of her ^oy^ll Hu^^and, the aspersion of Adulte^y
cast upon her self, the imputation of Bastardy laid to her Da^^hter^^
forgetting also her Oa^h made to the Earl of Richmonds Moth^r; seduced by
fla^tering words, she first delivered into king Richards hands her ^ive
Daughters, and after sent letters to the Marquess her Son, being then at
Pari^ wit^ the Earl of Richmond; willing him by any means to leave the Earl,
and with all speed to repair into England^ where for him were provided great
Honors and Promotions: Assuring him further, that all offenses on both parts
were forgot^en and forgiven; and both he and she incorporated in the kings
favor. If we wonder at this credulity in the Queen, we may conceive she was
moved with the (...) motives of Fear and hope; she feared (no doubt) that if
she denied the king^ request, he would presently take some sharp course both
against her and her D^^^ht^rs; and she hoped that if she yielded to his
request, he would undoub^e^ly perform his promise, seeing it was as easy for
him to keep it as to break it.

But now king Richards purpose being to marry one of his brother king Edwards
daughters: there was one impediment which directly hindered it; that he had a
wife living; and how to be rid of her, that he might not bring new aspersions
upon himself, he could not well tell; yet this he resolved, that be rid of her
he would by some way or other: but before he would use extremity, he would
first try milder ways; and first he absteyned both from her bed and company,
and complained to diverse of her barrenness; which coming to her ^are, he
hoped might cause her ^o dye with grief: And when this device failed, he then
caused a rumor to be s^^^^d among the people, that she was suddenly dead;
hoping the very conceit thereof would kill her: when this device also failed,
(for the Queen hearing of it, and mistrustring the worst, with a most
sorrowful countenance came unto him, demanding what she had done, that he
should judge her worthy to dye? who answered with fair words, bidding her be
of good cheer, for (to his knowledge) she should have no other cause:) he then
made sure work; for within few days after, whether by poison or by what other
^eans, it is not certainly known, she departed this life; and with all
solemnity, not without some formal tears of king Richard, was interred in St.
Peter's Church at Westminster.

King Richard now by his wives death, having made himself way to marry another;
(...) all the alluring means he can devise, to win the love of the Lady
Elizabeth his (...), but meaning at last to purchase his desire by Rape, if he
could not otherwise^ and had perhaps done it, but that the storms threatened
from beyond the seas, growing every day more strong then other, forced him to
prorouge the execution of his desires, and look to the prevention of his
present danger. The Lord Stanley is commanded presently to levy forces for the
kingsayde, as he will justify his integrity to him; but yet is not permitted
to go down into the Country, until he had left George Lord Strange his eldest
Son, as a Pledge of his Loyalty, behind him. And now king Richard being
informed (though the information was craftily suborned by his Enemies) that the
Earl of Richmond was out of hope of any great assistance from France;
discharges the ships which he had appointed to guard the seas, ^^d likewise
all the soldiers; only order is given for diligent watching of the Beacons.

At this time, one Morga^ Kidwelly, a Student at the Innes of Court, with great
ha^^d of his life, passed over to the Earl; Informing him, that King Richard
by all means labored to match himself with the Lady Elizabeth: which so
wrought with the Earl, that he saw there was no lingering: and the more, being
by him further informed, that Ric^ ap Thomas and John Savage, two powerful men
in their Coun^r^es, were ready with great forces to assist him: Whereupon not
having above two thousand Mercenaries, and but indifferent shipping to convay
him over: about the middle of August he put to sea, and by the advice of the
said Kidwelly, steered his course for Wales, and on the seventee^^^ day after
his departure from Harflew, arrived at Milford Haven; and there landing his
for^es without trouble or impeachment, from thence m^^^hed peacably (...)
Hereford, where by the Inhabitants he was joyfully received. Here he receives
news by Captain Arnold Butler, that the Earl of Pembrooke with all hi^
reti^^^, was upon the way to join with him; also thither came to him R^chard
Griffith and John Morgan, with a band of brave Welsh men; and the same day, Sir
Gi^ber^ T^lbo^ with all the Earl of Shewsbury^s Tenants, (being about two
thousand well appointed men) came unto him: with these he marched toward
Shrewsbury; at which time word is brought him, that Sir Robert Herbert and Rice
ap Thomas, were ready with a great power to stop his passage: which somewhat
troubled him, that his friends so suddenly should revolt: but it was but a
trick of R^ce ap Tho^^^ to make his bargain the surer: for soon after, Rice ap
Thomas meets him, and offers him his service, so as the Earl will pledge his
faith to perform his promise formerly made; which was, that having once
obtained the Crown, he would make Rice sole Governor of Wales: which was now
assented to, and afterward performed^ At this time the Lord St^^ley with five
thousand men, had taken up his lodging at the Town of Leicester; but hearing of
the Earls march that way, he le^t Leicester and went to Adde^t^^, not daring
to show himself openly for the Earl; for fear the King should put his Son
the Lord Strange to death, whom he had left an Hostage with him.

All this time King Richard lay at Nottigham, and was as it were fatally taken
with a spirit of security, hearing that the Earl had but small assistance
either from France or in England; and therefore slighting him as little able to
do any great matter: but when he heard that part of his own forces was
revolted to him, then he began to look about him, and sends present direction
to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Northumberland and Surry, with Sir
Thomas Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, with all speed to bring their
forces to him at Lutterworth, from whence upon their arrival, hearing that the
Earl was encamped at Lichfield: he marches thitherward: At which time, Sir
Walter Hungerford and some others, withdrew themselves from King Richards part:
and Sir John Savage, Sir Bryan Sta^ford, and Sir Simon Digby, with their
several Forces, joined with the Earl.

King Richard took the advantage of a large Plain near Bosworth, adjoining
to a Hill called Anne Beam; where he encamped: And observing by his
Adversaries manner of approach, that they meant to give him battle; He the
next morning put his Forces in order: The Vauntguard was led by the Duke of
Norfolk, which consisted of one thousand two hundred Bow-men, flanked with two
hundred Cuyrassiers, under the conduct of the Earl of Surrey: The Battle
King Richard led himself, which consisted of a thousand Bill-men, empaled with
two thousand Pikes: The Reereward was led by Sir Thomas Bracke^bury, consisting
of two thousand mingled weapons, with two wings of Horsemen, containing fifteen
hundred, all of them cast into square maniples; expecting the Lord Sta^ley's
coming with two thousand, most of them Horsemen: But the Lord Stanley carried
himself so warily, that he might neither give cause of suspicion to the King,
nor yet cause of disadvan^tage to the Earl: that when, early in the morning,
the Earl sent unto him, desiring his present repair; he answered, that he
must look for no aid from him, till the Battles should be joined; and
therefore advised him, with all possible speed to give the Onset. This Answer
somewhat staggered the Earl, because his number did but little exceed one
half of the Kings: Yet to make the best show he could^ by the advice of his
Counsel of War, he made his Vaward open and thin; of which John Earl of
Oxford had the leading: The Earl himself led the Battle: Sir Gilbert Talbot
commanding the Right wing, and Sir John Savage the left: whose soldiers being
all alike clad in white Coats and hoods of Frize; by the reflection of the Sun
upon them, made them appear in the view of their Enemies, double the number.
The Reereward was governed by the Earl of Pembrooke, which consisted most of
^orse, and some Pikes and Black bills. King Richard to encourage his soldiers,
made a solemn speech unto them: but alas! what hope co^ld he have to put them
in heart, whose hearts he had lost? or to rise alacrity in others, who had none
in himself? For now the remembrance of his fore-passed villainies, and
specially a fearful dream he had the night before, (wherein it seemed to him
he saw diverse Images like Devils, which pulled and haled him, not suffering him
to take any rest or quiet) so damped his spirits, that although he set a good
face upon the matter, yet he co^ld not choose but have a presaging fear that
the date o^ hi^ days was not far from expiring. The Earl of Richmond on the
other side, having a clear conscience in himself, and speaking to men that
followed him for love^ had the easier means ^o give them encouragement: which
he did with so cheerful a countenance; as though already he had gotten the
victory. After their military exhor^ations ended, King Richard commanded to
give the onset. Between both Armies, there was agreat Marsh; which the Earl
left on his right hand, that it might be a defense for his soldiers on that
side; and besides by so doing, he had the Sun at his back, and in the faces
of the enemy. When king Richard saw that the Earls company wa^ pa^^ed this
Marish, he commanded with all speed to set upon them. Then were the Arrows let
fly on both sides, and those spent, they came to hand-strokes; at which
encounter comes in the the Lord Stanley, and joins with the Earl. The Earl of
Oxford in the mean time, fearing lest his company should be compassed in with
the multitude of his enemies, gave charge in every rank, that no man should
go above ten foot from the Standard: whereupon they knit themselves together,
and ceased a while from fighting: which the Enemy seeing, and mistrusting some
fraud, they also paused and left striking. But then the E^rle of Oxford, having
brought all his Band together, set on the Enemy afresh; which the Enemy
perceiving, they placed their men slender and thin before, but thick and
broad behind; and resolutely again began ^he Fight. While these two
Va^ntgu^rds were thus contending, King Richard was informed, that the Earl of
Richmond with a small ^^^ber was not far off: whereupon he presently makes
toward him; and being of an invincible courage, whereof he was now to give the
last proof, he made so furious an assault, that first with his own hands he
slew Sir William Brandon, who bore the Earls Standard; next, he unhorst and
overthrew Sir John Cheyny, a strong and stout man at Arms; and then assaulted
the Earl of Richmond himself, who (though no man would have thought it, yet)
for all the Kings fury, held him off at his Lances point, till Sir William
Stanley came in with three thousand freshmen; and then oppressed with multitude,
King Richard is there slain. It is said, that when the Battle was at the
point to be lost, a swift horse was b^ought unto him, with which he might have
saved himself by flight: but out of his undaunted courage he refused it,
saying He would that day make an end of all Battles, or else lose his life. In
this Battle, Henry Earl of Northumberland, who led King Richards Reereward,
never struck stroke; as likewise many other, who followed King Richard more for
Fear than Love: and so King Richard who had deceived many in his time, was at
this time deceived by many: which was not unforeseen by some, who caused a
Rhyme to be set upon the Duke of Norfolks gate the night before the Battle;
which was this: Jack of Norfolk be not too bold,
For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold.
Yet notwithstanding this warning, the noble Duke continued firm to king
Richard; and more considering what he was toward him, then what toward
others; followed him to the last, and in his quarrel lost his life. This John
Howard was the son of Sir Robert Howard knight, and Margaret eldest daughter
of Thomas ^^^bray Duke of Norfolk, in who^e right he was created Duke of
Norfolk by king Richard the Third, in ^he year 1483. having been made a Baron
before by king Edward the Fourth. The whole number slain in thi^ battle on
kin^ R^ch^rds part was not above a thousand persons; whereof of the Nobility,
besides the Duke of Norfolk, only Walter Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Richard
Rat^liffe, and Sir Robert ^rakenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, and not many
Gentlemen more. Sir William Catesby, one of the chief Counselors of king
Richard, with diverse others, were two days after beheaded at Leicester.
Amongst those that ran away, were Franci^ Viscount Lovell, Hu^fry Stafford, and
Thomas Stafford his brother, who took Sanctuary in Saint John's at Gloucester. Of
Captives and Prisoners there were great number. Henry Earl of Northumberland,
who though on king Richards side, intermi^ted not in the battle; was
incontinently taken into favor, and made of the Counsel; But Thomas Howard
Earl of S^rry, though he submitted himself, yet as having been specially
familiar with king Richard, was committed to the Tower; where he remained a
long time: but at last was delivered and highly promoted. On the Earl of
Richmonds part were slain scarce a hundred persons; (some say, but ten) of
whom the principal was Sir William Brandon, the Earls Standard Bearer. This
battle was fought at Rodmer, near Bosworth in Leicestershire, the two and
twentieth day of August, in the year 1485. having continued little above two
hours. Presently after the battle, the Earl knighted in the field, Sir
Gilbert Talbot, Sir John Mortimer, Sir William Willoughby, Sir Rice ap Thomas,
Sir Robert Points, Sir Humfry Stanley, Sir John Turbervile, Sir Hugh Pershall,
Sir R. Edgecombe, Sir John Bykenill, and Sir Edmund Carew: and then kneeling
down, he rendered to Almighty God his hearty Thanks for the victory he had
obtained; and commanded all the hurt and maimed persons to be cured: whereat
the people rejoicing, clapped their hands and cried, king Henry, king Henry:
which good will and gladness of the people when the Lord Sta^ley saw, he took
the Crown of king Richard, which was found amongst the spoils in the field,
and set it on the Earls head, as though he had been elected King by the voice
of the people. It may not be forgotten, that when king Richard was come to
Bosworth, he sent to the Lord Stanley to come presently to his presence; which
if he refused to do, he swore by Christ's Passion, that he would strike off his
sons head before he dined: whereto the Lord Stanley answered, That if he did
so, he had more sons alive, and he might do his pleasure; but to come to
him, he was not then determined. Which answer when king Richard heard, he
commanded the Lord Strange immediately to be beheaded; but being at the very
time when both Armies were in sight of each other; his Lords persuaded him, it
was now time to fight, and not to put to Execution: and so the Lord Strang^
escaped.

Of his Taxations.
WE must not look for Taxations in kind, in this kings reign; for he drew
from his Subjects not money so much as blood; and the money he drew was most by
blood, which drew on confiscation: whereof, let never any Prince make a
president: for where Taxations properly do but Tondere, the^e did Deglu^ere.
Yet in his second year, he called a Parliament, wherein besides the great
confiscations of those that were then attainted, he imposed upon the people a
great Tax, which what it was, is not Recorded.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
HAving gotten the Crown by Pestilent courses, he sought to Establish i^ by
wholesome Laws: for in no Kings reign were better Laws made, then in the reign
of this man. Amongst other of his Laws, It was enacted, that from thence forth,
the Commonalty of the Realm should in no wise be charged by any imposition
called a Benevolence, nor any such like charge; and that such exactions called
a Benevolence, before this time taken, shall be taken for no example to make
any such like charge hereafter; but shall be damned and annulled for ever. Many
other good Laws were by him made; that we may say, he took the ways of being a
good King, if he had come to be King by ways that had been good.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN his time, the troubles of the Temporalty kept the Clergy at quiet; and
though there were complaining in the streets, there was none in the Church.
Only ^hores wife might complain, why she should do Penance for offending
lightly against only the seventh Commandment; and king Richard do none for
offending heavily against all the ten; but that perhaps he had gotten some good
fellow to be his Confessor.

Works of Piety done by him.
AS bad as this King was, yet some good works he did: he founded a College at
Middleham beyond York; and a Collegiate Chauntry in London, near unto the
Tower, called our Lady of Barking: He endowed the Queens College in Cam^^^^ge,
with five hundred Marks of yearly revenue; and disforested the great field of
Whitchwood, which king Edward his brother had enclosed for Dear.

Of Casualties happening in his time.
IN his second year, at the time when the Duke of Buckingham meant to pass
with his Army over Severn; so great an inundation was of wa^er, that men were
drowned in their beds, houses were overturned, children were carried about the
fields swimming in Cradles, beasts were drowned on hills: which rage of water
conti^^ed ten days; and is to this day in the Countries thereabout, called the
great water, or the Duke of Buckingham^ water.

Of his wife and issue.
HE married Anne the second Daughter of Richard Nevill the great Earl of
Warwick, being the widow of Edward Prince of Wales, the Son of king He^^y
the sixth: she lived his Wife to the last year of his reign; and then to make
way for another, was brought to her end, and laid a^ rest in the Abbey of
Westminster: by her he had only one Son, born at Middleham near Richmond in
the County of York; at four years old, created Earl of Salisbury by his
Uncle king Edward the fourth; at ten years old, created Prince of Wales by his
Father king Richard, but dyed soon after.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
THere never was in any man a greater uniformity of Body and Mind then was in
him; both of them equally deformed. Of Body he was but low, crooke-backt,
hook-shouldred, splay-footed, and goggle-eyed, his face little and round, his
complexion swarsie, his left arm from his birth dry and withered: born a
monster in nature, with all his teeth, with hair on his head, and nails on
his fingers and toes. And just such were the qua^^ties of his mind: One
quality he had in ordinary, which was, to look faw^^ngly when he plotted,
sternly when he executed. Those vices which in other men are Passions, in him
were Habits: and his cruelty was not upon occasion, but natural. If at any
time he showed any virtue, it was but pretense; the truth of his mind was
only lying and falsehood. He was full of courage and yet not valiant; valor
consisting not only in doing, but as well in suffering, which he could not
abide. He was politic and yet not wise, Policy looking but to the middle,
wisdom to the end: which he did, and did not. And it was not so much ambition
that made him desire the Crown, as cruelty, that it might be in his power to
kill at his pleasure: and to say the truth, he was scarce of the number of men
who consist of flesh and blood, being nothing but blood. One Miracle we may
say he did; which was, that he made the truth of History to exceed the fiction
of Poetry, being a greater Harpy than those that were feigned. He would feign
have been accounted a good King, but for his life he could not be a good Man;
and it is an impossible thing to be one without the other. He left no is^ue
behind him: and it had been pity he should, at least in his own Image; One
such Monster was enough for many Ages.

Of his Death and Burial.
BEing slain in the Battle at Bosworth, as before is related; his body was
left naked and des^oyled to the very skin, not so much as a c^out left about
him to cover his privy parts: and taken up, was trussed behind a Pursuivant at
Arms, one Bla^ch Senglyer or White-boare; his head and arms hanging on one
side of the horse, and his legs on the other; and all besprinkled with mire
and dirt, he was brought to the Gray-Friers Church within the Town of
Leicester, and there for some time lay a miserable spectacle; and afterward,
with small Funerall-pompe, was there interred. But after this, King Henry the
Seventh caused a Tomb to be made, and set up over the place where he was
buried, with a picture of Alablaster representing his person; which at the
suppression of that Monastery was utterly defaced: Since when, his Grave
overgrowne with nettles and weeds, is not to be found; only the Stonechest
wherein his Corpse lay, is now made a drinking-trough for horses, at a common
Inn in Leicester, and reteineth the only memory of this Monarchs greatness.
But his body (as is reported) was carried out of the City, and contemptuously
bestowed under the end of Bow-bridge, which gives passage over a branch of
Stowre, upon the West side of the Town. Upon this bridge (the like report
runs) stood a stone of some height; against which king Richard, as he
passed ^owards Bosworth, by chance struck his spur: and against the same
stone, as he was brought back, hanging by the horse side, his head was dashed
and broken; as a Wise-woman (forsooth) had foretold; who before his going to
battle, being asked of his success, said, that where his spur struck, his
head should be broken. But these are but Repo^^^ He had lived seven and thirty
years, Reigned two, and two months.

Of men of Note in his time.
OF men of Note for wickedness and villainy, enough have been mentioned i^ the
body of the Story: and for men of Valor and Learning, they will fitte^ be
placed in a better Kings Reign.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SEVENTH.
HENRY Earl of Richmond, borne in Pembrooke-Castle, son to Edmund Earl of
Richmond, by his wife Margaret, sole daughter of John Duke of Somerset, which
John was son of John Earl of Somerset, son of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, by his third wife Katherine Swinford; and by this descent, Heir of
the House of Lancaster: having won the Battle at Bosworth, against King
Richard; is by public acclamations saluted King of England, on the 22 day of
August, in the year 1485. and this was his first Title. And now to take away a
Root of danger; before his departure from Leicester, he sent Sir Robert
Willoug^by to the Castle of Sheriffehaton in the County of York, for Edward
Plantage^et Earl of Warwick, son and heir to George Duke of Clarence, being
then of the age of fifteen years, whom King Richard had there kept a prisoner
all his time; who was thence conveyed to London, and shut up in the Tower to be
kept in safe custody. In the same Castle also, King Richard had left residing
the Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth: and her now King
Henry appoints honorably attended to be brought up to London, and to be
delivered to the Queen her mother. This done, he took his journey toward
London; where at his approaching near the City, Thomas Hill the Major, Thomas
Britain and Richard Chester Sheriffs, with other principal Citizens, met him
at Shore-ditch, and in great state brought him to the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, where he offered three Standards: in the one was the Image of St. George;
in another was a red fiery Dragon, beaten upon white and green Sarcenet; in
the third was painted a dun Cow, upon yellow Tarterne. After Prayers said, he
departed to the Bishops Palace, and there sojourned a season: And in the time
of his stay here, he advised with his Council, and appointed a day for
solemnizing his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth: before which time
notwithstanding, he went by water to Westminster, and was there with great
solemnity Anointed and Crowned King of England, by the whole consent as well of
the Commons as of the Nobility, by the name of Henry the Seventh, on the
thirtieth day of October, in the year 1485: and this was his second Title. And
even this was revealed to Cadwalloder last King of the Britains, seven ^u^dred
ninety and seven years past; That his offspring should Reign and b^a^e
Dominion in this Realm again.

On the seventeenth day of November following, he called his High Court of
Parliament; where, at the first sitting, two scruples appea^ed: One concerning
the Burgesses; for that many had been returned Burgesses and knights of Shires,
who by a Parliament in king Richards time, stood Attainted still: and it was
thought incong^uous, for men to make Law^^, who were themselves outlawed: For
remedy whereof, an Act was presently passed for their restoring; and then they
were admitted to sit in the House. The other concerning the King himself, who
had been Attainted by king Richard: but for this, It was resolv^d by all the
Judges in the Ch^quer Chamber, that the possession of the Crown takes away all
defects; yet for Honors sake, all Records of hi^ Attainder were taken off the
File. And so these scruples thus removed, the Parliament b^ga^; wherein were
Attainted, first Richard late Duke of Gloucester, calling himself Richard the
Third: Then, his Assistants at the Battle of Bosworth: John late Duke of
Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey, Francis Viscount Lovell, Walter Devereux late
Lord Ferrers, John Lord Zouch, Rober^ Harington, Richard Cha^leto^^ Richar^
Rat^liffe^ William Ber^ley of Weley, Robert Middleton, James Haringto^^ ^obert
Br^c^enb^^y, T^omas Pilkington, Wal^er Ho^ton, William Catesby, Roger W^ke,
William Sapco^e, Humfry Stafford, William Clerk of Wenlock, Geoffry St.
German, Richard Watkins, Herald at Arms, Richard Revell, Thomas Pul^er,
John Welsh, John Ken^all l^te Secretary to the late king Richard, John Buck,
Andrew Rat, and William Brampton of Burford. But notwithstanding this
Attainder, diverse of the persons aforesaid, were afterward not only by King
Hen^y pardoned, but restored also to their lands and livings. As likewise he
caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever would submit themselves, and
take Oath to be true subjects, should have their Pardon: whereupon many came
out of Sanctuaries and other places; who submitting themselves, were received
to mercy.

And now King Henry con^idering that ^aena and Praemio Respublica contine^uy;
after Punishing for Offence^, he proceeds to Rewarding for Service: and first,
Jasper Earl of Pembrooke his Uncle, he created Duke of Bedford: Thomas Lord
Stanley he created Earl of Darb^: the Lord Chendow of Britain, his special
friend, he made Earl of Bathe: Sir Giles Dauben^y was made Lord Dawbeney: Sir
Robert Willoughby was made Lord Brook: and Edward Stafford eldest son to
Henry late Duke of Buckingham, he restored to his Dignity and Possessions.
Besides, in this Parliament, an Act was made, for se^^ing the Crown upon the
person of king Henry and the heirs of his Body successively for ever. And then
with all speed he sent and redeemed the Marquess Dorset, and Sir John
Bourchier, whom he had left Hostages in France for money: and called home
Morton Bishop of Ely, and Richard Fox; making Morton Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Fox Lord Keeper of the Privy S^ole, and Bishop of Winchester. Besides
these, he made also of his Privy Counsel, Jasper Duke of Bedford, John Earl
of Oxford, Thomas Stanley Earl of Darby, John Bishop of Ely, Sir William
Stanley Lord Chamberlain of his Household; Sir Robert Willoughby Lord Brook,
Lord Steward of his Household; Giles Lord Dawbeny; John Lord Dyn^^m, after made
Lord Treasurer of England; Sir Reginold Bray, Sir John Cheyny, Sir Richard
Guildford, Sir Richard Tunstall, Sir Richard Edgecombe, Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir
Edmund P^ynings, Sir John Risley, with some other.

These things thus done: as well in performance of his Oath, as to make his
Crown sit the surer on his head; on the eighteenth day of January, he proceeded
to the solemnizing his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth; which gave him a third
title: And indeed this conjunction made a wreath of three so indissoluble, that
no age since has ever questioned it: and it is fixed upon a Tree planted so
happily by the waters side, and has at this day so many flourishing branches,
that there is good hope it will continue as long as the world continues.

And now whether King Henry doubted any sudden attempt upon his person, or
whether he did it to follow the example of France: in the very beginning of his
reign, he ordained a band of tall personable men to be attending upon him,
which was called the Kings guard; which no King before, and all Kings since,
have always used: But though he provided a guard for defense of his own body;
yet for the bod^^^ of his people he could provide none; for at this time a
sickness (of the symp^^^e called the sweating sickness) seized so violently
upon them, that within a ^^ort time many thousands perished; particularly in
London, two Majors successive^y and six Aldermen within eight days dyed: and
for this: sickness no Physic aff^^ded any cure; till at last, this remedy was
found: if a man were taken with the sweat in the day time, that then he should
presently lie down in his clothes, and so lie still the whole four and
twenty hours: if he were taken in the night, then ^e should not rise out of
his bed for the space of four and twenty hours; not provoking sweat, nor yet
eating or drinking at all, at least but very moderately. In (...) sickness there
was one good circumstance; that though it were violent, yet it lasted not long:
for beginning about the one and twentieth of September, it cleared ^p before
the end of October following.

And now all things being set in good order in the South parts there arises a
little s^o^me in the North, but was soon dispersed. For King Henry making a
journey in^o the North parts, to show himself there where he had not yet been;
and where (...) respect to King Richard might have left some opposites: at his
coming to Li^colne was certified that the Lord Lovell and Humfry Stafford were
gone out of S^nctuary in Colchester; but whither, no man knew. The King
therefore not much regarding it, went forward to York; and being come thither,
it was then plainly told him, that the Lord Lovell with a strong power was at
hand, and would presently invade the City. This made the King in a great
straight; for neither had he any Army r^^dy; no^ if he had men, had he any
weapons or Munition ^or them. Yet in this straight, he commanded the Duke of
Bedford with three thousand men to ^et out ag^^nst him, but so ill armed, that
their armours for the most part were but of tanned l^^ther; who being come
near the Camp of the Rebels, caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever
would submit themselves as loyal Subjects, should have their Pardons, and be
received into grace: which Proclamation so prevailed, that i^ made the Lord
Lovell secretly in the night to fly away; and then the Army left without a
head, submitted themselves to the Kings mercy. The Lord Lovell fled into
Lancashire; and there for a time lurked with Sir Thomas Broughton, a man
powerful in those parts. Humfry Stafford took Sanctuary in a village called
Culnh^m two miles from Abington: but the Sanctuary being judged by the Justices
of the Kings Bench, to be no lawful defense for Traitors; he was taken from
thence by force, and convayed to the Tower, afterward to Tyburne, and there
hanged. His brother Thomas was pardo^ed, because it was thought, he was drawn
in by his brother Humfry.

In this year, John Persivall the Major of London's Carver, waiting at his
Table, was chosen one of the Sheriffs of London, only by Sir John Collet's,
then Major, drinking to him in a cup of Wine, (as the custom is, to drink to
him whom he li^t to name Sheriff) and forthwith the said Persivall sat down
at the Majors Table, and covered his head, and was afterward Major himself.

At this time a mean instrument attemped a great work; by which we may see,
how far imagination may out-goe reason: One Richard Symond a Priest, a man of
base birth though some learning; had a scholar of baser birth, the Son of a
Shoemaker, (some say a Baker) named Lambert Symnell; but of a pregnant wit, and
comely personage: Him he gives out to be Edward Earl of Warwick, lately (as
was said) escaped out of prison; Both of them being of like years and stature:
with this Scholar of his, he sails into Ireland; and so sets forth the
matter: that not only the Lord Thomas Fitz-Gerard Earl of Kildare, and Deputy
of Ireland; but many other of the Nobilty gave credit to his words; and as
those that affected the house of York, were ready to take his part; and even
already saluted the young Symnell King. Withal they sent into Flanders to the
Lady Margaret, sister to the late King Edward, and widow of ^harles Duke of
Burgoigne, requiring aid and assistance from her. This Lady being of the house
of York, bore an inward grudge against King Henry, being of the house of
Lancaster; and therefore though she well understood it was but a colored
matter, yet was willing to take advantage of it: and thereupon promised her
assistance. King Henry being advertised of these things, advised with his
Counsel; by whom it was agreed, that two things presently should be do^e.
First, to grant ^ Pardon to any that would submit themselves, for any offense
whatsoever, though it were for High Treason; the next, that the Earl of
Warwick should be openly showed abroad in the City, and other public places;
whereby, the report spread abroad of his being in Irel^nd, might appear
plainly to be false. Withal, the Queen Elizabeth, widow of King Edward the
fourth, and Mother to the present Queen, was adjudged to forfeit all her Lands
and Possessions, and to live confined in the Abbey of Bermondsey in Southwarke;
where in great pensivenes, within a few years she died. But for what cause this
severity was used against this Queen, is not altogether certain: To say, (as
was commonly said) that it was for rendering her self and her daughters into
the hands of king Rich^rd, were manifest injustice, to punish her for doing a
thing out of fear, which else she should have been compelled to do by force:
and to say (as some also have said) that it was for giving aid underhand to
Perki^, were a manifest unlikelihood, tha^ she should aid a Counterfeit
against her own Son in Law: we must therefore content our selves with knowing
the bare colorable pretext, and leave the true reason as a secret of State.
But this showing abroad of the true Earl of Warwick, though it satisfied
some, yet not all: for some gave out that it was but a trick of the King, and
not the true Warwick. At least the Earl of Lincoln, son to John de l^
Poole Duke of Suffolk, and Elizabeth sister to king Edward the fourth, would
not omit to take the advantage, though he knew that Symnell was but a
Counterfeit. And thereupon, as soon as ^he Parliament was dissolved, he fled
secretly into Fl^nders, to his Aunt the Lady Margaret D^tchesse of Burgoigne;
between whom it was concluded, that he and the Lord L^vell should go into
Ireland, and there attend upon the Counterfeit Warwick, and honor him as
king^ and with the power of the Irishmen bring him into England: but it was
concluded withal, that if their actions succeeded^ then the Counterfei^
Warwick should be deposed, and the true be delivered out of prison, and
anointed King. And to this purpose, the Earl of Lincol^, by the aid of the
Lady Margaret, had gotten together two thousand Almaines, with one Martin Swart
a valiant and expert Captain to be their leader. With this power, the Earl
sailed into Ireland, and at the City of Dublin, caused young Lambert the
Counterfeit Warwick, in most solemn manner, first to be Proclaimed, and after
to be Crowned king of E^gland: and then with a great number of beggarly and
unarmed Irishmen, under the Conduct of the Lord Thomas Gerardine Earl of
Kild^re, they sailed into England, and landed at a place called the Pile of
Fowdray, not far from Lancaster; hoping there by the means of Sir Thomas
Broughton, a powerful man in that Country, to have their Army both furnished
and increased. King Henry hearing that the Earl of Lincoln was landed at
Lancaster, assembled a great Army, Conducted by the Duke of Bedford, and the
Earl of Oxford; and with these he marched to Nottingham, and there by a little
wood called Bowres, he pitched his field; whither there came unto him, the Lord
George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, ^he Lord Strange, Sir John Cheyney, and
diverse other Knights and Gentlemen. In which mean time, the Earl of Lincoln
being entered into Yorkshire, passed quietly on his journey, without doing
spoil or hurt unto any; trusting thereby to have won the people to come to his
aid: but when he perceived few or none to resort unto him, he then determined
to venture a battle with the Army he had already; and thereupon took his way
from York to Newarke upon Trent. King Henry understanding which way he took,
came the night before the battle to Newarke; and going three miles further,
near to a little Village called Stoke, there waited the approach of the Earl
of Lincoln; So the next day they joined battle; where after a long fight, of
at the least three hours; though the Almaines, and specially their Captain
Martin Swart behaved themselves most valiantly; yet their Ir^sh, being in a
manner but naked men, were at last overthrown, four thousand slain, and the
rest put ^o fl^ght; but not one of their Cap^aines; for the Earl of Lincoln,
the Lord L^vell, Sir Thomas Broughton, Martin Swart, and the Lord Gerardine
were all found dead in the very place where they had stood fighting; that
though they lost the battle, yet they won the reputation of hardy and stout
soldiers. Only of the Lord Lovell, some report, that attempting to save
himself by flight; in passing over the river of Trent, was drowned. On the
kings part, though some were slain, yet not any m^n of note. This battle was
fought on a Saturday (observed as always fortunate to king Henry) being the
sixteenth of June, in the second year of king Henry's reign. The young
Lambert, and his Master Simond the Priest, were both taken; and both had their
lives saved: Lambert, because but a Child; S^mond, because a Priest: yet
Symo^d was kept in prison, Lambert was taken into the kings kitchen, to turn
the spit in the turn of his fortune, and at last made one of the kings
Fau^kners.

In the beginning of his third year, king Henry having been in Yorkshire, to
settle the m^ndes of that people: about the midst of August, came to Newcastle
upon Tine, and from thence sent Ambassadors into Scotland, Richard Fox lately
before made Bishop of Exceter, and Sir Richard Edgecombe Comptroller of his
House, to conclude a Peace or Truce with James king of Scots: A Peace, by
reason of the peoples backwardnes, could not be obtained: but a Truce was
concluded for the term of seven years; with a promise from the king, that it
should be renewed before the first seven years should be expired.

At this time, Ambassadors came from the king of France^ to king Henry; who
declared, that their Master king Charles was now at war with Francis Duke of
Britai^e, for that he succored the Duke of Orleance and other Rebels against
the Realm of France; and therefore requested, that for the old familiarity
that had been between them, he would either a^^ist him, or not assist the Duke,
but stand Ne^ter. King Henry answered, that having received courte^ies from
them both, he would do his uttermost endeavor to make them friends: and to
that end, as soon as the French Ambassadors were departed, he sent Christopher
Vrswick his Chaplain over into France; who should first go to the French king,
and after to the Duke of Britain, to mediate a Peace between them.

In the time of Vrswicks Embassage, king Henry caused his Wife the Lady
Elizabeth to be Crowned Queen, on Saint Katherines day in November, with all
solemnity; and at the same time delivered the Lord Thomas Marquess Dorset out
of the Tower, and received him again into his former favor.

Vrswick traveled between the two Princes, to procure a Peace; but they,
though making a show to incline to Peace, yet prepared for war, and offers on
neither side would be accepted. In which time, Edward Lord Wood^ile Uncle to
the Queen, made suite to the king, for leave to go over with a power of men,
in aid of the Duke of Britain; which su^e, though the king denied, yet the
Lord Woodvile would venture it; and with a power of ^oure hundred able men, got
secretly over, and joined with the Britains against the French. This the
French king took ill at king Henry's hand; but being informed that it was
against the kings will, he seemed sati^fied: and a Peace was concluded between
Fr^^^e and England, to endure for twelve months. But in conclusion, king Henry
finding that the French king dealt not r^ally with him, but only held him on
with pretences^ he called his high Court of Parliamen^, requiring their advice
what was fit to be done: where it was con^^uded, that the Duke of Britain
should be aided; and to that end great ^ummes of money were by Parliament
granted. This Determination of the Parliament, king Henry signifies to the
French king, hoping, it would have wrought him to some terms of Peace^ But the
king of France little regarding it, proceeded on in his violent cour^es against
the Britains; so as at last, on ^he eight and twentieth day of July, the
Britains gave battle to the French, near to a Town called (...); having
apparelled seventeen hundred of the Britai^^, in Co^^ with ^ed ^rosse^ after
the English fashion, to make the Frenchmen believe ^hey were all English,
although in ^eed they had no more English than the four hundred of the Lord
Woodvile. But no^withstanding this device, the Victory fell to the French; so
that all the Englishmen almost were slain, with the Lord Woodvile himself;
besides six thousand Britaines^ The Duke of Orleance and the Prince of Orange,
who were there on the Britain^s part, were taken Prisoners. The French lost
twelve hundred men; and amongst other^ that valiant Italian Captain James
G^le^t.

This news being brought into England, caused king H^^^y to make haste to send
forth his Army: and thereupon, the Lord Brook, with Sir John Cheyny, Sir John
Middleton, Sir Ralph Hilton, Sir Richard Corbet, Sir Thomas Leighton, Sir
Richard Lacon, and Sir Edmund Cor^^all, are sent over with all speed into
Britain; having with them eight thousand men, to aid the Duke of Britain
against the French. But while this war was thus set forward, the Duke of
Britain died; leaving in effect, one only Daughter, the Lady A^^e (for the
other being the younger, died soon after) and then the chief Rulers of
Britain falling at dissension amongst themselves, little regarded the defense
of the Country: whereupon the English returned home, within five months after
their setting forth: and the French king getting the upper hand of the
Britains, and marying the Lady Anne sole daughter of the Duke of Britain,
incorporated that Duchy to the Crown of France.

In the last Parliament, a Subsidy was granted, for the furnishing out an Army
into Britain; and it was agreed, that every man should be taxed after the rate
of his substance, to pay the tenth penny of his goods: which Tax the most part
of Yorkshire and the Bishopric of Durh^^ refused to pay: whereof the
Collectours complained to Henry E. of Northumberland, President of the North
parts. The E. signifies it to the King; and the K. commands him to levy the
same, by distress or otherwise (without sparing of any) as he should think
most meet. The rude multitude, hearing of this Command from the King, with
great violence set upon the Earl, by the exciting of a simple fellow named
John a Chamber; and alleging all the fault to be in the Earl, as chief
author of the Tax; they cruelly murdered both him and diverse of his household
servants. And to make good their seditious fact, they assembled a great number,
and made one Sir John Egremond their Captain: Declaring, that in defense of
their liberties, they would bid the King battle. In this bravery they stood,
as long as none opposed them: but when Thomas Earl of Surry appeared with an
Army, though they skirmished a while, yet they were soon discomfited, and their
Ringleader John a Chamber was taken, and at York on a Gibbet set upon a
square pair of Gallows, like an arch Traitor was hanged, and many of his
Accomplices on a lower Gallows; the innocent people for the most part Pardoned.
But Sir John Egremond fled into Flanders, to the Lady Margaret Duchess of
Burgundy; the common and sure refuge for all Rebels against King Henry. After
this, the king appointed Sir Richard Tu^st^ll to gather the Subsidy, and would
not spare the payment of a penny. This year, notwithstanding this Tax, the
king borrowed of every Alderman of London two hundred pounds, and of the
Chamber nine thousand eighty two pounds seventeen shillings and four pence,
which was paid again at the time with great thankfulness; which he did at a
time he needed no^, to the end perhaps he might do it another time, when he
needed.

At this time, James the third, king of Scotland, having by some errors of
Government incurred the hatred of his Nobility and people; labored with king
Henry, as also with the Pope, and the king of France, to make an Accord between
him and his people, who had compelled Prince James his Son, to be the Titular
head of those Arms which they assumed against him. The kings accordingly
interposed their mediations by Ambassadors; but could receive no other but
this outrageous answer, That there was no talking of Peace, unless he would
resign his Crown. Which answer the kings protested against, declaring by
their Ambassadors, that they thought it a common injury done to themselves, and
that the Example was not sufferable, for Subjects to lift their hands against
their Sovereign. Hereupon it came to a Battle, at B^nnocks-borne by
Strivelin: where king James, rashly beginning the fight, before his whole
Forces were come, was (notwithstanding the contrary commandment of the Prince
his son) slain in the Mill of that field, whither he fled, after the Battle
ended.

About this time, a Difference fell out which grew to a War, between the
Emperor Frederick, and some Towns of his in Flanders, especially Gaunt and
Bruges: In this war, the Lord Ravenstein a principal person about
Maximilian, not only forsook the Emperor and his son Maximilian his Lord,
(corrupted as was thought from France) but made himself head of the popular
party, seizing upon the Towns of Ipre and Sluice: and not this only, but
forthwith sent to the Lord de Cords Governor for the French king in Picardie,
to aid him against some Towns in Flanders: To which the Lord de Cords,
willing of any occasion to set foot in Flanders, was easily drawn. But king
Henry not liking to have the French so near his English pale, sent over the
Lord Morley with a thousand men, who should join with the L. Dawbeney then
Deputy of Callice, to resist them. Amongst other acts by them performed, this
was chief; That the Lord Dawbeney, with the Lord Morley, Sir James Tyrrell
Captain of Guisn^s, Sir Henry Willoughby, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir Humfry
Talbot Marshall of Callice, and others to the number of two thousand, issued
secretly one night out of Callice, and came to Newport, and from thence to
Dix^^e; where the Lord Dawbeney commanded all men to send back their hors^s:
which the Lord Morley only refusing to do, was cause that he only of all the
Captains was sl^ine with a Gun: for the rest, after their arrows discharged,
fell prostrate to the ground; by which means the Enemies Ordnance overshot
them, k^lling only the Lord Morley that was on horseback. Here they slew of
the Enemy, to the number of eight thousand; of the English part was slain the
Lord Morley, and not above a hundred more. This Victory so enriched the
English, that they who went forth in cloth, came home in silk; and they who
went out on foot, returned back on horseback. Upon this Defeat, the Lord de
Cords lying at Ypre with twenty thousand men, and thinking to be revenged,
besieged the Town of Newport; and so strongly assaulted it, that one day his
men entered, and set up his Banner upon a Tower of the Town: when suddenly a
Bark arriving with only fourscore ^resh English archers, so terrified them,
thinking their number to be far greater, that the French were glad to leave
their Banner behind them, and give over the assault; and the night following,
the Lord de Cords (who so much longed for Callice, that he would commonly say,
he could be content to lie seven years in Hell, so that Callice were in the
possession of the French) brake up his siege, and returned to Helding with as
much shame, as the English to Callice with honor.

A little before this t^me, Francis Duke of Britain dying, left only one
daughter, the Lady Anne, affianced to Maximilian King of the Romans; and in so
solemn a manner, that she taking upon her to be the Bride, and being laid in
her bed, was contented to permit Maximilians Deputy, in presence of many Noble
witnesses, as well men as women, to put his leg, stripped naked to the knee,
between the spousall sheets; accounting that Ceremony to amount to a
Consummation. The King of France likewise had been contracted to the Lady
Margaret daughter to the foresaid Maximilian, and had received her to that end:
Yet all this notwithstanding, out of a violent desire to join the Duchy of
Britain to the Crown of Fr^^ce, he disanulled and made void both the
Contracts. But to the end he might do it without opposition of the King of
England, he sent Ambassadors, the Lord Francis of L^^zemburg, Charles
Marignane, and Robert Gaguine, to King Henry; partly to conclude a Peace, but
chiefly to procure king He^ries good will to make void the foresaid contracts:
to which though king Henry was not willing to give consent, yet he consented
willingly to have a Treaty for Peace: and to that end, sent over Tho^as Earl
of Ormond, and Thomas Goldenston Prior of Christ's Church in Canterbury, to the
French King about it. But during this Treaty, and before conditions of Peace
could be agreed on, the French King had gotten into his possession the Lady
Anne of Britain, and solemnly married her. Which underhand dealing so incensed
King Henry, that he presently called his High Court of Parliament, and there
declared the just cause he had of War with France, desiring their Benevolence
toward the charge thereof; which was as readily granted as desired, and great
sums of money were soon collected.

In the year 1491, being the sixth year of the Kings Reign, on the sixth of
April, the Nobility of the Realm assembled in the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul in London; where also was the Major and Aldermen, and principal Citizens
in their liveries: to whom D. Morton Lord Chancellor made an Oration;
declaring from his own letters, that the King of Spain had won the great
and rich City and Country of Granado from the Moors, which had been in their
possession above seven hundred years: and having in places of their
superstition, built Churches to the honor of Christ, was thereupon entitled
the Catholic King. For joy whereof, Te De^m was sung with great solemnity.

In the month of May was holden a solemn Justing, at the kings Palace of
Shee^e, now called Richmond, which continued the space of a month; sometimes
within the Palace, and sometimes without, upon the green before the gate; in
which Justs, Sir James Parker running against a Gentleman named Hugh Vaughan,
by reason of a faulty Helmet, was stricken into the mouth at the first course;
so that his tongue was borne to the hinder part of his head, in such sort that
he dyed presently upon the place.

And now Maximilian having received back his daughter from the king of France,
was so displeased, that he presently sent an Ambassador, one James Contibald
to king Henry, requiring him to take his part in a war against the French
king; toward which he promised to provide ten thousand men, with pay for two
years: king Henry consented to it; and having p^ovided himself of a puissant
Army, on the sixth day of October, sailed to Callice; but sending his Almoner
Christopher ^rswi^ke, and Sir John Resley to Maximilian, requiring his promised
forces; they found him altogether unprovided of either men or money: which
brought king Henry into a great straight what he should do: To proceed in the
war with his own forces alone, would be ^ull of hazard; To return home
without doing any thing, would bring an imputation upon him amongst his
Subjects; as though he had used the pretense of war, but as a trick to get
money: at last, he resolved to do something; and thereupon, went and besieged
Boloigne, having in his Army of chief Lords, Jasper Duke of Bedford, his
Lieutenant General, Thomas Marquess Dorset, the Earls of Arundell, Oxford,
Suffolk, Shrewsbury, Darby, Ke^t, Devonshire and Ormond, sundry Barons, as
D^wbeney, Aburgayny, De la Ware, Zouch, Hastings, Cobham and others. During his
siege of Boloigne, (in which there were but few slain, and no man of note, but
Sir John Savage, who riding to take view at what place the town might best be
assaulted, was set upon by certain French men, and by them slain) King Henry
was secretly dealt with by the Lord Cords Governor of Heynault, on the king
of France's behalf, to accept of certain conditions of Peace. Who thereupon
sent Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter, and Giles Lord Dawbeney to conclude them;
which amongst other Articles were, That king Henry without quitting his claim
to France, should for a Peace to continue during the two kings lives, receive
in present of Charles king of France, for his charges in that war, seven
hundred forty and five thousand Dockets, which in English money amounts to one
hundred eighty six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds; and five and twenty
thousand crowns yearly, toward the expenses he had been at before in aiding
the Britains; which (by the English, called Tribute) was duly paid, during all
the Kings Reign, and also to king Henry his Son afterward, longer then it
could continue upon any computation of charges. There were also assigned by the
French king unto all king Henry's principal Counselors, great pensions,
besides rich gifts for the present. Which whether the king did permit, to save
his own purse from Rewards, or to communicate the envy of a business that was
displeasing to his people, was diversely interpreted: for certainly, the King
had no great fancy to own this Peace; and therefore a little before it was
concluded, he had underhand procured some of his best Captains and Men of
War, to advise him to a Peace under their hands, in an earnest manner, in the
nature of a Supplication, that he might have it show for justifying himself,
and to give some allay to the discontentments of many, who had sold and engaged
their Estates, upon the hopes of the war. After the Peace thus concluded, he
went to Callice, where he stayed some time, and the seventeenth of December
following came to Westminster, where he kept his Christmasse.

Soon after his return, he elected into the order of the Garter, Alpho^sus Duke
of Calabri^, Son and Heir to Ferdinand King of Naples: to whom Christopher
Vrswicke the kings Almoner, was sent to Naples to carry it; which as soon as
Alphonsus had received, he apparelled himself presently in the Habit, before a
great assembly, indeed to show what favor he was in with the king of England.

There had been disturbance in the Realm before, by a Counterfeit Son of the
Duke of Clarence; but that device had two maine imperfections: One, that the
true Son of the Duke was for^h-comming, and to be showed openly for
convincing the false; the other, that though the counterfeit had been the true,
yet he could have laid no claim to the Crown, as long as any Daughters of King
Edward the fourth were living: Now therefore a device is found, by which those
imperfections were both of them amended: for now a Counterfeit was set on foot,
who pretended to be Richard the younger Son of king Edward the fourth; so
that neither any other could be produced to convince him of being false, nor
any Daughters of King Edward could hinder his Right for claiming the Crown.
This device was first forged by Margaret Duchess of Burgundy; a woman that
could never be quiet in her mind, as long as king Henry was quiet in his
kingdom; and by this device she hoped, if not to put him clean out of his
seat, yet foulely at least to disturb him in it; and this was the purpose of
the Pl^t: but by what instrument it was acted, by what abe^tours fomented, and
what issue the device had, are wor^hy all to be related. The Duchess having
formerly given out, that Richard the younger Son of king Edward, was not
murthred, but in compassion spared, and sent secretly a way to seek his
fortune; and having after long search gotten at last a fit Boy to personate a
Prince; keeps him seretly a good time with her; in which time she so thoroughly
instructed him in all Circumstances, and he afterward put them so gracefully in
practice, that even those who had seen and known the young Prince while he
lived, could hardly perceive but that this was he. It is true, though he were
not King Edwards Son, yet he was his Godsonne; and might perhaps have in him
some base blood of the house of York. This Perkin Warbeck, (for so was the
youths name, called Perkin, as a diminutive of Peter) when he so perfectly had
learned his lesson, that he was fit to come upon the Stage; she sent him into
Portingall, that coming from a strange Country, it might be thought, he had
been driven to wander from one Country to another, for safeguard of his life,
at least that she of all other might not be suspected. From Portingal she
caused him to pass into Ireland, where the house of York was specially
respected, in regard of the great love which Richard Duke of York, Father of
King Edward the fourth, had won amongst them: by reason whereof, this Perkin
as esteemed his Grandchild, was well entertained by them, and held in great
estimation. He had not been long in Ireland, when the French king sent for him;
for being at that time at variance with King Henry, he thought he might make
good use of Perkin, as a pretender against King Henry for the Crown. Perkin
being come to Paris, was entertained in a Princely fashion; and for his more
honor, had a guard assigned him, over which the Lord Congreshall was Captain.
He had not been long at Paris, when there resorted to him Sir George Nevill
bastard, Sir John Taylour, Richard Robinson, and about a hundred other English:
Amongst the rest, one Stephen Fryon, that had been King Henry's Secretary for
the French Tongue; but discontented, fled, and became a chief Instrument in
all Perkins proceedings. But this float of Perkins lasted not long; for as soon
as Peace was concluded between the two Kings; the King of France dismissed
Perkin and would keep him no longer. Then passed he secretly to his first
foundresse, the Lady Margaret; who at his first coming, made a show of
suspecting him to be a Counterfeit. But causing him in great assemblies to be
brought before her, as though she had never seen him before; and finding him to
answer directly to all questions she put unto him: she openly professed, that
she was now satisfied, and thought him verily to be her true Nephew; and
thereupon assigned a gu^rd of thir^y persons, clothed in Murrey and Blew, and
called him the White Rose of England. Upon report hereof, many in England were
inclined to take his part; and Sir Robert Clifford and Robert Bareley were sent
into Flanders, to acquaint the Duchess with the peoples respect to Perkin:
and indeed Sir Robert Clifford, upon sight and conference with him, wrote
letters into England, wherein he affirmed, that he knew him to be true Son of
king Edward, by his face, and other Lineaments of his body. King Henry hearing
of these things, sent certain espials into Flanders, that should feign
themselves to have fled to Perkin; and by that means the better search out who
were of the Conspiracy with him. Whose name being returned to the King, he
caused them ^o be apprehended and brought to his Presence; the chief of whom
were John R^tcliffe Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Montford, and Sir Thomas Th^^y^^
knights, William Dawbeney, Robert Ratcliffe, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas
Astwo^d, also certain Priests, as William Richford D. of Divinity, Thomas
Boyns, D. William Sutton, William Worseley Dean of Paul's, Robert Layborne, and
Richard Lesley, of whom, some hearing of it, fled to Sanctuary, others were
taken and condemed, as Sir Simon Montford, Robert Ratcliffe, and William
Dawbeney, who were all three behe^ded. The Lord Fitzwater pardoned of life, was
conveyed to Calice, and there laid in hold; where seeking to make escape by
corrupting his Keeper, he lost his head. Shortly after, Sir Robert Clifford
returning out o^ Flanders (not as some think, sent a spy from the beginning;
but rather now at last either discerning the fraud, or wo^ by rewards) and
submitted himself to the kings mercy: discovering unto him, as far as he
knew, all that were either open or secret abettours of the Conspiracy; amongst
whom he accused Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain: his accusation was this
that in Conference between them, Sir William had said, that if he certainly
knew; that the young man named Perkin were the Son of king Edward the fourth,
he would never fight nor bear Arms against him. These words being considered
of, by the Judges, seemed to express a tickle hold of Loyalty; for who could
tell how soon he might be persuaded that he knew it? and upon the matter, was
to be Loyal to king Henry, but for want of better; and withal it struck upon
a string which had always sounded harsh in king Henry's ears, as preferring
the Title of York before that of Lancaster. Sir William being hereupon
arraigned; whether trusting to the greatness of his favors, or the smalnes of
his fault, denied little of that wherewith he was charged, and upon confession
was adjudged to dye; and accordingly on the sixteenth day of February was
brought to the Tower Hill, and there beheaded: after whose death, Giles Lord
Dawbeny was made L. ^hamberlaine. This was that Sir William Stanley, who came
in to rescue the Earl of Richmond, when he was in danger of his life; who set
the Crown upon his head, and was the cause of his being saluted King: And
could it enter into his breast, to put him to death, that had saved his life,
and done him so many great services besides? But it may be said, It was not the
Earl of Richmond that did it, but the King of England; for certainly, in many
cases, a King is not at liberty to show mercy, so much as a private man may.
Though there be that affirm, the cause of his death was not words only, but
real acts, as giving aid to Perkin underhand by money. And yet it seems,
there was some conflict in the mind of King Henry, what he should do in this
case; for he stayed six weeks after his Accusation, before before he brought
him to his Arraignment. How-ever it was, the Summer following, the King went in
Progress to Latham, to the Earl of Darby, who had ma^ied his mother, and was
brother to Sir William Stanley: perhaps to congratulate his own safety; perhaps
to condole with him his brothers death; but certainly to keep the Earl from
conceiving any sinister opinion of him: For to think that Sir William's suing
to be Earl of Chester, (an Honor appointed to the kings son) or his great
wealth (for he left in his Castle at Holt, in ready money forty thousand
marks, beside^ Plate and Jewels) were causes that procured or set forward his
death; are considerations very unworthy of so just a Prince, against a Servant
of so great deserving.

But in this mean while, Perkin having gotten a Power of idle loose fellows,
took to Sea, intending to l^nd in Kent; where though he were repelled, yet some
of his Soldiers would needs venture to go on Land; of whom a hundred and
sixty persons were taken Prisoners, whereof five were Captains; Mortford,
Corbet, Whitebolt, Qu^^tyn and Gemyne: These hundred and sixty persons were
brought to London, rayled in ropes, like horses drawing in a Cart, who upon
their Araignement, confessing their offense, were executed, some at London, and
some in Towns adjoining to the seacoast. Perkin finding no entertainment in
Kent, sailed into Ireland, and having stayed there a while, and finding them
also, being a naked people, to be no competent assistants for him, from thence
he sailed into Scotland, where he so moved the King of Scots with his fair
words and colorable pretexts (made no doubt before by the Dutcesse of
Burgoigne) that he received him in great state, and caused him to be called
the Duke of York: and to persuade the World that he thought him so indeed,
he gave to him in marriage the Lady Katherine Gourdon, da^ghter to Alexander
Earl Huntley, his own near kinswoman; and soon after, in Perkins quarrel,
entered with a puissant Army into England; making Proclamation, that whosoever
would come in and aid the true Duke of York, should be spared; but none
coming in, he then used all kind of cruelty, and the whole County of
Northumberland was in a manner wasted: whereat Perkin, at his return,
expressed much grief, saying It grieved him to the heart to see such havoc
made of his people: To whom the King answered, Alas, Alas, you take care for
them, who for any thing that appears are none of yours; for not one of the
Country came in to his succor. King Henry incensed with this bold attempt of
the king of Scots, called his High Court of Parliament, acquainting them with
the necessity he had of a present war to revenge this indignity offered him
by the Scots, and thereupon requiring their aid by money, had a subsidy of
sixscore thousand pounds readily granted him; and then in all haste a puissant
Army is provided, and under the conduct of the Lord Dawbeney sent into
Scotland, but before he arrived there he was suddenly called back, by reason
of a commotion begun at Cornwall, for payment of the Subsidy lately granted,
which though it were not great, yet they grudged to pay it. The Ringleaders of
this commotion were Thomas Flammock, a gentleman le^^ned in the Laws, and
Michael Joseph a Smith; who laying the blame of this exaction upon John Morton
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Reynold Bray, as being chief of the Kings
Council, exhorted the people to take arms; and having a^sembled an Army, they
went to Taunton, where they slew the Provost Pery^, one of the Commissioners
for the Subsidy, and from thence came to Wells, intending to go to London
where the King then lay, who having revoked the Lord Dawbeney, appointed Thomas
Howard Earl of Surrey (after the death of the Lord Dinham, made Lord Treasurer
of England) to have an eye to the Scots, and if they made invasion, to resist
them. In the mean time James Twychet Lord Audley confederated himself with
the Rebels of Cornwall, and took upon him to be their Leader, who from W^lls
went to Salisbury, and from thence to Winchester, and so to Kent, hoping there
^o have had great aid, but found none; for the Earl of Kent, the Lord of
Aburg^^^, John Brook Lord Cobham, Sir Edmond Poynings, Sir Richard Guildford,
Sir Th^^as Bourchier, John Peachy and William Scott were ready in Arms to
resist them; whereupon the Rebels brought their Army to Black Heath, four
miles distant from L^nd^n, and there in a plain on the top of a hill encamped
themselves; whereof when the King had knowledge, he presently sent John Earl
of Oxford, Henry Bou^^^ier Earl of Essex, Edmond de la Poole Earl of
Suffolk, Sir Riceap Thomas and Sir H^^fry Stanley to inviron the hill on all
sides, that so all hope of flight might he taken from them; and then set
forward himself, and encamped in St. George^ fields, where for encouragement
he made diverse Bannarets. The next day he sent the Lord Dawbeney to set upon
the Rebels early in the morning, who first got the bridge at Deb^ford Strand,
though strongly defended by the Rebels Archers, whose arrows were ^eported to
be a full cloath-yard in length; but notwithstanding the Lord (...) coming in
with his Company, and the Earls assayling them on every side, they were soon
overcome: In which conflict were slain of the Rebels above (...) thousand;
taken prisoners a very great number, many of whom the King p^^doned, but of the
chief Authors none: for the Lord Audley was drawn from Newgate to Tower Hill,
in a coat of his own Arms painted upon paper, reversed and all torn; and
there, on the four and twentieth day of June was beheaded. Thomas Flammock and
Michael Joseph were hanged drawn and quartered, and their heads and quarters
pitched upon stakes, set up in London and other places. Of the Kings Army were
slain not above three hundred. It is memor^ble with what comfort Joseph the
blacksmith cheered up himself at his going to execution, saying that yet he
hoped by this that his name and memory should be everlasting: so dear even to
vulgar spirits is perpetuety of Name, though joined with infamy, what is it
then to Noble spirits, when it is joined with Glory?

In the mean time the king of Scots taking advantage of these troubles in
England, invaded the Frontiers, forraged the Bishopric of Durham, and at last
besieged the castle of Norham, whereof Richard Fox then Bishop of Durham was
owner; who thereupon sent presently to the Earl of Surrey, acquainting him
with this Invasion: Whereupon the Earl, taking with him Ralph Earl of
Westmerland, Thomas Lord Barnes, Ralph Lord Nevill, George Lord Strange, and
many other Lords and knights, and an Army of little less then twenty thousand
men, besides a Navy, whereof the Lord Brook was Admiral; set forward against
the Scots, and not only forced the Scots to raise their siege of Norham Castle,
but followed them also into Scotland, where he overthrew and defaced, the
Castle at Cawdestraynes, the Tower of He^e^hall, the Tower of Edington, the
Tower of Fulden, and at last by composition took the strong Castle of Hayton,
and rased it to the ground. At the Earls being at Hayton, the King of Scots
sent to him Marchemont and another Herald, requiring him, at his election,
either to fight with him with their whole Armies, or else they two to fight in
single combat; upon condition, that if the victory fell to the Scottish king,
the Earl should deliver for his Ransom the Town of Barwick: Whereunto the
Earl made answer, that the Town of Barwick was the King his Masters, and
therefore not for him to dispose of; but for his offer of single combat, he
willingly accepted it, and thought himself highly honored by such a match: But
King James of Scotland had no meaning to perform either one or other, but
privily in the night fled back into Scotland; and then the Earl returned to
Barwick. In the mean time, one Peter Hyal^s a man of great learning and
policy, was sent Ambassador to the King of Scots, from the King of Spain, to
mediate a Peace between the two kings of of England and Scotland; who finding
the King of Scots conformable to his motion, found after the King of England
(who was never averse from Peace upon honorable Conditions) no less enclining
to it: and so a Truce was concluded for certain years; upon conditition, that
Perkin Warbeck should be sent out of the Scottish Dominions.

About this time, the Lord of Camphyre and others sent from Philip Archduke of
Austria and Duke of Burgundy, came to king Henry for a conclusion of Amity, and
to procure the English merchan^s resort again to his Country: for king Henry
some time before, upon displeasure with the Flemings, but specially with the
Lady Margaret, for abetting Perkin Warbeck; not only had banished all Flemish
wares and merchandises out of his Dominions, but had also restrained all
English merchants from having any traffic in any of their Territories, causing
the Mart for all English commodities to be kept at Callice: but now, upon this
invitation, and having found it had been a great hinderance to his own
Merchant-adventurers, and thereupon some insurrections had risen, he willingly
condiscended to their Request; and so the English resorted again into the
Archdukes Dominions, and were received into Antwerp with general Procession;
so glad was that Town of the Engglish-mens return.

In this eleventh year of the Kings Reign, dyed Cicely Duchess of York,
mother to king Edward the fourth, at her Castle of Berkhamstead, being of
extreme age; who had lived to see three Princes of her body Crowned, and four
Murdered: she was buried at F^dri^g^am by her Husband.

Shortly after the Truce concluded between England and Scotland, Perkin Warbeck
was commanded to depart out of the Scottish Dominions: who thereupon with his
wife and family, sailed into Ireland: where understanding that the Cornish-men
were ready to renew the war again, he thought best not to let p^sse so fair
an occasion; and thereupon, having with him four small ships, and not above
six-score men, he sailed into Cornwall, and there landed in the month of
September, and came to a Town called Bodmyn; where with fair words and large
promises, he so prevailed with the people, that he had gotten to him above
three thousand persons to take his part; and then made Proclamations in the
name of King Richard the Fourth, as son to King Edward the Fourth: and by the
advice of his three Counselors, John Heron a bankrupt Mercer, Richard Skeleton
a Tailour, and John Astley a Scrivener, determined to attempt first the winning
of Exceter; which with great violence he assaulted, and the Townsmen with as
great valiantnes defended: whereof when the King heard, he sent the Lord
Dawbeny to their rescue: but before he came, the Lord Edward Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, and the valiant Lord William his son, accompanied with Sir Edmund
Carew, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir William Courtney^ Sir Thomas Fulford, Sir John
Hal^well, Sir John Croker, Walter Court^ey, Peter Edgecombe, William St. Maure
with others came to their aid: upon whose coming, Perkin left the siege, and
retired to Taunton; where he mustered his men, as though he meant to prepare
for battle: but finding his number to be much diminished, (for of six thousand
which he had at Exceter, many were fled from him, when they saw no Great ones
to take his part) he began to distrust his case; and he^^ing withal, that the
king with a great Power was at hand: about midnight, with threescore horsemen
in his company, he departed in post from Taunton, and took Sanctuary in a Town
called Beauly near to Southampton. When king Henry he^rd that Perkin was fled,
he sent after him to the Seaside, to stop his passage and apprehend him: But
the messengers that were sent, when they came to St. Michaels (...), though
they found not Perkin, yet there they found his wife the Lady Katherine
Gourdon, whom they presently brought to the king; a beautiful young Lady: to
whom, in honor of her birth, and commiseration of her beauty, the king allowed
a competent maintenance, which she enjoyed during the kings life, and many
years after. king Henry being come to Exceter, stayed there a few days, about
examination of the Rebellion, and execution of the chief Offenders: of whom
there being a great multitude, and all of them craving pardon, the king caused
them all to be assembled in the Churchyard of St. Peter, where they all
appeared bar^-headed in their shirts, and halters about their necks: whom the
king viewing out of a window made for the purpose; after he had paused a while,
made a speech unto them, exhorting them to obedience; and then, in hope they
would afterward be dutiful Subjects, he pardoned them all: whereat they made a
great shout, crying (...), God save king Henry! though some of them afterward,
like ungrateful wretches, fell into new Rebellions.

All this while Perkin was in Sanctuary: and the King thinking himself in
danger as long as he was in safety, set a Guard about the place, to keep him
for escaping; whereby Perkin was so restrained, that at last he submitted
himself to the kings mercy, and was thereupon sent to the Tower to b^ there in
s^fe custody. This do^e, king Henry appointed Thomas Lord D^rcy, Sir Amy^s
Pawle^, and Robert Sherb^^^^ Deane of Pauls^ to be Commissioners, for ma^ing
enquiry of the Offenders, (...) for assessing their Fines; which they did with
great severity to some, with great mildness to others, to all with equity.

(...) was now the fourteenth year of the kings Reign, when one Sebastian
^^bato, ^ Ge^^^a's Son, born ^t B^iston, persuaded the king to man and
victua^^ a ship at Bristow, ^o search for (...) stand, which (he said) he knew
to be replenished with rich Commodities; who setting forth with three other
small sh^ps of London merchants, returned home two yeer^ after, when he had
made a large discovery westward, and would have gone to (...), if the Mariners
had not forced him to return: a likewise si^ years before, one Christop^er
Columbus a Spanyard, made the first discovery of America.

Perkin being in the Tower and carefully guarded, yet found me ^s to escape;
and fled to the Priory of Sheen near Richmond; where discovering himself to
the Pryor of that Monastery, he begged of him for Gods sake, to get the kings
Pardon for his life; which the Prior effected: but then was Perkin brought to
the Court at Westminster, and was one day set fettered in a pair of Stocks
before Westminsterhall, and there stood a whole day; the next day he was set
upon a like Scaffold in Cheape-side, and there standing the whole day also,
hethen read openly his confession, wr^tten with his own hand; wherein he
declared his Parentage and the place of his Birth, and all the passages of his
Life, and by what means he was drawn to make this attempt. After this, he was
committed again to the Tower, and care taken, he should be better looked to
than he was before. But all the care notwithstanding, once again Perkin
attempted to escape, and drawing into a Confederacy with him the young Earl of
Warwick; by fair words and large promises so corrupted his keepers,
Stra^gwish, Bl^wet, Astwood and long Roger, servants to Sir John Digbie
Lieutenant of the Tower, that they intended to have slain their Master, and
set Perki^ and the Earl of Warwick at liberty. But this practice was soon
discovered, ^o that Perki^ and John a Water, sometime Major of Cork in
Ireland, one of Perki^s chief founders, were on the sixteenth day of November
arraigned at Westminster and condemned, and both of them on the two and
twentieth day were drawn to Tyburne and there hanged; where Perki^ took it
upon his death, that the Confession he had formerly made, was true: soon after
also Blewet and Astwood, two of the Lieutenants men, were in the same place
executed. On the one and twentieth day of the same month, Edward Plantagemet
Earl of Warwick was arraigned at Westminster, before the Earl of Oxford,
then High Steward of England; not for consenting to break Prison, but for
conspiring with Perkin to raise Sedition and destroy the king; and upon his
Confession, had Judgment, and on the eight and twentieth day of the same
month, in the year 1499. was brought to the Scaffold on the Tower Hill, and
there beheaded. This Earl of Warwick was the eldest Son of the Duke of
Clarence, and was the last Heir male of the name of Plantagenet, and had been
kept in the Tower from his very In^ancy out of all company of Men and fight of
Beasts; so as he scarcely knew a Hen from a Goose, nor one beast from another;
and therefore could never know how to practice his escape of himself, but by
Perki^s subtlety: for which cause the king favored him so far, that he was
not buried in the Tower, but at Bissam by his Ancestors. And thus ended the
designs of Perki^ Warbeck, which had troubled both the Kingdom and the King,
the space of seven or eight years, a great part of the Kings Reign.

But in the time of Perki^s being in the Tower, another like practice was set
on foot; for an Augusti^e Friar called Patrick, in the County of Suffolk,
having a Scholar named Ralph Wilford a Cordwayners Son, he caused him to
take upon him to be the Earl of Warwick, lately by great chance gotten out of
the Tower; and they going together into (...); when the Friar perceived some
light credit to be given to him, he then stuck not to declare it openly in the
Pulpit, desiring all men to assist him. But this practice was soon discovered,
and both the Mr. and the Scholar were apprehended and attainted; the Scholar
Wilford was hanged on Shrovetuesd^y at S. Thomas Waterings, and the Friar was
condemned to perpetual Prison: for at that time so much reverence was
attributed to holy Orders; that a Priest, though ^e had committed Treason
against the king, yet had h^s life spared. And this pract^^e was some cause to
exasperate the king against the Earl of Warwick, who though innocent in
himself, yet was nocent in pretenders: and besides; king Ferdinand of Spai^e,
with whom at this time there was a Treaty for marriage of his Daughter to
Prince Arthur, had written to the king in plain terms, that he saw no
assurance of his Sons succession, as long a^ the Earl of Warwick lived: and
thus all things unfortunately concurred to bring this innocent Prince to his
end.

In the fifteenth year of his Reign, partly to avoid the danger of the
Plague, then reigning in England; but chiefly to confer with the Duke of
Burgoigne about many important businesses: the King and Queen sailed over to
Callice; where at an enterview between him and the Duke, at Saint Peter's Church
without Callice, the Duke offered to hold the kings sturrup at his alighting,
which the king by no means would permit; but descending from horseback, they
embraced wi^h great affection; and after Communication had between them, the
King and Queen in the end o^ Iu^^ returned into England.

In his seventeenth year ^wo great Marriages were solemnized: the Lady (...) of
Spain was sent by her Father king Ferdi^a^d, with a puissant, Army of S^^ps
into E^gland; where she arrived at Plymouth, the second day of October; and on
the fourteenth of November after^ was espo^sed openly to Prince Ar^hur, both
being clad in white; He of the age of ^^fteen years, she of eighteen: at night
they were laid together in one Bed, where they lay as Man and Wife all that
night: when ^o^ning appeared, the Prince (as his servants about him reported)
called for drink, which before time he had not used to do; whereof one of his
Chamb^rlaines ^sking (...) the cause^ he answered merrily, saying, I have been
this night in the midst o^ Spa^^^, which is a hot Country, and that make^ me
so dry: though some write, tha^ ^ grave Matron was laid in bed between them, to
hinder actual Consummation^^ The Ladies portion was two hundred thousand
Ducats; her jointure, the (...) part of the Principality of Wales, Cornwall
and Ch^ster. At this Marriage was gr^^^ solemnity and Royal Justings; during
which time, there came into London (...) Earl, a Bishop, and diverse other
noble personages sent from the king of Scots (...) conclusion of a Marriage,
(before treated of, between the Lady Margaret the (...) eldest daughter, and
him; where the Earl by Proxy, in the name of king James (...) Mas^er, affied
and contracted the said Lady, which Contract was published at (...) Crosse^
the day of the Conversion of Saint Paul; for joy whereof, Te Deum (...), and
great fires were made through the City of London; and if such joy we^e made
when the match was made, what joy should be made now at the issue of the match,
when by the Union of those persons is made an Union of these kingdoms; and
England and Scotland are but one great Britain? The Ladies portion was ten
thousand pounds, her jointure two thousand pounds a year, after king James his
death; and in present one thousand. When this match was first propounded at the
Connsell Table, some Lords opposed it; objecting, that by this means the Crown
of England might happen to come to the Scottish Nation. To which King Henry
answered, what if it should? It would not be an accession of England to
Sco^la^d, but of Scotland to England: and this answer of the kings passed for
an Oracle, and so the match proceeded, and in August following was Consummate
at Edi^b^rgh, conducted thither in great State by the Earl of Northumberland.

Prince Arthur after his marriage, was sent again into Wales, to keep that
Count^y in good order; to whom were appointed for Counselors, Sir Richard
Poole, hi^ ^insman and chief Chamberlain, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Richard
Crof^s, Sir David (...), Sir William Vdall, Sir Thomas Englefield, Sir Peter
Newton, John Walleston, (...) Marton, and Doctor William Smith President of his
Counsel: but within five months after his marriage, at his Castle of Ludlow
he deceased, and with great sole^^ity was buried in the Cathedral Church at
Worcester. His Brother Henry Du^e of York, was stayed from the title of Prince
of Wales, the space of half a year, till to women it might appear, whether
the Lady Katherine, the Relict of Prince Ar^^^^ were with child, or no. The
towardlines in learning of this Prince Arthur is very memorable; who dying
before the age of sixteen years, was said to have read over al^ or most of the
Latin Authors, besides many other.

And now Prince Arthur being dead, and the Lady Katherine of Spain left a
young widow; King Henry loath to part with her dowry, but chiefly being
desirous (...) continue the Alliance with Spain: prevailed with his other
Son Prince Henry, though with some reluctation, such as could be in those
years (for he was scarce ^welv^ years of age) to be contracted with the
Princess Katherine his bro^h^rs widow; for which marriage, a dispensation by
advice of the most learned men at that (...) in Christendom, was by Pope
Julius the second granted, and on the five and twentieth day of June, in the
Bishop of Salisbury^s house in Fleet Street, the marriage was solemnized.

A little before this time, (...) Earl of S^ffolke, Son to John Duke of
Suffolk and Lady Eliz^b^t^ Sister ^o king Edward the ^ourth, had in his fury
killed a mean person^ and was thereupon I^dighted of Murder; for which,
although he had the kings Pardon, yet because he was brought to the
Kings-bench-b^rr^, and there arraigned; he took it for so great (...) his
honor, that in great rage he fled into Flanders to his Aun^ the Lad^ M^^garet;
where having stayed a while, when his p^ssion was over, he return^d again. ^ut
after the marriage between Prince Arthur and the Lady (...), w^^ther it were
that in that solemnity he had run himself in debt; or (...) he were ^rawn to
do so by the Lady Margare^, he passed over the second time, with his b^other
Richard, into Fl^nder^. This put the king into some doubt of his intention^
whereupon he has recourse to his usual course in such cases, and Sir (...)
Captain of Hamme^ Castle, to feign himself one of that Conspiracy, the^^by
to learn the depth of their intentions: And to take away all susp^^ion of his
employment; ^he first Sunday of November, he caused the said Earl and Sir
Robert C^rson with five others to be accursed openly at Paul's Cross, as
Enemies to him and his Realm. In conclusion, Sir Robert Curson acquainted the
king with diverse of that faction; amongst whom, William Lord Court^ey, and
William de la Poole, brother to the foresaid Earl of Suffolk, who were taken
but upon suspicion, yet held long in prison: but Sir James Tyrrell (the same
that had murdered the two young Princes in the Tower) and Sir Io^^ Windham,
who were proved to be Traytor^, were accordingly attainted, and on the sixth
day of May at the Tower Hill beheaded. Whereof when the Earl heard, despairing
now of any good success, he wandered about all Germany and Fr^^c^, where
finding no succor, he submitted himself at last to Philip Duke of Austria, by
whom afterward he was delivered to king Henry, by this occasion: Ferdi^a^d king
of Aragon, by his Wife Isabella Queen of C^stile, had only two Daughters, the
eldest whereof named Ioa^e, was married to this Philip Duke of Austria; the
younger, named Katherine, to Arthur Prince of England: and now Queen Isabella
being lately dead, by whose death the kingdom of Castile descended in Right of
his Wife, to this Duke Philip; they were sailing out of Germany into Sp^ine to
take possession of the kingdom; but by tempest and contrary winds were driven
upon the coast of England, and landed at Waymouth in Dorsetshire; where
desiring to refresh themselves a little on shore, they were invited by Sir
Thomas Tre^cha^d (a principal knight of that Country) to his house, who
presently sent word to the king of their arrival. King Henry glad to have his
Court honored by so great a Prince, and perhaps upon hope of a courtesy from
him, which afterward he obtained: ^ent presently the Earl of Arundell to wait
upon him, till himself might follow; and the Earl went to him in great
magnificence, with a gallant troop of three hundred Horse, and for more State
came to him by Torch-light. Upon whose Me^^^ge, though king Philip had many
re^sons of haste on his journey; yet not to give king Henry distaste, and
withal to give his Queen the comfort of seeing the Lady Katherine her Sister;
he went upon speed to the king at Windsor, while his Queen followed by easy
journeys. After great magnificence of entertainment, king Hen^y taking a fit
opportunity, and drawing the king of Castile into a room, where they two only
were private; and laying his hand civilly upon his arm, said unto him; Sir,
you have been saved upon my Coast: I hope you will not suffer me to wrack upon
yours. The king of Castile asking him, what he meant by that speech? I mean it
(says the king) by that haire-brain'd fellow the Earl of Suffolk; who being
my subject, is protected in your Country, and begins to play the fool when all
others are weary of it. The king of Cas^ile answered; I had thought, Sir, your
felicity had been above those thoughts; but if it trouble you, I will banish
him: king Henry replied, that his desire was to have him delivered to him: with
this, the king of Castile a little confused said, That can I not do with my
honor: Well then (said the king) the matter is at an end: at last the king of
Castile, who held king Henry in great estimation, composing his countenance,
said, Sir you shall have him; but upon your Honor, you shall not take his
life: I promise it upon mine Honor, said King Henry: and he kept his promise;
for he was not put to death during all his Reign; but yet he took such order,
that in the Reign of his Son K. Henry the Eighth, he had his head cut off.
During the king of Castiles being here, a Treaty was concluded, and bears date
at Windsor; which the Flemings term Intercursus malus, for that the Free
fishing of the Dutch upon the Coasts and Seas of England, granted in the Treaty
of Vndecimo, was not by this Treaty confirmed, as all other Articles were. And
now, when king Henry had received the king of Castile into the Fraternity of
the Garter, and had his Son Prince Henry admitted to the order of the Golden
fleece; and that the Earl of Suffolk was brought over and committed to the
Tower; the king of Castile departed home.

In this kings time were two Calls of Serjeant^ at Law: One in his eleventh
year, in which were called nine Sergeants, Mordant, Higham, Kingesmill,
Conisby, Butler, ^^xely, Frowick, Oxenbridge, and Constable; who kept their
feast at the Bishop of Ely's Place in Holborne, where the King, the Queen, and
all the chief Lords dined. The other Call, in his twentieth year; in which
were called ten Sergeants, Robert Brudnell, William ^revill, Thomas Marow,
George Edgore, Lewis Pollard, Guy Palms, and William Fairfax; who kept their
feast at the Archbisho^s house in Lambeth.

King Henry having gotten as much honor as the Estimation of neighboring
Princes could give him, began now to be intentive to getting of wealth; wherein
he quickly found Instruments fit for his purpose, but specially two, Empson and
Dudley both Lawyers; Dudley of a good family, but Empson the son of a
Sieve-maker. These two persons being put in Authority, turned Law and Justice
into Rapine. For first, their manner was, to cause diverse Subects to be
indicted of Crimes, and then presently to commit them; and not produce them to
their answer, but suffer them to languish long in Prison; and by sundry
artificial devices and terrors, extort from them great Fines, which they
termed Compositions and Mitigations. Neither did they (toward the end) observe
so much as the half face of Justice, in proceeding by Indictment; but sent
forth their Precepts to attach men, and convent them before themselves and some
others at their private houses, and there used to shuffle up a Summary
proceeding by examination, without trial of Jury; as^uming to themselves, to
deal both in Pleas of the Crown, and controversies Civil. Then did they also
use to enthrall and charge the Subjects lands with Tenures in Capite, by
finding false Offices; refusing upon diverse pretexts and delays, to admit men
to traverse those false Offices, as by Law they might. Nay the Kings Wards,
after they had accomplished their full age, could not be suffered to have
livery of their lands, without paying excessive Fines, far exceeding all
reasonable rates. When men were outlawed in personal actions, they would not
permit them to purchase their Charters of Pardon, except they paid great and
intolerable sums; standing upon the strict point of Law, which upon
Outlawries gives forfeiture of goods. Nay, contrary to all Law and color, they
maintained, the King ought to have the half of men's lands and rents during the
space of full two years, for a Pain in case of Outlawry. They would also
ruffle with Jurors, and enforce them to find as they would direct; and if they
did not, then convent, imprison, and fine them. These and many other cours^s
they had of preying upon the people: but their principal working was upon
Penal Statutes; wherein they considered not whether the Law were obsolete, or
in use; and had ever a rabble of Promoters and leading Jurors at their command,
so as they could have any thing found, either for Fact or Valuation. There
remains to this day a Report, that King Henry was on a time entertained very
sumptuously by the Earl of Oxford, at his Castle of Heningham: and at the
Kings going away, the Earls servants stood in their livery-coates with
cognisances, ranged on both sides, to make the King a lane: Whereupon the King
called the Earl to him, and said: My Lord, I have heard much of your
Hospitality, but I see it is greater than is spoken; These handsome Gentlemen
and Yeomen whom I see on both sides of me, are sure your Meniall servants. At
which the Earl smiled, and said: It may please your Grace, that were not for
mine ease; They are most of them my Retainers, and are come to do me s^rvice
at such a time as this, and chi^fly to see your Grace. Whereat the King started
a little, and said: By my faith (my Lord) I thank you for my good cheer; but
I may not endure to have my Laws broken in my sight: my Attorney must speak
with you about it. And it is part of the Report, that it cost the Earl for a
composition, fifteen thousand marks. And to show further the Kings extreme
diligence: I remember (says Sir Francis Bacon Lord of Virula^ in his History)
to have seen long since a Book of Account of Empsons, that had the kings hand
almost to every leaf, by way of signing; and was in some places postilled in
the Margent with the kings own hand likewise, where was this Remembrance:
Item, Received of such a one five marks; for the Pardon to be procured; and if
the Pardon do not pass, the money to be repayd, except the party be some
other way satisfied. And over against this Memorand^m (of the kings own hand,)
Otherwise satisfied. This (says he) I do the rather mention, because it
shows in the king a Nearness, but yet with a kind of Justness.

In his three and twentieth year, there was a sharp prosecution against Sir
William Gapell now the second time, for misgovernment in his Majoralty: The
great matter was, that in some payments he had taken notice of false moneys,
and did not his diligence to examine who were the Offenders: for which and some
other things said to his charge, he was condemned to pay two thousand pounds;
whereof, being a man of stomach, he refused to pay a farthing; and thereupon
was sent to the Tower, where he remained till the Kings death. Knesworth
likewise, that had been lately Major of London, and both his Sheriffs, were for
abuses in their offices questioned and imprisoned, and not delivered but upon
payment of one thousand four hundred pounds. Sir Lawrence Ailmer, who had
likewise been Major of London, and his two Sheriffs, were put to the Fine of
one thousand pounds; and Sir Lawrence, for refusing to pay it, was committed to
prison, where he stayed till Empson himself was committed in his place. By
these courses he accumulated so great store of Treasure, that he left at his
death, most of it in secret places, under his own key and keeping at Richmond,
(as is reported) the sum of near eighteen hundred thousand pounds sterling.
But though by this course he got great store of Treasure, yet by it he lost the
best treasure (the peoples hearts) but that he something qualified it by his
last Testament, commanding that Restitution should be made of all such moneys
as had unjustly been levied by his Officers.

It seems king Henry, after the death of his Queen the Lady Elizabeth, had an
inclination to marry again; and hearing of the great beauty and virtue of the
young Queen of Naples, the widow of Ferdinando the younger; he sent three
confident persons, Francis Marsyn, James Braybrooke, and John Style, to make
two inquiries; one of her person and conditions, the other of her Estate: Who
returning him answer, that they found her Beauty and Virtues to be great, but
her Estate to be only a certain Pension or Exhibition, and not the kingdom
of Naples as he expected, he then gave over any further meddling in that matter.
After this, another Treaty of Marriage was propounded to the king, between him
and the Lady Margaret Duchess Dowager of Savoy, only daughter to Maximilian,
and Sister to the king of Castile; a Lady wise and of great good fame: In which
business was employed, for his first piece, the kings then Chaplain, and after
the great Prelate, Thomas Woolsey. It was in the end concluded, with ample
conditions for the king, but with promise de Futuro only. Which marriage was
protracted from time to time, in respect of the Infirmity of the king; which
held him by ^its till he dyed.

He left Executours, Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, Richard Fitz James
Bishop of London, Thomas Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of Rochester, Thomas
Duke of Norfolk and Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of Worcester and Lord
Chamberlain, John F. knight, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Robert R.
knight chief Justice of the Common Pleas. A little before his death, he had
concluded a marriage (in which negotiation Fox Bishop of Winchester was
employed) between his younger Daughter the Lady Mary, of the age of ten years;
and Charles king of Castile, not much elder: but though concluded, yet not
solemnized; and she was afterward married to Lewis the French king.

Of his Taxations.
IN his third year, there was by Parliament granted toward the maintaining an
Army in Britain; that every man should pay the tenth penny of his Goods: which
Tax though at first withstood in Yorkshire and Durham; yet was afterwad levied
to the uttermost. In his seventh year, toward his wars in France, a
Benevolence was by Parliament granted; by which great sums of money were
collected of the richer sort only. In his eleventh year, a Subsidy of sixscore
thousand pounds was granted him by Parliament, toward his wa^s with Scotland,
which caused afterward the insurrection in Cornwall. In his nineteenth year a
Subsidy was granted him by Parliament. In his one and twentieth year, ^e
raised great sums of money from offenders against Penal Statutes: the
greatest, but the unjustest way for raising of money, that every any king of
England used: and not content with this, he required and had at the same time a
Benevolence both from the Clergy and Laity. To the Clergy was employed
Richard Fox, then Bishop of Winchester; who assembling the Clergy before him,
exhorted them to be liberal in their contribution; but the Clergy being of
two sorts, rich and poor, made each of them their several excuses: The rich
and such as had great livings, said, they were at great charges in keeping
hospitality and maintaining their families, and therefore desired to be spa^ed:
The poorer sort alleged, that their means were small, and scarce able to find
them necessaries, and therefore desired to be forborne. But the Bishop answered
them both with a pretty Dilemma, saying to the rich, It is true, you live at
great charges in hospitality, in apparel and other demonstrations of your
wealth; and seeing you have store to spend in such order, there is no reason
but for your Princes service you should do it much more, and therefore you must
pay. To the poorer sort he said, though your livings be small, yet your
frugality is great, and you spend not in housekeeping and apparel as other
do; therefore be content, for you shall pay.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
THIS King was the first that ordained a company of tall strong men, (naming
them Yeomen of the Guard) to be attending about the person of the king; to whom
he appointed a Livery by which to be known, and a C^ptaine by whom to be
chosen. In his time, the authority of the Star Chamber, which subsisted before
by the Common Laws of the Realm, was confirmed in certain cases by Act of
Parliament. In his time were made these excellent general Laws: One, that from
thenceforth sines should be final, and conclude all strangers rights: Another
for admission of poor suitours, In forma pa^peris, without paying Fee to
Counselor, Attorney or Clerk. Another, that no person that did assist by
Arms or otherwise the King for the time being, should after be Impeached
therefore or Attainted, either by course of the Law, or by Act of Parliament;
and that if any such Act of Attainder did happen to be made, it should be void
and of none effect. Another for the Benevolence, to make the sums which any
had agreed to pay, and were not brought in, to be leviable by course of Law.
Another, that Murderers should be burnt on the Brawn of the left hand, with
the letter M. and Thieves with the letter T. so that if they offended the
second time, they should have no mercy, but ^e put to death; and this to ^each
also to Clearkes Convict. In his fifth year, It was ordained by Parliament,
that the Major of London should have Conservation of the river of Thames, from
the bridge of Stanes, to the waters of Yendal^ and M^dway. In his seventeenth
John Shaw Major of London, caused his brethren the Aldermen to ride from the
Guild Hall to the waters-side, when he went to Westminster to be presented in
the Exchequer: ^e also caused the kitchins and other houses of office ^o be
builded at the Guild Hall; where since that time, the Majors feast ha^h been
kept, which before, had been in the Grocers or Taylours-hall. In his eighteenth
year king Henry being himself a brother of the Taylours Company, as diverse
kings before had been, namely, Richard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the
sixth, Henry the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the second; also of Dukes
11. Earls 28. Lords 48. he now gave to them the Name and Title of Merchant
Taylours; as a name of worship to endure for ever.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN the tenth year of his Reign, Ioane Boughton widow, was burnt in
Smithfield, for holding certain opinions of John Wickliffe. In his seventh
year, king Henry finding great inconvenience by the privilege of Sanctuaries;
wrote to Pope Alexander, desiring him by his authority, to adjudge all English
men being fled to Sanctuary for the offense of Treason, to be Enemies to the
Christian Faith; and to prohibit the privilege of Sanctuary to all such as
once had enjoyed it before: which request the Pope granted, to the great
contentment of the king, and quiet of the Realm. In his sixteenth year being
the year 1500. a Jubilee in Rome was celebrated; whereof Alexander the then
Pope, by his messenger Gaspar Pons a Spanyard, gave notice to the king:
offering withal, that those who could not come to Rome, should notwithstanding
at a certain price have Pardons, and as full a benefit of the Jubilee, as if
they came; and to the end the king should not hinder his purpose, both offered
part of his gains to the king, and also promised to bestow it upon a war
against the Turk; by which course he gathered great sums, for which he had
other use, than to spend it so idly. In the two and twentieth year of this
king^ Pope Alexander the sixth dyed of Poison, by this accident: He went to
supper in a Vineyard near the Vatican, where his son Valentionis meaning to
poison Adria^ Cardinal of Cornetta, sent thither certain flaggons of Wine,
infected with poison, and delivered them to a servant of his, who knew nothing
of the matter; commanding him, that none should touch them, but by his
appointment: It happened, the Pope coming in something before supper, and
being very dry through the immoderate heat of the season, called for drink,
his own provision being not yet come: The servant that had the poisoned wine in
keeping; thinking it to be committed to him as a special wine, brought of it
to the Pope; and while he was drinking, his son Valentinois came in, and
drank also of the same; whereby they were both poisoned, but the Pope only
overcome of the poison, died; his son by the strength of youth bare it out,
though with long languishing.

Works of Piety and other structures by him^ and others.
THIS King magnificently enlarged Greenwich, which Humfry Duke of Gloucester had
formerly builded, calling it Placentia. In his sixteenth year, ^e new builded
his Manor of Shee^, and named it Richmond: He also new builded Baynards Castle
in London. In his two and twentieth year, he finished the goodly Hospital of
the Savoy near to Charing-crosse, to which he gave lands for the relieving of
two hundred poor people: This was first called Savoy place, built by Peter
Earl of Savoy Father to Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, about the nine and
twentieth year of Henry the third, who made the said Peter Earl of Richmond.
The house belonged since to the Duke of L^^caster; and at this time was
converted to an Hospital, reteyning still the first name of the Savoy. In this
Kings time, John Morton being Bishop of Ely, bestowed great cost upon his house
at Hatfield in Hartfordshire, now the house of the Right Honorable the Earl
of Salisbury; and at Wesbich Castle in Cambridgeshire, a house belonging to
that See; all the Brick building was of his charge: Being afterward Bishop of
Canterbury, he bestowed great sums in repairing and a^gmenting his houses at
M^idstone, Alington-Parke, Charing, Ford, L^mbeth, and specially at Knoll in
Kent, where he dyed. King Henry also builded three houses of Franciscan Friars,
which are called observants; one at Richmond, ^n other at Greenwich, a third at
Newark; and three other of Franciscan Friars, which are called Conventuals, one
at Canterbury, another at Newcastle, and a third at South^amp^on. And drawing
near his end, he did these works of charity: He granted a general Pardon to
all men, for any offense committed against any of his Laws, Thieves and
Murderers only excepted: He paid also all Fees of all Prisoners in all Goales
in and about London, abiding there for that cause only: He paid also the Debts
of all such persons as lay in the Counters or Lud-gate for forty shillings or
under, and some also for ten pounds. In his eighteenth year, the Chapel of
our Lady, abo^e the East Side of the high Altar at Westminster Church, with a
Tavern called the White-rose near adjoining, was taken down; in which place a
most beautiful Chapel was then presently begun to be builded, by King Henry;
the charges whereof amounted to the sum of fourteen thousand pounds (as Stow
witnesses.) In his second year, the great Conduite in Cheape-side, at the
charges of Thomas Il^m Alderman of London, was new made; and the Cross also in
Cheap was new builded, toward the charges whereof, Thomas Fisher Mercer gave
five hundred Marks. In his seventh year, the Conduite in Grace-street was
begun to be builded by the Executors of Sir Thomas Hill Grocer, late Major of
London. Also this year, Hugh Cl^pton Major of London builded the great bridge
of Stratford upon A^o^, as likewise a fair Chapel toward the South end of
that Town; and near unto the same, a pretty house of B^rick and Timber, where
he lay and ended his life: He glazed also the (...) of the Parish Church in
that Town; and made a Way of four miles long, (...) miles from Alisbury
toward London, and one mile beyond Ali^bury. In his ^^nth year, John T^le
Major of London, builded the Church of Saint Antho^^es, with a Free-schoole,
and certain Almeshouses for poor men. In his time, his Mother the Lady
Margaret Countess of Richmond, builded two Colleges in Cambridge, one called
Christ's College, the other St. John's; and endowed them with large possessi^ns,
for the maintenance of learning. Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester founded
Corpus Chirsti College in Oxford; and William Smith Bishop of Lincoln,
Brazen-nose Coll^^ge: He also builded at Liechfield an Hospital, for a Master,
two Priests, and ten poor men, as likewise a Free-schoole, with a
Shoole-master and an Usher. Anne A^eling gave a hundred Marks toward the
building of the Church in Cicester. In his time also John Alcock Bishop of Ely,
builded Jesus College in Cambridge: and in his two and twentieth year, Thomas
Knesworth Major of London, builded the Conduite at Bishopsgate at his own
charge; and gave to the Fishmongers certain Tenements; for which they are
bound to allow to four Scholars, two at Oxford, and two at Cambridge, to each
of them four pounds a year: also to poor people and Prisoners in Ludgate
something yee^ly. In his twentieth year, Sir William Capell Major of London,
caused all Hounseditch to be paved over; which till that time, had (...) very
noyously to all travelers that way. In his fourteenth year, all the Gardens
without Mooregate (which had continued time out of mind) were destroyed; and
of them was made a plain field, for Archers to shoot in. In this Kings time
also, (...) Savege Archbishop of York, repaired the Castle of Cawood, and the
Manor of (...), and founded the Chapel at Maclesfield in Cheshire, where he
was borne. Also in his time, Stephen Granings Major of London, founded a free
Gramm^r School (...) VVolverhampton in Staffordshire where he was borne; and
gave lands sufficient for a Master and an Usher, leaving the oversight to the
Merchant-Taylours in London. Thi^ Town of VVolverhampton, commonly so called,
is originally and rightly called (...)-hampton, upon this occasion: The Town
was anciently called Hampton, to which a noble woman named VVilfrune, a widow,
sometime wise of Athel^s Duke of Northampton; obtained of King Ethelred, to
give lands to the Church there, which she had founded; and thereupon the Town
took the addition of the said VVilfrune. In this Kings time also, John Coll^t
Deane of Paul's, founded Paul's School in the Churchyard there.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN his first year happened the Sickness called the Sweating-sicknesse, which
though it continued not long, yet took away many thousands: and in his two and
twentieth year, the like Sweating-sicknesse happened again; but by reason of
Remedies found in the former, took away fewer.

In his second year, Wheat was sold for three shillings the Quarter, Bay Salt
at the like price: In his seventh year, Wheat was sold at London for twenty
pence the Bushel; which was counted a great dearth. In his tenth year, Wheat
was sold at London for six pence the Bushel, Bay Salt for three pence half
penny, Nantwich^salt for sixpence, white Herrings nine shillings the Barrel,
red Herrings three shillings the Cade, red Sprats six pence the Cade, and
Gascoigne wines for six pounds the T^^. In his fifteenth year, Gascoigne wine
was sold at London for forty shillings the Tun, a Quarter of Wheat four
shillings, and Bay Salt four pence the Bushel.

The two and twentieth of August 1485. the very day that King Henry got the
victory of King Richard; a great fire was in Bread-street in London, in which
was burnt the Parson of Saint Mildreds, and one other man in the Parsonage
there.

In his tenth year, in digging to lay a new foundation in the Church of Saint
Mary Hill in London, the body of Alice Hackney, which had been buried in the
Church a hundred seventy five years before, was found whole of Skin, and the
joints of her Arms pliable; which Corpse was kept above ground four days
without annoyance, and then again buried.

In his twelveth year, on Bartholomew day, at the Town of Saint Ne^des in
Bedfordshire, there fell Hayle-stones that were measured eighteen Inches about.

In his thirteenth year, on the one and twentieth of December; suddenly in the
night brake out a fire in the Kings lodgings, being then at his Manor of
Shee^; by violence whereof, a great part of the old building was burnt, with
hangings, beds, Apparel, Plate and many Jewels. In his fifteenth year, the
Town of Babra^ in Norfolk was burnt: Also this year, a great Plague happened;
whereof many people died in many places, but specially in London, where there
died in that year thirty thousand.

In his twentieth year, Alum which for many years had been sold for six
shillings a hundred, rose to five nobles a hundred, and after to four marks.

In his two and twentieth year, the City of Norwich was well near consumed
with fire. Also in the same year in July, a gallery new builded at Richmond,
wherein the King and the Prince his Son had walked not an hour before, fell
suddenly down, yet no man hurt.

The great Tempest which drove king Philip into England, blew down the Golden
Eagle from the Spire of Paul's; and in the fall, it fell upon a sign of the
Black-Eagle, which was in Paul's Churchyard, in the place where the
School-house now stands; and battered it, and brake it down. This the people
interpreted to be an ominous Prognostic upon the Imperial House, as indeed it
proved; for this king Philip being the Emperors son, arriving in Spain,
sickned soon after; and being but thirty years of age, deceased: upon whose
decease, his wife Queen John out of her tender love to him, fell distracted of
her wits.

Of his wife and children.
HE married Elizabeth eldest daughter of King Edward the Fourth, being of the
age of nineteen years; whom two years after his Marriage he caused to be
Crowned: She lived his wife eighteen years, and dyed in Childbed in the Tower
of London, the eleventh of February, the very day on which she was borne; and
is buried at Westminster, in the magnificent Chapel and rich Monument of
Copper and Guilt, which her Husband had erected. He had issue by her, three
Sons and four Daughters: his eldest son Arthur was born at Winchester, the
twentieth day of September in the second year of his Reign; and dyed at
Ludlow, at fifteen years old and a half: and of this short life some cause
may be attributed to his Nativity, being borne in the eighth month after
conception: He was buried in the Cathedral Church of St. Mary's in Worcester,
where in the South side of the Quire he lies en^ombed in Touch or Jet, without
any remembrance of him by Picture. His second son Henry was borne at
Greenwich in ^ent, on the two and twentieth day of June, in the seventh year
of his Fathers Reign; and succe^ded him in the kingdom. His third son
Edmund was borne in the tenth year of his Fathers Reign, and dyed at five
years of age, at Bishops Hatfield, and lies buried at St. Peter's in
Westminster. His eldest daughter Margaret was born the nine and twentieth day
of November, the fifth year of her Fathers Reign; and at fourteen years of age
was married to James the fourth King of Scotland; unto whom she bare three
Sons, James the fifth, Arthur and Alexander, and one Daughter, which three last
dyed all of them young; and after the death of her husband king James, (slain
at Flodden field in (...) against the English) she was remarried to Archib^ld
Dowgl^sse Earl of Augus, in the year 1514. to whom she bare Margaret, espoused
to Matthew Earl of Lenox, Father of the Lord Henry, who died at the age of nine
months, and lies interred in the upper end of the Chancell in the Parish
Church of Stepney near London: Her second Son was Henry Lord D^^nley, reputed
for personage the goodliest Gentleman of Europe; who married Mary Queen of
Scotland, the Royal Parents of the most Royal Monarch James the first, King
of great Britain: Her third Son was Charles Earl of Lenox, Father to the
Lady Arbella. King Henry's second Daughter the Lady Eliz^beth was borne in the
year 1492. at three years of age, died; and was buried at Westminster: His
third Daughter the Lady Mary, had been promised to Charles King of Castile; but
was married to Lewis the twelveth, King of France; who dying three months
after, she was then married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk: His fourth
Daughter, the Lady Katherine, was borne in the year 1503. in the eighteenth
year of her Fathers Reign, and dyed ^n Infant.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was of Body lean and spare, yet of great strength; of statu^e somewhat
higher than the common sort, his Eyes gray, his Teeth single, his Hair thin,
of a fair complexion and pleasing countenance. Concerning his Conditions, ^e
had in him the virtue of a Prince, and of a private man; affable, yet reserved.
We might say he was Politic; if not rather, that he was Wise: for though he
used (...) of Cunning sometimes, yet solid Circumspection more. He loved not
War, but in case of necessity; always Peace, but with conditions of Honor.
Never ^^y Prince was less addicted to bodily pleasures of any kind, than he.
Three pleasures he had, but in three Cares; One for Safety; another for Honor;
and the third for Wealth: in all which he attained his end. His great respect
of the Church, was seen by his great employment of Churchmen; for through the
hands of Bishop Morton, Bishop Fox, and his Chaplain Vrswick, the greatest
part of all his great negotiation passed. He was Frugall from his youth, not
Covetous till ancient and sickly; and therefore what defect he had in that
kind, must be attributed to age and weakness. This City of London was his
Paradise, for what good fortune (...) befell him, he thought he enjoyed it not,
till he acquainted them with it. His Parliament was his Oracle; for in all
matters of importance he would ask their advice; and he put his very
Prerogative sometimes into their hands. He was no great lover of women; yet all
his great fortune both Precedent and Subsequent came by women: His own title to
the Crown, was by a woman; His Confirmation in the Crown, was by a woman; His
Transmission of the Crown to his Posterity, was by a woman: The first by the
Lady Margaret, descended from John of Gaunt; the second by the Lady Elizabeth,
eldest Daughter of King Edward the fourth; the third by the Lady Margaret,
eldest Daughter of himself King of England, and married to James the Fourth,
King of Scotland; by means whereof, as he was the Prince that joined the two
Roses in one, so he was the Founder of joining the two Kingdoms in one. And
lastly, it may be said of him, as was said by one of August^^ Caesar, -- Hic
^ir hic est ti^i quem promitti saepius audis: for Cadwalloder last king of the
Britains, seven hundred years before, had Prophesied of him; and of later
time, King Henry the Sixth plainly fore-shewed him.

Of his Death and Burial.
IN the two and twentieth year of his Reign, he began to be troubled with the
Gout; but a Defluction also taking into his Breast, wasted his Lungs, so that
thrice in a year, and specially in the Spring, he had great fits and labors of
the Tissick, which brought him to his end, at his Palace of Richmond, on the
two and twentieth day of April in the year of 1508. when he had lived two and
fifty years, Reigned three and twenty and eight months: Being dead, and all
things necessary for his Funeral prepared; his Corpse was brought out of his
Privy Chamber, into the great Chamber, where it rested three days; and every
day, had there a Dirge and Mass sung by a Plelate, Mitred: and from thence it
was conveyed into the Hall, wherein it remained also three days, and had a
like service there; and so three days in the Chapel: Upon Wednesday the
nineth of May, the Corpse was put into a Chariot, and over the Corpse was a
Picture of the late King, laid on Cushions of Gold; and the Picture was
apparelled in the Kings rich Robes, with a Crown on the head, and a Ball and
Scepter in the hands: when the Chariot was thus ordered, the Kings Chapel and
a great number of Prelates set forward, praying; then followed all the kings
Servants in Black; then followed the Chariot, and after the Chariot nine
Mourners, and on every side were carried Torches, to the number of six hundred,
and in this order they came from Richmond to St. Georges field; where there met
with it all the Priests and Religious men within the City and without; the
Major and Aldermen, with many Commoners, all clothed in Black, met with the
Corpse at London Bridge; and so the Chariot was brought throught the City to
the Cathedral of St. Paul, where the Body was taken out and carried into the
Quire, and set under a goodly Hearse of Wax; where after a solemn Mass, was
made a Sermon by the Bishop of Rochester: The next day, the Corpse in like
manner was removed to Westminster; Sir Edward Haword bearing the kings Banner.
In Westminster was a curious Hearse full of lights, which were lighted at the
coming of the Corpse; and then was the Corpse taken out of the Chariot by six
Lords, and set under the Hearse, which was double railed: when the Mourners
were set, Gart^r king at Arms, cried, For the Soul of the Noble Prince king
Henry the seventh, late king of this Realm: The next day were three Masses
solemnly sung by Bishops, and after the Masses was offered the kings Banner and
Courser, his Coat of Arms, his Sword, his Target and his Helm, and at the end
of the Mass, the Mourners offered up rich Palls of Choath of Gold and Bodkin;
and when the Quire sang Liber^ me, the Body was put into the Earth; then the
Lord Treasurer, Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain, the Treasurer and Comptroller
of the kings household, brake their Staves and cast them into the Grave: Then
Gartar cried with a loud voice; Vive le ^oy, Henry le ^^itiesme; Roy
d'Angleterre and de France, sire d' Irlande: and thus ended the Funeral.

Of men of Note in his time.
OF Men of Valor and Arms, they are to be seen in the History of this Kings
Reign. For men of letters in his time, of foreigners were Sancts Pagui^^s a
great Hebrician; Leonicenus, Gattinaria, Cabellus and Optatus Physicians;
Augustinus Niphus, Iacobus Faber, Stapulensis and Pighius Philosophers; Petrus
Bembus^ and the famous Clerk Rheudin, who restored again the knowledge of the
Hebrew Tongue. Of our own Country, there lived in his time, George Rippley a
Carmelite Friar of Boston, who wrote diverse Treatises in the Mathematics; and
after his death was accounted a Necromancer. John Erghom borne in York, a
Black-Frier, studious in Prophesies, as by the Title of the works he wrote,
may appear. Thomas Mallorie a Welshman, who wrote of King Arthur, and of the
round Table. John Rouse borne in Warwickshire, a diligent searcher of
Antiquities, and wrote diverse Treatises of Historical Argument. Thomas Scroope
surnamed Bradley, of the Noble family of the Scroopes, entered into diverse
orders of Religion, and after withdrew himself to his house, where for twenty
years he lived the life of an Anchorite; and after, coming abroad again, was
made a Bishop in Ireland, and went to the Rhodes in Embassage; from whence
being returned, he went barefooted up and down in N^rfolk, teaching the ten
Commandments; and lived till near a hundred years old. John Ton^eys an
Augustine Friar in Norwich, who wrote certain Rules of Grammar, and other
things printed by Richard Pinson. Robert Fabian a Sheriff of London, and an
Historiographer. Edmund Dudley, the same man whom king Henry used to take the
forfeitures of Penal Statu^es; who wrote a Book entitled Arbor Re^-publicae.
John Bockingham an excellent Schoole-man: and William Blackeney a Carmelite
Friar, a Doctor of Divinity, and a Necromancer.

THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE EIGHT.
KING Henry the seventh being deceased, his only son Prince Henry, Heir by
his Father of the house of Lancaster, and by his Mother of the house of York:
by unquestionable right succeeded in the Crown, at the Age of eighteen years,
on the two and twentieth of April, in the year 1509. who having been trained
up in the study of good letters all his Fathers time^ he Governed at first, as
a man newly come from Contemplation to Action, as it were by the Booke^ in so
regular and fair a man^er, that as of Neroes Government, there was said to be
Quinquennium Neronis; so of this Kings, there might as justly be said,
Decennium Henrici; and perhaps double so long a time, comparable with so much
time of any Kings Reign, that had been before him. How he came to alter, and
to alter to such a degree of change as he did, we shall then have a fit place
to show, when we come to the time of his alteration. King Henry having learned
by Books, that the weight of a Kingdom is too heavy to lie upon one man's
shoulders, if it be not supported by able Councillors; made it his first care,
to make choice of an able Council; to which he called William Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, Richard Fox Bishop of
Winchester, Thomas Howard Earl of Surry, and Treasurer of England, George
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Steward of his Household, Charles Summerset
Lord Chamberlain, Sir Thomas Lovell^ Sir Henry Wyatt, Doctor Thomas Ruthall,
and Sir Edward Poynings; by advise of these Councillors, his first Act after
the care of his Fathers Funeral; was the care to perform his Fathers Will, in
marrying the Lady Katherine of Spain, the Relict of his Brother Prince Arthur;
to which perhaps but in respect of filial pierie, he had not the greatest
devotion; and for relinquishing whereof, he might (no doubt) more easily have
obtained a Despensation from the Pope, then his Father had done, for getting it
to be allowed: but obsequiousness to his Fathers desire, and respect to his
Councels advice, so far prevailed with him, that he would not be Crowned, till
that were performed, that one Coronation might serve them both: and so on the
third day of June following, he married the said Lady, at the Bishop of
Salisburies house in Fleetstreet; where of many great solemnities, I will
remember but this one; that though the Bride were a Widow, yet to show she was
a Virgin Widow, she was attired all in white, and had the hair of her head
hanging-downe behind at the full length: and then (having made in the Tower
four and twenty Knights of the Bath) two days after being Midsomer day, he was
Crowned at Westminster, together with his Queen, by the hands of William
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury; with all Circumstances of State, in such
cases usual; and then all the Nobility Spiritual and Temporal, did him
Homage; and the people being asked whether they would receive him for their
King, they all with one voice, cried, yea, yea.

This done, his next Act was another part of performing his fathers Will, which
was to proclaim Pardons for all offenses, (Treason, Murder, and Felony only
excepted) and to have restitution made of all goods unjustly taken from any;
and because the Instruments of such injustice, are always most odious, and
nothing gives the people so much contentment, as to see their Persecutours
punished; he therefore caused Empson and Dudley the two chief Actours of the
late unjust proceedings, to be committed to the Tower, and diverse of their
inferior Agents, called Promoters, as Canby, Page, Smith, Derby, Wright,
Simpson, and Stockton, to be set on the Pillory in Cornhill, with papers on
their heads, and then to ride through the City, with their faces to the horse
tails; with the shame whereof within seven days after, they all died in
Newgate. Shortly after a Parliament was called; whereof Sir Thomas Ingleby was
chosen Speaker; and therein Empson and Dudley were attainted of High Treason,
and after arraigned; Edmund Dudley in the Guildhall, on the seventeenth of
July, and Sir Richard Empson at Northampton in October following, and on the
seventeenth of August the year following, they were both of them beheaded on
the Tower Hill; and their Bodies and Heads buried, the one at the White Friars,
the other at the Black.

On Midsomer Eave at night, King Henry came privily into VVestchester, clothed
in one of the Coats of his Guard, to behold the same: and this first year King
Henry spent in Justs and Maskes, which were almost perpetual, performed with
great Magnificence always; and sometimes with great Acts of Valor, on the
Kings part specially.

In February the same year, Ambassadors came from the Kings Father in law, the
King of Aragon; requiring Aid against the Moors; in which service, the Lord
Thomas Darcy, a Knight of the Garter, making suite to be imployd; he was sent
thither, and with him the Lord Anthony Gray, brother to the Marquess Dorset,
Henry Guilford, Wolstan Brown, and William Sidney Esquires of the Kings House,
Sir Robert Constable^ Sir Roger Hastings, Sir Ralph Elderton and others; who on
the Mund^y in the Rogation Week, departed out of Plimot^ Haven, with four
ships Royal, and on the first of June, arrived at the Port of Cadis in south
Spain; of whose coming the King of Aragon hearing^ sent to bid them welcome,
but advertising them withal, that he had now by reason of new troubles with
France, taken truce with the Moors; and therefore they might return again
into their own Country, to whom yet he allowed wages for all his soldiers.
W^ereupon the Lord Darcy and all his men went aboard their ships, but Henry
Guilford, Wol^tan Br^wne, and William Sidney, desirous to see the Court of
Spain, went thither and were honorably entertained. Henry Guilford, and
Wolstan Brown were made Knights by the King; who gave to Sir Henry Guil^ord a
Canton of Granado; and to Sir Wolstan Brown an Eagle of Sicily on a Chief, to
the augmentation of their Arms: William Sidney so excused himself, that he
was not made Knight. After this they returned to their ships, and their ships
into England.

During the time that the Lord Darcy was in Spain, the Lady Margaret Duchess
of Sa^oy, Daughter unto Maximilian the Emperor; and Governesse of Flande^s and
other the Low-countryes, pertaining to Charles the young Prince of Ca^tile,
sent to King Henry for fifteen hundred Archers, to aid her against the Duke of
Gelders, which the King granted; and thereupon Sir Edward Poynings Knight of
the Garter, and Comptroller of the Kings House appointed to go, accompani^d
with his son in law the Lord Clinton, Sir Matthew Brown, Sir John Dig^y,
John Werton, Richard Wetherill, and others, to the number of fifteen hundred,
took shipping at Sandwich, and passing over to the said Lady Regent, did her
there great service; for which John Norton, John Fogge, John Scott, and Thomas
Lynde were knighted; and then with many thanks and rewards, returned, not
having lost in all the Journey, by war or sickness, above an hundred men.

In the third year of King Henryes Reign, one Andrew Barton a scottish Pirate,
was grown so bold, that he robbed Englishmen no less then other Nations^ till
the King sent his Admiral, Sir Edward Howard to repress him, who in a fight,
so wounded the said Barton, that he died; and then taking two of his ships,
brought the men prisoners to London; and though their offense deserved no less
then death, yet the King was so mecifull as to pardon them all; provided, they
departed the Realm within twenty days. The King of Scotts hearing the death
of Barton, and taking of his ships; sent to King Henry, requiring restitution;
but King Henry answered his Herald, that he rather looked for thanks for
sparing their lives, who so justly had deserved death.

In the third year also of King Henryes Reign, the French King made sharp
War against Pope Julius the second; whereupon King Henry wrote to the French
King, requiring him to desist from his War against the Pope being his friend
and confederate; but when the King of France little regarded his request, he
then sent him word, to deliver him his Inheritance of the Duchy of Normandy
and Guyen, and the Countries of Angiou and Main; as also his Crown of France,
or else he would recover it by the sword. But when the King of France was not
moved with this threatening neither; King Henry then joining in league with the
Emperor Maximilian, with Ferdinand King of Spain, and with diverse other
Princes; resolved by advise of his Council to make war on the King of
France, and to that end made preparation both by Sea and Land.

This year the King kept his Christmas at Greenwich in a most Magnificent
manner. On New-yeers day was presented one of his Joviall Devises, which only
for a Pattern what his shows at other times were, I think fit to set down
at large. In the Hall was made a Castle, garnished with Artillery and weapons
in a most warlike fashion, and on the Front of the Castle was written, la
Forteresse Dangerense: within the Castle were six Ladies, clothed in russet
Satin, laid all over with leaves of gold: On their heads Coyfes and Caps of
gold. After this Castle had been carried about the Hall, and the Queen had
beheld it; in came the King with five other, apparelled in Coats, one half of
russet-Satten, with spangles of fi^e gold; the other half of rich cloth of
gold: on their heads Caps of russet Satin, embrodered with works of fine gold.
These six assaulted the Castle, whom the Ladies seeing so lusty and courageous,
they were contented to solace with them; and upon further communication, to
yield the Castle; and so they came down, and daunced a long space: after that
the Ladies led the Knights into the Castle, and then the Castle suddenly
vanished out of their sights. On Twelfth day at night, the King with eleven
more were disguised, after the manner of Italy, called a Mask; a thing not
seen before in England. They were apparelled in garments long and broad,
wrought all with gold, with Vysors and Caps of gold. And after the banquet done,
these Maskers came in, with six Gentlemen disguised in silk, bearing staff
Torches; and desired the Ladies to dance, and after they had danced and
communed together; took their leave and departed.

The five and twentieth of January began the Parliament, of which was speaker
Sir Robert Sheffield knight, where the Archbishop of Canterbury showed the
wrong which the King of France did to the King of England, in withholding his
Inheritance from him; and thereupon the Parliament concluded that War should
be made on the French King and his Dominions.

At this time King Ferdinand of Spain, having War with the French King,
wrote to his Son in law King Henry, that if he would send over an Army into
Biskey, and invade France on that side; he would aid them with Ordnance,
Horses, and all other things necessary; whereupon Thom^s Gray, Marquess Dorset
was appointed to go, and with him the Lord Howard Son and hei^e to the Earl
of S^rry, the Lord Brook, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Ferrers, the Lords
John, Anthony, and Leonard Gray, all brothers, to the Marquess; Sir Grisseth
ap Ryce, Sir Maurice Barkeley, Sir William Sands, the Baron of B^r^ord, and Sir
Richard Cornwall his brother, William Hussy, John Melton, William Kingst^n
Esquires, and Sir Henry Willoughby, with diverse others, to the number of ten
thousand, who taking ship at Southampton, o^ the sixteenth of Ma^^ the third of
June they landed on the coast of Biskey, whither within three days after their
arrival, came from the King a Marquess and an Earl to welcome them; but of
such necessaries as were promised, there came ^one; so as the English being in
some want of victuals, the King of Navarre offered to supply them, which they
accepted; and promised thereupon not to molest his Territories. After the Army
had lain thirty days, looking for aid and provision from the King of Spain,
at last a Bishop came from the King, desiring the^ to have patience a while,
and very shortly he would give them full contentme^t. In the mean time, the
Englishmen forced to feed much upon Garlic, and (...) drink of ho^t Wines;
fell into such sickness, that many of them dyed, at least eighteen hundred
persons; which the Lord Marquess seeing, he sent to the King to know his
pleasure, who sent him answer, that very shortly the Duke of Alv^ should come
with a great power, and join with him; and indeed the Duke of Alva came
forward with a great Army, as if he meant to join with him as was promised;
but being come within a days Journey, he suddenly turned toward the Realm of
Navarre; and entering the same, chased out the King, and Conquered the Kingdom
to the King of Spaines use. This Spanish policy pleased not the English, who
finding nothing but words from the King of Spain, and being weary of lying so
long idle; they fell upon some small Towns in the border of Guyen, but for
want of Horses as well for service as draught; were unable to perform any
great matter; at which time, being now October, the Lord Marquis fell sick, and
the Lord Howard supplied his place of General, to whom the King of Spain once
again sent, excusing his present coming, and requiring him, seeing the time of
year was now past, that he would be pleased to break up his Army, and disperse
his Companies into Towns thereabou^, till the nex^ spring, when he would not
fail to make good all his promises: Hereupon the Lord Howard and his Company
went to Render, the Lord Willoughby to Gorscha^g, and Sir William Sands with
many other Captains to Fontarely. King Henry in the mean time, hearing what
the King of Spaines intention was; sen^ his Herald Windsor with Letters to the
Army, willing them to tarry there^for that very shortly he meant to send them a
new supply of Forces, under the conduct of the Lord Herbert his Chamberlain;
but this message so incense^ the Soldiers, that in a great fury they had
slain the Lord Howard if he had ^o^ yielded presently to return home; who
thereupon was forced to hire shippe^^ and in the beginning of December they
landed in England; being taught ^^y this experience what trust is to be given
to Spanish promises.

About the same time that the Marquess went into Spain, Sir Edward H^^ard
Lord Admiral of England, with twenty great ships made forth toward Br^ttaine;
where setting his men on land, he burned and wasted diverse Town^ and Villages,
and being threatened by the Lords of Britain to be encountered, to encourage
his Gentlemen, he made diverse of them Knights; as Sir Edwa^^ Brook brother to
the L. Cobham, Sir Grif^eth Down, Sir Thomas Windham, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir
John Burdet, Sir William Pirton, Sir Henry Sherburne, and Sir Stephen Bull. The
Britains were ten thousand, the English but five and twenty hundred; yet the
Britains not contented with this advantage of number, would ne^ds use policy
besides, for by the advice of an old experienced Captain, their General
commanded his men that a^soone as Battles were joyned^ they should retire a
little, meaning thereby to draw the English into some disadvantage; but the
common Soldiers not knowing their Generals purpose, and supposing he had seen
some present danger, instead of retyring took their heels and fled; so giving
the English by their British policy, if not a Victory, at least a safety to
return to their ships. After which the Britains sued for truce, and could
not obtain it; for the English Admiral pursued his forraging the Country,
till fearing there were many French ships abroad at Sea, he came and lay before
the Isle of Wight. King Henry in the mean time followed his pleasures; and in
June kept a solemn Just at Greenwich, where he and Sir Charles Brandon took up
all cummers; and the King showed himself no less a King at Arms, then in
Estate.

After this, King Henry having prepared men and ships ready to go to Sea; under
the Governance of Sir Anthony Out^read, Sir Edmund Ichingham, William Sidney
and diverse other Gentlemen; appointed them take the sea, and to come before the
Isle of Wight, there to join with the Admiral; which altogether made a Fleet
of five and twenty fair ships: and to Portesmouth he went himself to see
them, where he appointed Captains; for one of his chiefest ships called the
Regent, Sir Thomas Knevet master of his horse, and Sir John Carew of
Devonshire, and to another principal ship called the Sovereign, he appointed
for Captains Sir Charles Brandon, and Sir Henry Guildford; and then making
them a banke^, sent them going. The French King likewise had prepared a Navy of
nine and thirty ships in the Haven of Breast, whereof the chief was a great
Carrick, called the Cordelyer, pertaining to the Queen his wife. These two
Fleets met at the Bay of Britain, and there entered a tirrible fight; The Lord
Admiral made with the great ship of Deep, and chased her; Sir Charles Brandon
and Sir Henry Guildford being in the Sovereign, made with the great Carrick of
Breast, and laid stem to stem to her but whether by negligence of the
Master, or by reason of the smoke from the Ordnance, the Sovereign was cast
at the ster^e of the Carrick; whereat the Frenchmen shoured for joy; which Sir
Thomas Knevet seeing, suddenly he caused the Regent in which he was, to make to
the Carrick, and to grapple with her a long board; and when they of the Carrick
perceived they could not get a sunder, they let slip an Anchor, and so with
the stream the ships turned, and the Carrick was on the Weather side, and the
Regent on the Lee side; at which time a cruel fight passed between these two
ships: but in conclusion the Englishmen entered the Carrick, which when a Gunner
saw, he desperately set fire on the Gunpowder (as some say) though others
affirmed, that Sir Anthony Outhread following the Regent at the stern, bowged
her in diverse places, and set her powder on fire; but howsoever it chanced, the
Carrick and the Regent both were consumed by fire. In the Carrick was Sir Piers
Morgan, and with him nine hundred men: in the Regent were Sir Thomas Knevett,
and Sir John Carew, and with them seven hundred men, all drowned and burnt.
King Henry to repair the loss of the Regent, caused a great ship to be made,
such a one as had never been seen in England; and named it Henry Grace de Dieu.

Though King Henry had hitherto followed his pleasures, as well agreeing with
his youth and constitution; yet he neglected not in the mean time severer
studies; for he frequented daily his Council Table, and no matter of
importance was resolved on, till he had heard it first maturely discussed: as
was now a War wi^h France, which he would not enter into upon his own head,
nor yet upon advise of his private Council, till he had it d^b^ted and
concluded in Parliament; whereupon he called his High Court of Parliament,
wherein it was resolved; that himself in person with a Royal Army, should
invade France; and toward the charges thereof, an extraordinary Subsidy was
willingly granted.

On May even this year, Edmund de la Poole, Earl of Suffolk, was beheaded on
the Tower Hill: This was that Earl of Suffolk whom King Phillip Duke of
Austria, had delivered up into the hands of King Henry the seventh, upon his
promise that he would not put him to death; which indeed he performed, but his
son King Henry the eight was not bound by that promise, and by him he was;
and shortly after, to bring another Lord in his place, Sir Charles Brandon was
created Viscount Lisle.

For all the great preparation for France, King Henry forbore not his course of
Revelling, but kept his Christmas at Greenwich, with diverse cu^ious devises, in
most magnificent manner. In March following, the Kings Navy Royal, to the
number of two and forty ships was set forth, under the conduct of Sir Edward
Howard Lord Admiral, accompanied with Sir Walter Deveraux Lord Ferrers, Sir
Wolston Brown, Sir Edward Ichingham, Sir Anthony Poynings, Sir John Walloppe,
Sir Thomas Windham, Sir Stephen Bull, William Fits Williams, Arthur
Plantagenet, William Sidney esquires; and diverse other Gentlemen, who sailing
to Brittane, came into Bertram Bay, and there lay at Anchor in sight of the
French Navy, whereof one Prior John was Admiral, who keeping himself close in
the Haven of Breast; the English Admiral intended to assail him in the Haven,
but because his ships were to great to enter the Bay; he caused certain Boa^es
to be manned forth, thinking thereby to toule out the French; but when this
neither would draw them to come abroad, he then called a Council, where it was
determined, that first they should assail Prior John and his Galleys, lying in
Blankesable Bay, and after set upon the rest of the French Flee^e in the Haven
of Breast; and it was further appointed, that the Lord Ferrers, Sir Stephen
Bull, and others should go on land, with a convenient number, to assault the
Bulworkes, which the French had there made; while the Admi^all with Row B^rges
and little Galleys entered into the Bay, that so the Frenchmen might at once be
assailed both by sea and land. But though this were determined by the Council
of War ^et, the Lord Admiral had a trick by himself, for by the advice of a
Spanish Knight called Sir Alphonso Charunt, affirming that he might enter the
Bay with little danger; he called to him William Fi^s-VVilliams, William
Cook, John Colley, and Sir VVolston Brown, as his most trusty friends, making
them privy to his intent, which was to take on him the whole enterprise with
their assistance only; and so confident he was of success, that he wrote to
the King to come thither in person, to have the honor of the enterprise
himself; but it seems the King had better Fates, at least went not; and
thereupon, on Saint Marks day the Admiral put himself in a small row B^rge;
and appointing three other small row Ships, and his own Shipboat to attend him:
and therewith on a sudden rowed into the Ba^, where Pryor John had moored up
his Galleys just to the ground; which Galleys with the Bulworks on the land
shot most cruelly; yet the Admiral went on, and coming to the Galleys, drove
out the Frenchmen. The Bay was shallow, and the other ships by reason the Tide
was spent, could not enter; which the Frenchmen perceiving, they entered the
Galleys again with Morris Pikes, and began a new fight; whereupon the Admiral
attempting to return back into his row B^rge; which by violence of the Tide,
was driven down the stream; with a Pike was thrown over board, and drowned;
the just issue of his headstrong enterprise; the forenamed Alphonso was also
there slain: upon which sorrowful accident, the Lord Ferrers with the rest,
returned into England. After whose departure, Pryor John came forth with his
Galleys; and coasting over the borders of Sussex, burnt certain poor
Cottages^ but the King made suddenly a new Admiral, the Lord Thomas Howard,
eldest Brother to him that was drowned; son and heir of the Earl of Surrey:
who so skowrd the seas, that the French were no more to be seen on any coast of
England.

King Henry had hitherto performed Acts of Arms, though in Jest, yet with
great magnificence; he will not perform them with less, being now in earnest
and especially to deal with so potent aa adversary: and therefore when it was
concluded by Parliament, that he should make a War in France himself in
person; he sent before to prepare the way for him, George Talbot, Earl of
Sh^ewsbury, high Steward of his Household; accompanied with the Lord Thomas
Stanley Earl of Derby, the Lord Dowckeroy Pryor of Saint John's, Sir Robert
Ratcliffe, Lord Fitswater, the Lord Hastings, the Lord Cobham, Sir Riceap
Thomas, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Richad Sacheverell, Sir John Digby, Sir John
Askew, Sir Lewis Bagot, Sir Thomas Cornwall and others, to the number of eight
thousand; who arrived at Callice about the middle of May; after him in the end
of May, followed Sir Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert, Lord Chamberline,
accompanied with the Lord Percy Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Gray Earl of
Kent, the Lord Stafford Earl of Wiltshire, the Lord Dudley, the Lord Delaware,
Sir Edward Hussy, Sir Edward Dimmock, Sir David Owen, with others, to the
number of six thousand: These Generals joining together, issued out of
Callice, and on the two and twentieth day of June, sat down before the strong
Town of Terwin, which City was strongly fortified; and in it was Governor the
Lord Poultreny, who had with him six hundred Horsemen, and five and twenty
hundred Almans, besides the Inhabitants. Here at the very first happened two
disasters to the English; one, that the Baron Carew was slain with a shot from
the Town; the other, that Sir Nicholas Va^x, and Sir Edward Belknappe coming
from Guys^es with four and twenty Carts of Provision, were set upon by the Duke
of Vendosme, Lieutenant of Picardie, and many of the English slain, and the
Provision taken. In this state was the English Camp at Terwin; when King Henry
the last day of June came himself to Callice, and on the one and twentieth of
July took the field, having in his Army of fighting men, not above nine
thousand, but with Pyoners, and others that attended the Cariages, eleven
thousand and three hundred men: His foreward was led by Charles Brandon
Viscount Lisle, his maine Battle by himself, and Sir Henry Guildford carried
his Standard; and in this order he marched forward to the siege of Terwin,
entering upon the French ground, the five and twentieth of July. On the morrow
after, by negligence of the Carters, that mistook the way, a great Gunne called
the John Evangelist, was overthrown in a deep Pond of water, and could not at
that time be recovered; but a few days after, the Master Carpenter taking with
him a hundred laborers, went and weyed it up; but having carted it ready to
bring away, was set upon by eight hundred French; and the most of his company
slain: the Gunne was taken by the French, and carried to Bulloyne. In the
French Army were to the number of eleaven thousand footmen, and four thousand
Horse; whereof were Captains, the Lord De la Palyce, the Lord De Priennes, the
Duke De Longuevyle, the Earl of Saint Paul, the Lord of Floringes, the Lord of
Clermont, and Richard De la Poole an English man, son to John Duke of
Suffolk. The Armies were come within two miles one of another, and some light
skirmishes passed between them, specially one; on a day called the dry
Wednesday, for the day was wonderful hot, and the King with his Army stood in
order of battle, from six a clock in the morning, till three in the
afternoon: after this, the King removed toward Terwyn; and as the Army
marched, another of the Kings Bombards of Iron, called the Red Gunne, was
overthrown in a lane, and there left; which the French understanding, went
with a great power to fetch it away, as they had done the other; but the Lord
Berners, Captain of the English Pyoners, prevented them; and though set upon
by the French, to the number of nine or ten thousand, yet by the valor of the
Earl of Essex, and Sir Riceap Thomas, with the bold adventures of Sir William
Tyler, and Sir John Sharp, they recovered it and brought it safe to the Camp.
On the fourth of August K. Henry came before the city of Terwyn, where he
strongly fortified his Tents with Ord^ance, and other Warlike defenses. In
which mean time, the Captain of Bulloigne, knowing that many of the Garrison
of Callice were gone with the King, thought to take advantage of their absence,
and do some great exploit upon Callice; and thereupon with a thousand men, came
to New^ha^ Bridge, and killing the watchmen, took it; but afterward some of
his company going to fetch Booties, and coming so near the walls of Callice,
that they were descried; about sixscore Coopers and other Artificers issued
forth, and driving them back, recovered again Newnham Bridge, and took diverse
of them prisoners; especially when the gate of Callice, called Bulloign gate
was opened, and that Colepepper the under Marshal, with two hundred Archers
issued forth, and joined with them. The French prisoners were brought to
Callice, and there sold in open Market; amongst others, a Cooper of the Town of
Callice, bought a prisoner that dwelt in Bulloigne, and had of the prisoner for
his ra^some, a hundred Crowns; when the money was paid, the French man prayed
the Cooper to see him safe delivered, and to conduct him out of danger; the
Cooper was content, and went himself alone with the French man, till he came
beyond the Cawsey, and there would have departed; but the French man perceiving
that the Cooper was aged, and that no rescue was nigh^ by force took the
Cooper prisoner, ^^d carried him to Bulloigne; making him pay two hundred
Crowns, before h^ was delivered.

Whilst King Henry lay thus at the siege of Terwyn, on the eleventh of Au^^^^,
the Emperor Maximilian was come to Air; which King Henry understanding, went
and met him between Air and the Camp; where with great complements they
saluted each other; but their complements were broken off, by ^^e extreme
foul weather which happened that day: the morrow after, the Emperor
Maximilian came from Air to the Kings Camp, wearing a Cross of Saint George,
as the Kings Soldier, and receiving wages of him for service; an honor never
done to any King of England before; and yet was no disparagement to the
Emperor, for he was royally received, and lodged in a Tent of cloth of gold;
that as no Emperor before, had ever been soldier to a King; so no soldier
before was ever lodged in such a Tent. At this time the City of Terwyn, being
in some distress for want of victuals; the French King appointed all his
horsemen to the number of eight thousand, to see victuals by any means
convoyed into it; the charge of which Convoy was committed to Monsieur De
Priennes: but King Henry by advise of the Emperor Maximilian, had made Bridges
to pass his men over the river, to the other side of the Town, where was
easiest access; in such sort, that when the French Convoy came with their
victuals, and thought to have entered the Town, they found the English Army
there ready to resist them; whereupon a fierce battle was fought between them:
but in conclusion the French were put to flight, and fled so fast, that from
thence it was called the battle of Spurs, for that they used more their
spurs in running away, then theit Lances in fighting. In this battle, the
Duke of Longuevyle, the Lord of Clermont, Captain Bayard, and others to the
number of twelve score were taken prisoners, and all brought to the Kings
presence; with six Standards that were likewise taken. After the battle, the
King made Sir John Pechye Banneret, and John Carre Knight, who had both of them
done great service in this encounter. King Henry having obtained this victory
against the French horsemen, and hindered the Town of Terwyn from relief of
victuals, and withal plying his battery more fiercely then before; made the
Townsmen soon fall to desire composition, and upon condition that the
soldiers might depart with Horse and Armor, they yielded up the Town into
the Kings hands. This was done on the eighteenth of August, and the Earl of
Shrewsbury entered the Town the same night; and set up the Banner of Saint
George in the highest place of it, in sign of victory, and swore all the
Townsmen to be true subjects to the King of England. The four and twen^eth of
August, the King himself entered the Town, and dined in the Bishops Palace,
where it was resolved, that the Walls and Fortifications of Terwyn should be
raced, and the Town burnt all but the Cathedral Church and the Palace, all
the Ordnance was sent to Air, to be kept there to the Kings use.

After this it was concluded, that the King should lay siege to the City of
Tourney; whereupon he set forward in three battles, the Eeale of Shrewsbury
led the Vangard; the King and the Emperor, the Battle; and the Lord
Chamberlain the Re^eward. In this order the Kings Army marched forwards
toward Tourney; by the way, he went and visited the young Prince of Castile,
and the Lady Margaret, Governesse of the Prince, in the Town of Lisle, where
with all Mag^ificence; or rather indeed Reverence, he was entertained; and
after he had stayed there three days, he took his leave, and being gone a mile
and somewhat more out of the town, he asked where his Camp lay, and no man
there could tell the way, and guide they had none; the night was so dark and
mystie, by chance at last they met with a victualler coming from the Camp, who
was their guide and conducted them to it. By which we may see, to what
distress a great Prince may be brought by a little oversight.

On the one and twentieth day of September, the King removed his Camp toward
Tourney; and being come within three miles of the town, he sent Garter king of
Arms to summon the town; but they, though they had but few men of war
amongst them, yet stood upon their guard; whereupon the King begin it on all
sides, and made such firce batteries upon it, that though it were written on
the gates of the town, graven in stone, Iamais tu ne as perdu ton Pucellege;
thou have never lost thy Maidenhead; yet now they were glad to loose it: and in
conclusion, they sent a trumpet to require a Parley, and then sued for mercy,
and yielded it up, and paid ten thousand pounds sterling besides, for
redemption of their liberties: and then Master Thomas VVoolsey the Kings
Almoner, calling before him all the Citizens young and old, swore them to the
King of England; the number of whom was fourscore thousand. This done, the
King entered into Tourney, and calling into his presence Edward Guildford,
William Fitzwilliams, John Dansie, William Tyler, John Sharp, William
Hussy, John Savage, Christopher Garnysh, and some other valiant Gentlemen; he
gave to them the order of knighthood; and then remembering the great
entertainment the Prince of Castile and the Lady Margaret had given him at
Lisle, he would not be behind them in such courtesy; and thereupon in^ited
them solemnly to his city of Tourney, whom at their coming he brought into the
town in great triumph: during their abode in Tourney, amongst other
compliments of entertainment, there was had a Justs, where the King and the
Lord Lisle answered all comers: after the Justs, was a sumptuous Banquet; after
the Banquet, the Ladies danced, and then came in the King, and eleven other in
a Mask, all richly apparelled with Bonnets of gold: and when the^ had passed
the time at their pleasures, the garments of the Maskers were cast off; amongst
the Ladies take them that could. This was King Henry's disposition, that he
could not forbear Revelling in the midst of his Arms; and Ladies must be
entertained as well as soldiers. After this, finding the French not willing to
come to a Battle, and the winter drawing on, he left Sir Edward Poynings
Governor of Tourney, and then returned to Callice, and from thence passed into
England, and rode in post to Richmond to the Queen.

Whilst King Herry was thus busied in his war with France, the King of Scots,
though his Brother in law, yet instigated by the French King, and taking
advantage of King Henry's absence, assembled his people to Invade England; but
before his whole power could come together, the Lord Humes his Chamberlin, with
seven or eight thousand men entered the borders; but as he was returning with a
great booty of Cattle, in a field overgrowne with Broom, called Milfield, he
was encountered by Sir Edward Bulmer, having with him not above a thousand men;
who lying in that field in ambush, broke out upon him, and put him to flight,
with the slaughter of five or six hundred of his company, and four hundred
taken prisoners, the Lord Humes himself escaped by ^light, but his Banner was
taken; and this, by the Scots was called, the ill Rode. In the mean time the
whole power of Scotland was assembled, no fewer then one hundred thousand men;
though Buchanan in favor of his Country, ^aith, not the fifth part of that
number; and with these, King James approaching the borders, and coming to
Norham Castle, laid siedge unto it, which for want of Powder, was soon
delivered up unto him. But by this time the Earl of Surrey, Lieutenant of the
North parts, had assembled an Army of six and twenty thousand men; to whom also
soon after, his Son the Lord Admiral, with one thousand expert soldiers
came and joyned^ and now having many great Lords and Knights in his Army, he
appointed to every one their station; and then was informed, that King James
being removed six miles from Norha^, lay embattelling upon a great Mountain
called Floddon, where it was impossible to come near him, but with great
disadvantage; for at the foot of the hill, o^ the left hand, was a great ma^ish
ground full of reeds and water, on the right hand was a river called Till, so
swift any deep that it was not possible; on the backside were such craggie
rocks and thick woods, that there was no assayling him on that part; the
forepart of his Camp he had fenced with his great Ordnance. Being in such a
hold, the Earl of Surry found there was no possibility of a Battle, unless
he could draw him from the hill; whereupon he called a coun^ell, by which it was
determined to s^nd Roug-Cross^ Pu^suivant at Arms with a trumpet, to the K. of
Scots, to let him know, that he was ready on Friday following to give him
Battle, if he would abide it; whereunto the King of Scots by his Pursuivant
Ilay, made answer, that at the day prefixed he should find him ready for
Battle as he desired, that he would willingly have come to such a ma^ch if he
had bin at Edinburgh; but though he made this answer, yet he would not leave
the strong Hold he was in, but kept himself still upon the Hill; at last,
Thomas Lord Howard, son and hei^e to the Earl of Surrey, having viewed the
Country round about, declared to his Father, that if he would but fetch a small
compass, and come with his Army on the back of his Enemies, he should enforce
the Scottish King to come down out of his strength, or else stop him from
receiving of victuals o^ any other thing out of Scotland. This council of the
Lord Howard his Father followed, and King James perceiving what their meaning
was, thought it stood not with his honor to be forestalled out of his own
Realm, and thereupon immediately raised his Camp, and got to another Hill, but
not so steep as the other; which the Earl of Surrey perceiving, he determined
to mount it, and to fight with the Scots, before they should have leisure to
fortify their Camp; and herewith making a short Speech, for encouragement of
his Soldiers, he divided his Army into Battles; the Van^guard was led by the
Lord Howard, to whom was joined as a Wing, Sir Edward Howard; the middle-ward
was led by the Earl himself, and the Rear-ward by Sir Edward Stanley; the Lord
Dacres with a number of horsemen was set apart by himself, to succor where need
should be; the Ordnance was placed in the Front, and in other places, as was
thought most convenient: and in this order they March forward, towerds the
Scots. On the other side, King James reckoning upon the benefit of the Hill,
thought the English half mad, to venture a Battle upon such disadvantage; and
thereupon making a Speech to encourage his Soldiers, who were of themselves so
forward, that they needed no encouraging. He divided his Battles in this
manner; the maine Battle he led himself, to which he appointed two Wings; the
right led by the Earls of Huntley, Cr^wford and Mountrosse; the left by the
Earls of Lenox and Argyle, together with the Lord H^mes Lord Camberlain: and so
confident they were of victory, that the King first, and after all the Lords
and meane^ me^, put away their Horses, as thinking they should not need them;
which confidence was afterward their undoing; for when the Battle being
joined, Sir Edward Howard in getting up the Hill, was so assaulted by the
Earls of Lenox and Argyle, that he was left almost alone, and in manifest
peril to be slain; in comes the Lord Dacres with his Horsemen, and trod under
foot the Scottish Battle of speeres on foot, which he could not have done, if
they had kept their Horses. And this part of the Scottish A^my being led by the
Earls of Crawford and Mountrosse, they were both of them slain, and the whole
Battle but to flight. In another part also Sir Edward Stanley did the like,
upon the Battle led by the Earls of Lenox and Argyle, putting it to flight,
with the slaughter also of these two Earls. King James notwithstanding,
maintained the fight still, with great resolution, till Sir Adam Forman his
Standard Bearer was beaten down; and then not fainting, though despairing of
success, he rushed into the thickest of his Enemies, amongst whom he was
beaten down and slain; and to make his death the more honorable, there dyed
with him three Bishops (whereof one was Alexander, Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, the Kings base Son) two Abbots, twelve Earls, and seventeene
Lords, of Knights and Gentlemen very many, in all about eight thousand, and
almost as many taken prisoners (as Paulu^ Iovius says) amongst whom was Sir
William Scot, Chancellor to the said King, and Sir George Forman his Sergiant
Porter; the Lord Hume and the Earl Huntley got horses and escaped. Neither was
the Battle without blood to the English, for there was slain at lest a
thousand, and (that which in a Defeat was strange) many also taken prisoners;
for many in pursuing the Scots, went rashly so farre^ that they knew not which
way ^o return, and by Bands of Scots that had not fought that day, were set
upon and taken. When the field was done, the Lord General called to him
certain Lords and Gentlemen, and made them Knights, as Sir Edward Howard his
Son, the Lord Scroope, Sir William Percy, Sir Edward Gorge, and others. This
Battle was fought on Friday the ninth of September, in the year 1513. called
by some Bramston, by some, ^lodden Field. King James here slain was the same
that had married the Lady Margaret eldest Daughter of King Henry the seventh;
and sister to the present King Henry; and might have enjoyed many happy days,
if he had kept himself firm to his alliance, but being carried away with the
inveterate spleen between the two Nations, and propension to France; he ended
his life, though honorably, yet miserably under many wounds. It is a very
memorable, but s^arce credable thing; which, (from the mouth of a very credible
person who saw it) George Buchanan relates concerning this King; that intending
to make a war with England; a certain old man of venerable aspect, and clad
in a long blew garment, came unto him, and leaning familiarly upon the chair
where the King sat, said, I am sent unto thee O King, to give thee warning,
that thou proceed not in the war thou art about; for if thou do, it will be
thy ruin: and having so said, he pressed through the company, and vanished out
of sight; for by no inquiry it could be known what became of him. But the King
was too resolute to be frighted with Phantosmes, and no warning could divert
his Destiny, which had not been Destiny if it could have been diverted. The
day after the Battle, his Body, though disfigured with wounds, was known by
the Lord Dacres and others, to be his; and thereupon bowelled, embalmed and
wrapped in lead, was brought to the Monastery of Sheene in Surrey, and there
interred; but at the dissolution of that House, was taken up and thrown into a
waste room amongst timber and stone; which John Stow says, he so saw; and
further relates, that the servants of Lancelot Young, Glasier to Queen
Elizabeth being at Sheene, in new Glazing the windows, either upon a foolish
pleasure, or desire of the lead, cut the head from the rest; but smelling the
sweet perfums of the Balms, gave it to their Master; who opening the lead,
found therein the head of a man, retaining favor, though the moisture were
clean dried up, whose hair both of head and beard was red: which afterward,
he caused to be buried, at Saint Michaels Church in Woodstreet, where he
dwelled. But notwithstanding this relation of Stow; John Lesly Bishop of Rosse
affirms, that it was held for certain, the Body thus found, was the Body of
the Lord Bouchard slain in that B^ttaile. Buchanan says, of Alexander
Elfinston, who in countenance and statu^e was like the King; and that King
James was seen alive the same night at Kelso, whence he passed to Jerusalem,
and there spent the rest of his days in holy contemplation: but howsoever it
was, he was never seen any more in Scotland.

King Henry being now returned from Tourney into England, and finding the great
services done in his absence against the Scots; on the day of the Purification
of our Lady, at Lambeth he created the Earl of Surrey Duke of Norfolk, with
an augmentation of the Arms of Scotland; Sir Charles Brandon Viscount Lisle,
he created Duke of Suffolk, the Lord Howard high Admiral, he made Earl of
Surry, Sir Charles Somerset Lord Herbert his chief Chamberlain Earl of
Worcester, and shortly after Sir Edward Stanly he made Lord Monteagle; and in
March following, Master Thomas Woolsey his Almoner, was made Bishop of
Lincoln. Here before we go further, it will be fit ^o ^ay something of this
man, that he be not a rub afterward in the way of the Story: He was borne at
Ipswich in Suffolk, the son of a Butcher, sent to Oxford by reason of his
pregnancy of wit, so soon, that taking there the first degree of Art, he was
called the Boy Batchelour; proceeding in learning, he was made Fellow of
Magdalen College in Oxford, and afterward Schoolmaster of the School there,
at which time the Marquess Dorset committed three of his Sons to be
Instructed by him; and having a Benefice fallen in his gift, sent for him one
Christmas, and bestowed it upon him; whereof Woolsey going to take possession,
at his being there, for what misdemeanour is not delivered, he was by Sir Amyas
Pawlet set by the heels, which afterward he remembered to Sir Iam^s his no
small trouble, for he made him attend his pleasure five or six years; all
which time lying in the Middle Temple, where he re-edified the Gate House next
the street very sumptuously, setting the Cardinals Arms upon it, to appease
him. After this disgrace he went over-sea, where he fell in acquaintance with
Sir John Naphant treasurer of Callice, and by him was preferred to be King
Henry the sevenths Chaplain: and now being by this means in the Kings eye, he
so diligently carried himself, that he soon got into the Kings heart. One
time it happened, the King had occasion to send a Messenger to the Emperor
Maximilian, about a business that required haste; for which employment no man
was thought more fit then Woolsey; whereupon, the King called him, gave him his
Errand, and bad him make all the speed he could; Woolsey departed from the King
at Richmond about noone, and by the next morning was got to Dover, and from
thence by noone that day was come to Callice, and by night was with the
Emperor; to whom declaring his Message^ and having a present dispatch, he rode
that night back to Callice, and the night following came to the Court at
Richmond. The next morning he presented himself before the King, who blamed
him for not being yet gone, the ma^ter requiring haste; to whom Woolsey
answered, that he had been with the Emperor, and had dispatched the
business, and for proof showed the Emperors lines; the King wondered much at
his speed, but then asked him if he met not his Pursuivant, whom he sent after
to advertise him of a special matter he had forgotten; whereto Woolsey
answered, May it please your Grace I met him yester-day upon the way, but that
business I had dispatched before, taking the boldness so to do without
commission, as knowing it to be of special consequence; for which boldness I
humbly entreat ^our Graces pardon. The King not only pardoned him, but
bestowed presently upon him the Deanery of Lincoln, and soon after made him
his Almoner. In this state King Hen^y the eight found him, with whom also he
grew into such favor, that he made him of his Council; and having won
Tourney, made him Bishop of that City; and returning into England, (the
Bishopric of Lincoln falling void by the death of Doctor Smith) made him
Bishop of that Diocese. And thus far the story has now brought him, but soon
after he was raised higher; for Doctor Bambridge Archbishop of York dying, he
was translated from Lincoln to that See; and that he might not be inferior to
the Archbishop of Canter^ury, he procured of the Pope to be made Cardinal, and
Legate a Latere; and after, by the King was made Lord Chancellor of England:
and being come to this height of dignity, he so carried himself in Expenses of
Household, in number of Retinve, and in all circumstances of State, that no
Subject before or since, has in any degree come near him. And if we may say
it, he was the first Debaucher of King Henry; for to the end he might have the
managing of all matters himself, he persuaded the King that he should not need
trouble himself with frequenting the Council Table as he did, but take his
pleasure, and leave those things to his Council, whereof himself would
alwa^es give him ^nie Information. This was plausible Council, and no marvel
if it were embraced of a young King, coming from the mouth of so great a Prelate.

In this fifth year of the King, the Citizens of London finding themselves
grieved with the Enclosures of the common fields about Islington, Hogsdon and
Sh^rdich, and other places adjoining; went one morning, and threw down all the
Hedges, and filled up all the Ditches; whereat though the Kings Council were
at first offended, yet the Mayor and City showed them such reasons, that they
rested satisfied, and the fields were never since hedged.

On the nineteenth of May, this year Pope Julius the second sent to King Henry
a Cap of Maintenance and a Sword; and being angry with the King of France,
transferred by Authority of the Lateran Council, the title of Christianissimo
from him, upon King Henry, which with great solemnity was published the sunday
following, in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul; but this solemnity must not
pass without Revelling, Maskes, and Justs; wherein the King and the Duke of
Suffolk were defendants against all comers; who having the Duke of
Longuevyle, and the Lord of Clermont to be spect^tours, spread the fame of
their Chivalrie into foreign Nations.

And now the great love that had been long between King Henry and the Flemings,
began to abate; upon this occasion, King Henry the seventh had concluded a
match between his daughter Mary, and Charles Prince of Spain: but by reason of
her young years, and for want of assurance of Jointure, the match was deferred
during his time; but now King Henry the eight seeing his sister of convenient
years, began to call upon it, and signified so much to the Council of
Flanders; but they, whether having other ends, or out of Spanish delays, put
him off with excuses, and at last sent him word plainly, they could do nothing
in it that year. The King of France had soon Intelligence how much King Henry
distasted these Spanish dealings, and meant to make some good use of it, for
the ends he began to propose to himself, which were, to get the Lady Mary for
himself, and thereby procure peace with England, being now old, and weary of
the War. And for this purpose he got the new Pope Leo the tenth to be his
mediator, and both of them send Ambassadors to King Henry, the Pope to
persuade him to have peace with France, the French King to treat about a
Marriage with the Lady Mary: upon whose Embassages, King Henry partly to
satisfy the Pope, and partly to advance his sister; did not unwillingly
hearken to the motions: but whilst this was in working, Pryor John (who knew
nothing of these intentions) began again to play his Pra^ks; and coming with
his Gallyes on the coast of Sussex, burnt Bhighthem-steed, and took away the
goods he found in the Village, whereupon the Lord Admiral sent Sir John
Walloppe to sea, with diverse ships and eight hundred men, who for one Village
that Pryor John burnt in England, burnt one and twenty Villages and Towns in
France, to the great honor of himself, and his country.

And now King Henry by advice of his Council, and specially of Woolsey Bishop
of Lincoln, concluded both the peace with France, and the Marriage of his
Sister the Lady Mary, with the French King; but yet it stuck a while upon some
differences, King Henry demanding Bulloigne, and the King of France Tourney: in
conclusion these demands were waved, and the principal conditions were^ first
concerning the Ladies Jointure, that she should have two and thirty thousand
Crowns of yearly revenues if she survived the King; and then concerning ths
peace, that the French King should pay yearly to King Henry for five years one
hundred thousand Crowns, and the peace to continue between them during their
lives, and a year after, and bound reciprocally to assist each other with ten
thousand foot, if the war were by land, with six thousand if by sea. All
things thus concluded, the Lady Mary was brought to Dover by King Henry and his
Queen: and on the second of October taking shippi^g, was conducted by the Duke
of Norfolk, the Marquess Dorset, the Bishop of Durham^ the Earl of Surry,
the Lord De la ware, the Lo^d Berners, the Lord Monteagle, Sir Maurice Berkely,
Sir John Pechye, Sir William Sands, Sir Thomas Bulleyne^ Sir John Carre, and
many other Knights and Ladies; but being not past half way over the sea, their
ships by tempest were dispersed, and the Lady with some jeoperdy landed at
Bullen, where Sir Christopher Garnish was feign to stand in the water and take
her in his arms, and so set her on shore, and there the Duke of Vendosme with
a Cardinal and many other great States received her. From Bullen the eight of
October, she came to Abbevyle where the Dolphyn received her: on the morrow
being Saint Dennis day, she came to Saint Dennis, where the marriage between
the King of France and her, was solem^ized (though some write it had been
solemnized before at Abbevyle.) The fifth of November she was Crowned Queen of
France, at which time the Dolphyn held the Crown over her head, as being too
massy for her to wear; and the day following she was received into Paris in
most magnificent manner. In honor of whose Marriage and Coronation, the
Dolphyn had caused a solemn Justs to be proclaimed, which should be kept in
Paris the seventh of November. Upon report of this Proclamation in England, the
Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess Dorset and his four Brothers, the Lord Clinton,
Sir Edward Ne^^ll, Sir Giles Capell, Thomas Cheiney and others, obtained leave
of the King to be at the challenge, where they all behaved themselves with
great valor, but specially the Duke of Suffolk; whose glory the Dolphyn so
much envied, that he got a Dutchman the tallest and strongest man in all the
Court of France, secretly as another person to encounter him, with a purp^e to
have the Duke foiled; but indeed it turned to his greater honor, for he foiled
the Dutchman in such sort, that when they came to the Barriers, the Duke by
maine strength took him about the neck, and so prommeled him about the head,
that he made the blood issue out at his nose: many other Princes and Lords did
bravely; and after three days the Justs ended.

King Henry was not long behind to solemnize it in England also; for at
Greenwich the Christmas following, on Newyeers night, and Twelfth night; he
presented such strange and magnificent devices, as had seldom been seen; and
the third of February following he held a solemn Justs, where he and the
Marquess Dorset answered all comers, at which time the King brake three and
twenty spears, and threw to the ground one that encountered him both man and
horse.

At this time preparation was making for King Henry in person to go to Callice,
there to meet with the French King and Queen, but death hindered the design;
for before the next spring, the first of January the French King dyed at the
City of Paris, fourscore and two days after his marriage; teaching others by
his example, what it is for an old man to marry a young Lady. King Henry
hearing of the French Kings death, sent the Duke of Suffolk, Sir Richard
Winkefield, and Doctor West, to bring over the Queen Dowager, according to the
Covenants of the marriage. Whereupon the Queen was delivered to the Duke by
Indenture, who obtaining her good will to be her husband, (which was no hard
matter, that had been her first love:) wrote to the King her brother for his
consent; whereat the King seemed to stick a while, but at last consented; so as
he brought her into England unmarried, and then marry at his return; but the
Duke for more surety married her secretly in Paris, and after having received
her Dower, Apparel and Jewels; came with her to Callice, and there openly
married her with great solemnity. At their coming into England, King Henry to
show his conten^ment with the marriage, in the company of the Duke of Suffolk,
the Marquess Dorset, and the Earl of Essex, all richly apparelled; held a new
kind of Justs, running courses on horseback in manner Volant, as fast as one
could follow another, to the great delight of the beholders.

This year the King at his Manor of Oking; Woolsey Archbishop of York came
and showed him letters, that he was elected Cardinal; for which dignity he
disabled himself, till the King willed him to take it upon him, and from
thenceforth called him Lord Cardinal, but his Hat and Bull were not yet come:
after which Doctor Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Chancelour of
England; finding Woolsey being now Cardinal, to meddle more in his office of
Chancelourship, then he could well suffer^ resigned up the Seal, which the King
presently gave to Woolsey. About this time, Cardinal Campejus was sent by Pope
Leo to King Henry, to solicit him to a War against the Turk, with whom
Cardinal Woolsey was joined in Commission, who hearing of the ragged retinue
of his fellow Cardinell; sent store of red cloth to Callice to make them fit
followers of so great a Lord: and when Campejus was landed at Dover, Cardinal
Woolsey caused the gentry of Kent to wait upon to Black Heath, where he was
met and received by the Duke of Norfolk and many Prelates, and there in a Tent
of cloth of gold shifted himself into his Cardinals robes. Eight Mules he had
laden with necessaries; but Woolsey not thinking them enough for his honor,
sent him twelve more. But now see the shame of pride, for in Cheap Side his
Mules by some mischance overthrew their Carriages and Coffers on the ground,
whose lyds flying open, showed the world what treasure it was they carried, old
Breeches, Boots, and broken Shoos, broken Meat, Marybones and crusts of Bread;
exposing him to the laughter of all the people: yet the Cardinal went joging
on before with his Crosses, guilt Axe and Mace, unto Paul's Church; and by the
way had an Oration made him by Sir Thomas Moore, in name of the City, and then
waited on with many Bishops, was conducted to Bath Place, where he was lodged
for his own particular: he got well by the Journey, for the King gave him the
Bishopric of Salisbury; but the errand he came about, which was to have Aid
by money, for a War against the Turk, he could not obtain, for it was well
known to be but a devise to get money, without any intention of what was
pretended.

In his seventh year, King Henry kept his Christmas at his Manor of Eltham;
where on Twelfth night according to his custom, was a stately Mask of Knights
and Ladies, with solemn Daunsing and a most Magnificent Banquet.

It was now the eight year of King Henryes Reign, when the new league between
him and the French King was Proclaimed in the City of London: and this year
Mageret Queen of Scots eldest Sister to King Henry, having before married
Archibald Dowglasse Earl of Angus; by reason of dissension amongst the Lords
of Scotland, was glad with her husband to fly into England, and to seek
succor at her brothers hands; who assigned to her the Castle of Harbottell in
Northumberland to reside in; where she was delivered of a daughter named
Margaret. From thence the King sent for her and her husband to come to his
Court; and thereupon the third of May, Queen Margaret riding on a white
Palfrye (which the Queen of England had sent her) behind Sir Thomas Parr^,
came through London to Baynards Castle, and from thence went to Greenwich: but
her husband the Earl of Angus, was secretly before departed into Scotland;
which when King Henry heard, he only said it was done like a Scot. And now in
honor of his sisters coming, King Henry the nine and twentieth of May,
appointed two solemn days of Justs; where the King, the Duke of S^ffolke, the
Earl of Essex, and Nicholas Carew Esquire: took upon them to answer all
comers, amongst others, the King and Sir William Kinston ran together, which
Sir William though a strong and valourous Knight, yet the King overthrew him to
the ground: all the rest was performed with no less valor then magnificence.
This year died the King of Aragon, Father to the Queen of England, for whom
was kept a solemn Obsequie in the Cathedral Church of Paul's; and Queen
Margaret after she had been a year in England, returned into Scotland.

In this year were sent twelve hundred Carpenters and Masons, with three
hundred Laborers, to the City of Tourney in France, to build a Castle there,
to keep the City in Awe. And now the Cardinal being weary of hearing so many
Causes himself, as were daily brought before him; ordained by the Kings
Commission (aftet the pattern of Mases, diverse under Courts to hear
co^mplaints of Suitours: whereof one was kept in the Whitehall, another before
the Kings Almoner Doctor Stokesley, a third in the Lord Treasurers lodging
near the Star Chamber, and the fourth at the Roles in the afternoon: these
Courts for a time were much frequneted; but at last, the people perceiving that
much delay was used in them, and that sentence given by them bound no man by
Law: they thereupon grew weary of them, and resorted to the common Law. By
occasion of this Government of the Cardinal, who under color of Justice, did
what he pleased: many great men withdrew themselves from the Court; as first
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Winchester, who went and lived
in their Diocesses; then the Duke of Norfolk, and at length the Duke of
Suffolk, who being run deep into the Kings debt, by reason of his many
Employments into France, and his great Housekeeping since his marriage with
the Kings Sister, hoped the King would have forgiven it, and would no doubt
have done it, but that the Cardinal opposed it, to the end the Duke should be
the more at his command.

In October this year, Matthew Bishop of Sion commonly called the Cardinal of
the Swizzers came into England from the Emperor Maximilian; by whose
soliciting, and Cardinal Woolseys persuasion, the King lent the Emperor a
great some of money, for Woolsey being angry with the King of France, for
detaining the revenewes of his Bishopric of Tourney, persuaded King Henry that
the best way to abate the French Kings power, was to furnish the Emperor
money, the better to maintain war against him: and what Woolsey said, was in
those days to King Henry an Oracle.

This year the King kept his Christmas at his manner of Greenwich; where on
Twelfth night according to his custom, rare devices with great magnificence
were presented; after which time the King exercised himself much in Hawking,
which was like to have proved no good sport to him; for one time following his
Hawke, and leaping over a Ditch with a Pole, the Pole brake, so that if one
Edmund Mody a footman had not leapt into the water and lift up his head which
was fast in the clay, he had been drowned.

In this year also there happened in the City of London, an Insurrection
against strangers, specially of Artificers, complaining that strangers were
permitted to resort hither with their Wares, and to exercise Handy-crafts, to
the great hindrance and impoverishing the Kings own Subjects; and not only so,
but that they were borne out in many great Insolences, and wrongs they offered
to the English, as one time it happened, a Carpenter in London called
Williamson, had bought two Pigeons in Cheap Side and was about to pay for them,
when a Frenchman took them out of his hand, saying, they were no meat for a
Carpenter: well (said Williamson) I have bought them, and I will have them; nay
(said the Frenchman) I will have them for my Lord Ambassador; hereupon they
grew to words, and complaint was made to the French Ambassador, who so
aggravated the matter to the Major, that the Carpenter was sent to prison, and
when Sir John Baker sued to the Ambassador for him, he answered, by the body
of God, the English knave was worthy to loose his life for denying any thing to
a Frenchman, and other answer he could have none. Matry like and worse
Insolences were offered by changes; which one John Lincoln a Broker drew into
a Bill, and prevailed with Doctor Beale, Preacher on Easter Tuesday at the
spittle to read it openly in the pulpit, which so stirred up many, that
strangers could hardly pass the streets, but were stricken, and sometimes
beaten down. At last, one evening, many Prentises and others assembling,
rifled some strangers houses, and much mischief was like to be done: but by the
tare of the Mayor and Aldermen and by the ind^stry of Robert Brook Recorder,
and Sir Thomas Moore, that had bin under shriefe of London; they were gotten to
be quiet and many of the disturbers were sent to prison, whereof Lincoln and
twelve other were hanged, four hundred more in their shirts, bound in ropes
and halters about their necks (and thereupon called the black wagon) were
brought to Westminster, where the King himself sat that day; and when the
Cardinal had charged them with the greatness of their offense; they all
cried, mercy, mercy: and then the King by the mouth of the Cardinal, pardoned
them all which clemency purchased the King no small love amongst the people.

In this ninth year, in June King Henry had diverse Ambassadors at his Court;
for whose entertainment he prepared a costly Justs; himself and twelve more
against the Duke of Suffolk and other twelve. The King had on his Head a
Ladies sleeve full of Diamonds, and perhaps something else of the Ladies in hes
heart, which made him perform his courses with the applause of all beholde^s.
This year by reason of a sweating sickness, Michaelm^s Term was adjourned;
and the year following, Trinity Term was held one day at Oxford, and then
adjourned again to Westminster.

About this time Cardinal Woolsey obtained of Pope Leo, authority to dispense
with all Offenses against the spiritual Laws; by virtue whereof he set up a
Court, and called it, The Court of the Legate; in the which he proved
Testaments, and heard Causes, to the great hindrance of all the Bishops of the
Realm; and to the debauching of Priests and Religious persons, who relying
upon his greatness, took ^uch a liberty of licentiousness, to themselves,
that none was more disorderly, then those that were in orders: and supposii^g
perhaps, they might lawfully commit such sins themselves, as they forgave to
others. And indede the Cardinals carriage exceeded all bounds of moderation;
for when he said mass, he made Dukes and Earls to serve him of wine, with a
say taken, and to hold the basin at the Lauatory: and when the Archbishop of
Canterbury, writing a letter to him, subscribed, your brother William of
Canterbury, he took it in great dudgion, to be termed his brother.

It was now the tenth year of King Henry's Reign, when the Kin^ of France,
longing much, to have Turney restored to him: by great gifts and greater
promises^ won ^he Cardinal Woolsey, to move the King in it; who upon his
persuasions, was contented to be treated withal about it: to which the King of
France sent the Lord Bonquet high Admiral of France: and the Bishop of Paris,
who in there attendance, having above fourscore Gentlemen, and with their
servants and all above twelve hundred, arived in England; and on Monday the
seven and twentieth of September, were met at Black Heath by the Ea^le of
Surrey high Admiral of England, attended likewise with above five hundred
Gentlemen and others, who conducted them to London, where they were lodged at
Marchantailors Hall: The last of September, the Ambassadors went to the King
at Greenwich, where after long communication, an Agreement was at last
concluded under pretense of a marriage to be had, between the Dolphin of
France, and the Lady Mary Daughter to the King of England, that in name of her
marriage money, Tourney should be deliveted to the French King: he paying to
the King of England, for the Castle he had made in that City, six hundred
Thousand C^ownes in twelve years, by fifty Thousand Crowns yearly: and if
the marriage should chance not to take effect, then that Tourney should be
again restored to the King of England; for performance of which article,
Hrstages shotld be delivered: namely, Monsi^ur de Memorancye, Monsieur de
Monpesac, Monsieur de Moy, and Monsieur Morett, and moreover the French King
should pay to the Cardinal of England a thousand marks yearly, in recompense
of his Revenewes, received before of his Bishopric of Tourney: All things thus
concluded, the Cardinal made to the Ambassadors a solemn Banquet, and after
presented them with a stately Mummery. The eighth of October, the King feasted
them at Greenwich, and at night presented a stately Mask of Knights and
Ladies, with rear devises and great magnificence: The next day, Sir Thomas
Exmew Major of London, feasted them at Goldsmiths-Hall, and then delivering
their four Hostages, they took their leave. At whose departure, the King gave
to the Admiral of France, a Garnish of guilt vessel, a pair of covered
Basins, gilt, twelve great guilt Bowls, four pair of great guilt Pots, a
standing Cup of Gold, garnished with great Pearls, and to some other he gave
Plate, to some other cheins of Gold, to some rich Apparel: to the great
comendation of his liberality. Shortly after their departure, the Earl of
Worcester Lord Chamberlain, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord of Saint John's, Sir
Nicholas Vaux, Sir John Pechy, and Sir Thomas Bullen, as Ambassadors from the
King of England, accompanied with Knights, Gentlemen, and others, to the number
of above four hundred, passed over to Callice, and from thence went to Paris;
where after Royal Entertainment by the King, with di^erse Maskes and stately
shows, they took their leaves and rode to Tourney to see the City delivered
to the French men, on the eighth of February to the great grief of the English
Garrison. After the English Ambassadors were returned, King Henry to cheer up
the four French Hostages, left here for performance of covenants, on the
seventh of May, presented a solemn and stately Mask, wherein himself, the
Duke of Suffolk and the French Queen were Actors, and on the eight of March
following was a solemn Just holden, and with great magnificence performed.

In the eleventh year of King Henry's Reign died the Emperor Maximilian, for
whom, the King caused a solemn obsequie to be kept in Paul's Church. After
whose death the French King and the King of Spain, endeavored by sundry plots,
each of them to get the Empire, but in conclusion, Charles King of Castile,
(afterward called Charles the fifth) was elected Emperor; for joy whereof, a
solemn Mass was sung at Paul's, the seventh of July, at which were present
the Cardinal Campeius, the Cardinal of York, the Duke of Buckingham,
Norfolk and Suffolk, with the Ambassadors of Spain, France, Venice, and
Scotland; and this year the King kept Saint Georges feast at Winsor, with
great solemnity.

At this time, diverse young Gentlemen that had been in France, after the
manner of that Country, carried themselves so familiarly with the King; that
the Lords of his counsel thought it a disparagement to him: and thereupon,
with his leave first obtained, they banished them the Court: and in their
places, brought in more stayed and graver men: namely, Sir Richard Winkefield,
Sir Richard Ierningham, Sir Richard Weston and Sir William Kingston.

In the summer of this year, the Queen lying at her Manor of Havering in
Essex, desired the King to bring thither the four Hostages of France to whom
she made a Royal Banpuet and in September following the King lying at his
Manor of Newhall in Essex, otherwise called Beaulieu; where he had newly built
a stately Mansion, invited the Queen and the French Hostages thither, where
after a sumptuous Banquet, he presented them with an extraordinary Mask, for
the Maskers were the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Essex, the Marquess Dorset,
the Lord Aburgaveny, Sir Richard VVinkfield, Sir Richard Weston and Sir
William Kingston, the youngest of whom was fifty years old at least, that the
Ladies might see, what force they had to make age young again.

At this time, the French King was very desirous to see the King of England
with whom he had entered into such a league of alliance, and to that end made
means to the Cardinal, that there might be an Enterview between them at some
convenient place: to which the Cardinal, no^ so much to satisfy the French
King as to show his own greatness in France; e^sily condiscended, and
thereupon persuaded King Henry, how necessary it was, that such an Enterview
should be: and then were sent unto Guysnes, under the rule of Sir Edward
Belknap three thousand artificers, who builded on the plain before the Castle
of Guysnes, a most stately Palace of timber, curiously Garnished without and
within: whither both the Kings in June next following, agreed ^o come and to
answer all comers at the Tilt, Tournies and Barriers, whereof proclamation
was made in the Court of England, by Orleance King of Arms of France and in
the Court of France by Clarentius, King of Arms of England: whilst these
things were preparing on Candlemas Even, as the King and Queen were come from
Even-song at their Manor of Greenwich; suddenly there blew a Trumpet, and
then entered into the Queens Chamber, four Gentlemen, who brought with them a
wagon, in which sat a Lady richly apparelled; which Lady, acquainted the
King, that the four Gentlemen there present, were come for the love of their
Ladies, to answer all comers at the Tilts on a day by the King to be
appointed; which day was thereupon appointed on Shrovetuesday next ^nsuing,
where they all behaved themselves with great valor, to the great delight of
the King and Queen.

By this time King Henry was ready for his journey into France, and so removing
from his Manor of Greenwich, on Friday the five and twentieth of May he with
his Queen arived at Canterbury, where he meant to keep his Whitsontide. At
which time, the Emperor Charles returning ou^ of Spain arrived on the coast
of Kent, where by the vice Admiral of England, Sir William Fitz-Williams, he
was conducted to land, and there met and received by the Lord Cardinal in
great state. After which the King himself rode to Dover, to welcome him: and
on Whitsunday early in the morning conducted him to Canterbury, where they
spent all the Whitsontide in great joy and solace. The chief cause that moved
the Emperor at this time, to come on land, was to have dissuaded the King from
any Enterview with the French King: but when he saw him ^o forward in that
jour^ey, he then only endeavored to perswad^ him, that he should put no trust
in the French Kings words, and with great gui^ts and promises, prevailed with
the Cardinal to join with him in this persuasion. The last of May, the
Emperor took his leave, and the same day, the King made sail from Dover and
landed at Callice, together with the Queen and many Lords and Ladies. The
fourth of June the King and Queen removed from Callice to his Princely lodging
beside the Town of Guysnes, the most Royal Building that was ever seen;
likewise Francis the French King had his lodging prepared close to the Town of
Ard, in a strange but most magnificent fashion. Both Kings had given authority
and power to the Cardinal to affirm and confirm, ^o bind or unbind,
whatsoever should be in difference between them; no less an honor to the
Cardinal then a confidence in the Kings. On Thursday the seaven^h of June, the
Kings met in the vale of Andren so magnificently attired, both themselves, and
all their followers, that from thence it was called ^he camp of cloth of
Gold. Here they spent that day in loving complements; and at night departed,
the one to Guysnes, the other to Ard. On Satureday the ninth of June were set
up in a place, within the English pale two Trees of honor, with stately rooms
and stages for the Queens, and thither the two Kings came, most Royally
accompan^ed; wherein most magnificent manner, they performed Acts of valor,
both on foo^e and horseback; and after them all the great Lords both of France
and England did the like: this solemnity of Justs and Maskes was continued to
the four and twentieth day of June; at which time, the Kings and Queens took
leave of each other, the French King and Q^eene removed to Ard; the King and
Queen of England to Callice, where he remained till the tenth of July, and
then ridings ^oward Graveling, was by the way met by the Emperor, and by him
conducted thithet, and there in most royal manner ente^tained; whereof when
the French King heard, he began from that day forward, to have King Henry in a
kind of jelousie, as though to love him and the Emperor both were
inconsistent, and could not stand together. On Wednesday the eleventh of July,
the Emperor and his Aunt the Lady Margaret, Duchess of Savoy, came with the
King of England to the town of Callice, and there continued with Feasting,
Dancing and Masking, till the fourteenth of July. In which time, all the
Articles of the league tripartito, between the Emperor and the Kings of
England and France were reviewed; to which the King of France had so fully
condiscended, that he had sent Monsieur de Roche to the Emperor with Let^ers of
credence; that in the word of a Prince, he would inviolably observe and keep
them all: all which notwithstanding, he dispensed with his conscience
afterward, in breaking them all. On Saturday, July 14. the Emperor took his
leave and went to Graveling; the King with his Queen returned into England.

It was now the twelfth year of King Henry's reign; when being returned from
Callice, he kept his Christmas at Greenwich with great magnificence; and on
twelfth day he and the Earl of Devonshire maintained a solemn Justs against al
comers.

The Cardinal had long born a grudg against the Duke of Buckingham, for
speaking certain words in his disgrace, and now has made his way for reveng:
for the Earl of Surrey, Lord Admiral, who had married the Dukes daughter, the
Cardinal had caused to be sent Deputy into Ireland, and the Earl of
Northumberland, the Dukes special friend he had caused upon certain suggested
crimes to be Imprisoned; so as the Duke having his friends sequestered from him,
he lay now open to accusations, and accusations shall not long be wanting; for
the Duke having some time before put from him in displeasure, one Charles
Knevet, that had been his Surveyar, and inward with him; him the Cardinal gets
to him, to see what he could get out of him against the Duke. And whether it
was out of desire of revenge, or out of hope of reward, or that the matter was
so indeed, this Knevet confessed to the Cardinal, that the Duke had once fully
determined to make away the King; being brought into a hope to be King himself
by a vain Prophecy, which one Nicholas Hopkins (a Monk of an house of the
Chartnar Order, besides Bristow, called Henton) sometimes his Confessor, had
opened to him; and as for the Cardinal, that he had often heard the Duke
swear, he would punish him soundly for his manifold misdoings. And now had the
Cardinal matter enough for Accusation, which he so aggravated to the King,
that the King bid him do with him according to Law. Hereupon the Duke is
apprehended and brought to the Tower by Sir Henry Marney, Captain of the Guard,
the fifteenth of April, and shortly after in Guild-hal before Sir John Brugge,
then Lord Major, was indicted of diverse points of High Treason; the substance
whereof was, that in the second year of the Kings reign, and at diverse times
before and after, he had imagined and compassed the Kings death at London and
at Thornbery in Glocestershi^e; and that in the sixth year of the Kings reign,
he went in person to the Priory of Henton, and there had conference with the
foresaid Nicholas Hopkins, who told him he should be King; and that he had
often said to the Lord Aburgayne who had married his daughter, that if King
Henry died without issue, he would look to have the Crown himself. Upon these
points he was arraigned in Westminster Hall, before the Duke of Norfolk,
sitting then as high Steward of England, the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess
Dorset, the Earls of Worcester, Devonshire, Essex, Shrewsbury, Kent, Oxford
and Darby, the Lords of Saint John's de la ware, Fitz-water, Willoughby, Brook,
Cobha^ Herbert and Morley. The Duke pleaded for himself til he swet again, but
al booted ^ot, for by these Peers he was found guilty and condemned, and so on
Friday the seventeenth of May was led by John Keyme and John Skevington
Sheriffs of London to the scaffold on Tower Hill, and there beheaded. The
Augustine Friars took his body and head and buried them. This Edward Bohun Duke
of Buckingham was the last high Constable of England (the greatest place, next
the high Steward in the kingdom) whose Power extended to restrain some actions
of the King. He was also Earl of Hereford, Stafford and Northampton, he married
Elianor the daughter of Henry Earl of Northumberland, and had issue Henry Lord
Stafford (Father to Henry Lord Stafford la^e living) and three daughters,
Elizabeth married to Thomas H^ward Earl of Surrey, Katherine married to Ralph
Nevil Earl of Wes^merland, and Mary married to George Nevill Lord of Abu^ga^enie.

In this mean while, a new War was begun between the Emperor and the King
of France; for composing whereof, the Cardinal of York was sent attended with
the Earl of Worce^ter, Lord Chamberline, the Lord of Saint John's, the Lord
Ferrers, the Lord Herbert, the Bishop of Du^ham, the Bishop of Ely, the Primate
of Armagh, Sir Thomas Bullen, Sir John Pechye, Sir John Hussy, Sir Richard
Winkfield, Sir Henry Guild^ord, and many other Knights, Gentlemen and Doctors.
On the twelfth of July he arrived at Callice, whether came to him the
Cha^cellour of France, and the Count de Palice attended with four hundred
horse, as Ambassadors from the French King; and from the Emperor the like,
with Commissions to treat and conclude of Peace. There were also Ambassadors
from the Pope, whom the Cardinal moved to have the Pope be a party also in
their League, but they wanting Commission. Letters were presently sent to Rome
about it, and in the time till answer might be had, the Cardinal went to
Bruges, to speak with the Emperor, with whom having stayed thirteen days,
after most Royal entertainment, he returned back to C^llice, and then fell
presently to the treaty of Peace, with the French Commissioner, but was colder
in the matter then he was before, as having had his edge taken off, by some
dealings with the Emperor, so as nothing was concluded; but that Fishermen of
both the Princes might freely Fish on the Seas without disturbance, till the
end of February following; whereof he sent advertisement to both the Princes;
to the Emperor by the Lord of Saint John's and Sir Thomas Bullen; to the French
King by the Earl of Worcester and the Bishop of Ely. During all which time of
the Cardinals stay in Callice, all Writs and Pa^ents were there by him sealed,
and no Sheriff could be chosen for lack of his presence, having the Great Seal
there with him, and full power in things, as if the King had been there in
person. Before he returned he made a new League with the Emperor, and
intimated to the French King, that he doubted the King of England would not
hereafter be so much his friend, as heretofore he had been; whereat, though the
King of France were much offended, yet he signified by his Letters (perhaps
dissemblingly) that he would continue the King of Englands friend as much as
ever: only he enveighed against the Cardinal, as a man of no truth, and
withdrew many Pensions which he had before given to some English. Presently
upon this, was Tourney besieged, by the Lord Hugh de Moncada a Spaniard; and
though the French King sent great Forces to succor it; yet it was rendered up
to the Emperor the last of November, in the thirteenth year of King Henry's
Reign.

This year Pope Leo died the first of December, suspected to be poisoned by
Barnabie Malespina his Chamberlain, whose office was always to give him
drink. After whose death, Doctor Pace was sent to Rome, to make friends in
behalf of the Cardinal of York; who was brought into a hope through the
Kings favor to be elected Pope, but that hope was soon quailed; for before
Doctor Pace could get to Rome, Adrian the sixth was chosen Pope. This Doct.
Pace was a very learned and religious man, yet through crosses in his
employment, fell mad and dyed; in whose place of Employment succeeded Doct.
Stephen Gardyner.

On the second of February, King Henry being then at Greenwich, received a Bull
from the Pope, whereby he had the Title given him to be defender of the
Christian Faith, for him and his successors for ever; which Title was ascribed
^o him, for writing a Book against Luther, of which Book (says Holings^eard)
I will only say ^hus much, that King Henry in his Book, is reported to rage
against the Devil and Antichrist, to cast out his foame against Luther, to
race out the Name of the Pope, and yet to allow his Law; which Book Luther
a^swered with as little respect to the King, as the King had done to him.

In this mean time, many displeasures grew between the two Kings of England
and France, specially two: one that Frenchmen seized upon English ships as
they passed: for remedy whereof, one Christopher Cee an expert seaman, was sent
with six ships to safeguard the Merchants. Another, that the Duke of Albanye
was returned into Scotland, contrary to that which was Covenanted by the
league, which though the King of France denied to be done with his privity, yet
King Henry knew the Duke of Albanye had Commission from the French King to
return, which did the more exasperate him; and hereupon were Musters made in
England, and a note taken of what substance all men were.

This year died the Lord Brook, Sir Edwad Poynings Knight of the Gar^er, Sir
John Pechy, and Sir Edward Belknappe, all valient Captains, suspected to have
poisoned at a Banquet made at Ard, when the two Kings met last.

At this time, Owen Douglas Biship of Dunkell, fled out of Sco^lnad into
England, because the Duke of Albanye being come thither, had taken upon him the
whole Government of the King and Kingdom; whereupon Clarentiaux the Herald was
sent into Scotland, to command the Duk of Albany to avoid that Realm; which he
refusing, the Herald was ^ommanded to defy him. Thereupon the, French King
seized all English-mens goods in Bordeaux, and impisoned their persons; and
retained not only the money to be paid for the restitution of Tourney; but
also withheld the French Queens Dower: whereof when King Henry understood; he
called the French Ambassador residing in England, to give account thereof; who
though he gave the best reasons he ^ould to excuse it, yet was commanded to
keep his house, and the French Hostages remaining here, for the money to be
paid for the delivery of Tourney, were restrained of their liberty, and
committed to the custody of the Lord of Sa^t John's, Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir
Andrew Windsor, and Sir Thomas Nevyle; each of them to keep one; and withal,
all Frenchmen in London were committed to prison, and put to their Fines; and
all Scots-men much more. There were then also sent to sea under the conduct of
Sir William Fitz-Williams Viceadmirall, eight and twenty great ships, and seven
more toward Scotland; who set fire on many Scottish-ships in the Haven, and at
length took many prisoners, and returned.

King Henry hearing that the Emperor would come to Callice, so to pass into
England, as he went into Spain; appointed the Lord Marquess Dorsett, to go to
C^llice, there to receive him^ and the Cardinal to receive him at Daver^ The
Cardinal taking his Journey thither on the tenth of May, rode through London
accompanied with two Earls, six and thirty Knights, and a hundred Gentlemen,
eight Bishops, ten Abbots, thirty Chaplains, all in Velvet and Satin; and
Yeomen seven hundred. The five and twentieth of May being Sunday, the Marquess
Dorset with the Bishop of Chichester, the Lord de Law^re and diverse others, at
the water of Graveling, received the Emperor, and with all honor brought him
to Callice, where he was received with Procession, by the Lord Berners
Lieutenant of the Town. On Monday he took ship at Callice, and landed at
Dover, where the Cardinal with three hundred Lords, Knights and Gentlemen
received him, and in great State brought him to the Castle, where he was
lodged. On Wednesday being Ascension Even, the King came to Dover, and there
with great joy and gladness, the Emperor and he met. On Friday in the
afternoon they departed from Dover, and came that night to Canterbury, and
from thence next day to Greenwich, where the Queen received her Nephew with
all the joy that might be. Here to honor the Emperors presence, Royal Justs
and Turneys were appointed; where the King, the Earl of D^vonshire and ten
Aids, kept the place against the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess Dorset and
other ten Aids, on their part. On Friday the sixth of June, the Emperor and
the King with all their companies went to London, where the City received them
with Pageants, and other as rare device^, as at a Coronation, and the Emperor
was lodged at the Blackf^yers, and all his Lords in the new Palaces of
Bridewell. On VVhitsunday, the King and the Emperor rode to the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul, where the Cardinal sung M^sse, and had his Traverse and
his Cupboord. Before Mass, two Barons gave him water, and after the Gospel,
two Earls, and at the last Lavatory two Dukes, which pride the Spaniards much
disdained. After many Feastings in other places, at last they rode to Windsor,
where they stayed a whole week; and there on Corpus Chris^i day, the Emperor
wore his Mantle of the Garte^, and sat in his own Stall. On the same day,
both the Princes received the Sacrament, and took their oaths to observe the
League concluded between them. On the morrow after, they came to Winchester:
before whose coming thither there was come to Hampton, the Earl of Surrey
Admiral of England, with all the Kings Navy, and with him the Lord Fitz-Water,
the Barron Curson, Sir Nicholas Carew, Sir Richard Wink^^eld Sir Richard
Ierning^am, Francis Brian, Sir William Barentine, Sir Adrian Foskew, Sir Edward
Done, Sir Edward Chamberlain, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir Antony Poynes, Sir
Henry Shirborn, and the Viceadmirall, Sir William Fitz-Williams, Sir Edmund
Bray, Sir Giles Capell, Sir William Pirton, John Cornwallis, Sir John Walloppe,
Sir Edward Ichingham, Sir William Sidney, Anthony Browme, Giles Hus^ey, Thomas
Moore, John Rus^el, Edward Bray, Henry Owen, George Cobham, Thomas Old^all,
Thomas Lovell, Robert Ichingham, Anthony Knevet, Sir John Tremaile, Sir
William Skevington, Master of the Ordinance, and John Fabian Serjant at Arms,
by whom chiefly a diss^gne was moved, though now noised only that it was but
to scowre the seas for the safe conducting of the Emperor. For the Earl of
Surrey having wafted the Emperor over to the co^st of Biskay; upon his
return, made to the coast of Britain; and there landing seven thousand of
his men, marched to the Town of Morleys, and by assault took it: having ^onne
this Town, the E^rle called to him certain Gentlemen and made them Knights;
as Sir Francis Brian, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir Thomas
Moore, Sir Giles Hus^ey, Sir John Russell, Sir John Rainsford, Sir George
Cobham, Si^ John Cornwallis, Sir Edward Ridgley, and some others; and after the
Earl had lien a while on the Coast of Britain, he was commanded home by the
Kings letters: who thereupon brought back his whole fleet, to a place called
the Cow under the Isle of Wight, and then went on land, leaving diverse of of
his ships, under the Governa^ce of the Vice Admiral Sir William Fitz-VVilliams.

In this mean time, diverse exploits were achieved between them of the
Garrison in the marches of Callice, and the French men of Bulloigne, where the
French commonly had the worst: but being of no great moment, may well be passed
over without relating. Likewise at the same time the Lord Rosse, and the Lord
Dacres of the North, appointed to keep the Borders against Scotland, burnt the
Town of Kelsie, and fourscore Vilages, and overthrew eighteen Towers of
stone, withal their Bulwarks.

King Henry intending now to go seriously on with his wars in France, levied
an Army, which under the conduct of the Earl of Surrey, he sent over to
C^llice; whither the Earl being come, he divided his Army into three
battles; the first was led by Sir Robert Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-water, the
middle-ward by himself and his brother the Lord Edmund Howard, the reare-ward
by Sir William Sands and Sir Richard VVinkfield, both of them Knights of the
Ga^ter: and Sir Edward Guildford was Captain of the horsemen. In this order
the Earl entered the French ground the second of September, and took his
Journey ^owards Hedring. By the way there came to him a great Power of
^^rgognias, sent by the Lady Margaret, according to the Articles of the League.
All the Towns, Villages and Castles, in the Country through which they
passed, they burnt and sacked; as the Town and Castle of Selloys, the Town of
Brun^rigge, Senekerke, Botington and Manstier, with diverse others. On the
sixteenth of September, they came before the Castle of Heding, and laid siege
unto it; but the Castle being well fortified, and the Earl having not battering
Ordnance, which by reason of the foul weather, he could not bring with him:
after eleven days he raised his siege, and passing from thence to Dorlens,
burnt the Town and raced the Castle, as also the Town of Dortyer, and then
the year being far spent, came back to Callic^ the sixteenth of October.

At this time, the Duke of Albany being established Governor of Scotland,
raised an Army of fourscore thousand men, with which he approached the b^^ders,
but made no Invasion, as thinking perhaps that the only report of his great
Army, would fright the English; but yet this stayed not the Lord Marquess
Dorset, Warden of the east and middle Marches; to enter into Tividale, and so
forward ten miles into Gallaway, burning all towns and Villages on every side
as he passed. All that night he tarried within the Scottish ground, and the
next day being Good Friday, withdrew back into England, with a head of four
thousand cattle; having burned Grimseley, Mowhowse, Donford, Miles, Ackforth,
Crowling, and many other Towns and Villages.

In King Henry's fourteenth year, on the fifteenth of April began a
Parliament, which was holden at the Blackfryers, whither the King came, and
there sat down in his Royal Seat; at his feet on the right side sat the
Cardinal of York, and the Archbishop of Canterbury; and at the Rail behind,
stood Doctor Tunstall Bishop of London, who making an Oration, told there the
causes of calling this Parliament; which were (as he said) for remedying of
mischiefs by the common Law, as Recoveries, Foreign Vouchers and corrupt
Trialls^ and for making new Laws for the good of the Commonwealth: whereof
notwithstanding, no one word was spoken all the time of the Parliament, nor any
other thing done, but a Subsedie granted; but howsoever, being commanded to
choose their Speaker, they chose Sir Thomas Moore, who at first disabling
himself, at last made two Petitions to the King; one for himself, that if he
should be sent by the Commons to the King on a Message, and mistake their
inten^, he might then with the Kings pleasure resort again to the Commons to
know their meaning. The other, for the House of Commons, that if in
communication and reasoning, any man should speak more largely then of duty he
ought to do, yet all such offenses should be pardoned, and that to be entered of
Record. Which Petitions were granted, and then the Parliament began; where at
first a Subsidy was demanded, but as there was much ado in the House of
Commons about it, so there was no less amongst the Clergey in the Convocation
House; for Richard Bishop of Winchester, and John Bishop of Rochester were
much against it, but most of all, one Rowland Philips, Vicar of Croyden, and a
Canon of Paul's, but the Cardinal taking him aside, dealt so with him, that he
took him off, so as he came no more to the House^ and then the Bel-weather (as
one says) giving over his hold, the rest soon yielded; and so was granted the
half of all their spiritual yearly Revenues, to be paid in five years
following. The Clergey being thus brought on, on the nine and twentieth of
April, the Cardinal came into the House of Commons, to work them also; and
there showing the great charges the King was necessarily to be at in his
present Wars: demanded the sum of eight hundred thousand pounds, to be raised
of the fifth part of every man's Goods and Lands, which was four shillings of
every pound. This demand was enforced the day after by the Speaker Sir Thomas
Moore; but the Burgesses were all against it, showing that it was not possible
to have it gathered in money; for that men of Lands had not the fifth part
thereof in Coin. And further alleged, that there be not many parishes in
England one with another, able to spare a hundred Marks, except Cities and
Towns; and seeing there were not above thirteen thousand Parishes in the
Kingdom, (at this day there are but 9285.) how could such a sum be raised?
Hereupon certai^e of the House were sent to move the Cardinal, to be a means
to the King to accept of a lesser sum, but the Cardinal answered, he would
rather have his tongue plucked out of his mouth with a pair of Pinsors, then
make to the King any such motion. Whereupon the Cardinal came again in^o the
House, and desired that he might reason with them that were against the demand;
to which it was answered, that the order of that house was to hear, and not to
reason, except amongst themselves. When the Cardinal was gone, the Commons
after long debating the m^tter; at last, agreed of two shillings in the pound,
from twenty pounds upward, and from forty shillings, to twenty pounds; of every
twenty shillings, twelve pence, and under forty shillings, of every head of
sixteen years and upwards, four pence, to be paid in two years: when this
was told to the Cardinal, he was much offended; so that to please him, the
Gentlemen of fifty pound Land and upward, by the motion of Sir John Hussy, a
Knight of Lincolneshire, were charged with twelve pence more in the pound, to
be paid in three years. The Cardinal to move them to it, bore them in hand,
that the Lords had agreed to four shillings of the pound; which was untrue,
for the Lords had granted nothing, but stayed to see what the Commons would
do; whereof when the King heard, he reproved the Cardinal for it; saying
withal, that ere it were long he would look to things himself, without any
Substitute. Which speech of the Kings, though it da^ted the Cardinal for a
while, yet he soon recovered his Spirits, and now as peremptory afterward as
he had been before. After this, the Parliament was prorogued till the tenth of
June; during with prorogation, the Common people said to the Burgesses, we
hear say, you will grant four shillings of the pound, we advise you ^o do
so, that you may go home; with many like threatenings. At this time, the
Cardinal by his power Legant me, dissolved the Convocation at Paul's, convoked
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, calling him and all the Clergy, to his
Convocation at Westminster: which was never seen before in England (says
Hall.) The one and thirtieth of July, the Parliament was adjourned to
Westminster, and there continuing till the thirteenth of August, was that day
at nine of the clock at night dissolved.

About this time, the Bishop of Durham died, and the King gave that Bishopric
to the Cardinal; who resigned the Bishopric of Bath to Doctor John Clerk,
Master of the Rolls, and Sir Henry Marney, that was Vice-chamberlain, was made
Lord Privy Seal, and shortly after, was created Lord Marney: also during this
Parliament, Sir Arthur Plantagenet, bastard son to King Edward the fourth at
Bridewell, was created Vicount Lisle; in right of his wife who was wise before
to Edmund Dudley, Beheaded.

The fifteenth of June; in the fifteenth year of the Kings Reign, Christian
King of Denmark with his Queen; driven out of his own Country, came into
England, and was lodged at Bath place; who after, he had been feasted by the
King and by the City of London, and received great gifts of both, returned
again into Flanders, where he remained as a banished man: some years after,
King Henry sent Doctor Henry Standish, Bishop of Saint Assaph, and Sir John
Baker Knight, into Denmark, to persuade the people to receive him again into
his Kingdom; but they could not prevail, he was so much hated for his cruelty.

About this time, the Earl of Kildare having recovered again the favor of
the Cardinal, was sent Deputy into Ireland, as he had bin before, where he
reduced the wild Irish to indifferent conformity. All this while had England
wars both with the French and with the Scots. In Scotland the Marquess of
Dorset threw down the Castles of Wederborne, of Nesgate, of Blackater, of
Mackwals, and burnt to the number of seven and thirty Villages, yet never came
to skirmish. In France, the Lord Sands, Treasurer of Callice, with twelve
hundred men went before Bulloigne, where he skirmished with the Enemy; and
after taking diverse Churches and Castles in the Enemies Countre^, returned
back to Callice, with the loss only of a dozen men. King Henry being
advertised that the Duke of Albanie was providing of Forces in France, with
which to return into Scotland, sent forth his Vice Admiral Sir William
Fitz-williams, with diverse great Ships to intercept him; but when he could
not meet with him, he then landed in the Haven of Trepor^; where with seven
hundred men, he beat six thousand French that sought to impeach his landing,
took their Bulworks and much Ordnance in them burned the suburbs of the town
of Treport, and all in five hours, and then returned.

All this while King Henry had but played with the French, but ^ow he means to
be in earnest, and therefore sends over the Duke of Suffolk with an Army, the
four and twentieth of August; attended with the Lord Montacute and his b^other
Sir Arthur Poole, the Lord Herbert, son to the Earl of Worces^er, the Lord
Ferrers, the Lord Marney, the Lord Sands, the Lord Barkley, the Lord ^owis, and
the Baron Curson, Sir Richard Wink^^eld, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, Sir John Vere, Sir Edward Nevile, Sir William Kings^on, Sir Richard
Weston, Sir Andrew Winsore, Sir Robert Winkfield, Sir Anthony, Winkfield, Sir
Edward Guildford, Sir Edw: Grevile, Sir Edw: Chamberlain, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir
Everard Digby, Sir Adrian Foskew, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir William Courtney,
Sir William Sidney, Sir Henry Owin, sand many other Knights and Gentlemen. In
the whole Army were six hundred Demylaunces, two hundred Archers on Horsback,
three thousand Archers on foo^, and five thousand Bilmen. Also seventeen
hundred taken out of the Garrisons of Hammes, Guysnes, and Callice, in all, ten
thousand and five hnndred, besides two thousand six hundred laborers and
Pioners. With this Army the Duke of Suffolk took the field, his vauntguard was
led by the Lord Sands; Cap^aine of the right wing, was Sir William Kingston; of
the left, Sir Everard Digby, Captain of all the Horsemen was Sir Edward
Guildford, Marshall of Callice; the Duke himself led the Battle, and Sir
Richard Winkfield the Reareward. The Dukes first enterprise was the winning of
Bell Castle, which the Lord Sands and the Lord Ferres assaulted, and had it
yielded to them: and then Sir William Skevington was placed Captain in it. At
this time, the Duke of Bourbon, high Constable of France, began to have his
mind aliena^ed from the King of France, and ^o draw him the more on, the Duke
of Suffolk sent Sir John Russel (afterward created Duke of Bedford) to him, who
passing in disguised apparel, so prevailed with him, that he professed to take
part with the Emperor, and the King of England, who having ten thousand Almans
in his pay: it was thought fit (for encourag^ment of the English) to proclaim
in the Army, the access of so powerful an assistant: and thereupon the Duke of
Suffolk removed to Ard, and so forward into Picardie. At Cords between Terwyn
and Saint Omers, there came to him the Lord of Isilst^yn, and with him of
Spaniards, Almans and others, three thousand Footmen, and five hundred Horse.
With these forces, the Duke marching on, took first the rich Town of Anchor,
then the Castle of Bounguard, and then by assault the Town of Bray, though two
thousand good men of war were in it. After this, the Towers of Cappe and Roy,
Lihome and Davenker, and then came before ^he Town of Mount-Dedyer, in which
were a thousand foot and five hundred horse; yet upon Sir William Skevingtons
Batteries, was yielded to him. From hence he removed to Roy, where he rested a
while with hi^ whole Army: and there on Alholland-day, in the chief Church of
Roy, made Knights, the Lord Herbert, the Lord Powis, Oliver Manners, Arthur
Poole, Richard Sands, Robert Ierningham, Robert Salisbury, Edward Beningfield,
Richard Corbet, Thomas Wentworth, William Storton, Walter Mantel, George Warram
and Edward Seymour (that was after Duke of Somerset.) The day after, the Army
removed to a place called Neele, from thence to Veane, and then ^o Beauford,
where the Duke made John Dudley, and Robert Vtreight Knights, and from thence
on the eighth of November to a place called Mount Saint Martin; here the
Welshmen began to murmr, that they might not return home, the winter being
so far spent; but there was to the number of a thousand persons, under the
leading of Sir John VValloppe, who having no wages, but what they could got by
booties, and were therefore called Adventurers, and by some Kreekers, and these
had more desire to stay, then the Welshman had to be gone; for the great gains
they made, by the spoils of so many Towns that were taken. The thirteenth of
November, the Duke removed to a place within two miles of Boghan Castle,
defended by great Marshes, that lay before it, but the frost being at that
time so great that many lost their fingers and toes with cold, and some died;
Sir Edward Guildford acquainted the Duke, that he thought the marshes were
hard enough frozen to bear great Ordnance; whereupon, the Duke bid him venture
it then and go on, which he resolutely did, and had the Castle presently
delivered up to him. In this mean time, the King hearing in what state the
Army stood, had prepared six thousand men to be sent to the Duke for a relief,
under the leading of the Lord Montjoy; but before they could be put in order to
pass the Sea, the Duke, partly by extremity of the weather, and partly by the
murmuring of the Soldiers, was constrained to break up his Army, and return
to C^llice.

In this mean time, the Scots knowing that the strength of England was gone
into France, took boldness to invade the Marshes; but then the Earl of
Surrey, Treasurer and high Admiral of England, with six thousand men, being
sent against them, took diverse of their Castles and Holds; and at Yedworth,
skirmishing with a great Garrison of Scots, overthrew them, and took and
burned both the Town and Castle. And now the French King finding that the
Scots did not work any great trouble to the English, whereby to keep them
from molesting of France, and thinking it to be for want of the Duke of
Albanies presence, whom they accounted their Governor; he therefore prepared a
Navy of Ships to transpo^t him into Scotland; but when the Duke of Albany
heard that Sir William Fitz-williams was sent with a great Fleet to stop his
passage, he brought his Ships into the Haven of Breast, and gave it out that he
would not go into Scotland that year; which being told to the King of
England, he commanded that his Ships also should be laid up in Havens, till the
next spring. And now see the cunning of the Scot; for when he saw the Kings
Ships discharged, he then boldly took shipping himself, and sailed into
Sc^tland; whither being come, he presently levied a great Army, and approached
the English Borders; but when he heard the Earl of Surrey was coming against
him with a mighty power, he then sent a Her^uld to him^ promising of his
honor, to give him Battle; and if he took him prisoner, to give him good
quarter. To whom the Earl answered, that he would not fail to abide his
Battle; but if he took him prisoner, the quarter he would give him, should
be to cut off hi^ head, and send it for a Present to his Master the King of
England. At this time, to the Earl of Surrey being at Alnewicke, came the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, the Lords Clifford, Dacres, Lumley,
Ogle and Darcye, with many Knights, Gentlemen and other Soldiers, to the
number of forty ^housand; and from the Court, came the Master of the Horse, Sir
Ni^holas Carew, Sir Francis Bryan, Sir Edward Baynton, and others. The last of
October, the Duke of Albonye sent two or three thousand men over the water to
bes^edge the Castle of VVarke; who by battery of their Ordnance won the
ou^ermost Ward, called the Barnekins; and continuing their battery, won the
second Ward; but then Sir William Lisle, that was Captain of the Castle,
issuing forth with those few he had left, drove the Fr^nch-m^n from the place,
and slew of them to the number of three hundred: a memorable service, and for
which the Earl of Surrey afterward gave him great thanks. The Earl would
gladly have followed his enemies in^o their own Borders, but that his
Commission was only to defend England, and not to invade Scotland. Shortly
after the Quee^e of Scots, Mother to the King, sent to her Brother the King of
England, for an abstinence from War, till a further communication might be
had; which being gra^^ed, the English Army brake up, and the Earl of Surrey
returned to the Court.

And now for a while we must be co^^ent to hear of pet^y Occurrances, because
greater did not happen; which if it make us like the Story the worse, it may
make us like the times the better; seeing they are ever the best times that
afford lest matter to be talked of: but this time will las^ but a while; for
shortly we shall come to hear Occurrances, that have been matter of talk to
this day, whereof the like have never scarce been seen, and will hardly be
believed, when they are heard; a Marriage dissolved after twenty years
co^summation; houses built in Piety; under pretense of Piety demolished; a King
made a captive^ a Pope held a prisoner^ Queens taken out of love, put to death
out of loathing; and the Church it self so shaken, that it has stood in
distraction ever since.

At this time, the Emperou^ Charles sent to the King of England two M^ses
trapped in crimson Velvet, richly embridered; also eleven goodly Je^its,
trapped with russe^ Velvet, richly wrought; four Spears and two Javelins of
strange timber, and work richly garnished; and five brace of Greyho^nd^. To
the Queen he sent two Mules richly trapped and high Chai^es after the Spanish
fashion: which Presents were thankfully received both of the King and Queen.

At this time in the month of October, the Cardinal sent out Commissions,
that every man being worth forty pounds, should pay the whole Subsedie before
granted, out of hand; which he called an Anticipation: which fine new word, he
thought would make them pay their money the more willingly; but they loved
their money better then any words he could devise.

In this year the King sent the Lord Morley, Sir William Hussy, knight, and
Doctor Lee his Almoner, to F^rdinand Archduke of Austria, with the Order of the
Garter; which he received in the town of Norimberg, to his great contentment.

In this year, through Books of Prognosticat^ons, foreshewing much hurt to
come by waters and ^^oods, many persons withdrew themselves to high grounds,
for fear of drowning; specially one Bolton, Prior of Saint Barthol^mewes in
Smithfield, builded him an House upon Harrow on the Hill, and thither wen^ and
made provision for two months. These great waters should have fallen in
February, but no such thi^^ happeni^g, the Astronomers excused themselves, by
saying, that in the computa^ion they had miscounted in their number an hundred
years.

In this mean time, many enterpri^es were attempted, between the Englishmen
of Callice, and Guy^^es, and the Frenchmen of Bulloigne, and the Fro^^tiers of
Picard^^, and still Sir William Fitz Williams, Captain of Guysnes, Sir Robert
I^rningham, Captain of Newnham Bridge, Sir John Walloppe, and Sir John Gage,
were the men that did the French most hurt.

This year, the first of September, was Docter Thomas Hannibell Master of the
Rolls, received into London, by Earls, Bishops, and diverse Lords and
Gentlemen, as Ambassadors from Pope Clement: who brought with him, a Rose of
gold for a present to the King^ and on the day of the Nativity of our Lad^
after a solemn Mass sung by the Cardinal of York, the said present was
delivered to the King, which was a Tree forged of fine Gold, and with branches,
leaves, and flowers resembling Roses.

About the beginning of Winter, the advent^rers called Kr^ekers, being not
above two hundred; and of them, five and twenty horsemen, made an attempt to
fetch some booty from a Village not far from Mattrell, whereof the Earl of
D^mmartine having notice, he set upon them with a far greater number, and slew
most of them, and this was the end of the Kreekers, as brave men as ever served
any Prince.

In December this year, there came to London diverse Ambassadors, out of
Scotland, about a peace to be had^ and a marriage to be concluded, between the
King of Scots, and the Lady Mary daughter to the King of England.

At this time, the Lord Leonard Gray, and the Lord John Gr^y, brothers to the
Lord Marquess Dorset, Sir George Cobham son to the Lord Cobham, VVillia^
Carye, Sir John Dudley, Thomas Wyatt, Francis Points, Francis Sid^^y, Sir
Anthony Brown, Sir Edward Seymor, Oliver Manners, Percivall Heart, Sebasti^^
Nudigat^, and Thomas Calen, Esquires of the Kings Household; made a challenge
of Arms against the Feast of Christmas, which was proclaimed by Windsor the
Herald, and performed at the time appointed very Nobly; at Tilts, T^rneys,
Barriars, and the assault of a Castle erected for that purpose, i^ the
Tilt-yard at Greenwich, where the King held his Christmas that year, with great
State and magnificence.

About this time, John Iokyn Steward of the Household to the French Kings
Mothe^, came into England, and was received in secret man^er into the House of
one Doctor Lark, a Prebrendary of Saint Stephens; who oftentimes talked with
the Cardinal, about a Peace to be concluded between the two Kings of ^ngland
and France, of whose often meetings, Monsieur de Brate the Emperors
Ambassador, grew very jealous. The four and twentieth of January, Monsie^r
Brynion President of Roan, came to London as Ambassador from the French King,
and was lodged with the said John Iokyn, which small things should not be
related, but that they were preparatives to great matters afterward.

On Sunday the fifth of March, were received into London Monsieur de Beuer Lo^d
of Campher, Admiral of Flanders, Monsieur John de la Coose President of (...),
and Master John de la Gache, as Ambassadors from the Lady Margaret in the name
of the Emperor, who required three things. First they demanded the Lady Mary
the Kings only daughter, to be presently delivered, and she to be n^^ed
Empress, and as Governesse take possession of all the Low-Countryes. Secondly,
that all such sums of money as the King should give with her in ma^riage,
should be paid incontinently. Thirdly, that the King of England should pass
the sea in person, and make War in France the next Summer. The ^^rst two
demands were not agreed too for certain causes; and as to the third, the King
said, he would take time to advize. On Thursday the ninth of March, a Gentleman
came in Post from the Lady Margaret, with Letters signifying, that whereas the
King of France had long lain at the siege of Pavia; he had now been forced to
raise his siege, and was himself taken prisoner by the Imperialests^ for joy
whereof, Bonfires and great Triumph was made in (...), and on the twentieth of
March being Sunday, the King himself came to Paul's, and there heard a solemn
Mass. But for all this show of joy, it was thought if the King of France had
not now been taken prisoner; that the King of England would have joined in
amity with him, as being angry with the Fle^^^gs, for Inhau^^ing his Coin in
Flanders, which caused much money to be con^ayed out of England thither. The
King of France being taken prisoner, was after some time convayed into Spain,
and at last brought to Madrill, where he ^ell so sick, that the Physicians had
little hope of his life, unless the Emperor would be pleased speedily to
visit him; upon whose visitation he recovered his health, though not presently
his strength. In which time, many propositions were made for his delivery, but
the Emperor would accept of ^one, without restitution of the Duchy of
Burgoigne. At last, the French King weary of imprisonment, and longing for
liberty, was content to agree to any conditions^ the chief whereof were, that
the French King by a certain day should be set at liberty, and within six
weeks after should resign to the Emperor the Duchy of Burgoigne, with all
Members pertaining to it; and at the ^ame ^^stant, should put into the
Emperors hands, the Dolphyn of France, and with him, either the Duke of
Orleance his second son: or else twelve pri^cipall Lords of France, whom the
Emperor should name; and that there should be between them a League and
perpet^all co^federation for defense of their estates. Of whose atonement when
King Henry heard, as before he had expressed gladness, that he was taken
prisoner, so now he sent Sir Thomas Cheiney to him, to express his joy for
being set at liberty; so sudden is the enterchange of love and hate amongst
great Princes. The French King being thus delivered, the Emperor married the
Lady Isabel, Daughter to Emanuel King of Portingal; and ^ad with her in Dower
eleven hundred thousand Ducke^s^ though three years before being at Windsor, he
had covenanted to take to wife the Lady Mary King Henry's Daughter.

At this time Cardinal Woolsey obtained license of the King to erect a
College at Oxford, and another at Ipswich; and toward the charge of them, got
leave also, to suppress certain small Monasteries, to the number of forty;
and after, got a confirmation of the Pope, that he might employ the Goods and
Lands belonging to those Houses, to the maintenance of those two Colleges; a
perni^ious president, and that which made the King a way afterward, to make a
general suppression of all religions Houses, though indeed there be great
difference between converting of Monestaries into Colleges, and utter
subverting them.

In March King Henry sent Cuthert Tunstall Bishop of London, and Sir Richard
Winkfield Chancelour of the Du^chy of Lanc^ster into Spain, to confer with
the Emperor, about matters of great importance, and particularly about War
to be made in France, and yet were these two Princes at this time in League:
but he that shall observe the carriage of these three Princes toward one
another, and how convertible their Leagues were into War, and their War
into Peace; shall find it a strange Riddle of Ragion di stat^, and their
Leagues to have been but mere complements, where the skale was turned with the
least grain of a circumstance; and though they were bound by Oath, yet that
Oath made the Leagues but little the firmer, seeing the League might be broken,
and yet the Oath kept: for while one gave the occasion, and the other took it,
though they were both accessaries, yet neither was principal; and where there
is not a principal, the Oath remains inviolate. And upon those Hinges did the
friend-ship of these Princes turn, as at this time; the Emperor, though not
long before, he had parted with the King of England, in the greatest kindness
that could be; yet gave not the English Ambassadors so kind entertainment
now, as he had formerly done; but for what cause was not apparent, unless upon
some sinister report made to him, by Monsieur de Prate; who having been his
Ligier with the King of England, was without taking leave of the King departed,
and come to the Emperor before the English Ambassadors came.

But howsoever, King Henry being determined to make War in France himself in
person, his Council fell into consideration how the charge of the War should
be maintained: which care the Cardinal takes upon him; and thereupon appoints
Commissioners in all Shiers, to sit and draw the people to pay the sixth part
of every man's substance, in plate or money: but the people opposed it,
alleging that it was against the Law of the Realm, for any man to be charged
with such payments, unless by Parliament: and as the Cardinal continued to
press it, so the people continued to deny it; and when some for denying it
were committed to prison, the Commons in many Countries, made great assemblies
for their defense: the report whereof at last came to the King, who thereupon
came to Westminster and protested openly, that it was done without his
knowledge, and that it was never his meaning, to ask any thing of his Subjects
but according to Law: and therefore desired to know by whose Authority it was
done. Here the Cardinal excused himself and said, that it was the opinion of
all the Judges, and of all his Council, tha^ he might Lawfully demand any
sum, so it were done by Commission, and thereupon it was done. But the King
liked not to take advantage of a distinction to draw money from his Subjects;
and thereupon gave warning for doing any such thing hereafter: and signified so
much by his Letters into all the Shiers of England giving also a general
pardon to all that had offered to rise upon it; which though he did of his own
free grace, yet the Cardinal to win a good opinion in the Commons, gave out,
that it was by his means the King granted the pardon.

King Henry's seventeenth year, was honored with the advancing of many in
honor, for on the eighteenth of June, at his Palace of Bridewell, the Kings
son (which he had by Elizibeth Blunt daughter to Sir John Blunt Knight)
called Henry Fitz-Roy, was created first Earl of Nottingham, and after on the
same day Duke of Richmond and Somerset, Henry Courtney Earl of Devonshire was
created Marquis of Excetur, the Lord Brandon, son to the Duke of Suffolk and
the French Queen (a child of two years old) was created Earl of Lincoln, Sir
Thomas Manners Lord Rosse, was created Earl of Rutland, Sir Henry Clifford,
was created Earl of Cunberland, Sir Robert Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-Water, was
created Viscount Fitz-VVater, and Sir Thomas Bullen Treasurer of the Kings
Household, was created Viscount Roch^ord.

At this time the French Kings mother, as then Regent of France, procured by
her Ambassadors, at first a Truce, and afterward a peace with England, which
was proclaimed in London, the eighth of September. By the covenants of which
peace, the King of England should receive at certain days, twenty hundred
thousand Crowns, which in sterling money amounted to the sum of four hundred
thousand pound; whereof fifty thousand was to be paid in hand. Sir William
Fitz-Williams and Doctor Talour, was sent to the Lady Regent, to take her
corporal oath, and likewise King Henry the four and twentieth of April, at
Greenwich, in presence of the Ambassadors of France, Rome and Venice, took
his corporal oath, to observe the peace between him, and his loving brother
the French King, during his life, and one year after.

In this winter was great mortality in London, so as the Term was adjourned,
and the King kept his Christmas at Eltham, with a small number, and was
therefore called the still Christmas. At which time, the Cardinal coming to
the Court, took order for altering the state of the Kings House: many officers
and other servants were discharged, and put to their pensions, in which number
were four score and four Yeomen of the Guard: who before having had twelve
pence the day with check, were now allowed but six pence the day without check,
and commanded to go into their Countries.

On Shrovetuesday this year, a solemn Justs was held at Greenwich, the King
and eleven other on the one part, the Marquis of Excetur and eleven other of
the other part.

In his nineteenth year, King Henry kept a solemn Christmas at Greenwich, with
Revels, Maskes, disguisings, and Banquets, and the thirtieth of December and
third of January were solemn ^usts holden, when at night the King and fifteen
other with him, came to Bridewel, and there putting on masking apparel, took
his Barge, and rowed to the Cardinals place, where were at supper many Lords
and Ladies, who da^ced with the maskers, and after the dancing was made a great
Banquet. This Christmas was a play at Grayes-Inne, made by one Master Roe a
Sergiant at Law, the effect whereof was, that Lord Gouvernance was ruled by
dissipation and negligence, by whose evil order Lady Publick-Weale was put
from governance. This the Cardinal took to be meant by him, and thereupon sent
the said Master Roe to the Fleet, though the Play were made long before the
Cardinal had any authority: by which we may see how inseparable a companion
suspicion is to a guilty conscience.

The fourteenth of January came to the Court Don Hugo de Mendoza, a Grande of
Spain, as Ambassadors from the Emperor to the King, with a large commission,
to make King Henry Judge; how just the conditions were, which the Emperor
required of the King of France, and about this negotiation ^arried two years in
England, so desirous the Emperor was to continue good correspondence with the
King of England.

On Shrovetuesday the King and the Maquesse of Excester with others, in most
sumptuous attire came to the Tilt, and ran so many courses, till two hundred
fourscore and six Spears were broken; and then disarming themselves went into
the Queens Chamber, where a sumptuous Banquet was provided. But this Banquet
was one of the last of the Queens preparing; for hitherto there had been no
exception taken to the lawfulness of her marriage, but now came over
Ambassadors from the King of France, requiring to have the Kings Daughter the
Lady Mary, to be given in marriage to the Duke of Orleance second Son to
their Master the French King, wherein they that were the suitors for it, were
the hinderers of it; for amongst them was the President of Paris, who made a
doubt, whither the marriage between King Henry and the Lady Katherin of
Spain, having been his Borthers wife, were lawful or no: But howsoever, the
French Ambassadors at Greenwich on Sunday the fifth of May, in the name of
their Master the French King, took their O^thes to observe the League concluded
between them during their lives. And shortly after were sent Sir Thomas Bullen
Viscount Rochford, and Sir Anthony Brown Knight, as Ambassadors to the King
of France, to take his Oath in person for performance of the League.

But enough of small Occurrances, and indeed there will be Occurrances now more
worthy to be related, but more lamentable to be heard; for now the Duke of
Bourbon General of the Emperors Army in Italy, was slain by a shot from the
Walls of Rome, as he was passing by; upon whose death, the Army entered and
sacked the City, made the Pope fly to the Castle of Saint Ang^lo, and there
cooped him up; abused the Cardinals, and put them to grievous ransomes, spared
neither Sacred places, nor Religious persons, but commit^ed all manner of
barbarous and inhumaine cruelty. These insolences of the Emperors Army
committed against the Pope; together with the hard conditions the Emperor had
imposed upon the King of France, for setting him at liberty; and the Emperors
breach of promise, in not marrying the Lady Mary King Henry's Daughter, were
the apparent causes of King Henry's breaking League with the Emperor Charles:
but a more enforcing though concealed cause perhaps was the growing greatness
of the Emperor, by his acquests in Italy and other places; enough to breed a
jealousy in all neighboring Princes; and indeed King Henry had some cause to
think the Emperors spirits were grown higher with his Victories, seeing where
before he was wont always to write letters to King Henry with his own hand,
and subscribe them, your son and faithful friend, now after his Victories in
Italy, he caused his Secretaries to write them, subscribing only Charles. And
yet a more pressing cause though not avowed, might be the Cardinals spleen
against the Emperor, for denying him the Bishopric of Toledo in Spain. But
which soever of these was the predominant cause, all of them together made a
cause sufficient for King Henry to fall off from amity with the Emperor; and
his falling off from the Empe^our, cause sufficient ^o fall in with the King of
France: and thereupon, the two Kings send their several Heralds to the
Emperor: King Henry Clarentiu^, the French King his Herald Guyen, to
expostulate their grievances with the Emperor, and he refusing to return a
satisfactory answer, to defi^ him as their enemy. The Emperor heard the
Heralds with great temper, and answered Clarentius very mildely; that he knew
his Masters grievance was grounded upon misinformation, wherein he would
shortly rectify him by his Letters, as desiring nothing more then to continue
his friend; but ^uyen he answered rougly, bidding him tell his Master that he
had broken his faith, in not performing the Covenants agreed upon for his
liberty; and with these answers dismissed them, only Guyen not thinking it fit
to deliver his answer, being in such terms by word of mouth, obtained to have
it sent in writing. The Heralds being returned home, and delivering the
answers; the King of France was so incensed, to be charged with breach of
faith, that soon after he sent another defiance to the Emperor, telling him
in plain terms, that he lied in his throat; and thereupon challenged him the
Combat, requiring him to appoint the field, and himself would the weapons.
The Emperor accepted the challenge, but other occurrances intervening, hindered
the performance.

In this mean time, the Cardinal was appointed to go Ambassador to the King
of France; carrying with him twelve score thousand pounds, to be employed by
the French King, and other the confederates; in a War against the Emperor,
who the eleventh of July took shipping at Dover, and landed that day at
Callice; with whom was Cut^ert Tuns^all Bishop of London, the Lord Sands
Chamberlain to the King, the Earl of Derby, Sir Henry Guild^ord, Sir Thomas
Moore, with other Knights and Gentlemen, in all to the number of twelve hundred
horse. At Amynes he was received by the French King himself, and by his
Mother, and by all the chief Peers of France. By whom it was agreed, that
Articles of Accord should be offered to the Emperor; which if he refused, then
the French King should marry the Lady Mary King Henry's Daughter, and they both
to be enemies to the Emperor. These things concluded, the Cardinal returned,
and on the last of September came to the King at Richmond. In October
following, there came Ambassadors from the French King, to take King Henry's
Oath, for observing the League with the King of France: and on Sunday the tenth
of November, King Henry at Greenwich received the Order of Saint Michael, by
the hands of the Lord Ann^s de Memorancye great Master of the Kings Household;
and Monsieur Humieres: as likewise the same day at Paris the French King
received the Order of the Garter by the hands of the Lord Li^le, Doctor Tailor
Master of the Roles, Sir Nicholas Carew Master of the Kings horse, Sir Anthony
Brown and Sir Thomas Wriothslye Knight, otherwise called Garter king of Arms,
who were sent thither with the whole Habit, Collar and other habiliments of the
Order.

Upon King Henry's defiance of the Emperor in the French Kings quarrel,
English Merchant^ their ships and goods were attached in Spain, and in the Low
Countries, as likewise all Spanish and Flemish Merchants were attached here;
which being very detrimentall to both Nations; at last, by mediation of Hugo de
Mendoza, the Emperors Ambassador Legier, a reconcilement was made, and free
traffic between the Nations was revived.

In this twentieth year, on the two and twentieth of February: Sir Piers Butler
of Ireland, was created Earl of Oscry. And now King Henry began to be troubled
in mind about his marriage with Queen Katherin, but whether his trouble of
mind grew for scruple of conscience, or from desire of change, was by many men
doubted; some thought he had set his affection upon the Lady Anne Bullen whom
afterward he married, and to make way for that marriage, moved his scruple, that
he might be divorced; but this is not likely, for he married not the said Lady,
til above three years after this doubt had bin moved; and three years was a
long time to have affection be delaid, which commonly is impatient of any delay:
if King Henry's own protestation may be taken, it was very scruple of
conscience that troubled his mind; but then by what means this scruple came
first into his ^ead, is another doubt; some thought it was first moved by his
confessor, Doctor Longland telling him, that the marriage with the relict of his
Brother, could not be lawful; but neither is this likely, for Doctor Longland
was not like to tell him so, who knew the marriage had been made by dispensation
from the Pope, an authority in that time beyond exception; some thought it was
a plot of VVoolseis, thereby to make variance between King Henry and the
Emperor, with whom he was at varience himself, and for spleen to the Nephew,
he revenged upon the Aunt; but neither is this likely^ or else the Cardinal was
much deceived in his plo^; for though the Emperor labored Milan and some other
Universities, to forbear giving sentence against the marriage, yet he continued
amity with King Henry, as much afterward as before; if we will believe the King
himself, it was the President of Paris, coming Ambassador from the King of
France, that first moved it, upon a proposition of marriage between the Lady
Mary, King Henry's daughter, and the Duke of Orleance, second son to the
French King: but by what means his scruple had beginning, King Henry's desire
was now it should have an ending, and that the matter might be debated with
indifferency; he allowed the Queen to make choice of what council she thought
best; who thereupon chose William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Nicholas
West Bishop of Elye, Doctors of the Law; John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and
Henry Standish Bishop of Saint Assaph, Doctors of Divinity, with many other;
and in the mean time, sent to all the Universities in Italy and France to have
their opinions, but specially to the Court of Rome, desiring the Pope ^o send
his Legate to hear the cause; who thereupon sent Cardinal ^ampeius, and joined
Cardinal Woolsey in Commission with him. The place appointed for the
Cardinals to sit and to hear the cause, was at the Blackfriars: where in the
great Hall preparation was made of seats, and all things necessary for such a
session. Amongst other Officers of the Court, Stephen Gardener (afterward
Bishop of Winchester) ^ate as chief scribe. The Court being set, the Judges
comm^nded silence, whilst their Commission was read; which done, the Scribes
commanded the Crier to call the King, by the name of King Henry of England,
come into the Court; who answered, Here: then called he the Queen, by the name
of Katherine Queen of England, come into the Court: the Queen though present,
yet answered not, but rising from her seat, went to the place where the King
sat, and kneeling down, said in effect; Sir, I humbly desire you to take pity
upon me, for I am a poor woman and a stranger, and have here no indifferent
Council, where all are your Subjects, and less assurance of friendship when
they all depend upon your favor; I have bin your wife these twenty years, and
have borne you diverse children, if you can charge me with dishonesty or
undutifulnesse, I am content to depart from you to my shame; but if you cannot,
I then desire you to do me justice, and to spare me until I may know what
council my friends in Spain will give me; but if you will not, then your
pleasure be fulfilled: and having so said, she rose up, and making a low
cursie, departed. The King being advertised that she was going out of the
House, commanded the Cryar to call her again; who there upon called her,
saying, Katherine Queen of England come into the Court, which her
Gentleman Usher Master Griffith hearing, told her, Madam, you are called; well
(said she) it makes no matter, I will not tarry, go your way: and thus she
departed, and never after would appear in any Court, but appealed from the
Cardinals to the Pope himself. The Queen being gone, the King said, I confess
she has bin to me, the most dutiful and loving wife, that ever Prince had;
and if it were ^ot for this scruple of my conscience, I would not leave her for
any woman living: and having now referred the judgment of the cause to these
Commissioners, I should be most glad they could find the marriage between us
to be in such sort lawful, that with obedience to the Law of God, we might
continue together; for I take God to witness, there is nothing I more desire.
This said, the King rose, and the Court was adjourned to another day; for
notwithstanding the Queens Appeal (from which she would by no means be drawn)
the Cardinals continued their Session weekly, and heard all of both sides: the
Point that was chiefly stood on, was, whether Prince Arthur had ever had
carnal knowledge of her, or no; the Kings Council alleged, he had, and
proved it; first, by Prince Arthurs speech, the nex^ morning after his marriage,
that ^e had bin that night in the midst of Spain; and then by the words of the
last Dispensation, Vel forsan Cognitam: the Queens Advocates alleged the
contrary; appealing to the Kings own conscience; whom the Queen charged that
he knew her to be a Virgin when he married her; (though, to say the truth, i^
were strange, Prince Arthur and she having lain five month together, and he
no less then almost sixteen years old.) But whilst Arguments were thus
urged on both sides, and no certainty could appear; the King sent the two
Cardinals to the Queen, lying then in Bridewell, to persuade her, she should
submit her self to the Kings pleasure, and not stand so peremptorily to her
Appeal. The Cardinals coming to her found her at work amongst her Maids, with
a skaine of white thread about her neck: who having heard their message,
answered, That in all other things she would willingly submit her self to the
Kings will, but in this which concerned her honesty, and the legitimatenesse of
her children, she durst not, but would rely upon the wisdom and piety of both
their Fathers, who (she knew) would never have assented to the marriage, if
there had bin the least scruple of unlawfulness in it; and other answer she
would not give. Upon their return to the King, when he perceived she could not
be removed from her opinion; he commanded the Court to go on; so that at last
it came to judgment, which every man expected should be the next day. At which
day the King came thither (but in so secret manner that he might hear and not
be seen) where the Kings Council at the Bar calling for Judgment;
Cardinal Campeius, as being chief Commissioner, stood up and said; I find
the case very doubtful, and the party Defendant standing to her Appeal, I
will therefore give no Judgment, till I have conferred with the Pope; and
therefore I adjour^e the Court for this time, according to the order of the
Court of Rome, which hears no Causes judicially from the last of July till the
fourth of October; at which protraction of time, King Henry was not a little
angry, and the Duke of Suffolk being present, in a great rage said; it was
never merry in England, since we had Cardinals amongst us. Soon after this, the
Cardinal took his leave of the King, and returned to Rome: he was indeed
commanded so to do by the Pope, who would else most willingly have gratified
King Hen^y, that had bestowed upon him the Bishopric of Salisbury. Whilst
these things were in acting, Cardinal Woolsey had an inkling of the Kings
affection to Anne Bullen, daughter of the Viscount Rochford; and that the
Divorce once passed, he meant to marry her; which Match, because for many
reasons, he misliked; one perhaps, because she was a Lutheran, he sent privily
to the Pope, that by no means he should give sentence for the Divorce, till he
had framed the Kings mind another way; for his desire was, that the King
should marry the Duchess of Alanson, the French Kings sister. This packing of
Woolsey was not so closely carried, but that it soon came to the Kings
knowledge; and the King finding him a rub in his way, whom he expected to
have expedited his proceeding, began to think it necessary to remove him, and
to take him off from that greatness which had made him so presuming; and
indeed he made short work with him; for soon after he sent the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk to him for the Seal, which yet he would not deliver to
them, till they brought him a Warrant under the Kings own hand. When the Seal
was brought to the King, he delivered it to Sir Thomas Moore, Speaker then of
the Parliament (the first Layman that bore that Office in any memory;) and in
his room was chosen Speaker Thomas Audley, Attorney of the Duchy. Woolsey
now removed from his Chauncellourship; was in the Parliament then holden,
charged with points of treason; but that charge was so clearly taken off by
his servant Thomas Cromwell, who was then of the House, that the Cardinal was
acquitted, to the great commendation of Cromwell, both for abilities in
himself, and faithfulness to his Master.

After this, the King being informed, that all those things which the Cardinal
had done by his power Legantine, were within the case of Praemenire; he caused
his Attorney Christopher Hales to sue out a Praemunire against him; and
thereupon the two Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk were sent unto him, to let him
know, the Kings pleasure was, he should go to Asher, a House near to
Hampton Court, belonging to his Bishopric of Winchester, and there to reside:
whereupon, the Cardinal having first delivered up all his Movables to the
Kings use; (the greatest store and richest that was ever known of any Subject)
went presently to Putney by water, and from thence rode to Asher, where he and
his Family continued three or ^oure weeks, without either Bed, Sheets,
Table-loathes or Dishes to eat their meat in, or money wherewith to buy any,
but what he was forced to borrow of the Bishop of Carlisle. After this, his
matter for the Praemunire being called upon in the Kings Bench, his two
Atturnies confessed the Action, and thereupon had Judgment to forfeit all his
Lands and Goods, and to be out of the Kings protection; but the King of his
clemency, sent him a sufficient Protection, and left him the Bishoprics of
York and Winchester, with Plate and stuff convenient for his dignity. His
Bishopric of Duresme was given to Doctor Tunstall, Bishop of London; his
Abbey of Saint Albans to the Prior of Norwich, and the Bishopric of London to
Doctor Stokestey, Ambassador then beyond the Seas.

In this mean while, Margaret Duchess of Savoy, aunt to the Emperor, and
the Lady Loyis Duchess of Angoulesme, Mother to the French King, met at
Cambray to treat of a Peace between the Emperor, the Pope and the Kings of
England and France, where were present Doctor Tunstall Bishop of London, and
Sir Thomas Moore, then Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancaster, Commissioners
for the King of England: after long debating, through the diligence of the said
Ladies, a Peace was concluded; and was thereof called, The Woman's Peace; and
was indeed as fickle as women, for it was soon broken, and neither of the
Princes trusted the other ere the more for it.

King Henry before this time had been wholly ruled by the Cardinal and by the
Clergy, but now growing sensible of that error, he called his high Cour^ of
Parliament; in which the Commons complained sharply of their grievances against
the Clergy, specially in six things.

The first, for that they exacted unreasonable sums of money, as due fees,
for the probate of men's last Wills and Testaments: in so much, that Sir Henry
Guildford Knight of the Garter, and Comptroller of the Kings House declared
openly, that he and others being Executers to Sir William Compton; paid for
the pro^ate of his Will to the Cardinal, and the Archbishop of Canterbury a
thousand marks. The second, the extreme exaction, which spiritual men used
in taking of corpse, or mortuaries. The third, that spiritual men became
Farmours of great Granges and Farms: to the prejudice of Husbandmen and
Graziers. The fourth, because many Abbots, Pryors, and other spiritual men,
kept Tan-houses, and bought and sold wool, cloth, and other wares, as
temporal Merchants. The fifth, because such Clergy men as had the best
livings, would take the uttermost of their right, and yet live in the Court or
in Noble men's or Bishops houses, where they spent nothing. The sixth, because
diverse ignorant men amongst them, held ten or twelve Benifices to themselves
severally, and yet lived not upon any one of them, but kept great scholars at
small pension.
These things before this time might not be touched, because the Bishops were
Chancelours, and had all the rule about the King: but now the King looking
better into ^he matter, gave way to these complaints: whereupon the Burgesses
drew up three Bills; one of the probate of Testaments, another for Mortuaries:
and the third, for Non-residence, pluralities, and taking of farms by
spiritual men. The bill of Mortuaries, passed first the House of Commons, and
was sent up to the Lords: within two days after, was sent up the Bill of
probate of Testaments, at which the Archbishop of Canterbury, and a^l the
Bishops much frowned, but specially John Fisher Bishop of Rochester who rose up
and said; my Lords, you see what Bills come daily from the Common House, and
all is to the destruction of the Church, for Gods sake, consider what a realm
Bohemia was, and when the Church went down, then fell the glory of that
Kingdom. Now with our Commons is nothing but down with the Church; and all
this me seems, is for lack of faith only. When these words were reported
to the House of Commons, they took the matter very hainously, and thereupon
sent their sp^aker Thomas Audeley, with thirty of the House, to the King,
complaining what a dishonor to the King and to the whole Realm it was to say,
that they which were elected for the wisest men of all Shires, should be
charged to lack faith, which was all one as to say, they were Infidels and no
Chrystians, so as what Acts or Laws soever they made should be taken as Laws
made by Paynims and Heathen, and not worthy to be kept by Christian men. And
therefore humbly besought his Majesty, to call the said Bishop of Rochester
before him, to give account of the words he had spoken. Whereupon within few
days after, the King sent for the Bishop, and acquainted him with the Commons
complaint against him; who excused himself, by saying he meant the doings of
the Bohemians was for lack of faith, and not the doings of the House of
Commons; of which excuse, the King sent word to the House by Sir William
Fitz-Williams Treasurer of his household, but it pleased the Commons nothing at
all. After diverse meetings between the Lords and the Commons, about the Bills of
probate of Testaments and Mortuaries, the temporalty laid to the spiritualty
their own laws and constitutions, and the spiritualty defended them, by
prescription and usage; to whom a Gentleman of Grays-Inne made this answer, the
usage has ever been of thieves, to rob on shooters hill; is it therefore
lawful? whilst these Bills were in debate, an Act was passed, which released to
the King all such sums of money as he had borrowed at the Loan, in the
fifteenth year of his Reign; which Bill at first was much opposed, but the
most part of the House being the Kings servants, it was at last assented to,
which once known in the Country abroad, made much murmering, and the
Parliament to be ill spoken of; for every man counted it as a sure debt, so as
some made their Wills of the money, and some turned it over in satisfaction to
their creditours. To qualify which grievance, the King granted a general
pardon for all offenses (certain excepted) and was a means also to have the
three Bills passed; one for probate of Testaments, another for Mortuaries; and
the third, against plurality of Benefices; Non-residence, buying and taking of
farms by spiritual persons, though this last with some qualifying.

During this Parliament, the King created Viscount Rochford, Earl of
Wilsthire, the Vicount Fitz-VVater Earl of Sussex, and the Lord Hastings Earl
of Huntington.

By this time, the Lords of the upper House, had drawn certain Articles
against the Cardinal, and sent them down to the House of Commons, the chief
whereof were these.

First, that without the Kings assent, he has procured himself to be made a
Legate, by reason whereof he took away the right of all Bishops and spiritual
persons. Secondly, that in all his writings which he wrote to Rome, or to any
foraign Prince he wrote Ego et Rex meus, I and my King; so preferring himself
before the King. Thirdly, that without the Kings assent, he carried the great
Seal of England with him into Flanders. Fourthly, that having the French Pox,
he presumed to come and breath upon the King. Fifthly, that he caused the
Cardinals-hat to be put upon the Kings Coin. Sixthly, that he would not suffer
the Kings Clerk of the Market to sit at Saint Albanes. Seventhly, that he had
sent infinite store of treasure to Rome, for purchasing of his dignity.
These Articles were read in the House, and if not otherwise proved, yet
confessed afterward under the Cardinals own hand, which added to the former
Praemunire; all his Lands and goods were seized on to the Kings use.

This Parliament being ended, the King removed to Greenwich, and there kept his
Christmas with his Queen Katherine in great state; for though this matter of
making void the marriage between them, was hotly pursued by the King; yet
abstaining only from her bed, he conversed with her still, and they kept Court
together, in as loving manner as they had done before. And now King Henry
understanding that the Pope and the Emperor was to meet at Bologna, he sent
Ambassadors thither, the Earl of Wiltshire, Doctor Stokesley Elect of London,
and Doctor Lee, to declare both to the Pope and to the Emperor, the opinions
of diverse learned men in the matter of his Marriage; who all agreed that it was
against the Law of God; and thereupon requiring the Pope to do him Justice;
and showing to the Emperor, that the King moved this matter for discharge of
his Conscience only, and to no other end. To which the Pope answered, that
when he came to Rome, he would hear the matter disputed, and do the King
right. The Emperor answered, that he would in no case be against the Law of
God, and if this marriage were Judged such by the Court of Rome, he would rest
contented: with these Answers the Ambassadors returned.

It was now the two and twentieth year of King Henry's reign, when the
Emperor gave to the Master of Saint John's of Jerusalem the Island of Maltas,
in supplying of the Island of Rodes, which the Turk sometime before had won
from that Order.

In this year, the New Testament having been Translated into English, by
Tindall, Joy, and others, was forbidden to be read; and many for reading it,
were sharply punished by command of the Bishops and Sir Thomas Moore then Lord
Chancellor; but none was more violent in the matter then the Bishop of London,
who caused all the Books to be brought into Paul's Churchyard, and there
burned.

King Henry having heard by good information, that when Campeius was sent Legate
into England, he had brought with him a Bull of Di^orce; but was afterward upon
change of the Popes mind, commanded to burn it; saw plainly by this, that the
Pope had no meaning of proceeding really in the matter, but to keep it a foot
for his own ends; neither to displease the Empour by granting it, nor King
Henry by not granting it, but promising expedition to keep him in expectance;
yet using delays to keep him in dependence; and therefore resolved now to
take such a course, that he should not need to care whether the Pope granted it
or no; and thereupon caused a Proclamation to be published, that no person of
what estate or condition soever should Purchase, or attempt to purchase from
the Court of Rome, any thing prejudicial to the Jurisdiction, or Prerogative
of this his Realm, upon pain of imprisonment, and other punishments at his
Graces pleasure; and shortly after an Act was made, that Bishops should pay no
more Annats, or money for Bulls to the Pope; for as much as it was proved, there
had been paid for Bulls of Bishops, since the fourth year of King Henry the
seventh, an hundred and threescore thousand pounds, besides what had been paid
for Pardons and other dispensations. Another Act was then also made, that no
person, should appeal for any cause, out of this Realm to the Court of Rome,
but from the Commissary to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop,
and from the Archbishop to the King: and all Causes of the King, to be tried in
the upper House of the Convocation.

At this time, the Cardinal lying still at Asher, and his Adversaries doubting
l^ast lying so near the King, he might one time or other get access to the
Kings presence, and come again into favor; they using means to have him sent
further off, and thereupon the King appointed him to go to his Diocese of
York, and not to come Southward without special license, whereupon in Lent he
made great preparation for his journey, and having in his train to the number
of an hundred and threescore persons: by easy journeyes came to Peterborrow,
and there kept his Easter; the week after he went to Stamford then to Newark,
and so to Southwell, where he continued most part of all that summer: and then
rode to Seroby, where he staid till Michaelmas and then came to Cawood Castle,
within seven miles of York where he kept a plentiful house for all comers:
and repaired the Castle, being greatly in decay, having above three hundred
Artificers in daily wages. At last, he determined to be installed at York, the
next Monday after Alhallan-day; against which time great preparation was made,
and the Cardinal sent to the King, to lend him the Miter and Pall, which he
used to wear at any great solemnity. At which p^esumption the King marvailed
not a little; saying to those that were about him, what a thing is this, that
pride should thus reign in a man that is quite under foot? but before the day
of Instalment came; he was arrested in this manner; Sir Walter Walsh one of the
Kings Privy-chamber, was sent down to the Earl^ of Northumberland, with whom
he was joined in Commission to arrest the Cardinal; whereupon they go
together to Cawood, where the Cardinal lay: and being entered into the house,
it was told the Cardinal, that the Earl of Northumberland was come, and in
the Hall; then (quoth the Cardinal) I am sorry we have dined, for I doubt our
Officers are not provided of any good cheer. With that, he went and brought
the Earl up, welcomming him in a complementall manner, as if he had come but
only to visit him: but being come into the Chamber, the Earl with a soft
voice, laying his hand upon the Cardinals arm, said; My Lord, I arrest you of
high treason: the Cardinal somewhat astonished, asked to see his Commission,
which the Earl denying to show; then (says the Cardinal) I will not obey
your arrest; at that instant Master Walsh came in, and kneeled down to the
Cardinal; who asked him if he were joined in Commission with the Earl; who
answered, he was^ well then, said the Cardinal, I trow you are one of the
Kings Privy Chamber, your name is Walsh; I am content to yield to you, but not
to my Lord of Northumberland, unless I see his Commission: the meanest of the
Kings Privie-chamber is sufficient to arrest the greatest Peer of the Realm,
by the Kings commandment, without any Commission. Then the Earl took the
Cardinals keys from him, and put him in custody of his Gentlemen: some few
days after, he was conveyed from Cawood to Pomfret, and after to Sheffield
Park, where he had kind entertainment, and staid with the Earl of Shrewsbury
and his Lady eighteen days; till at last sitting one day at dinner, his
color was observed to change, and being asked how he did; not well (says he)
I have something suddenly at my stomach, as cold as a whetstone, which I know
is wind; I desire to have something from the Apothecary, to break wind;
which was brought, and the Earl seeing the say taken, he took it, and
thereupon broke wind indeed; but whether it were he took it in too great a
quantity, or that there was some foul play used, he fell soon after into such
a looseness, that the night following he had above fifty stools; yet the next
day he rode to Nottingham, and the day after to Leicester Abbey; being so sick
by the way, that he was ready to fall off his Mule; coming to the Abbey gates,
the Abbot with all the Covent met him; to whom he said, Father Abbot, I am come
hither to lay my bones among you; and then was led up into his chamber, and
went to bed; where growing sicker and sicker; the next morning Master Kingston
Lie^tenant of the Tower, who had been sent to bring him up, coming to him,
and a^king him how he did; I do but tarry (says he) the pleasure of God, to
render up my poor soul into his hands; for this is my case, I have a flux
with a continual fever, the nature whereof is, that if there be no amendment
within eight days, either excoriation of the entrails will ensue, or frenzy,
or else present death; and the best of them is death; and (as I suppose) this
is the eight day. Sir (said Master Kingston) you are afraid of that you have no
cause; for I assure you, the King commanded me to say unto you, that you should
be of good cheer, for that he bears you as much good will as ever he did;
No, no (Master Kingston) said the Cardinal, I see how it is framed; but if I
had served God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have given
me over in my gray hayres; but it is a just reward for my study to do him
service, not regarding the service of God, to do him pleasure; and having so
said, his speech failed, and incontinent the clock struk eight, and then he
gave up the Ghost; which made some about him to remember, how he had said the
day before: that at eight of the clock they should loose their master. Being
dead, he was buried in the Abbey of Leicester. This man held at once the
Bishoprics of York, Winchester, and Durhan, the dignities of Lord Cardinal
Lega^ and Chancelour of England, the Abbey of Saint Albans, diverse Priories,
and sundry great Benefices in Commendum: he had also in his hands, as it were
in Farm, the Bishopric of Bath, Worcester and Here^ord, which having been
given by King Henry the seventh to strangers, that lived out of the Realm,
they suffered Woolsey to enjoy them, receiving of him a Pension only. The
Re^inue of this Pre^ate is scarce credible, a thousand persons daily in his
household, of whom many Knights and some Lords; all which greatness as it came
by the Kings favou^, so by the withdrawing of his favor, it was overthrown:
so true is that saying of Solomon, The Kings favor is as dew upon the grass;
but his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, and as a messenger of death. After
this the King removed from Hampton Court to Greenwich, where with his Queen
Katherine he kept a solemn Christma^, and on twelfth night he sat in state in
the Hall, where was diverse Enterludes; costly Masks, and a sumptuous Banquet.
After Christmas he came to his Manor of Westminster, which before was called
York Place; for the Cardinal had made a Feoffment of it to the King, which
the Chapter of York confirmed, and then it was no more called York Place, but
the Kings Manor of Westminster, now White Hall.

At this time the whole Clergy of England was charged by the Kings learned
Council, to be in a Praemunire, for supporting and maintaining the Cardinals
Legatine power; and were thereupon called by Process into the Kings Bench to
answer; but before their day of Appearance came, they in their Convocation
concluded an humble submission in writing, and offered the King an hundred
thousand pound to have their pardon by Parliament; which offer, after some
labor, was accepted, and their pardon promised. In which submission the
Clergy called the King supreme Head of the Church. This Pardon was signed
with the Kings hand, and sent to the Lords, who assented to it; and then sent
it to the Lower House: but here, diverse of the House excepted against the
Pardon, unless themselves also might be included in it; who (they said) having
had something to do with the Cardinal, might be brought into the same case as
the Clergy were. Hereupon their Speaker Thomas Audeley, with a convenient
number of the House, was sent to the King about it; to whom the King made
answer, that he was their Sovereign Lord, and would not be compelled to show
his mercy; and seeing they went about to restrain him of his liberty, he would
grant a Pardon to the Clergy, which he might do by his great Seal without
them; and for their Pardon, he would be advised before he granted it: with this
Answer the Speaker and Commons returned, much grieved and discontented; and
some said that Thomas Cromwell, who was newly come into the Kings favor, had
disclosed the secrets of the House, which made the King give this unpleasing
Answer. But soon after the King of his own accord, caused their Pardon also to
be drawn, and signed it^ which easily passed both Houses, with great
commendation of the Kings judgment, to deny it at first when it was demanded
as a right, and to grant it afterward, when it was received as of grace.

In this Parliament time, on the thirtieth of March, Sir Thomas Moore Lord
Chancellor, with twelve of the Lords, came into the Lower House, acquainting
them, that though in the matter of the Kings Divorce, he might sufficiently
rest upon the judgment of learned men in his own Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, yet to avoid all suspicion of parciality, he had sent into France,
Italy, the Popes Dominions, and the Venetians, to have their opinions; and then
causing them to be read, Sir Bryan Tuke took out of a box certain writings
sealed, which were the determinations of the Universities of Orleance, of
Paris, of Anjou, of Burges, of Bolonia, of Padua, and of Thoulouse: all which
were peremptory in these two Points; that the Brother, by the Law of God, might
not marry the Relict of his brother; and then, being against the law of God,
that it is not in the power of the Pope to dispense with it: and now (said
they) you may know, that the King has not sought this Divorce for his
pleasure; but for discharge of his conscience; and this said, they departed.
The King himself, when he heard of these determinations, was so far from
rejoicing at it, that he rather mourned, as for the loss of so good a wife;
yet he conversed with her as he had done before, in nothing altered but in
abstaining from her bed. But being willing the Queen should know these
Determinations; in Whitsonweeke after, he sent diverse Lords to acquaint her
with them; requi^ing her thereupon to recall her Appeal, and to refer the
matter to eight indifferent Lords; which she utterly refused, using her usual
Answer, that she was his lawful wife, and would abide the Determination of the
Court of Rome, but of no other. After Whitsontide, the King and Queen removed
to Windsor, and there continued till the fourteenth of July, on which day the
King removed to Woodstocke and left the Queen at Windsor, where she remained a
while, and after removed to Easthamsted, whither the King sent to her diverse
Lords, first to persuade her to be conformable to the law of God; which if they
could not do, then to let her know, that his pleasure was, she should be at
either of these three places, his Manor of Oking, or of East-hamstead, or the
Monastery of Bisham, and there to continue without further molesting him with
her suits.

And now came Cranmer in to play his part. It chanced that Doctor Stephe^s,
Doctor Fox and he met at Waltham one day at dinner; where falling into
discourse, about the case then in agitation, of the Kings marriage with Queen
Katherine; the other Doctors thought the marriage might be proved unlawful by
the Civil Law: (but (said Cranmor)^ it may better be proved by the Law of God,
and it is no hard matter to do it; which words of his being made known to the
King^ Cranmor is sent for, and commanded to set his reasons down in writing:
which having done, and showed them to the King; he was asked whether he would
stand to that which he had written: who answered, he would, even before the
Pope himself, if his Majesty pleased: marry (said the King) and to Pope you
shall go; and thereupon sent him to the Court of Rome, and with him Thomas
Bullen Earl of Witshire, Doctor Stokesley Elect of London, Doct. Lee the Kings
Almoner, and others: who coming to Bolonia where the Pope was, had a day of
audience appointed, but was hindered by a ^^diculous accident; for the Pope
holding out his foot for them to kiss his toe, as the manner is, a dog of the
Earls, by chance in the room, ran and caught the Popes foot in his mouth, and
made it for that time unfit to kiss. After this, when Cranmor had made his
Proposition, he was told, it should be answered when the Pope came to Rome: so
the Ambassadors were dismissed, and Cranmor went to the Emperour^ Court; where
in private conference he satisfied Cornelius Agrippa, the most learned at that
time about the Emperor, and brought him to be of his opinion. Cranmor
returning home, and giving the King this satisfaction; the Kings marriage with
Queen Katherine was soon after dissolved by Parliament, and the Bishop of
Canterbury accompanied with Doctor Stokesley Bishop of London, Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Bathe and Lincoln, and other learned men,
rode to Dunstable where Queen Katherine then lay; where being cited to appear,
and making default fifteen days togethers, for lack of appearance, she was
divorced from the King, and the marriage declared to be void and of none effect;
and from thenceforth it was decreed, she should no more be called Queen, but
Princess Dowager: after which time, the King never saw her more.

At this time, being the four and twentieth year of King Henry's reign, Sir
Thomas Moore, after long suit, delivered up the great Seal, which was then
delivered to Thomas Audeley Speaker of the Parliament; and he made first Lord
Keeper, and shortly after Chancelour; in whose room of Speaker, H^nfrey
Wing^eld of Grayes-Inne was chosen on the first of September this year: the
King being at Windsor, created Anne Bullen Marchioness of Pembrooke, giving
her a thousand pounds land a year: and then being desirous to talk with the
King of France in person, on the tenth of October, taking the said Lady with
him, and diverse Lords, as the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, the Marquess of
Dorset and Excester, the Earls of Arundell, Oxford, Surrey, Essex, Derby,
Rutland, Sussex and Huntington, with diverse Viscounts, Barons and Knights, he
sailed over to Callice; and on the twentieth of October me^ with the King of
France at Bolloigne, with whom he staid four days; in which time, to do him
honor, the King of France honored the two Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk with
the Order of Saint Michael, and then both Kings went to Callice, where the
French King stayed certain days; in which time to do the King of France
honor, King Henry honored two of his great Lords with the Order of the Garter,
and then after great magnificence in revelling and feasting, on the twentieth
of Ostob. the French King departed from Callice, and King Henry returned into
England, where on the fourteenth of November following, he married secretly the
Lady Anne Bulle^^ which marriage was not openly known till Easter after, when it
was perceived she was with child; at which time William Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury dyed, Thomas Cranmor was elected Archbishop in his room.

After that the King perceived his new wi^e to be with child, he caused all
Officers necessary to be appointed to her; and so on Easter eave she went to
her closet openly as Queen, and then the King appointed her coronation to be
kept on Witsunday following; and writings were sent to all Sheriffs, to
certify the nams of men of forty pounds, to receive the order of Knighthood,
or else to mak^ fine: the assesment of which ^ines was appointed to Thomas
Cromwell Master of of the Jewel-house, and of the Kings Council; a man newly
come in the King^ favor, by whose industry great sums of money were by such
fines gathered. In the beginning of May, the King caused Proclamation to be
made, that all men who claimed to do any service at the Coronation, by the way
of tenure, gran^, or prescription, should put in their claim three weeks
after Easter in the Star Chamber, before Charles Duke of Suffolk, for that
time high Steward of England, the Lord Chancellor and other Commissioners. Two
days before the Coronation were made Knights of the Bath, the Earl of Dorset,
the Ea^le of Der^y, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Fitzwater, the Lord Hastings,
the Lord Monteagle, the Lord Vaux, Sir John Mordant, Sir Henry Parker; Sir
William Windsor, Sir Francis Weston, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir John Hurlson, Sir
Thomas Poynings, Sir Henry Savill, Sir George ^itzwilliams, Sir John Tindall,
and Sir Tho: I^rmey. On Whitsunday the Coronatio^ was kept in as great state
and (...) for all circumstances as ever an^ was, and the day after a solemn Just^
was ^olden.

In May this year Pope Clement sent a messenger to King Henry, requiring him
personally to appear at the general Council, which he had appointed to be
kept the year following; but when his Commission was showed, there was neither
time nor place specified for keeping of the said Council; and so with an
uncertain Answer to an uncertain Demand, the Messenger departed.

It was now the five and twentieth year of the Kings reign, when on Midsomer
day, Mary the French Queen, and then wife to Charles Duke of Suff^lke, dyed;
and was buried at Saint Edmund-berry; and on the seventh of September
following, between three and four a clock in the afternoon, the Queen was
delivered of a daughter that was named Elizabeth; the Godfather at the
christning was the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Godmother the old Duchess of
Norfolk, and the old Marchioness Dorset widow; and at the Confirmation, the
Lady Marchioness of Excester: the Christning was performed with exceeding
great state, and great gifts were given by the Gossips.

This year, one Pavier the Town-clerke of London hanged himself, (whom
Hollinshead says) he heard once swear a great oath; that if he thought the
thought the King would set forth the Scripture in English, rather then he would
live to see that day, he would cut his own throat: which I therefore relate,
that the judgment of God may be seen upon such unhallowed oaths.

A little before this time one Elizabeth Barton, named the Holy Maid of Kent,
came to be discovered; whose abettours were Richard Master a Priest, Parson of
Aldington in Kent, Edward Bocking Doctor of Divinity, a Monk of Canterbury,
Richard Deering a Monk, Edward Thwayts Gentleman, Henry Gold Parson of
Aldermary, Hugh Rich a Friar observant, Richard Risby and Thomas Gold,
Centlemen. This Maid had learned to counterfeit falling into Trances; in which
she would deliver many strange things, and amongst others, said, that by
Revelation from God and his Saints she was informed; that if King Henry
proceeded to the Divorce, and married another, he should not be King of England
one month after. And here we may see how credulous oftentimes great Scholars
are in believing Impostures, when Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fisher
Bishop of Rochester were thought to give credit to this Counterfeit, that we
need not wonder at Saint Austin; who though he gave credit to many lying
Miracles, yet they were such as had more probability in them then this; which
consisted in nothing but making of faces, as upon Examination of the Maid and
her Abettours was confessed; and thereupon she and most of them were condemned,
drawn to Tyburne and there hanged.

In this mean time the Scots had been troublesome, and made Intodes upon the
Borders; till at last, Commissioners being sent to treat of agreement; a Peace
was concluded, to continue both the Kings lives; which on the twentieth of May
this year, was openly Proclaimed.

About this time, at the suit of the Lady Katherine Dowage, a Bull was sent
from the Pope, which cursed both the King and the Realm; which Bull was set up
in the Town of Dunkerke in Flanders, the Messenger not daring to come nearer:
and because it was known that the Lady Dowager had procured this Curse to be
sent, the Duke of Suffolk was sent to her, lying then at Bugden besides
Huntington, to discharge a great part of her household servants; yet leaving her
a convenient number, like a Princess.

It was now the six and twentieth year of King Henry's reign, when in a
Parliament holden, an Act was made for establishing the succession in the
Crown, upon the Lady Elizabeth; to which, first all the Lords, Knights and
Burgesses were sworn; and after Commissioners were sent into all parts of the
Realm, to take the oath of all men and women to the said Act. Another Act was
also made, which authorized the King to be Supreme Head of the Church of
England, and the Popes authority to be utterly abolished. But Doctor John
Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas Moore Knight, and Doctor Wilson Parson
of Saint Thomas Apostles in London, expressly denied at Lam^eth, before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to take the Oaths; of whom Doctor Wilson recanted,
but the other two persisting in their opinion, were both of them beheaded. Of
these two Bishop Fisher was much lamented, as reputed a man both of great
learning and good life. The Pope had elected him Cardinal, and his Hat was
come as farr^ as Callice, but before it could come into England his head was
off. Sir Thomas Moore was both learned and very wise, but so given to a vain
of jesting and merry scoffing, that he could not refrain it at the very time of
his death: as when he was carried to the Tower, being demanded his upper
garment (meaning his Gown) you shall have it, said he, and gave them his cap;
saying, it was the uppermost garment he had: also, when being upon the
Scaffold, the Hangman kneeled down and asked him forgiveness; I forgive thee
(said he) but I promise thee, thou will never have credit by cutting off my
Head, my neck is so short: and when he was to lay his head down upon the
block, having a great gray beard, he stroked it out, and said to the Hangman,
I pray you let me lay my beard over the block, lest you should cut it; for
though you have Warrant to cut off my head, you have none to cut my beard. But
his Devotion was no jesting matter, for he used to wear a shirt of hair next
his skin, for a perpetual pen^ance; and oftentimes in the Church he would put
on a Surplesse, and help the Priest to say Mass; which he forbore not to do
even when he was Lord Chancellor of England; as one time the Duke of Norfolk
coming to the Church found him doing it. Two memorable things are recorded of
him; one, which shows his great integrity, and the small reckoning he made of
riches; that having passed through so many great employments, and borne so many
great Offices; yet in all his time, ^e never Purchased above one hundred pounds
land a year, nor left any great stock of money behind him, when he died. The
other, which shows his filial piety, that being Lord Chancellor of England,
at the same time that his Father wa^ a Judge of the Kings Bench, he would
always at his going to Westminster, go first to the Kings Bench and ask his
Father blessing, before he went to sit in the Chancery.

The ninth of July, this year, the Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned at
Westminster of high treason, before the Duke of Norfolk, as high Steward of
England; his Indictment being read, he so answered every part and matter
therein contained, that by his Peers he was found Not guilty; a rare thing to
stop a current that ran with such violence. The one and twentieth of September
Doctor Taylour Master of the Roles, was discharged of that Office; and the
ninteenth of October following, Thomas Cromwell was sworn in his place.

This year the King of Scots was installed Knight of Garter, by his Deputy the
Lord Erskin and Stephen Gardener, who after the Cardinals death, was made
Bishop of Winchester, was sent Ambassador Legier, into France, where he
remained three years. Also in January, of this year, Katherine Princess
Dowage^, fell into her last sickness; to whom the King sent the Emperors
Ambassador Legier, desiring her to be of good comfort; but she finding her
death to approach, caused only one of her Gentlewoman to write a Letter to the
King; commending to him her Daughter and his, and beseeching him to be a good
Father to her; and then desiring him further, to have some consideration of her
Servants. On the eighth of January, at Kimbolton, she departed this life, and
was buried at Peterborough. A woman of so virtuous a life, and of so great
obsequiousness to her husband, that from her only merit, is grown a
reputation to all Spanish wives. Also the nine and twentieth of January, this
year, Queen Anne was delivered of a child before her time, which was borne
dead.

And now King Henry began to fall into those great disorders, which have been
the blemish of his life, and have made him be blotted out of the Catalogue of
our best Princes; for first, in October this year, he sent D^ctor Lee and
others, to ^isit the Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries in England; who set at
liberty all those Religious persons, that would forsake their habit, and all
that were under the age of four and twenty years; and in December following, a
survay was taken of all Chantries, and the names of such, as had the gift of
them. After which, in a Parliament holden the fourth of February, an Act was
made, which gave to the King all Religious houses, with all their lands and
goods, that were of the value of three hundred marks a year and under: the
^^mber of which Houses, was three hundred seventy and six: the value of their
lands yearly, above two and thirty thousand pounds, their movable goods, one
hundred thousand, the Religious persons put out of the same houses above ten
tho^sand. This year, William Tindall, was burnt at a Town in Flanders,
between Brussels and Mechlyn, called Villefort, for translating into English
the New Testament, and diverse parts of the old; who having been long
imprisoned, was upon the Lord Cromwels writing for his Deliverance, in all
haste, brought to the fire, and burnt.

It was now the eight and twentieth year of King Henry's Reign, when on
Monday, there were solemn Justs holden at Geeenwich, from whence the King
suddenly departed, and came to Westminster, whose sudden departure stroke
great amazement into many, but to the Queen especially, and not without cause;
for the next day, the Lord Rochford her brother, and Henry Norris were brought
to the Tower of London, prisoners, whither also the same day at five a clock in
the afternoon, was brought Queen Anne her self, by Sir Thomas Audeley Lord
Chancelour, the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Cromwell Secretary, and Sir William
Kingston Leivtenant of the Tower, who at the Tower-gate, fell on her knees
before the said Lords, beseeching God to help her, as she was innocent of that
whereof she was accused: on the ^ifteenth of May, she was arraigned in the
Tower, before the Duke of Norfolk, sitting as high Steward of England. When
her Indictment was read, she made unto it so wise and discreet answers, that
she seemed fully to clear her self of all matters laid to her charge: but
being tried by her Peers, whereof the Duke of Suffolk was chief; she was by
them found guilty, and had Judgment pronounced by the Duke of Nor^olke;
immeadiatly the Lord Rochford her brother, was likewise arraigned and
condemned: who on the seaventeenth of May, together with Henry Norris, Mark
Smeton, William Briorton, and Francis Weston, all of the Kings Privy-chamber,
about marters touching the Queen, were behe^de^ on the Tower Hill, Queen Anne
her self on the nineteenth of May, on a Sca^fold upon the Green within the
Tower, was beheaded with the sword of Callice by the hangman of that Town; her
body with the head, was buried in the Quire of the chapel there. This Queen
Anne, was the daughter of Thomas Bullen Earl of Wilsthire, and of Lady
Elizabeth daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Nor^olke; the Earls Father was the
son of Sir William Bullen, whose wife was Margaret the second daughter and
Coheire of Thomas Butler Ealre of Ormond, and the said Sir William, was the
son of Sir Godfrey Bullen, Lord Major of London, who lies buried in Saint
Leonards Church in the Iewry, whose wife was Anne eldest daughter and coheire
to Thomas Lord Hoo and Hastings: and his descent was out of the house of the
Bullens in the County of Norfolk; thus much for her Parentage: for her
Religion, she was an ^arnest Professor, and one of the first Countenancers of
the Gospel: in Almsdeeds so liberal, that in nine months space; It it is
said, she distributed amongst the poor, to the value of fifteen thousand
pounds: now for the crimes for which she died, (Adultery and Incest:) proofs
of her guiltiness there are none recorded: of her Innocence, many; first, her
own clearing of all objections, at the time of her arraignment: then Cromwels
writing to the King, after full examination of the matter; that many things
have been objected, but none confessed, only some circumstances had been
acknowledged by Mark Smeton: (and what was Mark Smeton, but a mean fellow,
one that upon promise of life, would say any thing; and having said something,
which they took hold of was soon after executed least he should retract it:)
lastly, they that were accused with her, they all denied it to the death: even
Henry Norris, whom the King specially favored, and promised him pardon if he
would but confess it. It was a poor proof of Incest with her brother, that
coming one morning into her chamber before she was up, he leaned down upon her
bed, to say something in her ear; yet this was taken hold of for a proof: and
it need be no marvel if we consider the many adversaries she had; as being a
Protestant, and perhaps in that respect, the King himself not greatly her
friend: (for though he had excluded the Pope, yet he continued a Papist still:
and then who knows not, that nature is not more able of an Acorn to make an
oak, then authority is able of the least surmise, to make a certainty. But
howsoever it was, that her death was contrived: certain it is, that it cast
upon King Henry a dishonorable Imputation; in so much, that where the
Protestant Princes of Germany had resolved to choose him for head of their
League; after they heard of this Queens death, in such a manner, they utterly
refused him as unworthy of the honor: and it is memorable what conceit Queen
Anne her self had of her death; for at the time, when she was led to be
beheaded in the Tower^ she called one of the Kings Privy-chamber to her, and
said unto him, commend me to the King, and tell him; he is constant in his
course of advancing me, for from a private Gentlewoman, he made me a Marquess,
from a Marquess, a Queen; and now, that he had left no higher degree of
worldly honor for me, he has made me a Martyr.

Immediately after her death, in the week before Whi^^on^ide, the King married
Jane Seymour, daughter to Sir John Seymour, who at Whitsontide was openly
showed as Queen: and on the Tuesday in the Whitson-weeke her brother Sir
Edmund Seymour, was created Viscount Beauchamp, and Sir Walter Hangerford, was
made Lord Hangerford.

The eight of June, the Parliament began; during the which, the Lord Thomas
Howard, without the Kings assent, had affianced the Lady Margaret Douglas,
daughter to the Queen of Scots, and Niece to the King: for which he was
attainted of treason, and an Act was made for like offenders hereafter; and so
he died in the Tower, and she long time remained there a prisoner; yet
afterward was set at liberty, and married Matthew Earl of Lenox, who by him had
Henry, Father of James the first King of Great Britain.

In the time of this Parliament, the Bishops and all the Clergy had a solemn
Convocation at Paul's Church in London; where after much disputation and
debating of matters, they published a book of Religion; entitled, Articles
devised by the Kings Highness: in which book are specially mentioned but
three Sacraments: namely Baptism, Eucharist, and Penance; also certain
Injunctions were set forth, whereby many of the old Holi-dayes were abrogated,
specially those that fell in Harvest time.

The two and twentieth of July, Henry Duke of Richmond and Somerset, base son
of King Henry by Elizibeth Blunt, died at Saint James, and was buried at
Thets^one in Norfolk.

The nine and twentieth of June the King held a great Justs and Triumph at
Westminster, but a disastrous Sea Fight on the water; where one Gates a
Gentl^man was drowned in his harness, and by the breaking of a Gunne two
Mariners were sore mained: in July following, Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to the
King, and Master of the Rolls, was made Lord Keeper of the Privy-seale: and
the ninteenth of July the Lord Fitz-Warren was created Earl of Bath; and the
day after, the said Cromwell was made Lord Cromwell; and on the eighteenth of
July, Vic^r General under the King over the Spiritualty; who sat diverse
times in the Convocation House, amongst the Bishops as head over them: and now
was the state of Religion in England come to a strange pass; because always
in passing, and had no consistance; for at first, the authority of the Pope was
excluded in some cases only, a while alter in all; but yet his Doctrine was
wholly retained. Afterward, his Doctrine came to be Impugned, but in some few
points only: a while after, in many more: that the fable of Proteu^ might no
longer be a fable, when the Religion in England might be his true Morral^: and
indeed, it could be no otherwise; the distance between the two Religious being
not possible to be passed Per saltum; but must be done by degrees, which
degrees may be observed in the progress of the story: for where at first, it
was permitted only to read the Bible in English, now it came to be permitted,
to pray in English; for now in September, the Lord Cromwell set forth
Injunctions, to have the Lords prayer, the Ave, the Creed, the ten
Commandments, and all Articles of the Christian-faith translated into English,
and to be taught by all Parsons and Curates to their Parishoners: which
Innovation so stirred up the people, that in Lincol^shire they assembled to the
number of twenty thousand; against whom the King himself went in person, who
win^^ng by persuasions their chief leaders, brought the rest upon pardon to
submit themselves: but when he had himself done the work of mercy; he
afterward sent the Duke of Suffolk, with Sir Francis Brian, and Sir John
Russell to do the work of Justice; who caused Nicholas Melton, and a Monk
naming himself Captain Cobbler, and thirteen others (Ringleaders of the
sedition,) to be apprehended, and most of them to be executed. But this
Commotion was scarce appeased, when presently there rose another in the
North-parts, where forty thousand were assembled, giving themselves out for an
holy Pilgrimage, where on one side of their Ensigns, they had Christ hanging
on the cross, on the other side, the Cup and Bread of the Sacrament, as
taking Arms only for maintenance of the Faith of Christ, and deliverance of
the holy Church now oppressed: but these were opposed by George Earl of
Shrewsbury, who having raised an Army without Commission, though to resist the
Rebels, yet began to be much troubled, whither in so doing he had not committed
Treason, and was never quiet till he had sent to the King for pardon and
commission to proceed: at which time a rumor being raised amongst his
soldiers, that the Earl so well liked the Rebels cause, that what show soever
he made, yet when it should come to the trial, he would not stick to join
with them and take their parts: to remove which Opinion out of their mind^, he
caused all his soldiers to come before him, and made his Chaplain give him an
oath; by which he swore in their hearing, to be true to the Crown, and never
to be assisting to any Rebels: to his aid were sent the Duke of Norfolk, with
the Marquis of Excetur^ the Earls of Huntington and Rutland: who with a mighty
Army approachi^g the Rebels, beyond Doncaster, in the way toward York,
attempted first to have pacified them without bloodshed; but when no
persuasions would serve, it was resolved of both sides to come to a battle;
but see here the great goodness of God, for the night before the day appointed
for battle, it happened that a little Brook called Dun, running between the two
Armies, upon a small rain grew to such a height, that it was not passable by
either foot or horse; so as the Armies having time to consider, and considering
perhaps this miracle as sent of God, they came to agreement, and upon pardon
disbanded and returned to their houses: but in the mean time they had besieged
the Castle of Scarborough where the resolute carriage of Sir Ralph Evens is
memorable; who held the Castle by only his own servants and Tennants, and
that, when for twenty days together, he had no other sustenance but bread and
water: but all Comotions were not yet appeased, for at this very time, there
was another great Army assembled out of Cumberland, Westmerland, and the
North-parts of Lancashire, marching South-wards; but by the diligence of the
Earl of Darby, to whom also the Earl of Sussex was sent, they were suppressed,
and their chief Leader^, as the Abbo^s of Wally, Sauly, and others, apprehended
and hanged: but neither is there yet an end of comotions, for now in February
Nicholas Musgrave, Thomas Til^y, with others to the number of twelve thousand,
began a Rebellion, and be sieged Carlisle, but by the power of the City were
first beaten back, and then were encountered by the Duke of Norfolk, who caused
seventy four of them, by Martiall-law ^o be hanged on the walls of Carlisle:
but neither was there yet an end of Comotions, for now in Setrington,
Pickering, L^igh and Scarborough, began a new Rebellion, by procurement of
Francis Bigot; who had r^ised a great power, and meant to have taken Hull, but
by the industry of Sir Ralph Ellarker, and the Major of the Town, threescore
a^ the Rebels were taken and hanged, and the rest put to flight, and glad to be
quiet: but neither yet was there an end of Commotions, for in the latter end of
this eight and twentieth year, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, Sir Robert
Constable Sir John Bulmer and his wife, Sir Thomas Percy brother to the Earl of
Northumberland, Sir Stephen Hamilton, Nicholas Tempest Esquire, and others
began to conspire, although each of them before had been pardoned by the King:
but this as being but the fagge end of Commotion; was soon suppressed, the Lord
Darcy was beheaded on the Tower Hill, the Lord Hussy at Lincol^e, Sir Robert
C^nstable was hanged in cheins at Hull, Sir John Balmers Paramout was burnt in
Smithfield, and most of the other were executed at Tyburne: Tantae molis erat,
so great a matter it was^ to make the Realm be quiet, in so great innovations
of Religion.

This year on Saint Georges-feast, the Lord Cromwell was made Knight of the
Garter, and on the twelfth of October, which is Saint Edwards-eve^, at
Ha^ton-Court, the Queen was delivered of a son; (but with so hard a labor
that she was feign to be ripped) the child was named Edward, whose Godfathers at
the Christning were the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Duke of Norfolk, his
Godmother was his sister the Lady Mary: at his Bishoping, his Godfather was the
Duke of Suffolk: on the eighteenth of October, he was made Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester: but the birth of his son brought not
so much joy to the King, as the death of his Queen brought him sorrow; for
within two days after she died, and was buried at Winsor, and ^o much was the
Kings grief for her death, that he continued a widdawer two years after.

It is not unworthy the relating, what a miserable dissolation befell the
family of the Geraldynes or Fitz-Garrets, (Earl of Kildare in Ireland) about
this time; for Gerald Fitz-Garret, who had been ten years Deputy in Ireland;
upon complaint of some fault, was sent for over into England, where not making
a satisfying answer, he was committed to the Tower; but before his commi^g
over, had with the Kings leave, left Deputy there his own son, a Young Man of
not above twenty years of age, but yet ripe of understanding and fit for the
pla^e: this young Lord, hearing that his father was committed prisoner to the
Tower; and soon after, as the rumor increased, that he was put to death; in
rage to be revenged, rose up in Arms; and having five Unckles in the Country
(men of great estimation) drew them (though some of them unwillingly) to take
his part; amongst other outrages he committed, the Archbishop of Dublin was
slain in his presence^ the Father in the Tower hearing hereof, with very
grief died; the Son and his Uncles, upon the Kings sending a^ Army, were all
either taken or submitted; and being sent for over into England, those of his
Unckles, that against their wills had been drawn into the Action, had good hope
of their lives, till entering the ship of passage, which was called the Cow;
they then presently dispaired, because of a Prophecy, that five sons of a
certain Earl should be carried into England in the belly of a Cow, and never
after return: and indeed it fell out true, for through the malice of their
adversaries, (exasperating the King against them and saying, there would never
be quietness in Ireland, as long as any of the Geraldines were left alive,) they
were all put to death: one only son of the family remained, a youth of
thirteen years of age, who though at that time sick of the smal-pox, yet made
shift to save himself by flight; fled first into France, and frighted from
thence, afterward into Flanders, and driven from thence, at last into Italy,
where pr^oected by Regin^ld Poole, ar that time made Cardinal, by Pope Iulie
the third, he was afterward, by this meane^, restored to his dignity and his
patrimony.

This year Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp the Queens brother, was created
Earl of Hartford, and Sir William Fitz-VVilliams Lord Admiral, was created
Earl of Southamton, Master Paulet was made Vice Treasurer, Sir John Russell was
made Controller of the Kings House, and diverse Gentlemen were made Knights.

In February diverse Roodes were taken down by the Kings commandment, as the
Roode of Boxeley, called the Rood of grace, which was made with vices to move
the eyes and lips, also the Rood called Saint Savior at Bermondsey Abbey in
Southwarke, and diverse others: in May a Friar Observant, called Friar Forest,
who had taken the oath of Supremacy himself, yet privately persuaded others,
that the King was not supreme head of the Church; was thereupon examined, and
for his defense said, that he took the oath with his outward man, but his
inward man never consented to it; but this answer served not his turn from
being condemned; and on a pair of Gallows prepared for him, in Smith^^eld, he
was hanged by the middle, and arme-holes, all quick, and under the Gallows was
made a fire wherewith he was consumed: a little before his execution, a huge
great Image was brought to the Gallows, fetched out of Wales, which the
Welch-men had in great reverence, called Darvell Gatheren, of which there went
a Prophecy, that thi^ Image should set a whole Forest on fire, which was
thought to take effect, in ^erring this Friar Forest on fire, and consuming
him to nothing.

In September, by the special motion of the Lord Cromwell, all the notable
Images, unto which were made any special Pilgrimages and offerings, were taken
down and burnt; as the Images of Walsingham, Ipswic^, Worcester, the Lady of
VVilsdon, with many other, and forthwith by means of the said Cromwell all the
orders of Friars and Nuns, with theirs Cloisters and Houses were suppressed
and put down: also the shrines of counterfeit Saints; amongst others, the
shrine of Thomas Becket in the Priory of Christ-church was taken to the Kings
use, and his bones, scull and all which was there found, with a piece ^roken
out by the wound of his death, were all burnt in the same Church by command of
the Lord Cromwell: and the one and twentieth of October, the Church of Thomas
Becket in London, called the Hospital of Saint Thomas of Acres was suppressed:
the sixteenth of November the Blackfriars in London was suppressed; the next
day the VVhite-friers, the Gray-friers, and the Monks of the Charter House,
and so all the other immediately after, (...) three Abbots resisted, the Abbot
of Colechester, the Abbo^ of Reding, and the Abbot of Glastenbury, who
therefore were all taken and executed. The four and twentieth of November the
Bishop of Rochester Preached at Pauls-crosse, and there showed the blood of
Hales, affirming it to be no blood, but honey clarified and colored with
sa^^ron, as it had been evidently proved before the King and Council. The
number of Monasteries suppressed, were six hundred forty five, besides
fourscore and ten Colleges, one hundred and ten Hospitals, and of Chantries
and free Chapels two thousand three hundred seventy four. But now to make
amends for the suppressing of so many Monasteries, the King instituted certain
new Bishoprics, as at Westminster Oxford, Peterborough, Bristow, Chester and
Gloucester; and assigned certain Canons and Prebends to each of them.

The third of November Henry Courtney Marquess of Exceter, and Earl of
Devonshire, Henry Poole Lord Montacute, Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington, Knight
of the Garter, and Master of the Kings Horse, and Sir Edward Nevill, brother to
the Lord of Aburgeiney, were sent to the Tower, being accused by Sir Geoffry
Poole, the Lord Montacutes brother, of high treason; the^ were indi^ed for
devising to promote and advance one Reinold Poole to the Crown, and put down
King Henry. This Poole was a near kinsman of the Kings (being the son of the
Lady Margaret Countess of Salisbury, daughter and heir to George Duke of
Clarence) he had been brought up by the King in learning, and made Deane of
Excetur; but being sent after, to learn experience by travail, he grew so
great a friend of the Popes, that he became an enemy to King Henry, and for his
enmity to the King, was by Pope Julius the third made Cardinal; for this man's
cause, the Lords aforesaid being condemned, were all executed, the Lord
Marquis, the Lord Montacute, and Sir Edward Ne^ill, beheaded on the Tower Hill,
the ninth of January, Sir Nicholas Carew the third of March, two Priests
condemned with them were hanged at Tyburn, Sir Ieoffry Poole though condemned
also yet had his pardon.

About thi^ time one Nicholson alias Lambert, being accused for denying the
Real presence in the Sacrament, appealed to the King, and the King was content
to hear him; whereupon a Thron^ was set up in the Hall of the Kings Palace at
Westminster, for the King to si^: and when the Bishops had urged their
arguments, and could not prevail, then the King took him in hand, hoping
perhaps to have the honor of con^erting an Heretic, when the Bishops could
not do it, and withal promised him pardon if he would recant; but all would
not do, Nicholso^ remained obstin^te, the King mist his honor, the delinquent
mist his pardon; and shortly after was drawn to Smithfield and there burnt.

About this time King Henry being informed that the Pope, by instigation of
Cardinal Poole, had earnestly moved diverse great Princes to invade England; He
as a provident Prince, endea^oured a^ ^arn^stly to provide ^or defense; and to
that end, rode himself to the S^a-coast^ (...) them fortifi^^, and in needful
places Bulwarks to be erected: He c^used hi^ Na^^e^^ be rigged, and to be in
readiness at any short warning: he c^^sed Musters ^^ be raken in all shee^es;
and lists of all, able men in every Count^, in L^^^don specially; where Sir
William Forman the ^hen M^jor, ^^^^ified the number of fifteen thousand; not
that they were (...), but that so many were ready prepared; and these on the
eight of May, the King himself saw Mustered in James Park; where the Citizens
^^^ove in such sort to exceed each other in bravary of arms, and forwardness
of service, a^ if the City had bin a Camp, and they not men of the gown^, but
all professed Soldiers; which they performed to their great cost, but greater
comend^^ion.

It was now the one and thirtieth year of King Henri^s reign, and the nine
and fortieth of his age; when having continued a widdower two year, he began
to think of marrying again; and be needed not be a sui^our for a wife, for
he was sued unto take one. The Emperor solicited him to marry the Duchess
of Milan; but to marry her he must first obtain a License from the Pope, and
King Henry was resolved rather to have no wife, then to have any more to do
with the Pope. Then the Duke of Cleve made suit unto him, to marry the Lady
Anne hi^ Sister, and he was a Protestant Prince; and so, though differing in
points of Doctrine, yet in the maine Point of excluding ^he Pope, both of one
min^e. Many about the King were forward for thi^ Ma^ch, but the Lord Cro^well
specially; and indeed it concerned him more then any other, that the King
should take a Protestant wife, seeing (...) actions h^d been such as none but
^ Protestant Queen would ever like; and if the Queen should not like them;
the King, though done by his leave, would ^ot like them long. Hereupon such
means was used, that Emb^ssa^ours came from the Duke of Cleve to conclude the
March; and the^, the elev^nth of December, the Lady her self in great state
was brought, first to Callice, and then over to Dover; and being come to
Rochester, the King secretly came to see her, afterward she was conducted to
London, me^ by the way in several places, by all the great Lords and Ladies of
the Kingdom. The third of January she was received into London by Sir William
Hollice, then Lord Major, with Oration^, Pageants, an^ all complements of
Sta^e, the greatest that ever had been seen. On Twelfth day the Marriage was
^olemnized, the Archbishop of Canterbury did the office, the Earl of
Oversteine, a German Lord ga^e her. In April following the Lord Cromwell, as
though he had won the Kings heart for ever by making this march, was made Earl
of Essex; for in March before, Henry Rourchie^ Earl of Essex^ and the
ancientest Earl of England, had broken his neck by seeking to break a young
Horse, leaving only one Daughter, and the dying without issue, the Earldome
came to the Family of Devereux, which yet enjoyed not the honor, till
afterward in Queen Elizabeth's time, and then made but not restored.

The ninth of March, the King created Sir William Paulet Treasurour of his
House, Lord Saint John, Sir John Russell Controlour, Lord Russell, and shortly
after Sir William Par was created Lord Par. The eight and twentieth of April
began a Parliament at Westminster, in the which Margaret Countess of
Salisbury, Gertrude wife to the Marquess of Exceter, Reynold Poole Cardinal,
bro^her to the Lord Montacute, Sir Adrian Foskew, Thomas Dingley Knight of
Saint John's; and diverse others were attain^ed of high treason; of whom Foskew
and Dingley the tenth of July were beheaded, the Countess of Salisbury two
years after: and in this Parliament the Act of the six Articles was
established, and Sir Nicholas Hare was restored to his place of Speaker in the
Parliament.

It was now five months after the Kings marriage with the Lady Anne of Cleve;
and though the King at the first sight of the Lady, did not like her person;
yet, whether as respecting the honor of Ladies, he would not disgrace her at
the first meeting; or whether he meant to try how time might work him to a
better liking; or indeed, that he would not give distaste to the German Princes
at that time, for sole ends he had a working, he dissembled the matter, and all
things went on in a show of contentment on all hands. But for all these shows;
the crafty Bishop of London Stephen Gardener, finding how the world went with
the Kings affection toward his Queen; and for her sake with Cromwell; to
neither of whom he was greatly affected (not to the Queen, as misliking her
religion; not to Cromwell, as envying his greatness;) he so wrought upon the
Kings inclination; what by suggesting, and what by aggravating, that the Lord
Cromwell the ninth of July, sitting in the Council Chamber, was suddenly
apprehended and committed to the Tower; and the ninteenth of the same month
was attainted by Parliament, and never came to his Answer; by a Law, which (as
some reported) he himself had caused to be made; and the eight and twentieth
of July was beheaded on the Tower Hill; for crimes (as appears in Record) of
Heresy and Treason. This Lord Cromwell was borne at P^tney, a Village in
Surrey near the Thames side; son to a Smith, after whose decease, his Mother
was married to a Sheereman; for the pregnancy of his wit he was first
entertained by Cardinal Woolsey, and by him employed in many great affairs;
the Cardinal falling, the King took him into his service; and finding his
great abilities, first advanced him for his worth, and then for his pleasure
overthrew him. But the greatest part of Stephen Gardiners practice had been
done before; for at Midsomer before, the King caused the Queen to remove to
Richmond, as for her health and pleasure; and and in the time of her absence,
on the sixth of July, sent certain Lords to the Lower House of Parliament, who
there declared certain causes, for which the Kings marriage with the Lady Anne
of Cleve, was not to be counted lawful; and so carried the matter, that the
Convocation clearly determined, the King might marry any other; and so might
she. Being thus Divorced; it was further Enacted, she should no more be called
Queen, but the Lady Anne of Cleve. The fault for which this Divorce was
decreed, is not expressly delivered^ some say, a precontract of the said Lady
with a Lord of Germany was pretended; but it seems to have bin for some
womanish defect in her body; as she spared not to a^firme that she had never
bin carnally known by the King in all the time of their lying together: and as
it is said, when her Ladies, one time said unto her, that they looked now every
day to hear of her great belly; she should answer, they might look long enough,
unless, saying, how do thou sweerest, God morrow sweetheart, and suc^ like
words, could make a great belly; for (said she) more then this, there never
passed between the King and me. How ever it was, she willingly submitted to the
Decree, whether out of fear, or perhaps as little liking the King as the King
did her; and afterward led a private life here in England, well respected of the
King, and dying sixteen years after, in the fourth year of Quee^ Mary, was
buried at Westminster.

About this time Leonard Gray Deputy of Ireland, was on the Tower Hill
beheaded, for suffering his Nephew Gerald Fitz-Garret to escape, who had been
declared an enemy to the state, and then also was Thomas Fines Lord Dacres, a
young m^n of four and twenty years of age, hanged at Tyburne, ^or kiling a
mean peson upon a sudden affray; also the fourth of A^gust, Thomas Epson a
Monk of Westminster, for denying to take his oath, to be true to the King, had
his Monks garment plucked from his back, the last Monk that was seen in such
habit in England till Queen Maryes days.

The sixth of July in the two and thirtieth year of his Reign, King Henry had
been divorc^d from the Lady Anne of Cleve, and now the eighth of August
following, the Lady Katherine Howard, Niece to the Duke of Norfolk and
daughter to the Lord Edward Howard was showed openly as Queen at Hampton Court.

On the tenth of June the year following, Sir Edmund Knevet of Norfolk,
Knight, was arraigned before the Officers of the Green-cloath, for striking one
Master Clear of Norfolk, within the Tennis-court of the Kings House^ being
found guilty, he had judgment to loose his Right hand, and to forfeite all his
lands and goods; whereupon there was called to do execution, first, the
Sergeant Surgion, with his Instruments pertaining to his office, then the
Sergeant of the Wood-yard, with a mallet and a block to lay the hand upon, then
the Kings Master-cooke with the knife ^o cut off the hand, then the Sergeant of
the larder to set the knife right on the joint, then the Sergeant Farrier with
searing^irons to sear the veins, then the Sergeant of the ^oultry with a
Cock, which cock, should have his head smitten off upon the same block, and
with the same knife; then the Yeoman of the Chandry with seare-cloaths, then
the Yeoman of the Scullery, with a pan of fire to hear the irons, a chafer of
water to cool the ends of the irons, and two forms for all Officers to set
their stuff on, then the Sergeant of the Cellar with wine, Ale and Beer, then
the Sergeant of the Ewry, with Basin, Ewre, and towels: all things being thus
prepared Sir William Pickering Knight Marshall, was commanded to bring in his
prisoner, Sir Edmund Knevet, to whom the chief Justice declared his offense,
which the said Knevet confessed, and humbly submitted himself to the Kings
mercy, only he desired, that the King would spare his Right hand and take his
left, because (said he) if my right hand be spared, I may live to do the King
good service: of whose submission, and reason of his suite, when the King
was informed, he granted him to loose neither of his hands, and pardoned him
also of his lands and goods.

The summer of his three and thirtieth yeer^ King Henry with his Queen
Katherine, made a progress into the North-parts, and ret^rning at Alhallantide
to Hampton Court he was there informed, of the Queens dessolute life first
before her marriage with one Francis Deerham, a Gentleman of N^rfolke, whom
employed afterward in Ireland; she had lately again at Pomfret received into
her service, and now since her marriage with one Thomas Colepepper, of the Kings
Privy-chamber; whereupon the thirteenth of November, Sir Thomas VVriothsley
Knight secretary to the King, was sent to the Queen at Hampton Court, to charge
he^ with these crimes, and discharging her household, to cause her to be
convayed to Sion, there to remain, till the Kings pleasure should be further
known: the deli^quents being examined, Deerham confessed, that before the
King^ marriage with the Lady Katherine, there had been a pre-contract between
himself and her; but when he once understood of the Kings liking toward her,
he then waved and consealed it for her preforment: so the first of December,
the^ Gentlemen being arraigned at the Guild Hall, they confessed the
Indictment, a^^ had Judgment to die, as in cases of treason: the tenth of
December, they we^e drawn from the Tower to Tyburne, where Colepepper was
beheaded, and Deerham was hanged and dismembered; Colepeppers body was buried in
Sepulchers Church in London, but both their heads were set on London Bridge:
the two and twentieth of December, there were arraigned at the King's Bench, the
Lord William Howard and the Lady Margaret his wife, Katherin Tilney and Alice
Restwold Gentlewomen, Ioane Bulmer, wife to Anthony Bulmer Gentliman, Anne
Howard wife to Henry Howard Esquire, and brother to the Queen, with diverse
others, who were all condemned for misprision of treason, for concealing the
Queens misdemeanor, and adjudged to forfeit all their lands and goods during
life, and to remain in perpetual prison. The sixteenth of January the
Parliament began at Westminster, where the Lords and Commons p^^itioned the
King, that he wo^ld not vex himself with the Queens offense, and that both
she and the Lady Rochford might be attainted by Parliament; and that to avoid
protracting of time, he would give his royal assent un^o it, under the great
Seal, without staying for the end of the Parliament. Also, that Derham and
Colepepper having been attained before by the Common Law, might be attainted
likewise by Parliament: all which was assented to by the King; and after, on
the thirteenth of February, the Queen and the Lady Roch^ord were beheaded on
the-greene within the Tower, where they confessed their offenses, and dyed
penitently: yet something to take off the offenses of this Queen; it is
certainly said, that after her condemnation, she protested to Doctor White
Bishop of Winchester, her last Confessor, that as for the Act for which she
was condemned, she took God and his holy Angels to witness, upon her souls
salvation, that she died guiltless.

Before this, on the three and twentieth of January, King Henry was proclaimed
King of Ireland; where as before this ^ime, the Kings of England were only
entitled Lords of Ireland: and this title was given him both by the Parliament
here, and by the Parliament holden in Ireland, before Sir Anthony Seintleger
knight, the Kings Deputy there.

About this time Arthur Plantagenet Visconnt Lisle, base son to King Edward
tha fourth; having been imprisoned upon suspicion of a practice, for betraying
of Callice to the French, whilst he was the Kings Lieutenant there, was now
found to be innocent of the Fact: and thereupon, the King to make him some
reparation for his disgrace, sent him a Ring and a very gracious message, by
Sir Thomas VVriothsley his Secretary; whereat the said Viscount took so great
joy, that the night following, of that very joy he died: so deadly a thing is
any passion, even joy it self, if it be extreme. After his death Sir John
Dudley, his wives Son, was crea^ed Viscount Lisle. This Sir John Dudley was
son to Edmund Dudley, beheaded in the first year of this Kings reign, and
was made Viscount Lisle in right of his Mother.

During this Parliament, one George Ferrers Gentleman, servant to the King and
Burgess for the town of Plimmouth in Devonshire, in going to the Parliament
House, was arrested in London by a Process out of the Kings Bench, for a Debt
wherein he was late before condemned, as surety for one Welden, at the suit of
one White; which arrest being signified to Sir Thomas Moyle knight, ^peaker
then of the Parliament, and to the Knights and Burgesses there; order was
taken, that the Sergeant of the Parliament, called Saint John, should be sent
to the Counter in Bredstreet (whither the said Ferrers was carried) and there
demand to have him delivered: but the Officers of the Counter not only refused
to deliver him, but gave the Sergeant such language, that they fell at last to
an affray; at which time the Sheriffs coming, they also took their Officers
part; so as the Sergeant was feign to return without the prisoner; which being
signified to the Speaker and the Burgesses, they took the matter in so ill
part, that they would sit ^o more without their Burgess; and thereupon rising
up, repaired to the Upper House, where the whole Case was declared by the
Speaker, before Sir Thomas Audeley Lord Chancellor, and the Lords and Judges
there assembled: who judgeing the contempt to be very great, referred the
punishment thereof to the House of Commons it self: whereupon returning to
their places againe^ upon new debate of the Case, they took order that t^eir
Serje^nt should once more rep^ire to the Sheriff of London, and demand ^^e
prisoner, wit^out carryi^g any Writ or Warrant for the matter. It is tru^^ the
Lord Chancellor offered to grant a Writ, but the House of Common^ refused it;
being of a cle^re opinion, that all Commandments from the nether House were to
be executed by their Sergeant without Writ, only by showing his Mace, which is
his Warrant: but before the Sergeants return into London, the Sheriffs better
advised, became more mild, and upon the second demand, delivered the prisoner
without any denial, but then the Sergeant had further in charge, to command
the Sheriffs and Clerks of the Counter, to appear personally the next morning
before the House of Commons: where appearing, they were charged by the Speaker,
with their contempt, and compelled to make immediate answer, without being
admit^ed ^o any counsel, Sir Roger Chomley Recorder of London, offered to
speak in the cause, but was not suffered, nor any other but the p^rties
themselves: in conclusion, the Sheriffs and White who had caused the Arrest,
were committed to the Tower, the Officer that did the Arrest, with four other
Officers to Newgate; but after two or three days, upon the ^umble sui^e of the
Major, were set at liberty; and because the said Ferrers being in execution
upon a condemnation of debt, and set at large by privilege of Parlaiment, was
not by law to be brought again into execution; and so the creditour without
remedy for his debt, against him as his princip^ll debtour; therefore after
long debate, by the space of nine or ten days together, they at last resolved
to make an Act of purpose, to revive the execution of the said debt, against
Welden who was principal debtour, and to discharge Ferrers that was but
surer^: wherein notwithstanding, the house was divided, and the Act passed but
by fourteen voices: the King being adver^ised of this proceeding, called before
him the Lord Chancelour and the ^udges, the Speaker and diverse of the lower
House, to whom he decla^ed his Opinion to this effect: first commending their
wi^dome, in maintaining the privileges of t^eir house, (which he would ^o^
have to be infringed in any point) he alleged, that ^e being head of the
Parliament, and attending in his own person upon the business t^ereof, ought
in reason, to have Privilege for himself and all his servants attending upon
him, so as if the said Ferrers had been no Burgess, but only hi^ servant; yet
in that respect, he was to have the privilege as well as any other: for I
understand (says he) that you, not only for your own persons, but also for
your necess^ry servants, even to your Cooks and Hors-keepers enjoy the some
p^i^iledge^ i^ so much, as my Lord Chancelour here present, has informed u^,
that whilst he was Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of the Temple was
Arrested i^ London, and in execution upon a statute of the S^aple, and for so
much, as the said Cook during all the Parliament served the Spe^ker in that
office; he was taken out of execution by privilege of Parliament; the
Prerogative of which Court, (as our learned Counsel informs us) is so
great, that all Acts and processes coming ou^ of any other Court, must for the
time ce^se and give place to it: and touching the party himself, though for
his presumption he was worthy to have lost his debt, yet I commend your Equity,
that have restored him to hi^ debt against him that was the principal: when
the King had said this, Sir Edward Mountacute Lord chief Justice, rose up, and
confirmed by many reasons, all that the King had said, as likewise did all the
other Lord, none speaking any thing to the contrary.

It was now the four and thirtieth year of King Henry's Reign, when in May
he took a loan of money of all such as were valued at fifty pounds and upward^
in the Subsidy book, the Lord Privy-seale, the Bishop of Winchester, Sir John
Baker, and Sir Thomas Wriothsley were commissioners, that the loan in London,
who so handled the matter, that of some chief Citizens they obtained a thousand
ma^kes in pressed to the Kings use: for which Privy Seals were delivered to
repay it again within two years.

At this time, were many complaints made by the ^^gli^h, against the Scots,
partly for receiving and maintaining diverse English Reb^ls, (...) into
Scotland, and partly for invading ^he Engli^h Borders; but still when the King
of Englan^ was preparing to oppose them, the Scottish King would send
Ambassadors to tre^t of reconcilement, till at last, after m^n^ delusory
prankes of the Scots; the King of England, no longer ^nduri^g such abuses, sent
the Duke of Norfolk his Leivtena^^ General, accompanied with the Earls of
Shrewsbury, Darby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hart^o^d, A^^us, Rutland, the Lords of
the North parts, Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Kings horse, and Sir John
Gage Controller of the King^ House, with others, to the number of twenty
thousand men; who on the one and twentieth of Oc^ober entered Scotland, where
staying but eig^t daye^ only he burnt above eighteen Towne^, Abbeys, and
Castles, and then without ^aving bat^aile offered, for want of victuals
returned to Barwick; ^^ soon as ^e was returned, comes abro^d the King of
Scots, raises a power of fifteen thous^nd men, and using great threatenings
what he would do, invaded the west Borders, but the edge of his threatening was
soon taken off, for the bastard Da^^es, with Jack of Musgrave setting upon them
with only an hundred Light^horse, and Sir Thomas Wharton with three hundred,
put them to flight; upon a concei^, th^^ the Duke of Norfolk with all his Army
had been come i^to those part^; where were taken prisoner^ of the Scots, the
Earl of Cassill and Glenc^^ne, the Lord Maxwell Admir^ll of Scotland, the Lord
Flemming, the Lord So^erwell, the Lord Oli^ha^t, the Lord Gray, Sir Oliver
Sinclee^e, the Kings Minion, John Rosse Lord of Gragy, Robert Erskin son to
the Lord Erskin, Car Lord of Gredon, the Lord Maxwells two Brothers, John
Lesloy bastard son to the Earl of Rothus, George Hame Lord of Hemetton, with
diverse other men of account, to the number of above two hundred, and more then
eight hundred of meaner calling; so as some one English m^n, and some women
also, had three or four prisoner^ in their hands: at which over^hrow, the King
of Scots took such grief, that he fell into a burning Ague, and thereof died,
leaving behind him one only daughter; and here King Henry began to apprehend
a greater matter then the victory, for he and his Couns^ile conceived, that
^hi^ daughter, would be a fit match for his son Prince Edward, thereby to
make ^ perpetual union of the two Kingdoms; and to ^his purpose they
confer^ed with the Lord whom they had taken prisoners, who exceeding glad of
the proposition, and promising to further it by all the possible mean they
could, were ^hereupon s^t at liberty, and suffered ^o return home. Coming into
Scotland (...) acquainting the Earl of Arraine wi^h the motion, who was chosen
Gover^our of the young Queen and of the Realm; the matter with great liking
was entertained, and in Parliament of the three est^tes in Scotland, the
marriage was confirme^, and ^ peace between the two Re^lms, for ten yeer^ wa^
proclaimed, and Embass^dours sent into England, for sealing the conditions. But
Beton Archbishop of S^int Andrews being Cardinal, and at the Popes devotion,
and therefore an utter enemy to King Henry, so crossed the business that it
came to nothing, but ended in a war between the two Kingdoms; so as in March
the year following, the Lord Seymour Earl of Hartford, with an Army by Land
and Sir John Dudley Lord Lisle, with a Flee^e by Sea, me^ at New Castle, and
there joined together, for invading of Scotland; with the Earl of Hartford,
were the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lords Cobham, Clinton, Conyers, Stinton, the
Lord William Howard, with Knights and others, to the number of ten thousand,
with Sir John Dudley the Admiral, were two hundred s^ile of ships: on the
fourth of May, the whole Army was landed two miles from the Town of Lies, at
a place called Granther Crag; and there the Lord Lievtennant putting his men in
order, ma^ched toward the Town of Lies: the Lord Admiral led the foreward,
the Lievtennant the Battle, and the Earl of Shrewsbury the Rearward. Before
they came to the Town of Lies, the Cardinal with six hundred ^orse, besides
foot, lay in the way to impeach their passage; but they were so assailed by
the, Harqu^butars, that they were glad to fly, and the first man that fled was
the Cardinal himself, and then the Earls of Huntley, Murrey and Bothwel;
hereupon the English made forward to Lies, and entered it without any great
resistance: the sixth of May they marched toward Edenbrough, and as they
approached the Town, the provost with some of the Burgers, came and offered
the keys of the Towen, to the Lord Lievtennant, upon condition they might
depart with bag and baggage, and the Town to be preserved from fire; but the
Lord Livetennant told them, their falsehood had been such, as deserved ^o
fa^our, and therefore unless they would deliver the Town absolutely without
any condition, he would pro^eed in his enterprise, and burn the Town. Here
we may see, what it is to make men desperate, for to this the Provest
answered, they were better then to stand upon defense, and so indeed they did,
and made the English glad to retire, for the Castle shot so fiercely upon them,
that having burnt only a part of the Town, they returned to Lies; but whilst
they lay there, they so wasted the Country, that within seven mile^ every way
of Edenbrough, there was not a Town, nor Village, nor house that was left
unburnt: at Lies, the eleveth day of May, the Lord General made Knights, the
Lord Clinton, the Lord Conyers, Sir William Wroughton, Sir Thomas Holecraft,
Sir Edward Dorrell, Sir Francis Hothome, and other^, to the number of at least
threescore: in Lies Haven, they seized upon all the Scottish Ships; whereof
two were of notable fairness, the one called the Salamander, given by the
French King, at the marriage of his daughter into Scotland, the other called the
Unicorne, made by the late Scottish King; the ballast of which two ships was
Cannon-shot, whereof they found in the Town, to the number of fourscore
thousand. On the fiftee^th of May, their Army and their Flee^ departed from
Lies, both in one hour, having first set the Town on fire and burned it to
the ground: from Lies the English Army marched to Seaton, from thence to
Haddington, from thence to Dunbar, from thence to Ranton, all which Towns and
Castles with diverse others they burnt and utterly defaced; and on the
eighteenth of May came to Barwick, not having lost in all the journey above
fourteen men^

In the mean time, in King Henry's five and thirtieth year, on Trinity sunday
a new league was entered into and sworn, between the King and the Emperor at
Hampton Court, to be both offensive and defensive.

In this year, Proclamation was made, whereby the people were licensed to eat
white meats in Le^t, but straightly forbidden the eating of flesh; whereupon
shortly after, the Earl of Surrey with diverse other Lords and Knights, were
imprisoned for eating of flesh contrary to the proclamation.

The third of June this year, there came ou^ of Ireland three Lord, of whom
Obrine was here created Earl of Thonmo^d, (which ho^our his posterity injoyeth
to this day) Mack William a Bary, was created Ea^le of Clanrinckford, and Mack
Gilparick, was made Barron of Ebranky.

King Henry had already had five wives all of them Maids, and no good luck
with any of them, he will now therefore try his fortune with a Widow, and
thereupon the twelveth of June, in the five and thirtieth year of his Reign
he took to wife the Lady Katherine Par, widow of the Lord Latimer late
deceased, who was then proclaimed Queen; but how lucky would this ma^ch have
proved, if the King had longer lived, God knows, seeing in the short time of
three years they lived together, it was no small danger she escaped, which
though it hapenned not till a year or ^wo after this time, yet will not unfitly
be spoken of in this place, that so her story may come together; this Queen as
being an ^arnest Protestant, had many great adversaries, by whom she was
accused to the King, to have Heretical books found in her closet; and this was
so agravated against her, that they prevailed with the King, to sign a warrant
to commit her to the Tower, with a purpose to have her burnt for Heresy; this
warrant was delivered to Wriothsley Lord Chancelour, and he by chance, or
rather indeed by Gods providence, letting it fall from him, it was taken up and
carried to the Queen; who having read it, went soon after to visit the King, at
that time keeping his chamber, by reason of a sore leg; being come to the King,
he presently fell into talk with her, about some points of Religion, demanding
her resolution therein; but she knowing that his nature was not to be crossed,
specially considering the case she was in, made him answer, that she was a
woman accompanied with many imperfections, but his Majesty was wise and
judicious, of whom she must learn as of her Lord and Head; not so by Saint
Mary (said the King) for you are a Doctor Kate to instruct us, and not to be
instructed by us, as often we have seen heretofore: indeed Sir (said she) if
your Majesty have so conceived, I have been mistaken, for if heretofore I have
held talk with you touching Religion, it has bin to learn of your Majesty
some point, whereof I stood in doubt, and sometimes that with my talk, I might
make you forget your present infirmity: and is it even so Sweet heart (quoth
the King) why then we are friends, and so kissing her, gave her leave to
depart. But soon after, the day was appointed by the Kings warrant, for
apprehending her; on which day, the King being disposed to walk i^ the Garden,
had the Queen with him, when suddenly the Lord Chancelour with forty of the
Guard^ come into the Garden, with a purpose to apprehend her: when as soon as
the King saw, he stepped to him, and calling him knave and fool, bid him avaunt
out of his presence: the Queen seeing the King so angry with him, began to
entreat for him, to whom the King said; ah poor soul, thou little know
what it is he came about, of my word sweet heart, he has bin to thee a very
knave; and thus by God^ providen^^ was this Queen preserved, who else had
tasted of as bitter a c^p, as any of his former wives had done.

About this time King Henry and the Emperor sent Garter and Toyson d^or, kings
at Arms, to demand performance of certain Articles of the French King: which
if he denied, they were then commanded to defy him: but the French King would
not suffer them to come within his land, and so they returned: whereupon King
Henry caused the s^id demand^ to be declared to the French Ambassador at
Westminster; and in July sent over six thousand men, under the leading of Sir
John Walloppe accompanied with diverse Knights and Gentlemen, Sir Thomas Seymour
was Marshal of the Army, Sir Robert Bows Treasuror, Sir Richard Cronwal
Captain of the horse, and Sir George Carew his Lieutenant. There were likewise
Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir John Rainsford, Sir John St. John, and Sir John
Gascoigne Knights, that were Captains of the foot. Their Commission was to join
with the Emperor, and together to m^ke war upon France. The third of August
open wa^ was proclaimed in London, between the Emperor and the King of England
on the one part, and the F^e^ch King on the other, as mortal enemy to them
both; and to all other christian Princes besides, as he that had confederated
himself with the Turk. Sir John Wallop marching forth of Callice with his
Army, joined with ^^e Emperors Forces, who together went and besieged Landersey
a Town lately fortified by the French, lying within the borders of the Emperors
dominions: to raise this siege, the French King had raised a mighty army; with
which he came on, as if he meant to give the Emperor battle; and thereupon the
Emperor raising his siedge, with a purpose to encounter him, the French King
took the opportunity to put men and victuals into the town, which was the
thing he intended: and having done this, the night following departed with his
army; and then the Emperor seeing him gone, and finding the winter coming on,
and no hope of sudden ge^ting the Town, being now newly supplied, he also broke
up his Army, and returned home.

This year, the sunday before Christmas, the Lord William Parre, brother to the
Queen, who had married the daughter and heir of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex,
was at Hampton Court created Earl of Essex, and Sir William Parre knight uncle
to them both, was made Lord Parre of Horton and Lord Chamberlin to the Queen;
and on New-yeers-day Sir Thomas Wriothsley, the Kings Secretary, was made Lord
Wriothsley of Tichfield.

In June this year, Matthew Earl of Lenox fled out of Scotland and came into
England, whom King Henry received kindly, and gave him in marriage the Lady
Margaret his Sisters daughter, by whom he had Henry, Father of our late King
James of blessed memory.

Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor, being lately dead, Thomas Lord Wriothsley
succeeded him in the place; and now was an Army levied to go for France; the
Duke of Norfolk and the Lord Privy Seal, accompanied with the Earl of Surrey
the Dukes Son, the Lord Gray of Wilton, the Lord Ferrers of C^artley and his
Son Sir Robert Devereux, Sir Thomas Chainey Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
the Lord Montjoy, Sir Francis Byran, Sir Thomas Poynings Captain of Guysnes,
with many other Knights and Gentlemen, about Whitsontide passed over to
Callice; and marching toward Muttrel, joined with the Emperors forces, under
the leading of the Count de Buren; which two Armies laid siedge to Muttrel,
whereof Monsseur de Bies, one of the Martials of France was Captain, but being
then at Bulloign, and hearing of the siedg of Muttrel, he left Bulloigne and
with his forces came thither, which was the thing that was desired, to draw him
from Bnlloign; and thereupon was the Duke of Suffolk appointed to pass over
with the Kings army, accompanied with the Earl of Arundell. Marshall of the
Field, the Lord St. John, the Bishop of Winchester, Sir John Gage Controlor of
the Kings house, Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Kings horse, with diverse
others; who the ninteenth of July came and encamped before Bulloigne; the four
and twentieth of July the King in person, accompanied with diverse of the
Nobility, came to Callice; and the six and twentieth encamped before Bulloign
on the north side; many batteries and assaults were made, so long, till at last
the Town upon composition yielded, and the Duke of Suffolk entered and took
possession, suffering six thousand French, as was agreed, with bag and baggage
to depart. The eight of September King Henry entered the town himself, and then
leaving the Lord Lisle Lord Admiral, his Deputy there, he returned into
England, landing at Dover the first of O^tober. Many enterprises after this
were made by the Dolphin of France, and by Monsieur de Bies for recovery of
Bulloigne, but they were still repulsed, and the English kept the town in
spite of all they could do; although at one time there came an Army of
eighteen thousand foot, at another time an Army, wherein were reckoned twelve
thousand Lance-knights, twelve thousand French footmen, six thousand
Italians, four thousand of Legionarie soldiers of France, a thousand men of
Arms, besides eight thousand light Horse; great Forces certainly to come and
do nothing.

Whilst these things were doing about Bulloign, the ships of the west Country
and other places wa^ted abroad on the Seas, and took above three hundred French
ships; so that the Gray-friers Church in London was laid full of wine, the
Austin-friers and Blackfriars full of herrings and other fish, which should
have bin convayed in France.

About this time the King demanded a Benevolence of his Subjects, toward his
wars in France and Scotland, to which purpose, the Lord Chancelour, the Duke of
Suffolk, and other of the Kings Counsel sat at Baynards Castle, where they
first caled before them the Major and Aldermen, and because Richard Read
Alderman, would not agree to pay as they set him, he was commanded to serve the
King in his wars in Scotland, which the obstinate man rather choose to do,
then he would pay the rate he was required, but being there, he was taken
prisoner by the Scots, to his far greater damage, then if he had agreed to the
Benevolence required. For at this time, Sir Ralph Evers Lord Warden of the
Marches, after many fortunate Roades into Scotland, assembled four thousand
men, and entering Scotland now again, was encountered by the Earl of Arraigne by
whom he and the Lord Oagle, and many other Gentlemen were slain, and diverse
were taken prisoners, of whom Alderman Read was one.

It was now the seven and thirtieth year of King Henry's Reign, when on Saint
Georges day Sir Th^mas Wriothsley Lord-Chancelour, was made Knight of the
Garter, also Trinity Term was adjourned, by reason of the wars but the
Exchequer and the Court of the Te^thes were open.

At this time, the English fleet went before New Haven, but being there
encountered by a far greater fleet of French, they ret^rned; with whose
retreat, the French Admiral emboldned, came upon the Coast of Sussex, where
he landed Soldiers, but upon firing of the Beacons was driven back, after
which he landed two thousand men in the Isle of Wight, but was there repelled,
though reported to have in his ships threescore thousand men.

In Angust this year, died the valiant Captain, the Lord Poynings, the Kings
Lieutenant of his Town of Bulloigne, and the same month also, died at
Guildford, the noble Duke of Suffolk, Charles Brandon, Lord great Master of
the Kings House, whose Body was honorably buried at Windsore at the Kings cost.

About this time, the Scots having received aid out of France, approached the
English Borders, but durst attempt nothing, whereupon the Earl of Hertford,
Lieutenant of the North parts, raising an army of twelve thousand men, English
and strangers, entered Scotland and burnt a great part of Mers and Tividale, as
Kelsay Abbey and the Town, the Abbeys of Medrosse, Driborne, and Yedworth,
with a hundred Towns and Villages more; when on the sixteenth of September, an
Army of Scots and French attempted to enter into England on the East borders,
but in a straight were set upon by the English, who slew and took of them to
the number of seven score, amongst whom was the Lord Humes son, and a
principal French Captain; in another road, which they made into the West
Borders, the Lord Maxwels son, and diverse other were taken, but then at
another time (such is the chance of war) five hundred English entering the West
Borders of Scotland were discomfited, and the greatest part of them either
taken or slain.

And now to revenge the presumptious attempts of the French upon the Isle of
Wight, the Lord Admiral with his fleet approached the Coasts of Normandy landed
six thousand men at Treport, burnt the Suburbs of that Town with the Abbey,
destoryed thirty ships there in the Haven, and then returned, not having lost
above fourteen persons in the whole voyage.

At this time the Earl of Hartford lying at Bulloigne, had in his Army above
fourscore thousand men, and many skirmishes passed between him and the French,
till at last, by mediation of the Emperor and diverse other Princes a meeting
was appointed to treat of a peace, between the two Kings of England and France;
hereupon there came to Guisnes for the King of England, the Earl of Hertford,
the Bishop of Winchester, Sir John Dudley Viscount Lisle, Baron of Mawpas and
high Admiral of England, Sir William Paget the Kings Secretary and Doctor
Nicholas Wootton Dean of Canterbury. For the French King, there came to Ard,
Claude Danebolt Admiral of France, the Bishop of Eureux, Monsieur Reymond
chief President of Roan, and the Secretary Bouchetell. Diverse times they met
betwixt Ard and Guisnes, and after long debating of matters, and diverse
breakings off^ at length, the seventh of June, a Peace was concluded, and
proclaimed in the City of London on Whitsunday the thirteenth of June, by sound
of trumpet; and the same day in like manner at Paris and Roan; the chief
Article of which Peace was this; that the French King paying to the King of
England eight hundred thousand Crowns, within the term of eight years,
should have Bulloigne again restored to him, which in the mean time should
remain in possession of the King of England, as a pledge for assurance of the
said money; and now for a full establishment of this Peace, the Viscount Lisle
Lord Admiral, with the Bishop of Duresme and diverse other Lords, were sent
into France to take oath of the French King and of the Dolphin; as likewise at
the same time, diverse Lords came from the French King to take oath of King
Henry; who by the way were met by the young Prince and many Lords, and conducted
to the King at Hampton Court.

In his seven and thirtieth year, the three and twentieth of November, a
Parliament began at VVestmins^er, wherein was granted to the King, a Subsidy
both of Spiritualty and Temporalty, and all Colleges, Chanteries and
Hospitalls were given to him to dispose of: the four and twentieth of December
the Parliament was prorogued, on which day the King coming to the Parliament
House, the Speaker made to him an Oration, which the Lord Chancelour was used
to answer, but at this time the King would answer himself, the effect whereof
was, that where Master Speaker had commended him for many excellent qualities
that were in him, he thanked him for it, not that he had them, but for putting
him in mind, how necessary it was, he should have them; then he thanked the
whole House for their Subsidy, and for giving him the Colleges and Chanteries,
which he promised to see bestowed, to the glory of God and good of the Realm;
lastly, he ackowledged their love to himself, but found fault with want of
love to one another; for what love, where there is not concord? and what
concord, when one calls another Heretic and Anabaptist, and he again
calls him Papist and Hipocrite: and this not only amongst those of the
Temporalty, but even the Clergy men themselves preach one against another,
inveigh one against another, without Charity or Discretion; some be so stiff
in their old mumpsimus, and others so curious in their new sumpsimus, that few
or none Preaches truly and sincerely the word of God; now therefore let this be
amended, fear and serve God, be in Charity amongst your selves, to the which I
as your supreme Head and Sovereign Lord, exhort and require you: and this
said, the Acts were openly read, to some he gave his Royal assent, and to
diverse assented not.

Whilst oath for the peace was thus taken by both Kings, Bulloigne remaining
still in King Henry's possession, Monsieur de Chatillon Captain of
Mont-pleasier began to make a new Bastillion at the very mouth of the Haven of
Bulloigne naming it Chatillous Garden: hereof the Lord Gray of Wilton as then
Deputy of Bulloigne advertised the King by Sir Thomas Palmour, requiring to
know his pleasure whither he should race it, as a thing very incommodious to
the Town, or let it stand; the King asked advice of his Counsel, who all
agreed, that the conditions of the peace ought in no wise to be infringed, and
therefore to let the Bastillian stand; whereupon the King caused his Secretary
the Lord Paget, to write a letter to the Lord Gray, to that purpose, but then
called Sir Thomas Palmour secretly to him, bidding him tell the Lord Gray, that
whatsoever he had written in his letter, yet with all speed possible, he should
race the fortification to the ground; Sir Thomas Palmour replying that a
message by word of mouth being contrary to his leter, would never be believed,
well (said the King) do you tell him as I bid you, and leave the doing it to his
choice; upon the coming back of Sir Thomas Palmour, the Lord Gray called a
counsel, showing them the King^ letter, and withal Sir Thomas Palmours
message, and then asked their Advise, what in this case he should do? who all
agreed without any question, that the letter was to be followed, and not the
message, to which the Lord Gray himself said nothing, but caused the message
to be wtitten verbatim from Sir Thomas Palmours mouth, and those of the
Counsel, to set their hands to it: this done, the night following he issued
forth with a company of Armed men and Pioners, and overthrew the fortification
to the ground, and then sent Sir Thomas Palmour with letters to the King, who
as soon as he saw him, asked aloud, what, will he do it or no? Sir Thomas
Palmour delivering his letter said, your Majesty shall know by these, but then
the King half angry, nay tell me (says he) will he do it or no? being then
told it was done, and the fortification clean raced, he turned to his Lords and
said, what say you my Lords to this, Chatillous Garden is raced to the ^loore;
whereto one presently answered, that he that had done it, was worthy to loose
his head, to which the King streightl^ replied, that he would rather lose a
dozen such heads as his was, that so J^dged, then one such servants as had done
it, and therewith commanded the Lord Grays pardon should presently be drawn,
the which he sent with letters of great thanks, and promise of reward; the
cause why the King took this course was this, lest if he written the racing of
the Fortification, in his letter it might have come t^ the French-mens
knowledge, before it could have been done, and so have been prevented, and by
this may be taken a scantling of King Henry's great Capacity.

It is now the eight and thirtieth year of his reign, when about Michaelmas
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Earl of Surrey his Son and heir, upon
certain surmises of treason, were committed to the Tower of London; and the
thirteenth of January, the King then lying at the point of death, the said
Earl was arraigned in the Guild Hall, before the Lord Major, the Lord
Chancellor, and other Lords there in Commission; the special matter
wherewith he was charged, was the bearing of certain Arms that were said to
belong to the King and to the Prince; though the Earl justified the bearing of
them, as belonging to diverse of his Ancestors; affirming withal, that he had
the opinion of Heralds therein: But this notwithstanding, being no Lord of the
Parliament, he was tried by a common Jurie, and by them was found guilty, and
thereupon had judgment of death; and the nineteenth of January was beheaded on
the Tower Hill. The Duke was attainted by Parliament and kept in prison, ^ill
in the first year of Queen Mary the Attaindour was reversed. The death of this
Earl might lay an imputation of cruelty upon King Henry, if a just jealousy
growing from the many circumstances of the Earls greatness, in the tender age
of his own Son did not excuse him.

Soon after the death of this Earl, the King himself died; having made his
last Will, in which he took order, that his Son Edward should succeed him in
the Crown, and he dying without issue, his daughter Mary, and she dying
without issue, his daughter Elizabeth; although another order of succession had
passed before by Act of Parliament. The Executors of his last Will were these
sixteen; Thomas Cranmor Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Wriothsley Lord
Chancellor, Sir William Pawlet Lord Saint John, and great Master of the
Household, Sir Edward Seymor Earl of Hartford and high Chamberlin of England,
Sir John Russell Lord Privy Seal, Sir John Dudley Viscount Lisle, Lord
Admirall^ Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Sir Anthony Brown Master of the
Horse, Sir Edmund Montacute, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir
Thomas Bromley one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir Edward North
Chancellor of the Augmentation, Sir William Paget Knight of the Order, Sir
Anthony Dennie, Sir William Herbert, Sir Edward Wootton Treasurour of Callice,
and Nicholas VVootton Deane of Canterbury and Yooke. To whom were adjoined as
assistance these twelve, Henry Fitz Allan Earl of Arundell, William Par Earl
of Essex, Sir Thomas Cheyney Treasurour of the Household, Sir John Gage
Controlour, Sir Anthony VVingfield Vice-chamberlaine, Sir William Peter
Principal Secretary, Sir Richard Rich, Sir John Baker of Sissingherst in Kent,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Thomas Seymour, Sir Richard
Southwell and Sir Edward Peckham. And it was not without need to leave a full
Council Table, considering in what terms he left the Kingdom when he died.
Abroad, in league with the Emperor, at Peace with the King of France; but
whether these were not personal only, and no longer binding then King Henry
lived, might be doubted; with the Scots at deadly send; with the Pope at utter
defiance; from both which coasts there could be expected but little fair
weather: at home, the frame of Religion extremely disioynted; and the Clergy
that should set it in frame, out of frame themselves: the minds of the people
extremely distracted; and the Nobility that should cyment them, scarce holding
themselves together: And in this stare was the Kingdom when King Henry the
eight dyed, in the year 1547. the fifty sixth of his life, and of his Reign
the eight and thirtieth.

Of his Taxations.
IN his fourth year, in a Parliament at Westminster, was granted to the King,
two Fifteens of the Temporalty, and two Tenths of the Clergy, and Head-money;
of every Duke ten mark, an Earl five pound, a Barron ^oure pound, a Knight
four marks, and every man valued at eight hundred pounds in goods, to pay
^oure marks, and so after that rate till him that was valued at forty
shillings, and he paid twelve pence, and every man and woman of fifteen years
and upward four pence. In his sixth year, a Parliament was holden, wherein
diverse subsidies were granted to the King, toward the charges of his wars in
France: in his fourteenth year, order was taken by the Cardinal, that the true
value of all men's substance might be known, and he would have had every man
swom, to tell what they were worth, and required a ^enth part thereof, toward
the Kings charges in his present wars, as the spiritualty had granted a fourth
part: this the Londoners thought very hard, and thereupon were excused for
taking oath, and were allowed to bring in their bills upon their honesties; but
when all was done, after much laboring by the Cardinal, the Clergy granted
one half of all their yearly Spiritual Revenues, for five years, and the
Temporalty two shillings in the pound, from twenty pounds upwards, and from
forty shillings to twenty pounds, of every twenty shillings twelve pence; and
under forty shillings, of every head of sixteen years and upwards four pence,
to be paid in every two years: in his sixteenth year, the Cardinal of his own
head, attempted by Commission, to draw the People to pay the sixth part of every
man's substance in plate or money; but this was generally opposed, and the
People in many Countries rise upon it, so as coming to the Kings knowledge, ^e
utterly disavowed it, and blamed the Cardinal exceedingly for attempting it.
In his four and twentieth year in a Parliament then holden, a fifteenth was
granted to the King, toward his charges of making fortifications against
Scotland. In his one and thir^ieth year, a Subsidy of two shillings in the
pound of lands, and twelve of goods, with four fifteenes were granted to the
King, toward his charges of making Bulwarks. In his five and thirtieth year, a
Subsidy was granted to be paid in three years, every Englishman being worth
in goods twenty shillings and upwards to five pounds, to pay four pence of
every pound, and from five pounds to ten pounds eight pence, from ten pounds to
twenty pound six pence^ from twenty pounds and upwards, of every pound two
shilings; strangers as well denizens as others, being inhabitants to pay double,
and for lands, every Englishman paid eight pence o^ the pound, from twenty
shillings to five pounds, and from five pounds to ten pounds sixteen pence, and
from ten pounds to twenty pou^d^ two shillings, and from twenty pounds and
upwards, of every pound three shillings, strangers double; the Clergy six
shillings in the pound of Benefices, and every Priest having no Benifice, but
an Anual stipend, six shillings eight pence yearly, during three years.

Of Laws and Ordinances in his time.
IN a Parliament holden in his sixth year, diverse Laws were made, but two
most spoken of; one for Apparel, another for Laborers. In his twelvth year,
he caused the Statutes against Enclosures to be revived, and Commanded that
decayed houses should be built up again, and that enclosed grounds should be
laid open; which though it did some good, yet not so much as it might have
done, if the Cardinal for his own benefit, had not procured liberty for great
men, to keep up their enclosures, to the oppression of poor men. In his
seventeenth year, the King lying at Eltham, diverse ordinances were made b^ the
Cardinal touching the Governance of the Kings House, and were long after
called the Statutes of Eltham. In his eighteenth year, in the month of May,
Proclamation was made against all unlawful games, so that in all places
tables, dice, cards and Bowls, were taken and burnt; but this order continued
not long, for young men being restrained from these Games, fell some to
drinking, some to stealing of Conies and Dear, and such other misdemeanors:
also in this year, was an inhauncing of Coin, for preventing the carrying it
over to places where it went at higher rate, so that the Angel which went
before but for seven shillings, should now go for seven and six pence, and
every ounce of Gold should be five and forty shillings, which was before but
forty, and other Coins accordingly. In his twentieth year Sir James Spencer
being Major of London, the watch used on Mid-somer night was laid down. In his
three and thirtieth year, in a Parliament then holden, an Act was made, that
whosoevet should poison any person should be boiled to death, by which Statute
one Richard Roose, who had poisoned diver^e persons in the Bishop of Rochester
place, was boiled to death in Smithfield, to the terrible example of all other.
In his two and twentieth year, three Acts were made, one for probate of
Testaments, another for Mortuaries, the third against plurality of benefices,
Non-Residence, buying and taking of Farms by spiritual persons. In his
thirtieth year, it was ordained by Cromwell the Kings Vicar General, that in all
Churches a Register should be kept of every Weddng, Christning, and burial
within the same Parish for ever. In his one and thirtieth year, the King first
instituted and appointed fifty Gentlemen called Pensioners, to weight upon his
person, assighning to each of them fifty pounds a year, for the maintenance of
th^mselvs and two horses, in his six and thirtieth year, Proclamation was made
for the inhancing of Gold, to eight and fort^ shillings, and silver to four
shillings the ounce, also he caused to be coined base money, mingling it with
brass which was since that time called down the fifth year of Edward the
sixth, and called in the second year of Queen Elizibeth. In his seven and
thirtieth year, the brothell houses, called the Stews on the Bank-side in
Southwarke, were p^t down by the Kings Commandment, and was done by
proclamation and sound of Trumpet. In his three and twentieth year, it was
enacted, that Butchers should sell their meat by weight, Beef for a halfpenny
the pound, and Mutton for three farthings, also at this time foreign Butchers
were permitted, their flesh in Leadenhall-market, which before was not allowed;
in his time also, the Government of the President in the North was first
instituted, and the first President there, was Tunstall Bishop of Durham.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN the year 1517. the eighth year of this Kings Reign, Martin Luther of
Wittenberg in Germany a Friar of the Order of the Hermisses, taking occasion
from the abuse^ of Indulgences, began to Preach against the Authority of the
Pope, and to bring in a Reformation of Religion; for repressing of whom the
Counsel of Trent was called by Pope Paul the third, in the year 1542. which
continued above forty years, but was never received in the Kingdom of France^
which Counsel, by decreeing many things to be poins of faith, which were not
so accounted before, has made no small distraction amongst P^pists themselves:
against this Luther, King Henry wrote a book with great bitterness, and with
as great bitterness was answered; at the same time with Luther, there arose
also in the same Country other Reformers of Religion, as Zuingliu^,
Occloampadious, Melancthon, who differing from Luther in some few points, made
the difference which is at this day of Lutherans and Protestants, so called at
first Auspurg, for making a protestation in defense of their Doctrine, which
soon after spread all Christendom over: King Henry in the sixth and twentieth
year of his Reign, had excluded the Popes Authority ou^ of his Realm; but
thinking the work not sufficiently done, as long as Abbeys and Prio^ies kept
their station, which were, as it were his Forteresses and Pillars; there was
not long after me^nes found to have them suppressed, for aspersio^s being l^id
upon them (and perhaps no more then truth) of Adulteries and Murther^, they by
Act of Parli^ment, in his eight and twentieth year, at lest near four hundred
of them suppressed, and all their lands and goods conferred upon the King. In
his one and thi^tieth year all the rest; and lastly, in his five and thirtinth
year, all Colledge^, Chantries and Hospitals; so as the hives being now all
removed, there have never since any Bees or Drones been seen in the Country: in
this Kings time, the City of Rome was taken and sacked by the Imperial Army,
forcing the Pope to fly to his Castle Saint Angelo, and there kept a prisoner,
till he agreed to such conditions as his Adversaries propounded. In the two and
twentieth year of this Kings reign, a Proclamation was set forth that no
person should purchase any thing from the Court of Rome, and this was the first
blow given to the Pope in England. In his three and twentieth year the Clergy
submitting themselves to the King, for being found guilty of a Praemunire, were
the first that called him supreme head of the Church. In his four and
twentieth year a Parliament was holden, wherein one Act was made, that Bishops
should pay no more Annats or money for their Bulls to the Pope, and another that
no person should appeal for any cause out of this Realm, to the Court of Rome,
but from the Commissary to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop,
and from the Archbishop to the King, and all causes of the King to be tried in
the upper Horse of the Convocation. In his six and twentieth year in July, John
Frith was burnt in Smithfield, and with him at the same stake one Andrew Howet
a Tailor, both for denying the Real presence in the Sacrament; and in a
Parliament holden t^is year, an Act was made which Authorized the Kings
Highness, to be supreme head of the Church of England, and the Authority of
the Pope to be abolished, and then also was given to the King the first fruits
and tenths of all Spiritual livings; and this year were many put to death,
Papists for denying the Kings Supremecy, Protestants for denying the Real
presence in the Sacrament; and it is incredible what numbers for these two
causes were put to death, in the last ten years of this Kings Reign, of whom if
we should make particular mention, i^ would reach a great way in the Book of
Martyrs: in his eight and twentieth year, the Lord Cromwell was made Vi^a^
General under the King, over the Spiritualty, and sat diverse times in the
Convocation House amongst the Bishops as head over them; and in September thi^
year, he set forth injunctions, commandi^g all Parsons and Curates to ^each
their Parishoners the Pa^er Noster, the A^e, and Creed, with the ten
Commandments and Articles of the Christian Faith in the English tongue. I^ his
one and thirtieth year, was set forth by the Bishops, the Book of the six
Articles, condemning all for Heretics and to be burnt that should hold, 1.
That the body of Christ was not Really present in the Sacrament after
Consecration. 2. That the sacrament might not truly ^e Administered under one
Kind. 3. That Priests entered into Holy Orders might marry. 4. That vows of
Chastity entered into upon mature deliberation, were not to be kept. 5. That
private Masses were not to be used. 6. That Auricular Confession was not
necessary in the Church.


T^is year also the Religion of St. John's in England, commonly called the
Order of Knights of the Rhodes was dissolved; and on Assension day, Sir William
Weston Knight, Prior of St. John's departed this life, for thought (as was
reported) after he heard of the dissolution of his Order, for the King took all
the lands that belonged to that Order into his own hands; in his six and
thirtieth ^eere, the Letany or Praecession was set forth in English, with
commandment by the King, to be generally used in Parish Churches.

Works of Piety done by him or others in his time.
UPon the suppressing of Abbeys, King Henry instituted six new Bishoprics and
six Cathedral Churches, endowing them with convenient mainte^ance, he also
gave competent Pensions during their lives, to such Riligious Persons as were
turned out of their Cloisters; he also insti^uted in both the Universities,
Professors of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, of Divinity, Civil-law and Physic,
allowing to each of them forty pound a year: he also founded a College at
Cambridge; he gave at his death a thousand marks to the poor, and to twelve
poor Knights of Windsore, each of them twelve pence a day for ever, and every
year a long gown of white cloth: in the fifth year of this Kings reign,
George Monor Major of London, re-edified the decayed steeple of the Church of
Waltham-stow in Essex, adding thereunto a side Isle with a Chapel where he
lies buried; on the North side of the Churchyard there he founded a fair
Almshouse, for a Priest and thirteen poor men and women, giving them a weekly
maintenance; he also for the commodity of Travelours made a cawsey of timber
over the marshes, from Waltham-stow to Lock-bridg toward London. In this Kings
eighth year Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester founded Corpus Christi College
in Oxford, minding to have made it a house for Monks, but Hugh Oldham Bishop
of Exceter, persuaded him to make it rather a College for Scholars, and
joined with him in it, contributing great sums of money toward it, contenting
himself with the name only of a Benefactour. In his seventh ye^r King Henry
builded the town of Greenwich. In this Kings time, Cardinal Woolsey Founded
two Colleges, one at Oxford, another at Ipswich; to his College at Oxford he
had given four thousand pounds Land a year, but his Lands being all
confiscate to the King, the King took the Lands, but yet gave to the College
a competent maintenance for a Deane, eight Prebends, and a hundred Fellows;
which College is now called Christ-Church, and accounts King Henry for their
Founder. His College at Ipswich was demolished. This Cardinal also built
Hampton Court, the chiefest at this day of all the Kings houses, and built or
enlarged White Hall, called then Yorke-Place. King Henry in his four and
twentieth year, built his Mansio^ House of Saint James, where also he made a
fair Park. This place before had ^eene an Hospital of Sisters, with whom the
King compounded, giving them Pensions during their lives. In his thirtieth
year, Nicholas Gibson Gro^er, then Sheriff of London, builded ^ Free School
at Ratcliffe nere London with maintenance for a Master and an Usher; ^e also
builded an Almshouse there for fourteen poor and aged people. In his one and
thirtieth year, Thomas Huntlow the then Sheriff of London, gave certain
tenements to the Haberdashers, for finding of ten Almes-men of the same
company. In his six and thirtieth year, Sir John All^n who had been twice Major
^ London, and of the Kings Counsel, gave at his death, to the City of
London, a rich Collar of Gold, to be worn by the Major: which Collor was first
wor^e by S^r William Laxton on Saint Edwards day, at the Election of the new
Major, who gave to every Ward in London twenty pounds, to be distributed
amongst poor Householders, besides to sixscore persons, whereof threescore men
to every one a gown of broad-cloth and a black cap; and threescore women, to
every one a gown of the like cloth and a white Kerchiffe. In his eight and
thirtieth year, King Henry gave to the City of London, for relief of poor
people Saint Barthalomews Spittle, the Church of the Gray-Friers, and two
Parish Churches, the one at Saint Nicholas in the ^hambles, the other Saint
Ewins in Newgate-Marke^, all to be made one Parish Church of the Gray-Fryers;
and in Lands he gave for the maintenance of the same five hundred marks a
year for ever: and this Church to be named Christ-Church; founded by King
Henry the eighth.

Casualties in his time.
IN his ninth year happened a Swea^ing-sicknesse, whereof infinite multitudes
in many parts of England dyed, specially in London; and was so violent, that in
three and sometimes two hours, it took away men's lives, and spared neither
rich nor poor; for in the Kings Court the Lord Clinton, the Lord Gray of
Wilton, and many Knights, Gentlemen and Officers dyed of it. It began in July,
and continued to the midst of December. In his thirteenth year, was a great
mortality in London, and other places of the Realm, and many men of Honor and
Worship dyed; amongst others, Doctor Fitz-Iames Bishop of London, in whose
place Doctor Tunstall succeeded. In his nineteenth year, by extremity of rain
in seed-time, there followed a great dearth of Corn, which would have caused
great calamity, but that it was relieved in London by Merchants of the Styliard
out of Germany, and a thousand quarters supplied out of the Kings own
provision. In his twentieth year, in the end of May, began in London another
Sweating-sicknesse, which afterward infected all places of the Realm; by
reason whereof the Term was adjourned, and the Cicuit of the Assizes also;
many dyed in the Court, as Sir Francis Points, Sir William Compton Knights, and
William Carew Esquire of the Kings Privie-Chamber; the King himself for a
space, removed almost every day, till he came to Tittinhanger, a place of the
Abbot of Saint Albones, where he with the Queen and a small number remained,
till the sickness was past. In his thirtieth year, the manner of casting
Pipes of Lead, for conveyance of water underground, without using of soder,
was first invented by Robert Brocke Clerk, one of the Kings Chaplains: a
profitable invention, for by this, two men and a boy will do more in one day,
then could have been done before by many men in many days: Robert Cooper
Goldsmith, was the first that made the Instruments, and put this Invention in
practice. In a Rebellion in the North, in this Kings time, when the Duke of
Nor^olke, was sent with an Army against the Rebels, and that a day o^ battle
between them was appointed, it happened, that the night before a small Brook
called Dun, running between the two Armies, upon the fall of a small rai^e,
swelled to such a height, that it was not passable by either foot or horse; a
thing which had never happened before upon a great rain, and was then
accounted (as indeed it was) no less then a Miracle. In his three and
thirtieth year, was a great mortality in the Realm, by reason of hot Agues
and Fluxes; and withal so great a drouth, that small Rivers were clean dried,
much cattle dyed for lack of water, and the Thames were grown so shallow,
that the Salt Water flowed above London Bridge, till the rain had increased
the fresh waters. In his five and thirtieth year, the first cast-Peeces of
Iro^ that ever were made in England, were made at Buckstead in Sussex by Ralph
H^ge and Peter Bawd. In his six and thirtieth year, was a great Plague in
London, so as Michaelm^s Term was adjourned to Saint Albones, and there kept.
In his seven and thirtieth year, on Tuesday in Easter-weeke, William Foxley
Pot-maker for the Mint of the Tower of London, fell asleep, and could not b^
waked with pinching or burning, till the first day of the next Term, which
was full fourteen days; and when he awaked, was found in all points, as if he
had slept but one night, and lived forty years after. About ^^is fifteenth
year, it happened that diverse things were newly brought into England,
whereupon this Rhyme was made: Tur^^s, Carps, Hoppes, Piccarell and Beer,
Ca^^e into ENGLAND all in one year.


Of his Wives and Children.
KIng Henry had six Wives, his first was Katherine, daughter of Ferdinand King
of Spain, the Relict of his brother Arthur, she lived his Wife above twenty
yee^s, and then was divorced from him; after which she lived three years by the
name of Katherine Dowager, she deceased at Kimbolton in the County of
Huntington, the eighth of January in the year 1535. and lies interred in the
Cathedral Church of Peterborough, under a Hearce of black say, having a white
Cross in the midst. His second Wife was Anne second da^ghter of Sir Thomas
Bullen, Earl of Wilsthire and Ormond; she was married to him the five and
twentieth day of January, in the year 1533. lived his wife three years, three
months and five and twenty days, and then was beheaded, and her body buried in
the Quire of the Chapel in the Tower: his third Wife was Jane daughter of Sir
John Seymour and sister to the Lord Edward Seymour, Earl of Hartford and Duke
of Somerset, she was married to him the next day after the beheading of Queen
Anne, lived his Wife one year five months and four and twenty days, and then
died in Childbed, and was buried in the midst of the Quire of the Church
within the Castle of Windsor. His fourth Wife was Anne, sister to the Duke of
Cleve, she lived his wife six months, and then was Divorced; she remained in
England long after the Kings death, and accompanied the Lady Elizabeth through
London, at the solemnizing of Queen Mary's Coronation. His fifth wife was
Katherine, daughter of Edmund, and Niece of Thomas Howard his brother Duke of
Norfolk; she was married to him in the two and thirtieth year of his reign;
lived his wife one year six months and four days, and then was beheaded in
the Tower of London, and buried in the Chancell of the Chapel by Queen Anne
Bullen. His sixth wife was Katherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Parre of Kendall,
and sister to the Lord William Parre, Marquess of Northampton; she was first
married to John Nevill Lord Latimer, and after his decease to the King at
Hampton Court, in the five and thirtieth year of his reign: she was his wife
three years six months and five days; and then surviving him, was again
married to Thomas Seymour Lord Admiral of England, unto whom she bore a
daughter, but died in her Childe-bed, in the year 1548. He had children by his
first wife Queen Katherine, Henry borne at Richmond, who lived not full two
months, and was buried at Westminster; also another Son, whose name is not
mentioned, lived but a short time neither: then a daughter named Mary, borne at
Greenwich, in the eighth year of his reign, and came af^erward to be Queen
of England. By his second wife, Queen Anne Bullen, he had a daughter named
Elizabeth, borne at Greenwich, in the five and twentieth year of his reign;
who succeeded her sister Mary in the Crown: he had also by her a son, but
borne dead. By his third wife Queen Jane, he had a Son named Edward, borne
at Hampton Court in the nine and twentieth year of his reign, who succeeded
him in the Kingdom. Besides these, he had a base Son, named Henry Fitz-roy,
begotten of the Lady Talboyse, called Elizabeth Blunt, borne at Blackamore in
Essex, in the tenth year of his reign; who was made Duke of Richmond and
Somerset; married Mary daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk; with whom he
lived not long, but dyed at Saint James by Westminster, and was buried at
Framingham in Suffolk.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was exceeding tall of statu^e, and very strong; fair of complexion, in
his latter days corpulent and burley: concerning his condition^, He was a
Prince of so many good parts, that one would wonder he could have any ill; and
indeed he had no^ many ill, till flattery and ill council in his latter time
got the upper hand of him. His cruelty to his wives may not only be excused,
but defended; for if they were incontinent, he did but justice; if they were
not so, yet it was sufficient to satisfy his conscience, that he thought he
had c^use to think them so; and if the marriage bed be honorable in all? in
Princes it is sacred. In suppressing of Abbeys he showed not little Piety, but
great providence; for though they were excellent things being rightly used, ye^
most pestilent, being abused; and then may the use be justly suppressed, when
the abuse scarce possibly can be restrained. To think he suppressed Abbeys out
of covetousness and desire of gain, is to make him extremely deceived in his
reckoning; for if we compare the profit with the charge that followed, we shall
find him certainly a great looser by the bargain. He was so far from Pride,
that he was rather too humble, at lest he conversed with his Subjects in a more
familiar manner then was usual with Princes. So valiant, that his whole li^e
almost, was nothing but exercises of valor; and though performed amongst his
friends in jest, yet they prepared him against his enemies in earnest, and they
that durst be his enemies found it. It may be said, the complexion of his
government for the first twenty years, was sanguine and joviall; for the rest,
collerick and bloody: and it may be doubted, whether in the former, he were
more prodigal of his own treasure, or in the latter of his Subjects blood;
for as he spent more in Fictions, then any other King did in Realities, so in
any distemper of his people, he had no other Physic, but to open a vein: but
we shall do him extreme wrong, to think that all the blood shed in his time,
was of his shedding; they were the Bishops that were the Draco to make the
bloody Laws; the Bishops that were the Phalaris, to put them in execution: the
King of^entimes scarce knowing what was done. Certain it is, when a great Lord
put a Gentlewoman the second time on the rack, the King hearing of it,
exceedingly condemned him for such extreme cruelty. As for Religion, though he
brought it not to a full Reformation; yet he gave it so great a beginning, that
we may truly say of that he did, Dimidium plus toto. They who charge him with
the vice of lust, let them show such another example of continence as was seen
in him to lie six months by a young Lady, and not to touch her; for so did he
with the Lady Anne of Cleve: but this is to make Nosegayes, I like better to
leave every flower growing upon its staulke, that it may be gathered fresh;
which will be done by reading the Story of his Life.

Of his Death and Burial.
IT is Recorded of him, that in his later time he grew so fat and slothful,
that engines were made to lift and remove him up and down; but howsoever in
the six and fiftieth year of his age, whither a dropsy, or by reason of an
ulcer in his leg, he fell into a lang^ishing fever, which brought him into
such extremity, that his Physicians utterly despared of his life, whereof yet
none durst speak a word to him, till Master Denny one of his Privy-chamber
took the the boldness to go to him, telling him of the danger he was in, and
withal putting him in mind to think of his souls health; to which he
answered, that he confessed his sin^es to be exceeding great, yet had such
confidence in the mercy of God through Christ, that he doubted not of
forgiveness though they had been much greater; and being then asked by Master
Denny, if he would have any Divine brought to him with whom to confer, he
answered he would willingly have the Archbishop Cranmer, but not yet a while,
til he had taken a little rest: whereupon the Archbishop being then at Croydon,
was presently sent ^or, but before he could come, the King was grown
speechless, only seeming to retain a little memory, so as putting out his
hand, and the Archbishop desiring him to show some sign of his faith in
Christ, he then wrung the Archbishop hard by the hand, and immediately gave up
the Ghost, the eight and twentieth of January, in the year 1547. the six and
fiftieth of his age, and of his reign the eight and thirtieth: his body with
great solemnity was buried at Windsor under a most costly and stately Tomb,
begun in copper and guilt, but never fi^ished.

Men of note in his time.
MEn famous for the sword were many in his time, and in a manner all, that it
is hard making choice, without being partial, unless we shall prefer Dukes
of equal valor, before others of meaner caling, and then will the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk hold worthily the place first, and next to them the young
Earl of Surrey, who had been more fortunate if he had been less valiant. Of
men of letters in his time, there were whole Armies in foreign parts, the
most ^amous, were Budaeus, Ludovicus Vines, John Revolin, Erasmus Roteradamu^,
Vrsinus, Cornarius, Sadolet, Martin Bucer; in England were John Collet Deane of
Paul's and Founder of the School there, William Lilly borne a^ Odiham in
Hamshire, first Scholmaster of Pauls-Schoole, Thomas Linaker a learned
Physician, John Skeleton a pleasant Poet, William Horman Vice Provest of Eaten,
who wrote diverse works, Sir Thomas Moore, William Tindall, John Rastal^ a
Citizen and Stationer of London, Christopher Saint-Germane an excellent Lawyer,
Sir Thomas Elyot, John Leland, a diligent searcher of Antiquities, Sir John
Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, who translated ^he Chronocles of Froysard out
of French into English, Henry Standish Bishop of Saint Assaph, who w^ote a book
against Erasmus traslation of the new Testament; Arnold of London, who wrote
certain Colections touching Historical matters, Thomas Lupset a Londoner, who
wrote sundry virtuous Treatises, Henry Bradshaw a black Monk, who wrote the
life of Saint VVerborough, and also a certain Chronocle, John Palsgrave a
Londoner, who wrote instructions for the perfect understanding of the French
tongue, John S^vish a Cornish-man, who wrote certain abbreviations of
Chronicles, with a Treatise of the wars of Troy, Anthony Fitz-Herbert a Judge,
who wrote an Abridgment of the Law, Wilfride Holme who wrote a Treatise of the
rebellion in Lincolnshire, Thom^s Lanquet who wrote an Epitomy of Chronicles,
and also of the winning of Bulloigne, Thomas Soulman of Gernsey, who wrote
diverse notes of History, Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Robert VVhittington
who wrote diverse Treatises for the instruction of Grammarians, John Russell,
who wrote a Treatise entitled super jure Caesaris et Papae, also commentaries
in Cantica, Simon Fish a Kentish-man, who wrote a book called the supplication
of Beggars, George Bullen Lord Rochford brother to Queen Anne who wrote diverse
songs and sonets, Francis Bigod Knight born in Yorkshire, who wrote a book
against the Clergy, entitled de Impropriationibus, Henry Lord Morley, who wrote
diverse Treatises, as Comodies and Tragedies, as the life of sectaries, and
certain rimes, William Botevile alias Thynne, who restored the works of
Chawcer, Richard Turpin, who ser^ing in the Garrison of Callice, wrote a
Chronicle of his time, and died in the ^eer 1541. Sir Thomas Wiat Knight, who
wrote diverse matters in English-meeter, and transl^ted the seven Penitential
Psalms, and (as some say) the whole Psalter, he died of the pestilence, as he
was going Ambassador to the Emperor, in the year 1541. Henry Howard Earl of
Surrey, who wrote diverse Treatises in English-meeter, John Field a Londoner,
who wrote a Treatise of man's Free Will, de Servo homi^is Arbitrio, and
Collections of the common Laws of England, Robert Shingleton borne in
Lancashire, who wrote a Treatise of the seven Churches, and certain
Prophesies, William Parry a Welsh-man, who wrote a book entitled speculum
Iuvenam.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE SIXTH.
IT was now the year 1547. when on the eight and twentieth of January King
Henry dying; Prince Edward his Son by his third wife, the Lady Jane Seymour,
and the only Son he left behind him, as well by right of Inheritance, as by
his last Will, succeeded him in the Kingdom; to whom as being but nine years
old, and therefore unripe for Government; he had assigned eight and twenty
Councillors; a fit number, if agreeing amongst themselves; too many, if at
variance: and at variance they would soon fall, if there were not a moderatour
to keep them in concord; the first work therefore necessary to be done in this
new world, was to make choice of such a man, as might be to the Counsailors a
Moderator, a protector to the King, and in his minority, to the Kingdom. To
this place, by common consent of the King and Counsel, Edward Seymour Earl of
Hartford the Kings Uncle, was chosen to hold the place, until the King should
accomplish the age of eighteen years. In which Office the first thing he did,
was to make the young King Knight, who presently thereupon, made Henry
Hobblethorne Major of London Knight, and then King Henry's Obsequies being
solemnly performed; on the seaventeenth of February, were raised in Honor the
Earl of Hartford Protector, to be Duke of Somerset, William Par Earl of
Essex, to be Marquis of Northampton, Dudly Viscount Lisle, to be Earl of
Warwick; Wriothsley Lord Chancelour, to be Earl of Southampton, Sir Thomas
Seymour the Protectours brother, was made Lord of Sudeley, and Admiral of
England, Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, Sir William Willoughby was made
Lord Willoughby, and Sir Edmund Sheffield was made Lord Sheffield of
Butterwick: on the nineteenth of February, the King in great state rode from
the Tower to the Palace of Westminster, where the day following, he was
Crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury, with all rites accustomed, in great
solemnity. At which time a general pardon was Proclaimed for all offenders,
six only excepted, namely the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal Poole, Edward
Courtney eldest son to the Marquis of Excetur, Master Fortescue, Master
Throgmorton, and Doctor Pa^es Bishop of Worcester, who was fled to Rome, to
avoid taking the oath of Suprem^cy, all which six continued unpardo^ed, till
the first year of Queen Mary, and then were restored. A few days after, the
Earl of Southampton Lord Chancelour for being contumacious to the rest of the
Lords in matters of Counsel, was removed both from his Office of being
Chancelour, and from his place in Counsel, and the great Seal was delivered
to Sir William Pawlet, Lord Saint-Iohn, and Lord great Master of the Kings
Huoshold.

Within two months after the death of King Henry, died Francis King of France
also, for whom solemn Obsequies were kept in Paul's Church, as he likewise had
kept before at Paris for King Henry: these two Kings were of so consenting
natures, that they had certainly been great friends while they lived, if they
had not been Kings, and that jelousie of state had not made them oftentimes not
to be themselves.

King Henry before his death, had left in charge with the Lords of his
Counsel, by all means possible, to procure a proceeding in the marriage with
the young Queen of Scots; and now in discharge thereof the Lord Protector
himself, with an Army of twelve thousand foot, and six thousand horse, besides
Laborers and Pioners thirteen hundred, entered Scotland the third of September,
at which time also Edward Lord Clinton with a fleet of threescore sail
assisted by sea, but before he would do any hostile Act, he caused
Proclamation to be made, that his coming was only to have performance of the
Articles heretofore agreed on for the marriage, tending to the good of both
Kingdoms, if they would yield unto, he would then return in peaceable manner,
and the more to draw them on, w^ere before it was demanded to have the Queen
brought into England, and there to be brought up, the Protector was content,
she should remain in Scotland till years of consent^ this demand, the more
moderate sort of the Scots accounted very reasonable, but those of the French
and Papal faction, who were the greatest persons, and the greatest number
strongly opposed; whereupon, the Lord Protector, presently put his Army into
Array, the Lord Gray and Sir Francis Brian, with eight hundred Light Horse,
were sent before to provide lodging for the Army, and to give advertisement of
the enemies approaches; then followed the Avant-guard, in number between three
and four thousand foot, one hundred men at Arms, and six hundred Light Horse,
led by the Earl of Warwick; then followed the maine Battle, consisting of
above six thousand foot, six hundred men at Arms, and one thousand Light Horse
led by the Protecter himself lastly followed the Arrear, wherein were between
three and four thousand foot, one hundred men at Arms, and six hundred
Light Horse, under the conduct of the Lord Dacres, upon one wing the Artillery
was drawn, being sixteen pieces of great Ordinance; the other wing was made by
men at Arms and Demilances; for the Avant-guard and half the battle, ridi^g
about two flight shoot from their side, the other half of the battle, and
the whole flank of the Arrear was closed by the carraiges, being nine hundred
^arts besides Wagons; ^he rest of the men at Arms, and the Demilances marched
behind. In this order they marched two days, taking in three Castles ^s they
went, with little resistance; where it is memorable, what a sudden device the
Defendants of one of them used to save themselves; for finding they were no
longer able to defend themselves, and that their obstinacy had excluded a^^
hope of pardon; they made suite, they might not presently be slain, but have
some time to commend their souls to God, and afterward be hanged: which
respite being obtained, their pardon afterward did more easily ensue; so much
does the winning of time oftentimes prevail, more then any other policy. The
Governor of Scotland, hearing of the Protectours approach and having no
sufficient Army ready to resist him, sent his Heralds abroad, into all parts of
the R^alm, and commanded the fire-crosse to be carried (an ancient custom in
cases of importance) which, was two firebrands set in fashion of a cross, and
pitched upon the point of a spear, and therewith Proclamation to be made, that
all above sixteen years of age, and under sixty, should resort forthwith to
Musselborough and bring convenient provision of victuals with them. By this
means, having gotten a sufficient Army, he set forward toward the English who
were now come to a River called Linne, and here the Earl of Warwick being too
^enterous, was like to have bin entrapped, but by his valor came off bravely;
and now the Scottish Horsemen began to hover about the English Army, and to
come pricking toward them, sometimes within length of their staves, using
provoking words, to draw the English from their strength, but the Protector,
not moved with their provocations, maintained a close march till he came to
Salt-presion by the Frith, where he encamped within two miles of the Scottish
Army: and here the Scots having gotten the advantage of a Hill came upon the
English with the number of twelve hundred Horse, besides five hundred foot that
lay in ambush behind the Hill; at which time the Lord Gray and Sir Francis
Brian, impatient of such bravaries, obtained leave of the Gene^ to encounter
them, and so as they came scattered upon the spur, within a stones cast of
the English, and were beginning to wheel about, the Lord Gray with some troops
of Light hors-men, charged them home, and was forthwith seconded by certain
numbers of Demilances, and both of them backed with a thousand men at Arms;
yet the Scots resolutely maintained the fight three hours and more, but in the
end, overlaid with number, they were put to flight and chased almost to the
edge of their Camp. In this fight the chiefest force of the Scottish Hors-men
was defeated, the Lord Hume, by a fall from his Horse lost his life, his son
and Heir with two Priests and six Gentlemen were taken prisoners, and about
fifteen hundred slain: the next day, the Protector and the Earl of Warwick,
rode toward the place where the Scottish Army lay, to view the manner of their
incamping. As they returned, an Herald and a Trumpeter from the Scots overtook
them; who having obtained Audience, the Trumpeter said, that the Lord Huntley
his Master, to spare effusion of Christian blood, would fight upon the whole
quarrel, either with twenty against twenty, or with ten against ten, or else try
it between the Lord General and himself: the Protector answered, that for
number of Combatants, it was not in his power to conclude any bargain; and as
for himself, that being in public charge, it was not fit he should hazard
himself against a man of private Conditions, which otherwise he would most
willingly accept: here the Earl of Warwick entreated the Lord General, that
he might accept the Challenge, and Trumpeter (says he) bring me word, that thy
Master will perform the Combat with me, and thou shall have an hundred Crowns
for thy pains; nay rather (says the Lord General) bring me word that thy
Master will abide and give us battle, and thou shall have a thousand Crowns
for thy pains: and thereupon, when no other agreement could be made, a
general battle was resolved on: in the Army of the Scots, were five or six
and thirty thousand men; in the Avant-guard, commanded by the Earl of Angus,
about fifteen thousand; in the Battle, over whom was the Lord Governor,
about te^ thousand; and in the Arreare as many, led by the valiant Gourdon
Earl of Huntley; Hackbutters ^hey had none nor men at Arms, bur about two
thousand Hors-men (Prickers as they term them) the rest were all on foot
we'^l furnished with Jack and Scull, pikes, daggers, Bucklers made of board,
and slicing swords broad and thin; every man had a long Kirchiffe, folded twic^
or thrice about his neck, and many of them had cheines of Lattin, drawn th^ee
or four times along their hoses and doublet-sleeves: they had also to affright
the enemies Horses, great ^attles covered with parchment or paper, and small
stones within put upon staves three else long. And now both Armies joined in
battle, where a long fight and much variety of fortune on both sides; at
length, the victory fell to the English: in this fight, diverse of the Nobility
of Scotland were slain; of the inferior sort about ten, or as some say,
fo^rteen thousand: of the English were slain, only one and fifty Horsemen and
on footmen, but many hurt; the Lord Gray was dangerously thrust with a pike in
the mouth which struck two inches into his neck; the Scottish prisoners
accounted by the Marshals book, were about fifteen hundred, the chief
whereof were, the Earl of Huntley, the Lords Yester, Hobley and Hamilton, the
Master of San^-Poole and the Lord of Wimmes; the Earl of Huntley being asked
whilst he was a prisoner, how he stood affected to the marriage; made this
answer, that he liked the marriage well enough, but he liked not this kind of
woing. This victory of Muskelborough against the Scots, was on the tenth of
December, the very same day on which thirty years before a victory had bin had
against them at Flodden field; so as it seems this day was fatal to the Scots,
and confirms the opinion of Astologers, that there are days to some men
fortunate and unfortunate to others if they could be known. This victory struck
such a terror into many of the Scots, that the Earl Bothwel and diverse chief
Gentlemen of Tividale and Meers submitted themselves to the King of England,
and were received by the Prorectour into his protection: after this, the
English army took many towns and Castles, and then for want of Provision,
returned into England, having not stayed above five and twenty days in
Scotland, and not lost above threescore men. But notwithstanding this great
overthrow at Muskelborough, the Governor of Scotland would not yet be quiet;
but assembling the people, made unto them a long Oration, exhorting them to
defend the liberty of their Country, and not to be daunted with any event of
war. In this mean time many distractions and troubles happened in England;
partly in matters of Religion, and partly about Enclosures: and first for
enclosures, the Lord Protector caused Proclamation to be set forth, commanding
they who had Enclosed any Lands, accustomed to lie open, should upon a certain
pain, before a day assigned, lay them open again: and then in matter of
Religion, certain Injunctions were set forth, for removing of Images out of
Churches; and diverse Preachers were sent with Instructions to dissuade the
people from praying to Saints or for the dead; from use of Beads, Ashes and
Processions; from Masses, Durges, praying in any unknown tongue; and for defect
of Preachers, Homilies were appointed publicly to be red in Churches: and many
for offering to maintain these Ceremonies, were either punished or forced to
recant. Edmund Bonner Bishop of London, was committed to the Fleet, for
refusing to receive these Injuctions; Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester,
was likewise committed first to the Fleet and after to the Tower, for that he
had preached; It were well, these changes in Religion should be stayed until
the King were of years to govern by himself: for the like causes Tunstall
Bishop of Durham, Heath Bishop of Rochester, and Day Bishop of Chichester, were
in like manner committed to prison, and all of them dispossessed of their
Bishoprics; and that which was worse, the Bishoprics themselves were
dispossessed of their Revenues, in such sort, that a very small part remained to
the Bishops that came after. And now a Parliament was held, in the first year
of the King, and by Prorogation in the second; wherein diverse Chantries,
Colleges, free Chapels, Fraternities and Guildes, with all their Lands and
goods were given to the King; which being sold at a low rate, enriched many and
ennobled some, and thereby made them firm in maintaining the change: also it
was then ordered, that no man should speak against receiving the Eucharist in
both kinds, and that Bishops should be placed by Collation of the King under
his Letters Patents, without any election preceding, or confirmation ensuing;
and that all Processes Ecclesiastical should be made in the Kings name, as in
Writs at the Common Law; and that al Persons exercising Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, should have the Kings Arms in the Seals of their Office: and
further, the Statute of the six Articles and other Statutes concerning
punishment of Lollards were repealed, and the Kings Supremacy over the Church
of England was confirmed.

All this while the wars in Scotland continued, and were managed by the Lord
Gray of Wilton with variable success; and now about this time was sent to him
in aid, the Earl of Shrewsbury with fifteen thousand men; against him, in aid
of the Scots was sent the Rhinegrave with ten thousand French; who entering into
consul^ation, how to remove the young Queen out of the reach of the English;
provided a Fleet, and sailing round about Scotland, notwithstanding the English
Fleet lay in wait to impeach their passage, yet conveyed her safely into
France, being then but six years old; accompanied in the journey with James her
base brother, John Erskin and William Leviston; and in April following was
married to Francis the Dolphin of France.

You heard before the alterations, now hear the troubles; for when the
Injunctions were sent abroad into the Country, and Commissioners appointed to
see them executed; one Master Body a Commissioner, as he was pulling down
Images in Cornwall, was suddenly by a Priest stabbed into the body with a
knife. Hereupon the people flocked together in diverse parts of the sheere,
taking Arms, and beginning to commit outrages; and although the chief
Offendour was hanged and quartered in Smithfield, and many of his accomplices
executed in diverse parts of the Realm; and withal a Pardon proclaimed to all
that would lay down Arms, yet neither could that severity, nor this lenity
restrain them from their insolences; but in diverse Countries, as Sussex,
Hampshire, Kent, Glostershire, Warwickshire, Wostershire, but specially in
Semersetshire and Devonshire, great assemblies of people gathered to a head;
whose chief Leaders were Humfrey Arundel, and about six others of inferior
note, but many Priests. Some of these (we may say) were Commonwealth mutiners;
and some mutined for religion: they who were for the Commonwealth could agree
upon nothing; some would have no Justices, some no Gentlemen, some no Lawyers,
nor ordinary Courts of Justice, but above all Enclosures must down; but whether
all, or which, or how to be employed, none could tell. The religious Mutiners
were not altogether so various in their voices, as having some few amongst them
by whom they were guided: these in name of the people hamered up these Ar^icles
following; upon granting of which, they pro^essed that both their bodies and
goods should be at the Kings devotion.

1. That Curates should administer Baptism at all times of necessity, a^ well
o^ week-dayes as on holy days. 2. That their children might be confirmed by
the Bishop. 3. That the Mass might be celebrated, no man communicating with
the Priest. 4. That they might have reservation of the Lords body in their
Churches. 5. That they might have holy-bread and holy water in remembrance of
Christ's precious body and blood. 6. That Priests might live unmarried. 7. That
the six Articles set forth by King Henry the eight might be continued, at lest
till the King should come to full age.
Upon these demands, the King, although he knew that Reasons would little
prevail with unreasonable men; yet to discharge the place he held, he sent
them in writing Answers to them all, and withal a general pardon, if they
would desist and lay down arms. But the sedicious growing the more
outrageous, the fairer they were entreated; and finding themselves unable to
subsist with their own estates, began to think upon the spoil of Cities; and
first they came to Excetour, and demanded entrance, which the Citizens
refusing, they fell to set fire on the ga^es; but the Citizens prevented this,
by casting in wood and maintaining the fire, till they had cast up a half
moon within; upon which when the Seditious attempted to enter, they were
presently hewn and cut in pieces. After this they mined the walls, laid powder,
and rammed the mouth; but the Citizens prevented this also, by making a
countermine, whereinto they poured such plenty of water, that the wet powder
could not be fired. All this while, the Lord Russell Lord Privy Seal, who had
been sent down to suppress the Commotion, lay at Huntington, expecting more
Forces; whilst these Citizens of Excetour, for twelve days together endured so
great famine, that they were feign to eat horses, and make bread of course bran
molded in clothes, for that otherwise it would not cleave together. At last
the Lord Gray came to the Lord Russell with supply of Forces; who after many
conflicts with the Rebels, forced them to raise their siedge at Excetour; and
thereby freed the City from many miseries: to whom the King afterward, gave the
Manor of Evyland, in reward for their loyalty. After this, the Rebels
rallying their Force^, were again set upon by the Kings Army, and the greatest
part of them slain, the rest fled; many were taken and executed by Martial
Law; the chief Leaders were sent to London and there executed. The sedition
being thus suppressed; it is memorable what sport Sir William Kingston the
Provost Marshall made, by virtue of his Office, upon men in misery. One Boyer
Major of Godmin in Cornwall, had bin amongst the Rebels, not willingly but
enforced; to him the Provost sent word he would come and dine with him, for
whom the Major made great provision; a little before dinner, the Provost took
the Major aside, and whispered him in the ear, that an execution must that day
be done in the town, and therefore required to have a pair of Gallows set up
against dinner should be done; the Major failed not of his charge, presently
after dinner the Provost taking the Major by the hand, entreated him to lead
him to the place where the Gallows was, which when he beheld he asked the
Major if he thought them to be strong enough; yes (said the Major) doubtless
they are; well then (said the Provost) get you up speedily, for they are
provided for you. I hope (answered the Major) you mean not as you speak: in
faith (said the Provost) there is no remedy, for you have bin a busy Rebel;
and so without respit or defense he was hanged to death:) a most uncurreous
part, for a guest to offer his host. Near the said place dwelled a Millar, who
had bin a busy actor in that Rebellion; who fearing the approach of the
Marshall, told a sturdy fellow his servant, that he had occasion to go from
home, and therefore bid him, that if any man came to enquire after the Millar,
he should not speak of him, but say that himself was the Millar, and had bin
so for three years before. So the Provost came and called for the Millar, when
out comes the servant, and says, he was the man: the Provost demanded how long
he had kept the Mill; these three years answered the servant: then the Provost
commanded his men to lay hold on him, and hang him on the next tree. At this
the fellow cried out, that he was not the Millar but the Millars man: nay Sir
(said the Provost) I will take you at your word, and if thou be the Millar
thou art a busy knave; if thou be nor, thou art a false lying knave, and
howsoever thou can never do thy Master better service then to hang for him;
and so without more ado he was dispatched.

When this sedition in Devonshire was appeased, there rose another in Norfolk,
and that specially upon a grievance for enclosures; the Rebels had got one
Robert Ket a Tanner of Wimondham to be their Leader, and were grown to a body
of twenty thousand, seating themselves at Monshold, near Mount-Surrey, where
they carried a face as it were of Justice and Religion; for they had one
Conyers an idle fellow to be their Chapleyne, who morning and evening read
solemn Prayers, also Sermons they had often, and as for Justice they had a
bench under a tree where Ket usually sat, and with him two of every hund^ed
whence their Companies had been raised, to hear complints and to give
Judgment, and from hence were warrants sent in the Kings name, to bring in
powder, shot, victuals, and all things necessary: which tree has ever since
been called the tree of Reformation; and now being grown to a height, they
presented certain complaints to the King, requiring, he would send a Herald to
them, to give them satisfaction; the King though he took it for a great
indignity, to have such base fellows to capitulate with him, yet framing
himself to the time, he returned this answer; that in October following he
would call a Parliament wherein their complaints should be heard, and all their
grievances should be redressed, requiring them in the mean time, to lay down
Arms and return to their houses, and thereupon granting them a general
pardon: but this was so far from satisfying the seditious, that hereupon first,
they assaulted the Town of Norwich took it, and made the Major attend them as
their servant, and then returned again to their station at Manshold^ not long
after William Parre Marquess of Northampton, with the Lord Sheffield, the Lord
Wentworth, diverse Knights, and fifteen hundred Horse, with a small band of
Italians was sent against them; whom the seditious so stoutly oppos^d, that
much mischief was done on both sides, the Lord Sheffield falling with his
Horse in a ditch was taken prisoner, and as he pulled off his helmet to show
who he was, he was by a Butcher stricken down with a club and slain; so as
the Marquess with his forces not prevailing, there was afterward sent the
Earl of Warwick with six thousand ^oot, and fifteen hundred Horse, with whom
were the Lords Willoughby, Powis and Bray his two sons Ambrose and Robert,
and many Knights and Gentlemen of Name. When the Earl was come near to the
Camp of the seditious, he sent a Herald to them, offering them the Kings
pardon, if they would desist, but they were so far from accepting it, that a
lewd Boy turned up his naked breech toward the Herald and bid him kiss it;
upon this, many skirmishes passed between the Earl and them, with loss
sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another; at last they came to a
Battle, where the Rebels placed in the Fro^t, all the Gentlemen they had
taken prisoners, meaning they should be the first slain, of whom yet very few
were hurt, but of the Rebels were slain above two thousand, and now once again
the Earl offered them pardon, if they would desist; but for all their losses,
they continued obstinate still, at last the Ea^le sent to know if they would
entertain their pardon, in case he should come in person and assure them of
it; this moved them much, and then they answered, they knew him to be so
honorable, that from himself they would embrace it; whereupon the Earl riding
to them, and causing their pardon to be read, they thre^ away their weapons,
wishing all joy and prosperity to the King: nine of ^he principal Rebels were
hanged upon the tree of Reformation; Ket himself flying away was taken and
hanged in chains upon Norwich Castle; the day of this defeat of the sedicious,
was a long time after observed for a festival day by the Inhabitants of
Norwich, and thus ended the sedition in Nor^olke; when at the same time another
arose in Yorkshire, whereof the chief movers were William Ombler a Gentleman,
Thomas Dale a Parish Clerk, and Stephenson a Post, to whom were assembled four
or five thousand, who took their encouragement from a certain Prophecy, which
did foretell, that the time should come, when there should be no King, when the
Nobility and Gen^ry should be destroyed, when the Realm should be ruled by
four Governors elected by the Commons, holding a Parliament in commotion,
which should begin at the South and North Seas of England, and that time they
understood to be the present, and that the Rebels of Devonshire, Norfolk and
Yorkshire should draw together to accomplish this prophecy; but as soon as
they heard that the tumults of Devonshire and Norfolk were quieted, they found
that they were deceived in the understanding of the prophecy, and thereupon
presently upon the Kings pardon, they fell off and dispersed, their chief
Leaders Ombler, Dale and four others were executed at York; and with this,
the Spirit of sedition was quite laid in all places of the Kingdom.

But the King of France, taking advantage of these sedicio^s, though he had
been in treaty before of peace with England, yet now he brake off the treaty,
Proclaimed war, and denounced it by his Ambassador to the King: hereupon all
Frenchmen in England, not Denizens, were taken prisoners, and all their goods
seized for the King, which the French King understanding, he sent a fleet of
Ships to surprise Gernsey and Iarnsey, but was repelled with the loss of a
thousand men: after this, he levied an Army by land, and went himself in
person against Bulloigne, defended by the valiant Sir Nicholas Arnold, but
being weary of the work, he left his Lieutenant Chatillon to pursue the
Siedge, who having made many fierce batteries, and at last assaults and no^
prevailing, he then attempted to hinder the Town from supply of victuals; and
to this end, charged a Galley with gravel and stones, meaning to sink it in
the Haven, but the English took the Galley before it was sunk, and made use of
the stones for their own defense: after this, they made faggo^s of light
matter, mixed with pi^ch, tar, tallow, rosi^^ powder and wildfire, with
intention to fire the ships in the Haven, but that enterprise was defeated by
the Bulloignes, and the faggots taken from the French; and more then this,
there was little done in those parts at this time.

But in England in the mean time, an unfortunate accident happened, which
beginning upon a very light occasion, produced afterward very heavy effects;
whereof, though there were many concurrant circumstances, yet the original
cause was the pride of a woman, upon a point indeed, wherein the natures of
women are commonly most tender, Precedence of place: the Protector had married
Anne Stanhope, a woman of a haughty stomach, and the Lord Admiral his Brother
the Queen Dowager, a Lady of great mildness: the neerenesse of the Husbands,
gave occasion to the Ladies often meeting, where the Duchess would inwardly
murmur, why she being the wife of the elder brother and the better man, should
give place to her, who was the wife of the younger brother, and the meaner man;
this envy of hers toward the Queen, bred a malice in her toward the Admiral,
as thinking the mischief she did to the husband, to be a part of revenge upon
the wife, and though the Queen shortly after died in Childbed, yet the
malice of the Duchess toward the Admiral lived still; (so hard a thing it
is, for malice once settled in a woman's heart, to be removed) out of this
malice, she put diverse surmises into her husband the Protectours head against
his brother the Admiral, as though he went about to procure his death, to the
end he might aspire to the place he held; but certainly as misliking his
government being a Protestant, who was himself a Papist; in this case causes
of jealousy against the Admiral was obvious enough, for it was known that in
King Henry's time, he had aimed at the marriage of the Lady Elizabeth King
Henry's second daughter; and now his wife the Queen Dowager being dead (and not
without suspicion of poison) he fell upon that marriage a fresh, which could not
be thought to tend, but to some very high aspiring end: the Protector a plain
man, and one that had not the cleerest insight into practices; whether too
importunately provoked by his wife, or whither out of an honest mind, not
willing to patronize faults though in a brother, gave way to accusatio^s
brought against him, so as in a Parliament then holden, he was accused, for
attempting to get into his custody the person of the King, and government of
the Realm, for endeavoring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the Kings sister, for
persuading the King in his tender years, to take upon him the rule and ordering
of himself; upon which points (though perhaps proved, yet not sufficiently
against him, who was never called to his answer) he was by Act of Parliament
condemned, and within few days after condemnation, a warrant was sent under
the hand of his brother the Protector to cut off his head; wherein (as after
it proved) he did as much, as if he had laid his own head down upon the block;
for whilst these brothers lived and held together, they were as a strong
fortress one to the other; the Admirals courage supporting the Protectours
authority, and the Protectours authority maintaining the Admirals stoutnesse;
but the Admiral once gone, the Protectours authority as wanting support began
to totter, and fell at last to utter ruin: besides there was at this time,
amongst the Nobility a kind of faction; Protestants who favored the Protector
for his own sake, and other of Papal inclination, who favored him for his
brothers sake, but his brother being gone, both sides forsook him, even his
own side; as thinking they could expect little assistance from him, who gave
no more assistance to his own brothe^; and perhaps more then all this, the Earl
of Warwick at this time, was the most powerful man both in Courage and
Counsel amongst all the Nobility, and none so near to match him as the
Admiral while he lived, but he being gone, there was none left that either was
able and durst, or durst and was able to stand against him: however it was, not
long after the Admirals death, the Protector was invaded with sundry
accusations, wherein ^h^ Earl of Warwick made not always the greatest show,
but yet had always the greatest hand; one thing the Protector had done, which
though a private act, yet gave a public distaste. To make him a Mansion house
in the Strand (the same which is now called Somerset House) he pulled down a
Church, and two Bishops houses by the Strand Bridge; in digging the foundation
whereof, the bones of many who had been there buried, were cast out and carried
into the fields; and because the stones of those houses and the Church suffised
not for his work, the steeple and most part of the Church of Saint John's of
Jerusalem near Smithfield, was mined and overthrown with powder, and the
stones applied to this sparious building; and more then this, the Cloister of
Paul's on the North side of the Church, in a place called Pardon Churchyard,
and the dance of Death very curiously wrought about the Cloister, and a Chapel
that stood in the midst of the Churchyard; also the Charnal house, that stood
upon the South side of Paul's (now a Carpenters yard) with the Chapel, timber
and Monuments therein were beaten down, the bones of the dead carried into
Finsbury-fields, and the stones converted to this building. This Act of the
Protectours, did something alienate the Peoples minds from him; which the Earl
of Warwick perceiving thought it now a fit time to be falling upon him; and
thereupon drew eighteen of the Privy Counsel to join with him, who
withdrawing themselves from the Court, held secret consultations together, and
walked in the City with many Servants weaponed, and in new Liveries; whereof
when the Lord Protector heard, he sent secretary Peter to them, to know the
causes of their Assembly, requiring them to resort unto him peaceably, that
they might comune together as friends; but in the mean time, he Armed five
hundred men, and removed the King by night from Hampton Court to Windsor: on
the other side, the Lords at London having first taken possession of the Tower,
sent for the Majo^ and Aldermen of the City, to the Earl of Warwicks lodging
at Ely-house in Holburn; to whom the Lord Rich then Lord Chancelour made a long
Oration wherein he showed the ill government of the Lord Protector, and the many
mischifes that by it were come upon the Kingdom; and therup^n requiring them
to join with the Lords there assembled to remove him; and presently that day, a
Proclamation was made in diverse parts of the City to that purpose; to which
the Lords and Counsailors that subscribed their names were these; the Lord Rich
Chancelour, the Lord Saint-Iohn Lord great Master, the Marquess of
Northampton, the Earl of Warwick Lord great Chamberlain, the Earl of
Arundell Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Southampton,
Sir Thomas Cheyney Treasurer of the Household, Sir John Gag^ Constaple of the
Tower, Sir William Peter secretary, Sir Edward North Knight, Sir Edward
Montague chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir John Baker Chancelour of the
Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Edward Wootton, Sir Richard Southwell Knights:
and Doctor Wootton Deane of Canterbury. In the afternoon of the same day, the
Lord Major assembled a Common Counsel in the Guild Hall where two letters
arrived almost in one instant from the King and the Lord Protector, for a
thousand men to be Armed for defense of the Kings Person; another from the
Lords at London for two thousand men to aid them in defense of the Kings
person also; both pretending alike, and therefore hard how to please them both.
The Recorder set forth the complaint of the Lords against the Protector, in
such sort, that he made many inclinable to favor that side, but one named
George Stadlow better advised, stepped up, and in a long Speech showed, what
mischiefs had come to the City by opposing the King; and therefore gave his
opinion to suspend giving aid to the Lords, at lest for a time. His advice was
harkened to, and thereupon the Court resolved only to arm a hundred Horsemen
and four hundred foot, in defense of the City; and to the letters, returned
submissive but dilatory answers. After some other passages between the
Protector and the Lords, Sir Edward Winkfield Captain of the Guard, was sent
from the Lords to Windsor; who so well persuaded the King of the Lords loyal
affection toward him, and of their moderate intention toward the Protector,
that the King was contented to have him presently remvoed from him, and
suffered him within two days after to be carried to the Tower. In whose
absence, seven Lords of the Council and four Knights were appointed by turns
to attend the Kings person; and for affairs of State, the government of them
was referred to the whole body of the Council: soon after were sent to the
Protector in the Tower, certain Lords of the Council, with Articles against
him, requiring his present Answer, whether he would acknowledge them to be
true, or else stand upon his justifica^ion. The chief Article was this; That
he took upon him the Office of Protector, with express condition, that he
should do nothing in the Kings affairs, but by assent of the late Kings
Executours, or the grea^est part of them; and that contrary to this condition,
he had hindered Justice, and subverted laws of his own authority, as well by
letters as by other command; and many other Articles, but all much to this
purpose. The Protector, whether thinking to speed better by submission then by
contesting; or perhaps finding himself not altogether innocent, (for indeed in
so great a place, who can bear himself with such sincerity, but he will
commit errors, with which he may be taxed;) subscribed an acknowledgement with
his own hand; humbly submitting himself to the Kings mercy, and desiring
their Lordships favor ^owards him. Upon this submission, three months after
he had bin imprisoned, he was released, entertained and feasted by the King,
and swor^e again to be a Privy Counselor, but no more Protector: at which
time, between him and the Lords, a show at lest of perfect amity was made; and
to make it the more firm, the Dukes daughter was afterward married to the Lord
Lisle, Son and heir to the Earl of Warwick; at which marriage the King
himself was present; and perhaps to honor their reconcilement and this
marri^ge, the Earl of Warwick was made Lord Admiral of England, Sir John
Russell Lord Privy Seal was created Earl of Bedford, the Lord Saint-Iohn was
created Earl of Wiltshire, and soon after made Lord Treasurour, Sir William
Paget Controlour of the Kings House, was made Lord Paget, Sir Anthony
VVinkfield Captain of the Guard, was made Controlour, and Sir Thomas Darcye
was made Captain of the Guard. But of the other side, the Earl of Arundell,
the Earl of Southampton, were put off from the Council; of whom, the Earl of
Southampton dyed shortly after at Lincolne-Place in Holborne, and was buried in
Saint Andrews Church there.

About this time a Parliament was held at Westminster, wherein one Act was made
against spreading of Prophesies; another against unlawful Assemblies: but for
fear of new tumults, the Parliament was untimely Dissolved, and Gentlemen were
commanded to retire to their Count^ey-habitations; and ^or the same cause also
Trinity Term did not hold.

About this time also, Pope Paul the third dyed; after whose death the
Cardinals being divided about the election of a new Pope; the Imperial part,
which was the greatest, gave their voices for Cardinal Poole; which being told
him, ^e disabled himself, and wished them to choose one that might be most for
the glory of God, and good of the Church: upon ^his stop, some that were no
friends to Poole, and perhaps looked for the place themselves, if he were put
off, laid many things to his charge; amongst other, that he was no^ without
suspicion of Lutharisme, as having bin very conversant with Immanuell
Tremellius and Anthonius Flaminius, great Lutherans, and not altogether without
blemish of incontinency; there being a young Nun that was thought to be his
daughter. But of these criminations Poole so cleared himself, that he was
afterward more importuned to take the place then he was before; and thereupon
one night the Cardinals came unto him, being in bed; and sent him word they
came to adore him (which is one special kind of electing the Pope) but he being
awaked out of his sleep, and acquainted with it; made answer, that this was
not a work of darkness, and therefore required them to forbear till the
next day, and then to do as God should put in their minds. But the Italian
Cardinals attributing this putting off, to a kind of stupidity and sloth in
Poole; looked no more after him, but the next day chose Cardinal Montanus
Pope, who was afterward named Julius the third.

And now the King of France, upon many just considerations, was grown desirous
to have a Peace with England; and thereupon sent one Guidol^i a Florentine in^o
England, to make some overture of his desire to the Lords of the Council; who
addressing himself to the Earl of Warwick, whom he knew to be most
prevalent; so prevailed, that it was concluded four Ambassadors should be
sent from the King of England into Franee^ and four from the French King, to
treat with them. The Commissioners for the English were John Earl of Bedford,
William Lord Paget, Sir William Peter and Sir John Mason, Secretaries of State.
For the French were Monsieur Rochpot, Monsieur Chatillon, Guyllart de Martyer
and Rochetelle de Dassie: much time was spent to agree about a place of
meeting; till at last the English to satisfy the French, were contented it
should be before Bulloigne; where were many meetings and many diff^rences about
conditions; but in conclusion, a Peace was concluded upon certain Articles;
the chief whereof was, that Bulloigne and the places adjacent should be
delivered up to the French within six weeks after the Peace Proclaimed; and
that the French should pay for the same two hundred thousand crowns, within
three days after delivery of the Town; and other two hundred thousand crows
upon the fifth day of August following: hostages were on both sides given for
performance; and to those Articles the French King was sworn at Amyens, and
the King of England in London: the Lord Clinton who had been Deputy of
Bulloigne was made Lord Admiral of England.

Presently after this Agreement, the Duke of Brunswicke sent to the King of
England, to offer his service in the Kings wars, with ten thousand men, and to
entreat a marriage with the Lady Mary, the Kings eldest sister. To his offer of
aid, answer was made, that the Kings wars were ended; and touching the
marriage with the Lady Mary, that the King was in speech for her marriage with
the Infanta of Portugal, which if it succeeded not, he should then be
favorably heard. Upon this, the Emperors Ambassador demanded of the King,
that the Lady Mary might have free exercise of the Mass, which the King not
only constantly denied, but thereupon Sermons were exercised at Court, and
order taken, that no man should have any Benefice from the King, but first he
should Preach before him; and shortly after, under pretense of preparing for
Sea-matters, five thou^and pounds were sent to relieve Protestants beyond the
Seas. At this time also, an Ambassador came from Gustanu^ King of Sweden, to
enter league with the King for intercourse of Merchants; and charge was then
also given, that the Laws of England should be administered in Ireland.

About this time the Queen Dowager of Scotland, going from France to her
Country, passed through England, having first obtained a safe Conduct, she
arrived at Portesmouth, and was there met by diverse of the English Nobility;
conducted to London, she was lodged in the Bishops-Pallace: after four days
staying, having been feasted by the King at Whitehall, she departed; being
waited on by the Sheriffs of Counries to the borders of Scotland. And now was
one Steward a Scot apprehended in England, and imprisoned in the Tower, for
intending to poison the young Queen of Scots, whom the King delivered to the
French King upon the frontiers of Callice, to be by him justiced at his
pleasure.

At ^his time certain Ships were appointed by the Emperor, to transport the
Lady Mary either by violence or by stelth out of England to Antwerpe; whereupon
Sir John Gates was sent with Forces into Essex, where the Lady lay; and
besides, the Duke of Somerset was sent with two hundred men, the Lord Privy
Seal with other two hundred, and Master Sentleger with four hundred more, to
several coasts upon the Sea, and the Lord Chancellor and Secretary Peter were
sent to the Lady Mary; who after some conference, brought her to the Lord
Chancellours house at Lyee in Essex, and from thence to the King at
Westminster. Here the Council declared unto her, how long the King had
permitted her the use of the Mass, and considering her obstinacy, was resolved
now no longer to permit it, unless she would put him in hope of some
conformity in short time. To which she answered, that her soul was Gods; and
touching her faith, as she could not change, so she would not dissemble it.
Reply was made, that the King intended not to constrain her faith, but to
restrain the outward profession of it, in regard of the danger the example
might draw. After some like enterchange of speeches, the Lady was appointed to
remain with the King, when there arived an Ambassador from the Emperor, with a
threatening message of war, in case his cousin the Lady Mary, should be denied
the free exercise of the Mass: hereupon the King presently advised with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and with the Bishop of London and Rochester, who gave
their opinion, that to give license to sin was sin, but to connive at sin
might be ^llowed so it were not too long, nor without hope of reformation: then
answer was given to the Ambassador, that the King would send to the Emperor
within a month or two, and give him such satisfaction as should be fit.

And now the King being uncertain of the faith, both of his Subjects and of
his Confederates, intended by alliance to strengthen himself; and thereupon
sent one Bartwicke, to the King of Denmark with private instructions, to treat
of a marriage, between the Lady Elizabeth the Kings youngest sister, and the
King of Denmarks eldest son; but when it came to the point, this Lady could not
be induced to entertain marriage with any.

After this, the Marquess of Northampton was sent Ambassador to the French
King, as well to present him with the Order of the Garter, as to treat with him
of other secret affairs: with him were joined in Commission the Bishop of
Elye, Sir Philip Hobbie, Sir William Pickering, Sir John Mason, and Master
Smith Secritary of State; also the Earl of Worcester, Rutland, and Ormond were
appointed to accompany them; as likewise the Lords Lisle, Fitzwater, Bray,
Aburgavenie and Evers, with other Knights and Gentlemen of note, to the number
of six and twenty; and for avoiding of immoderate train, order was given that
every Earl should have but four attendants, every Baron but three, every
Knight and Gentlem^n but two, only the Commissioners were not limited to any
number. Being come to the Court of France, they were forthwith brought to the
King, being then in his Bedchamber; to whom the Marquess presented the Order
of the Garter, wherewith he was presently invested: then the Bishop of Elye in
a short Speech, declared, how the King of England, out of his love and desire
of amitye, had sent this Order to his Majesty; desiring with all, that some
persons might be authorized to treat with them, about some other m^tters of
importance; whereupon a Commission went forth to the Cardinal of Lorraigne,
Chastillion the Constable, the Duke of Guysae, and others. At the first, the
English demanded, that the young Queen of Scots might be s^nt into England for
perfecting of marriage between King Edward and her. But to this the French
answered, That conclusion had been made long before for her marriage with the
Dolphin of France. Then the English proposed a marriage between King Edward
and the Lady Eliza^eth the French Kings eldest daughter: to this the French did
cheerfully incline; but when they came to talk of Portion, the English
demanded at first fifteen hundred thousand crowns, then fell to fourteen,
and a^ last to eight hundred thousand: the French offered at first, one hundred
thousand crowns, then rose to two hundred thousand, and higher they would not
be drawn; saying, it was more then ever had bin given with a daugh^er of
France. Shortly after Monsieur the Marshall and other Commissioners were sent
by the French King, to deliver to the King of England the Order of Saint
Michael; and then was further treaty about the marriage; and because the French
could be s^rued no higher then two hundred thousand crowns, it was at last
accepted, and the agreement was reduced into writing, and delivered under Seal
on both sides.

And now King Edward supposing his state to be most safe, when indeed it was
most unsure; in testimo^y both of his joy and love, advanced many to new titles
of honor; the Lord Marquess Dorset, who had married the eldest daughter of
Charles Brandon was created Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Warwick Duke of
Northumberland, the Earl of Wiltshire was created Marquess of Winchester, Sir
William Herbert Lord of Cardisse and Master of the Horse, was created Earl of
Pembrooke; also William Cecill the Kings Secretary, John Cheek one of his
Schoolmasters, Henry Dudley and Henry Nevill were made Knights, and (that which
perhaps it had bin happy, if it had never bin) Sir Robert Dudley one of the
Duke of Northumberlands sons (the same who was afterward the great Earl of
Leicester) was sworn one of the six orninary Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber;
for after his coming into a place so near about him, the King enjoyed his
health but a while.

The aspiring thoughts of the Duke of Northumberland, were now grown up to be
put in execution: He was advanced in title of honor equal with the highest;
in authority and power above the highest; he had placed his politic Son
near about the Kings person; the next thing was to remove the Duke of Somerset
out of the way; and for this also he had prepared instruments; Sir Thomas
Palmer, Crane, Hamond, Cecill, and others; who brought several accusations
against the Duke; some trenching upon the King and Kingdom, but one specially
against the Duke of Northumberlands person; whose practices when the Duke of
Somerset found, and had cause to fear; he went one day Armed into the Duke of
Northumberlands Chamber, with a purpose to kill him; but finding him in his
bed, and being received with much kind complement by him, his heart relen^ed,
and thereupon came away without any thing done: at his coming out, one of his
company asked him if he had done the deed? who answered, No: then said he, you
are your self undone: and indeed it so fell out; for when all other
Accusations were refelled, this only stuck by him, and could not be denied;
and so on the first of December he was arraigned at Westminster; where the Lord
William Pa^let Marquess of Winchester and Lord Treasurour, sat as high Steward
of England, and with him Peers to the number of seven and twenty; the Dukes of
Suffolk and Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earls of Derby,
Bedford, Huntington, Rutland, Bathe, Sussex, Worcester, Pembrooke and Hert^ord;
the Barons, Aburgaveuy, Audeley, Wharton, Evers, La^ymer, Borough, Zouth,
Stafford, Wentworth, Darcye, Sturton, Windsor, Cromwell, Cobham and Bray. The
Lords being set, the Indit^ments were read, in number five, containing a
charge, for raising men in the North parts of the Realm; and at his house, for
assembling men to kill the Duke of Northumberland; for resisting his
Attac^ment, for raising London, for assaulting the Lords, and devising their
deaths. To all which he pleaded, Not guilty, and made a satisfactory Answer to
every point, though the Kings learned Council p^essed them hard against him.
This done, the Lords went together, where exception was taken by some, ^s a
thing unfit, that the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton, and
the Earl of Pembrooke should be of the Jurie; seeing the prisoner was chiefly
charged with practices against them. But to this, the Lawyers made answ^r, that
a Peer of the Realm might not be challenged; so after much variation of
opinions, the prisoner was acqui^t of Treasor, but by most voyees found guilty
of Felony; and that by a Statute, lately by his own p^ocureme^t made; That if
any should attempt to kill a Privy Counselor, although the Fact were not
done, yet it should be Felony, and be punished with death. But upon his being
acquit of Treason, the Axe of the Tower was presently laid down, which m^de
people conceive he had been acquitted of all; who thereupon for joy, gave so
great a shout, that it was heard as far as Charing-Crosse: but the Duke was
little the better for being acquitted of Treason, seeing he was found guilty of
Felony; and had Judgment to dye. It is thought by some, he might have saved
his life, if he had demanded his Clergy; but it is rather thought, that in
that Statute Clergy was denied. Two months after his condemnation; (much
against the Kings will) He was brought to the Tower Hill to execution; where
b^ing ^scended the Scaffold, he entered into a Speech, wherein though he
justified himself, for any matter tending to the hurt of the King or Kingdom;
yet he confessed, he was justly by the Law brought to th^^ d^^^h; and thanked
God, that had given him so large a time of repentance, spe^ially that he had
opened his eyes, to see clearly the light of the Gospel; and going on in his
Speech, a sudden noise arose, of some crying, away, ^way; which made some
think a Pardon had been come; but was indeed the voice of some that had
been warned to be at the Execution, and were come somewhat late: but the
tumult being appeased, the Duke went on with his Speech, and at last commending
his soul to God, with a coun^enance not showing a sign of fear or
perturbation, only his cheeks a little redder then they use ^o be; he
peaceably laid down his head upon the block, and in a moment with one stroke
of the Axe, had it stricken off. The death of this Duke, made the Duke of
Northumberland more odious to the people then he was before; and there were
some that dipped H^ndkerchiffes in his blood, and kept them to upbraide the
Duke of Northumberland withal, when he came himself afterward to the like
end. After execution of the Duke, Sir Ralph Vane and Sir Miles Partridge were
hanged at the Tower Hill, Sir Michael Stanhope and Sir Thomas Arundell were
there beheaded.

After the Dukes condemnation, it was thought fit to have something done for
averting the Kings mind, from taking thought; and to that end, one George
Ferrers, a Gentleman of Lincolnes-Inne, was appointed in the Christmastime, to
be Lord of Misrule; who so carried himself, that he gave great delight to
many, and some to the King, but not in proportion to his heaviness.

About this time was a call of seven Sergeants at Law, who kept their Feast at
Grayes-Inne; of whom, Master Robert Brook Recorder of London, was the first;
and the next Master Dyer, who was chosen Speaker the next Parli^ment.

About this time also, the Lord Paget was committed to the Tower, ^or what
cause is not certain; and being a Knight of the Order, his Garder was taken
from him by Garter king at Arms, upon this pretense, that he was said to be no
Gentleman, either by Father or Mother; and the Garter was then bestowed on the
Earl of Warwick, the Duke of Nor^hum^erlands eldest Son, and the Lord Rich
Lord Chancellor, was put off from his Place, and the Seal then delivered to
Doctor Thomas Goodricke Bishop of Elye.

About this time also three great Ships were set forth at the Kings charge, for
discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the North Seas; the chief Pilot
and directour in this Voyage, was one Sebastian Gabato an Englishman, borne at
Bristow, but the son of a Genoway: these Ships at the last arrived in the
Country of Muscovia, but not without loss of their Captain Sir Hugh
Willoughby, who being tossed and driven by tempest, was afterward found in his
Ship frozen to death, and all his people.

At this time al^o the Duke of Suffolks three Daughters, which he had by
Frances, Daughter of Charles Brandon and Mary Queen of France, were married at
Durham-House; the eldest Jane to the Lord Guildford Dudley^, fourth Soon of
the Duke of Northumberland: the second Katherine, to Henry Son and heir to
the Earl of Pembrooke; the yo^gest Mary, being somewhat deformed, to Martyn
Keys the Kings Gentleman-Porter. And then also Katherine the Duke of
Northumberlands youngest daughter, to the Lord Hastings, eldest son of the
Earl of Huntington. And now had the Duke of Northumberland gone a great way in
his design; it remained to persuade King Edward to exclude his two sisters from
succession in the Crown; for that do^e, his daughter in law the Lady Ian^,
would come to have a right; for as for pretenders out of Scotland, or any
other, he made no great matter. And now to work the King to this persuasion,
(being in a languishing sickness, not far from death) he inculcates to him,
how much it concerned him to have a care of Religion, that it might be
preserved in purity, not only in his own life, but as well after his death;
which would not be, if his sister the Lady Mary should succeed, and she could
not be put by unless her other sister the Lady Elizabeth were put by also,
seeing their rights depended one upon another; but if he pleased to appoint the
Lady Jane, the Duke of Suffolkes eldest daughter, and his own next kinswoman
to his Sisters, to be his successor, he might then be sure that the true
Religion should be maintained, to Gods great glory, and be a worthy Act of his
own religious Providence. This was to strike upon the right string of the young
Kings affection, with whom nothing was so dear as preservation of Religion;
and thereupon his last Will was appointed to be drawn (contrived chiefly by
the Lord chief Justice Montague, and Secretary Cecill:) by which Will, as
far as in him lay, he excluded his two sisters from the succession, and all
other, but the Duke of Suffolkes daughters; and then causing it to be read
before his Council, he required them all to assent unto it, and to subscribe
their hands; which they all, both Nobility, and Bishops and Judges did; only
the Archbishop Cranmer refused at first, Sir James Hales a Judge of the
Common Pleas to the last, and with him also Sir John Baker Chancellor of the
Exchequer. And now remained nothing for the Duke of Northumberlands purpose,
but that the King should dye; which soon after he did at Greenwich the sixth
of July, in the year 1553. One point of the Dukes policy must not be
forgotten, that fearing what troubles the Lady Mary might raise after the Kings
decease, if she should be at liberty; he therefore, seeing the King drawing on,
used all means possible to get her within his power; to which end Letters are
directed to her in the Kings name from the Council, willing her forthwith to
repair to the King, as well to be a comfort to him in his sickness, as to see
all matters well ordered about his person: whereupon, the Lady suspecting
nothing, addressed her self with all speed to the journey; till being upon the
way, she was advertised of the Dukes design; and then she returned to her
House at Hoveden, and so escaped the snare; by whose escape, the whole design
of the Duke of Northumberland was disappointed; as soon after will be seen.

Of his Taxations.
IN no Kings reign was ever more Parliaments for the time, nor fewer
Subsidies; the greatest was in his last year, when yet there was but one
Subsidy, with two fifteenes and tenths granted by the Temporalty, and a
Subside by the Clergy. And indeed to show how loath this King was to lay
Impositions upon his people, this may be a sufficient argument; that though he
were much in debt, yet he chose rather to deal with the Foulker in the
Low Countries for money upon loan, at the interest of fourteen pounds for a
hundred, for a year. But his ways for raising of money, was by selling of
Chantrie Lands and Houses, given him by Parliament; and by inquiring after all
Churchgoods, either remaining in Cathedral and Parish-Churches, or embezeled
away, as Jewels, gold and silver, Chalices, ready money, Copes, and other
Vestments; reserving to every Church one Challice, and one covering for the
Communion Table, the rest to be applied to his benefit. He also raised money by
enquiring after offenses of Officers in great places; in which inquiry, one
Beamont Master of the Rolls, being convinced of many crimes, surrendered all
his Offices, Lands and Goods into the Kings hands: also one Whalley Receiver of
Yorkshire, being found a delinquent, surrendered his Office, and paid a great
fine besides: also the Lord Paget, Chancellor of the Duchy, convinced, that
he had sold the Kings Lands and Timber-woods without Commission, and had
applied the Kings Fines to his own use; for these and other offenses,
surrendered his Office, and was fined at four thousand pounds, which he paid
in hand. One thing more was done in his time for raising of money; twenty
thousand pounds weight of Bullion, was appointed to be made so much baser, that
the King might gain thereby a hundred and forty thousand pounds.

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
IN his third year a Parliament was holden; wherein one Act was made against
spreading of Prophesies; another against unlawful Assemblies. In his fourth
year a Parliament was holden, wherein Priests children were made legitimate;
and usury for the loan of money was forbidden. In his fifth year, it was
ordained that the Laws of England should be administered in Ireland; and a king
at Arms named Vlster, was newly instituted for Ireland; whose Province was all
Ireland; and he was the first fourth king of Arms, and first Herald appointed
for Ireland. Also in his fifth year, base moneys formerly coined, were cried
down; so as the shilling went but for nine pence, and shortly after but for
six pence, the g^oat but for three pence, and shortly after but for two pence.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
IN the first yee^e of this Kings reign, Injunctions were set forth, for
pulling down and removing all Images out of Churches; also certain Homilies
were appointed to be made by learned men, to be read in Churches, for the
peoples instruction: and at Easter this year, it was ordered, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be ministered to the Lay People in both
kinds; also Marriage was allowed to Clergy men; Auricular Confession and
prayer for the dead were forbidden: and it is observable, that the very same
day that Images were pulled down at London, the great overthrow was given to
the Scots at Mu^kleborough. Also at this time, by the Archbishop Cranmers
means, diverse learned Protestants came over into England, and had here
ente^tainment, as Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius; of whom Peter
Martyr was sent to read a Divinity Lecture in Oxford, Bucer and Fagius in
Cambridge. In this Kings foutth year, all Altars in Churches were commanded to
be taken down, and Tables placed in their rooms. In his fifth year the Book
of Common Prayer was established.

Casualties happening in his time.
IN his second year, Saint Annes Church within Aldesgate was burnt. In his
^ifth year, a sweating sickness infested first Shrewesbury, and then the
north parts, and after grew most extreme in London, so as the first week
there dyed eight hundred persons, and was so violent that it took men away in
four and twenty hours, sometimes in twelve, and sometimes in less: amongst
other of account that dyed of this sickness, were the two Sons of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, who dyed within an hour after one another, in such
order that both of them dyed Dukes. This disease was proper to the English
Nation, for it followed the English wheresoever they were in foraigne parts;
but seized upon none of any other Country. In this year, one Master Arden of
Kent, by procurement of his wife was murdered in his own house; being dead,
his body was carried out and laid upon the ground, in a close hard by; where
this is memorable, that for two years after, the ground where his body lay,
bore no grass, but represented still as it were a picture of his body, only
in the space between his legs and arms there grew grass, but where any part
of his body touched, none at all. Yet this miraculous accident was not so much
for the murder, as for the curses of a widow-woman, out of whose hands the
said Master Arden had uncharitably bought the said close, to her undoing. And
thus the divine justice even in this world oftentimes works miracles upon
offenders, for a merciful warning to men, if they would be so wise to take it.
In his sixth year, the third of August, at Middleton-stony, eleven miles from
Oxford, a woman brought forth a child which had two perfect bodies from the
navill upward, the legs for both the bodies grew out at the midst where the
bodies joined, and had but one issue for the excrements of them both: they
lived eighteen days, and were women children. This year also were taken at
Quinborow three Dolphins, and at Black-Wall six more, the least of which was
bigger then any horse.

Works of Piety by him or other in his time.
THis King gave three houses to the relief of the poor; first for the
fatherless and beggars children, he gave the late Gray-Fryers in London, which
i^ now called Christ's Hospital: then for lame and diseased persons he gave the
Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and Saint Barthalomews in West
Smithfield: Thirdly, for riotous and idle persons, he gave his house of
Brid^well; and for their maintenance, he took six hundred pounds a year land
from the house of the Savoy (which had been long abused) and bestowed it upon
these houses; to which he added four thousand marks a year more. By his example
Sir William Chester Alderman of London, and John Calthroppe Draper, at their
own costs made the Brickwalls and way on the backside that leads to the
Hospital of Saint Barthalomews; and also covered and vawted the Town Ditch,
which before was very noisome. In the second year of this King, Sir John
Gresham then Major of London, founded a free School at Host in Norfolk; also
at his decease, he gave to every Ward in London ten pounds, to be distributed
amongst the poor, and to maids marriages two hundred pounds. In his third year,
Sir Rowland Hill the ^hen Lord Major of London, caused to be made a Cawsway
commonly called Overlane pavement, in the high way from Stone to Nantwich, in
length four miles, for the ease of horse and man. He caused also a Cawsway to
be made from Dunchurch to Bransen in Warwickshiere, more then two miles in
length; and gave twenty pounds toward the making of Roitton Bridge three miles
from Coventry. He made likewise the high way to Kilborne near to London. Also
four Bridges, two of them of stone, containing eighteen arches in them both;
the one over the River of Severne called Acham Bridge, the other Terne Bridge;
and two other of Timber at Stoke, where he built also a good part of the
Church. A free School likewise he builded at ^rayton in Shropshiere, with
Master and Usher, and gave sufficient stipends to them both. Also he purchased
a free fair to the said Town, with a free Market weekly; and every fourteen
days a free Market for cartell. Besides all thi^, he gave to the Hospital of
Christ-Church in London in his life time, five hundred pounds, and at his
death, a hundred. In this Kings fourth year, Sir Andrew Iud Major of London,
founded a notable free School at Tunbridge in Kent; he builded also an
Almshouse for six poor people, nigh to the Parish Church of Saint Helens in
Bishopsgate-streete; and gave threescore pounds land a year to the Skinners of
London, for which be bound to pay twenty pounds to the Schoolmaster, and eight
pounds to the Usher of his free School at Tunbridge yearly for ever; and four
shillings weekly to the six poor Almspeople, and something more yearly. In his
sixth year, Sir George Barnes Major of London, gave a Windmill in
Finsbury-field to the Haberdashers of London, the profits thereof to be
distributed to the poor of that Company; also to Saint Bartholamews the little,
certain Tenements to the like use.

Of his personage and conditions.
COncerning his personage, it is said, he was in body beautiful, of a sweet
aspect, and specially in his eyes, which seemed to have a starry liveliness
and luster in them. Concerning his conditions, in matter of fact, there is not
much to be said; but in matter of disposition and inclination very much, even
to admiration. For though his tree was not yet come to the maturity of bearing
fruit, yet it was come to the forwardness to bear plenty of buds and
blossoms. For proof of his merciful disposition this one example may be
sufficient; when one Joan Butcher was to be burned for blasphemy and heresy,
all the Counsel could not get him to sign the Warrant, till the Archbishop
Cranmer with much importunity persuaded him, and then he did it, but not
without weeping. For his pregnancy of wit, and knowledge in all kinds of
learning; we shall need but to hear what Cardan (who coming into England, had
often conference with him) reports of him: that he was extraordinarily
skillful in Languages, and in the Politics; well seen in Philosophy and in
Divinity, and generally indeed a very miracle of Art and Nature. He would
answer Ambassadors somerimes upon the sudden, either in French or Latin; he
knew the state of foreign Princes perfectly, and his own more. He could call
all Gentlemen of account through his Kingdom by their names; and all this when
he had scarce yet attained to the age of fifteen years; and died before
sixteen; that from hence we may gather, it is a sign of no long life, when
the faculties of the mind are ripe so early.

Of his death and burial.
IN the sixth year of his reign, which was the year before he died, he fell
sick of the Measels, and being well recovered of them, he fell after soon into
the small Pox, and of them also was so well recovered, that the summer following
he rode a progress, with a greater magnificence then ever he had done before;
having in his train no fewer then four thousand horse. In January following,
(whether procured by sinister practice, or growing upon him by natural
infirmity) he fell into an indisposition of body, which soon after grew to a
cough of the Lungs. Whereupon a rumor was spread abroad by some, that a
Nosegay had been given him at Newyeerstide, which brought him into this slow
but deadly consumption; by others that it was done by a Glister: how ever it
was, he was brought at last to so great extremity, that his Physicians despared
of his life; and when Physicians could do him no good, a Gentlewoman (thought
to be prepared for the purpose) took him in hand, and did him hurt; for with
her applications his legs swelled, his pulse failed, his skin changed
color, and many other symptoms of approaching death appeared. The hour before
his death, he was overheard to pray thus by himself, O Lord God, deliver me
out of this miserable and wretched life; O Lord, thou know how happy it were
for me to be with thee; yet for thy chosens sake, if it be thy will send me
life and health that I man truly serve thee: O Lord God, save thy chosen people
of England, and defend this Realm from Papistrie, and maintain thy true
Religion, that I and my People may praise thy holy Name, for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake. So ^urning his face and seeing some by him, he said; I thought
you had nor been so nigh: Yes, said Doctor Owens we heard you speak to your
self; then said the King, I was praying to God: O, I am faint; Lord have mercy
upon me, and receive my spirit; and in so saying gave up the Ghost, the sixth
day of July, in the year 1553. and in the sixteenth year of his Age when he had
reigned six years, five months, and nine days. It is noted by some, that he
died the same month, and the same day of the month that his father King Henry
the eight had put Sir Thomas Moore to death. His body was buried upon the ninth
of August in the Chapel of Saint Peter's Church in Westminster; and laid near
to the body of King Henry the seventh his grandfather. At his funeral which
was on the tenth of August following, his sister Queen Mary showed this respect
to him, that though Doctor Day a Popish Bishop preached, yet all the service
with a communion was in English.

Men of note in his time.
THis Kings reign being short, and having but small wars, had not many
swordmen famous for any acts they did; Gown men there were some, as Edward
Holl a Counselor in the Law, who wrote a notable Cronicle of the union of the
two houses of York and Lancaster; William Hugh a Yorkeshireman, who wrote a
notable Treatice called The troubled man's medicine; Thomas Sternehold, borne in
Southampton, who turned into English Meete^ seven and thirty of David's Psalms.

The Interregnum between the death of King Edward and the proclaiming at
London of Queen Mary.
KIng Edward being dead, the Duke of Northumberland took upon him to sit at
the Stern, and ordered all things at his pleasure: so two days after he with
others of the Council, sent to the Lord Major that he with six Aldermen and
twelve principal Commons, should repair presently to the Court; to whom when
they came, it was secretly signified that King Edward was dead; and that by his
last Will, to which all the Nobility and Judges had given assent, he had
appointed the Lady Jane, daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, to succeed him; his
Letters Patents whereof were showed them, and thereupon they were required, to
take their Oaths of Allegiance to the Lady Jane, and to secure the City in her
behalf; which whether dissemblingly, or sincerely; whether for love or fear,
yet they did, and then departed. The next day the Lady Jane in great state, was
brought to the Tower of London, and there declared Queen; and by edect with
the sound of Trumpet proclaimed so through London; at which time, for some
words seeming to be spoken against it, one Gilbert Pot a Vint^ers servant, was
set in the Pilory, and lost both his ears. Before this time, the Lady Mary
having heard of her brothers death, and of the Duke of Northumberlands
designs; removed from Hovesdon to her Manor of Keninghall in Norfolk, and
under pretense of fearing infection, (having lately lost one of her household
servants of the plague) in one day she rode forty miles, and from thence
afterward to her Castle of Framingham in Suffolk; where taking upon her the
name of Queen, there resorted to her the most part of all the Gentlemen both
of Norfolk and Suffolk, offering their assistance; but upon condition she
would make no alteration in Religion, to which she condiscended; and thereupon
soon after came to her, the Earls of Oxford, Bathe and Sussex, the Lord
Wentworth, Thomas Wharton, and John Mordant Barrons eldest sons; and of
Knights Cornwallis, Drury, Walgrave, Shelton, Beningfield, Ierningham, Suliard,
Freston and many others. The Lady Mary being thus assisted, wrote her letters
signed the ninth of July to the Lords of the Council, wherein she claimed the
Crown, as of right belonging to her; and required them to proclaim her Queen
of England in the City of London, as they tendered her displeasure. To this
letter of hers, the Lords answered, that for what they did, they had good
Warrant; not only by King Edwards last Will, but by the Laws of the land,
considering her Mothers divorce, and her own Illegitimation; and therefore
required her to submit her self to Queen Jane, being now her Sovereign. This
Letter was written from the Tower of London, under the hands of these that
follow, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Thom^s Elye Chancellor, William
Marquess of Winchester, John Earl of Bedford, Henry Duke of Suffolk, Francis
Earl of Shrewsbury, John Duke of North^mberland, William Earl of Pembrooke,
Thomas Lord Darcey Lord Chamberlin, Cobham, Rich, Huntington, Cheyney, John
Gates, William Peter, William Ce^ill, John Clerk, John Mason, Edward North and
Robert Bows. The quarrel on both sides being thus begun by Letters, is
prosecuted by Arms; and the Lords for their General make choice of the Duke
of Suffolk, as a man most likely to be firm and sure in the employment; but
the Queen his daughter cannot miss his presence; and besides, is not willing
to hazard his person; and thereupon, she by entreaties and the Lords by
persuasions prevail with the Duke of Northumb^rland to undertake the charge;
who before his going having conference with the Lords, let them know how
sensible he was of the double danger he under-went in this enterprise; both in
respect of the Lady against whom he went, and in respect of them whom he left
behind him; for if they in his absence should by any accident be drawn to
waver in their resolution, they might work their own safety with his
destruction, and make themselves seem innocent in his guiltiness. To which
one of the Lords replied and said; Your Grace makes a doubt of that which
cannot be, for which of us all can wash his hands clean of this business? and
therefore it behooves us to be as resolute as your self; and the Earl of
Arundell, to testify his resolution in the matter, said, he was sorry it was
not his chance to go with him, at whose feet he could find in his heart to
spend his blood. So the Duke with the Marquess of Northampton, the Lord Gray,
and diverse other of account, on the fourteenth of July set forward on the
journey with eight thousand foot and two thousand horse; and passing through
Shoreditch, the Duke said to the Lord Gray, see how the people press to see
us, but not one of them says, God speed you. The Duke had every days march
how far he should go, appointed him by Commission; which being very slow,
whether it were done of purpose, by some that favored the Lady Mary's side,
was certainly a great help to her proceedings; for by this means she had the
longer time to make her preparations; and indeed in this time two accidents
happened, of great benefit to her; one, that Edward Hastings the Earl of
Huntingtons brother, having an Army of four thousand foot committed to him by
the Earl of Northumberland, he now left his Party, and went to the Lady Mary:
the other, that six great Ships which lay before Yarmouth to intercept the Lady
Mary, if she shouly attempt to fly, now at the persuasion of Master
Ierningham, came in to her aid: which two revolts so terrified the Londoners,
that though Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, on the sixteenth of July, at Paul's
Cross Preached a Sermon, wherein he invited the people to stand firm to
Queen Jane, whose cause he affirmed to be most just, ye^ few or none were
persuaded by him; so as the Lords themselves fell off from the side, who
assembling at Beynards-Castle, first the Earl of Arundell, then the Earl of
Pembrooke fell to invectives against the Earl of Northumberland; and then all
the Lords joining in opinion with them, they called for the Major, and in
London Proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen; as likewise the Lord Windsor, Sir
Edmund Peckham, Sir Robert Drurie and Sir Edward Hastings did in
Buckinghamshire; Sir John Williams of Tame, and Sir Leonard Chamberlain in
Oxfordshire, and Sir Thomas Tresham in the County of Northampton. All this came
soon to the knowledge of the Duke of Northumberland, being then at Bury; who
thereby seeing how the world went, thought it his best course to turn with the
stream, and thereupon returning to Cambridge, he took the Major of the Town
with him into the Marketplace, and there himself for want of a Herald,
Proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen, and in sign of joy threw up his Cap; which
yet served not his turn, for the next morning Henry Fitz-Allen Earl of
Arundell, came into Cambridge from Queen Mary, who entering his Chamber, the
Duke at his feet fell on his knees; desiring him for Gods love to consider his
case, that had done nothing but by the Warrant of him and the Council: My Lord
(said the Earl) I am sent hither by the Queen to arrest you; and I (said the
Duke) obey your arrest; yet I beseech your Lordship, to use mercy toward him
whose Acts have been no other then were enjoined by Commission: you should have
thought of that sooner (said the Earl) and thereupon committed him to a Guard,
and left him to the Queens mercy. Thus ended all this great Dukes designs, in
his own destruction, and brought him to fall on his knees to them, who had
often before bowed their knees to him; and the Earl, who at the Dukes going
ou^, could have been contented to spend his blood at his feet, was now
contented to be made an instrument of his fall: so sudden are the turns of
men's affections, and so unstable is the building upon their asseverations; at
lest no man must look to have his case be of any weight against him, who has
his own case put in the Balance. Together with the Duke his three Sons
John, Ambrose and Henry, the Earl of Huntington, Sir Andrew Dudley, the two
Gates, John and Henry, Sir Thomas Palmer and Doctor Sands were conveyed toward
London, and brought to the Tower; and the next day the Marquess of
Northampton, the Lord Robert Dudley and Sir Robert Corbet. Before which time,
the Duke of Suffolk entering his daughters the Lady Ianes Chamber, told her,
she must now put off her Royal Robes, and be contented with a private life: to
which she answered, She would much more willingly put them off, then she had
put them on; and would never have done it, but in obedience to him and her
Mother. And this was the end of the Lady Ianes ten days Reign.

THE REIGN OF QUEEN MARY.
THE Lady Mary having bin Proclaimed Queen in London and other parts of the
Realm; removed from her castle of Framingham toward London; and being come to
Wanstead in Essex, on the thirtieth of July, the Lady Elizabeth her sister,
with a train of a thousand horse, rode from her place in the Strand to meet
her: on the third of August the Queen rode through London to the Tower, where
at her entrance were presented to her Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Edward Lord
Courtney, Stephen Gardener late Bishop of Winchester, and the Du^chesse of
Somerset; who all kneeling downe^ she kissed them, and said, These be my
Prisoners, and then caused them presently to be set at liberty: the next day
she restored the Lord Courtney to his Marchisate of Exceter; and the same day
also she not only restored Stephen Gardener to his Bishopric of Winchester,
but a few da^es after made him Chancellor of England; yet this was the man
that had subscribed to her Mothers Divorce^ and had written Books against the
lawfulness of her marriage. The fifth of August Edmund Bonner late Bishop of
London prisoner in the Marshalsey, and Cutbert Tunstall the old Bishop of
Durham prisoner in the Kings Bench, had their Pardons and were restored to
their Sees. Sortly aft^r, all the Bishops which had been deprived in the time
of King Edward the sixth, were restored to their Bishopricks^ and the new
removed, as Ridley was removed from London and Bonner placed, Skory from
Chichester and Day placed, Miles Coverdale from Exceter and West placed, John
Hooper from Worcester and Heath placed. Also all Beneficed men that were
married, or would not renounce their Religion, were put out of their Livings,
and other of a contrary opinion put in their rooms.

On the thirteenth of August one Master Bourne a Canon of Paul's, preaching at
Paul's Cross, not only prayed for the dead, but also declared that Doctor
Bonner Bishop of London, (late restored, and there in presence) for a Sermon by
him made four years before, in the same place, and upon the same Text, had
unjustly been cast into the vile prison of the Marshalsey; which Speech so
offended some of the Auditory, that they cried, Pull him down, pull him down;
and had certainly done him violence (for a Dagger was thrown at him) if Master
Bradford a Protestant Preacher, had not stepped into his place and appeased the
tumult, and Master Rogers another Protestant Minister (who were both afterward
burnt for Religion) had not shifted away Bourne into Paul's School.

Hitherto Queen Mary's reign had been without blood, but now the Cataracts
of seventy will be opened, that will make it rain blood: for now on the
eighteenth of August, John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, William Parre
Marquess of Northampt^n, and John Earl of Warwick, son and heir to the
Duk, were arraigned at Westminster Hall, before Thomas Duke of N^^folke as
high Steward of England; where the Duke of Northumberland, after his Indictment
read, required the opinion of the Court in two points; first, whither a man
doing any Act by authority of the Princes Couns^^le, and by warrant of the
great Seal of England, might for any such Act be charged with treason:
secondly, whither any such persons as were equally culpable, and by whose
commandments he was directed, might be his Judges and pass upon his trial:
whereunto was answered, that concerning the first; the great Seal which he
alleged for his warrant, was not the Seal of the lawful Queen of the Realm,
but of an Usurper, and therefore could be no warrant for him: and as to the
second, it was resolved, that if any were as deeply to be touched in the case
as himself, yet so long as no Attainder were of record against them, they were
persons able in law to pass upon his trial, and not to be challenged but at
the Princes pleasure. After which answers, the Duke used few words, but
confessed the Indictment, and accordingly had judgment to dye. By whose example
the other prisoners arraigned with him, confessed the Indictments, and thereupon
had judgment: the ninteenth of August, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir John, and Sir
Henry Gates brethren, and Sir Thomas Palmer Knights, were arraigned at
Westminster, who c^nfessing their Indictments, had judgment, which was
pronounced by the Marquess of Winchester, Lord high Treasu^er, sitting that
day as chief Justice: after these condemnations, followed the executions; for
on the two and twentieth of August John Duke of Northum^erland was brought to
the Tower Hill, and there beheaded; being upon the scaffold in a gown of green
colored damask, he put it off and then made a long Speech, wherein he asked
the Queen forgiveness, whom he acknowledged to have grievously offended; and
then making profession of his Faith, that he died a true Catholic (meaning a
Papist) he said the Psalms of Miserere and De Profundis, the Pater noster, and
six of the first verses of the Psalm In te Domine speravi, ending with this
verse, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit; and this said, he looked
about him, as looking for a Pardon, but none coming, he laid his head down
upon the block, and at one blow had it stricken off; his body with the head
was buried in the Tower, by the body of Edward late Duke of Somerset (mortal
enemies while they lived, but now lying together as good friends) so as there
lies before the high Altar in Saint Peter's Church, ^wo Dukes between two
Queens, namely the Duke of Somerset and the Duke of Northumberland between
Queen Anne and Queen Katherine, all four beheaded. Of what religion this Duke
was may well be doubted, seeing at his death he professed himself a Papist,
when lately before he had importuned King Edward to make the Lady Jane his
successor, lest the Papal religion should be restored; it seems he was not
greatly of either but for other ends; a Protestant then when it was to make his
daughter in law Queen; now a Papist, when it was to save his life (for it was
thought he had Pardon promised, if he would recant. At the same time and place
were beheaded Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer, who were no such
temporizers but persisted and dyed in the Protestant Religion, which they had
always professed.

After this, a sprinkling of mercy came from the Queen; for on the third of
September the Lord Ferrers of Chartley, the two chief Justices, Sir Roger
Cholmley and Mountague, Sir John Cheek and others were delivered out of the
Tower whether before they had been committed; but a shower of severity followed
soon after, for on the fifteenth of September Master Latimer and Doctor Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury were sent to the Tower, and on the third o^ November
following, the said Archbishop Cranmer, the Lady Jane (late Queen) and the
Lord Guildford her husband, with the Lords Ambrose and Henry, sons to the
late Duke of Northumberland, were all arraigned at the Guild Hall, found guilty
and had judgment to dye.

All this while Queen Mary had contented her self to be Queen by
Proclamation; but now that things were something settled, she proceeds to her
Coronation: for on the last of September she rode in her Chariot through London
toward Westminster in this order; first rode a number of Gentlemen and
Knights, then Doctors, then Judges, then Bishops, then Lords, then the
Council, after whom followed the Knights of the Bath, thirteen in number in
their Robes, then the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor, and the Marquess
of Winchester Lord high Treasurer, next came the Duke of Norfolk, and after
him the Earl of Oxford who bore the sword, then the Major of Lond^n in a Gown
of Crimson Velvet, who bore the Scepter of Gold; after came the Queens
Chariot, and then followed another Chariot wherein sat the Lady Elizabeth her
sister and the Lady Anne of Cleeve, and then came Ladies and Gentlewomen riding
on horses, trapped with red velvet: etc. In this order they came through London
to Westminster; where in many places by the way, were Pagents and stately
shows, and many rich presents given to the Queen. The next day she went by
water to the old Palace, and remained there till eleven of the clock, and then
went on foot upon blew cloth, being railed on either side to Saint Peter's
Church, where she was Crowned and Anointed by the Bishop of Winchester, (the
two Archbishops being then in the Tower) with all Rites and Ceremonies of old
accustomed.

After her Coronation, a general pardon was published in her name, but
interlaced with so many exceptions of matters and persons, that very few took
benefit by it; for after the pardon published, there were Commissioners
assigned, to compound with such persons as were excepted: from some of whom
they took away their Fees and Offices, some they fi^ed, and some they deprived
of their estates and livings.

About this time Sir James Hales one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, who
in the time of King Edward had refused to sign a writing for disinheriting the
Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth; (a fact worthy at least of a kind
remembrance from the Lady Mary now Queen) yet now, for that at a quarter
Sessions in Kent, he gave charge upon the statutes of King Henry the eight, and
King Edward the sixth, in derogation of the Primacy of the Church of Rome; he
was first committed to the Kings Bench, then to the Counter, and lastly to the
Fleet; where he grew so troubled in mind, that he attempted with a Penknife
to kill himself; and being afterward recovered of that hurt, and brought to
the Queens presence, who gave him very comfortable words, yet could never come
to be quiet in his mind; but in the end, drowned himself in a River not half
a mile from his house, the River being so shallow, that he was feign to lie
grovelling before he could dispatch himself of life.

And now another sprinkling of mercy came from the Queen; for the Marquess of
Northampton, and Sir Henry Gates, lately before condemned to dye, were now
pardoned and set at liberty. The Lady Jane also was allowed the liberty of the
Tower, not without hope of life and liberty altogether; if her father the Duke
of Suffolk had not the second time been cause of her destruction.

About this time also a Synod was assembled, for consulting about matters of
Religion; and the point specially of the real presence in the Sacrament. The
Prolocutour was Doctor Weston; and of the Protestant side, were John Almer and
Richard Cheyney, both Bishops afterward in Queen Elizabeth's time, also John
Philpo^, afterward burnt, James Haddon and others. After long disputation,
where reasons were not so much weighed as voices numbered; the Papal side, as
having most voices, carried it; and thereupon was that Religion again
restored, and the Mass commanded in all Churches to be celebrated, after the
ancient manner.

It was now the year 1553. when Queen Mary was come to the age of seven and
thirty years, and therefore high time now to think of marriage, at least if
she meant to have issue of her body; but a hard ma^ter it was to find a
husband in all points ^itting for her, yet three at this time (in common fame
at least) were taken into consideration: one was the Lord Courtney M^rquesse of
Exceter, a goodly Gentleman and of Royal blood, but there was exception
against him because inclining (as was thought) to Lutheranisme; another was
Cardinal ^oole, of a dignity not much inferior to Kings, and by his Mother
descended from Kings; but there was exception against him also, because four
and fifty years old, (as old a Batchelour as Queen Mary was a maid) and so the
less hope of issue between them: but the third (if he might be had) was
without exception, and this was Phillip Prince of Spain, the Emperor Charles
his eldest son, with whom being a Spaniard, she was the fitter matched, as
being by the Mother a Spaniard her self. And now very oppertunely came in the
beginning of Ian. Ambassadors into England about it; amongst others, the Cou^^
of Egmond Admiral of the L^w Countries; and John of Memorancy Lord of
Curryers; whose message was so kindly entertained, that the marriage in short
time was absolutely concluded, though it seemed something strange to many, that
she should now be wife to the son, who thirty years before should have been
wife to the father. But so it is, Queens are never old, so long as they are
within years of bearing children. And indeed the match was concluded, with
conditions of far more advantage to Quee^e Mary, then they were to King
Phillip, as on the fourteenth of January Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester
and Lord Chancelour of England, openly in the Presence Chamber at Westminster,
declared to all the Lords and Gentlemen there present: for it was agreed, that
after the mar^iage, King Phillip should have the Title of all the Queens
Dominions, and be assumed into fellowship of the government; but yet with
reservation to the Queen, of all Privileges and Customs of the Kingdom, and
free disposition of all Offices and Honors, as likewise the Queen should be
assumed into the fellowship of all the Kings Dominions, and surviving him,
should have a Jointure of two hundred thousand Pounds a year. Then for the
issue between them, if she had a Son, that he should inherit the Low
Countries and Burgundy; and King Phillips son Charles, which he had by a
former wife, should inherit all his Dominions in Italy and Spain; but if his
son Charles should fail without issue, then the son he should have by
Queen Mary, should inherit his Kingdoms of Italy and Spain also. And the
like good provision was also made for daughters. But notwithstanding these
great ^dvantage^ of the ma^ch, yet such was the precipitant rashness of some;
that thinking themselves wiser then the Queen and the Council, they sought by
all means to oppose the match; giving out that it ^ended to bring England
under the yoke of Spain, and to make the Country a slave to strangers. This
was the general murmuring of people; but the first that showed himself in
Arms, was Sir Thomas Wyat of Kent; who having communicated the matter with the
Duke of Suffolk the Lady Ianes father, with Peter Caroe a Knight of
Devonshire, and diverse others; intended only to make secret provision, but not
to stir till Prince Phillip should be come, that so their cause of taking
arms might have the better color. On the fifteenth of January, Robert Dudley
son to the Duke of Northumberland, was arraigned at the Guildhall of high
Treason, who confessed the indictment, and had judgment given by the Earl of
Sussex, to be drawn, hanged, bowelled and quartered.

But now in counsels communicated to many, it is a hard matter to have counsel
kept, and Sir Peter Caroe finding that their plot was discovered, fled privily
into France, where lurking for a time, he was afterward taken at Bruxells, and
brought captive into England; as likewise at the same time and place Sir John
Cheek King Edwards Schoolmaster was taken, who being drawn by terrors to
embrace the Papal Religion, with very grief afterward of his error pined
away and dyed; Sir Peter Caroe lived many years after, and dyed in Ireland;
though it be falsely recorded, they were both burnt for Religion, in June of
this year. Wyatt hearing of Sir Peter Caroes flight, and that all their purpose
was discovered; was driven before his time to enter into arms, giving out for
the cause that it was not to attempt any thing against the Queen, but only to
remove ill Councillors, and chiefly to repel Prince Phillip; least by this
marriage the Kingdom should come in subjection to the Spaniard. With Wyatt were
joined Sir Henry Isley, Sir George Harper, Anthony and William Knevet, and
diverse other Gentlemen of the County; against him were the Lord Abuegaveny, Sir
Thomas Cheyney Lord Warden of the Ports, Sir Sobert Southwell Sheriff of Kent,
Sir Warram Sentleger, Sir Thomas Kempe Sir Thomas Moyle, Sir Thomas Finch with
diverse other; yet all these great men had such doubt of the people, that they
durst not proceed but very warily. The five and twentieth of January, news
came to London of Wyats rising; against whom was presently sent the Duke of
Norfolk, with Sir Henry ^erningham Captain of the Guard, Sir Edward Bray, Sir
John Fogge, John Covert Roger Appleton Esquires, and five hundred soldiers out
of London; appointed to go after him, under the leading of Captain Brett. And
now see in times of Sedition, how uncertain a thing it is to trust to the
people; for before Brett could overtake the Duke, Sir George Harper was
secretly got to him, who so persuaded him that he and his five hundred
soldiers left the Duke and went all to VVyatt; which made the Duke and those
with him presently to fly, and put such boldness into VVyatt, that now he
marched in great confidence toward London, with so great terror to all sorts
of people, that at Westminster Hall, the Sergeants and other Lawyers, pleaded
in harness.

In the mean time, the Duke of Suffolk was perceived in Warwickshire, to be
raising of Forces in assistance of VVyatt; against whom was presently sent the
Earl of Huntington, and the Duke finding himself unable to make resistance,
having with all his industry gotten together but only fifty men; he betook
himself to a Tenant of his One, Underwood, with whom he hoped and had promise
to remain undiscovered, till he might have oppertunity to escape, as some say,
as others to a Keeper of his Park called Nicholas Lawrence, who kept him in a
hollow Oak in the said Park^ for two or three days: but whether Underwood or
Lawrence, either out of fear, or out of hope of reward, he betrayed him to the
Earl, by whom he was taken, and under a strong guard carried to the Tower.
Upon this, Queen Mary her self came into London, where calling the Major and
chief of the City together, she made an Oration, wherein she showed the
insolency of VVyatt; who though he pretended the but only the crossing of the
marriage; yet was now grown to such presumption, that he required to have the
custody of her person; and to have Councillors retained or removed at his
pleasure. And as for her marriage, she there affirmed she had done nothing in
it, but by advice of her Council; and for her self, tha^ she was not so
longing for a husband, but that if it were not more for the good of the
Kingdom, then for her ownsatisfaction, she would never once think of
entertaining it. Having by her speech confirmed the minds of the Citizens;
Forces are presently raised, and placed about the Bridge, and other fit places
of the City. The third of February, Wyatt with an Army of three or four
thousand, came to London, hoping of present entrance, but finding the Bridge
broken, and soldiers placed to resist him, after two days stay in Southwarke,
he removed to Kingstone, where he found likewise the Bridge broken, yet with
great industry suddenly repairing it, he passed over his men, and meant with
all speed, to get to the Court, before the Queen should have notice of him
coming; and had done so indeed, if a mischance, and an error upon that
mischance had not hindered him. For being come within six miles of London, the
carriage of one of his great Ordnance brake, in mending whereof so much time
was spent (and VVyatt by no persuasions would go forward without it) that the
time was past, in which his friends at London expected his coming; which
disappointment made many in those parts to fall off, and being perceived by
those about him, many of them also; so as one half of his Army was suddenly
gone and left him; amongst other, Sir George Harper, the most intimate of all
his council, went to the Queen and discovered all his purposes: whereupon the
Earl of Pembrooke with a company levied upon the sudden^ was sent against him;
which made Wyatt slack his pace, so as it was noone before he came to the
suburbs of the City; and then placing his Ordnance upon a hill, and leaving
there the greatest part of his Army, he only with five Ensigns marched
toward Ludgate, and being encountered at Charing-crosse by the Lord Chamberlin
and Sir John Gage, after a small fight put them to flight in such sort, that
word was carried to the Queen, how near Wyatt approached, and how wonderfully
he prevailed all the way he came: with which nothing dismayed; well then (said
she) I will go in person against him my self; and was prep^ring to do so
indeed (so much was her Fathers valor running in her veins:) but it needed
not; for by this time Sir Henry Ie^ningham Captain of the Guard, Sir Edward
Bray Master of the Ordnance, and Sir Phillip Paris, had given him battle and
slain many of his men; and that which was more, coming ^o Ludgate, he was
denied entrance; and then thinking to retire, ^e heard the Earl of Pembrooke
with his Forces was behind at Cha^ing-crosse; so as neither able to go
forward nor yet backward, he was at a stand and in amazement, and then lea^ing
a while upon a stall by the Bell-savage, after a little musing, he returned
toward Temple-gate; where Clarentius the Herald meeting him, fell to persuade
him, not to be a cause of more effusion of blood, nor by persisting in
obstinacy to exclude all hope of the Queens mercy. The Soldiers of Wyatt were
earnest with him to have stood it out; but Wyat as sillily ending, as he had
unadvisedly begun; yielded himself to Sir Maurice Berkeley, and getting up
upon his horse behind him, in that manner rode to the Court; where he had not
the entertainment he expected, for without more ado he was presently sent away
to the Tower. The Captain taken, the rest made no resist^nce, few fled, and of
the other many were taken and laid in prison: and this was done the sixth of
February. And now consultation was held what Delinquents should be punished;
where the first that was thought on was the Lady Jane, in whom was verified,
The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge^
the innocent Lady must suffer for her Fathers fault; for if her Father the Duke
of Suffolk, had not this second time made shipwreck of his loyalty, his
Daughter perhaps had never tasted the salt-waters of the Queens displeasure:
but now as a rock of offense, she is the first that must be removed; and
thereupon is Doctor Fecknam sent to acquaint her, that she must prepare her
self to dye the next day: which Message was so little unpleasing to her, that
she seemed rather to rejoice at it, as whereby she should at last be set at
liberty; and the Doctor being earnest with her to leave her new Religion, and
to embrace the old; she answered, She had now no time to think of any thing,
but of perparing her self to God by Prayer: Fecknam thinking she had spoken
this, to the end she might have some longer time of life, obtained of the
Queen three days longer, and then came and ^old so much to the Lady Jane;
whereat she smiling said, You are much deceived if you think I had any desire
of longer life; for I assure you, since the time you went from me, my life has
been so tedious to me, that I long for nothing so much as death, and since it
is the Queens pleasure, am mo^^ willing to undergo it. Before she was brought
to Execution, her hu^band the Lord Guildford, had made suit, and obtained to
see her and have some conference with her; but she refused it, saying, These
were rather augmenters of grief, then comfort^ of death^ she made no doubt,
but they should shortly meet in a better place, and in a better condition of
society: so on the twelfth of February, her husband the Lord Guildford first,
and then she an hour or two after, was beheaded within the Tower; where she
acknowledged her self to have deserved death, not for seeking the Crown, but
for not refusing it, being offered; and after prayers to God, unclothing her
self, and putting a Handcarchiffe before her eyes, she laid her head down
upon the block, and patiently suffered death, more grievous to the beholders,
then to her self. This end had the Lady Jane Gray, a Lady of incomparable
Piety; and (for her years) of incomparable learning; for being not past
seventeen years of age, she understood perfectly the Greek and Latin tongues,
and was so ready in all points of Divinity, as if she knew them by inspiration
rather then by instruction; no less a miracle in this kind then King Edward;
and therefore no mervaile if he appointed her to succeed him in the Kingdom,
who in the endowments of mind was so like unto him, that whilst she reigned,
it might be thought he continued to reign himself, at lest no more differing
but only the sex. It may not be forgotten, that Judge Morgan, who at her
arraignement gave the sentence against her, shortly after fell mad, and in his
raving, cried continually to have the Lady Jane taken away from him, and so
ended his life.

Two days after the execution of the Lady Jane, namely the fourteenth and
fifteenth of February, twenty pair of Gallows were set up in diverse places of
the City, whereon were handed fifty of Wyats faction; on the eighteenth of
February Bret was hanged at Rochester in chains, Sir Henry^ Isle, who had
been taken in an old freeze coat and an old pair of hose, with his brother
Thomas Isle and Walter Mantell were hanged at Maidstone, Anthony Knevet and his
brother William, with another of the Mantels were executed at Sevenocke; but
then on the twentieth of February a sprinkling of mercy came, for four hundred
of Wyats followers, being brought before the Queen with halters about their
necks, were all pardoned and set at liberty. But then severity soon after
began again, for on the three and twentieth of February the Lord Henry Gray
Duke of Suffolk, and Father to the Lady Jane, who the week before had been
attaigned and condemned, was on the Tower Hill beheaded, and on the eleventh of
April, in the same place was beheaded (the Author of all this mischief) Wyot
himself, whose quarters were set up in diverse places of the City, his head
upon the Gallows at Hay-hill, besides Hide Park. This man, in hope of life,
having before accused the Lord Courtney and the Lady Elizabeth the Queens
sister^ to be privy to his conspiracy, yet at his death he cleared them, and
protested openly, that they were altogether innocent, and never had been
acquainted with his proceedings. Yet was this matter so urged against them by
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellor, that both of them
in March before had been committed to the Tower, though in May following they
were both again released, but yet confined, the Lady Elizabeth to Woodstocke,
under the custody of Sir Henry Beningfield of Oxenborough in the County of
Norfolk; the Lord Courtney to Foderingham, under the custody of Sir Thomas
Tres^am, who after some time was set at liberty, and going into Italy there
dyed. It is memorable, what malice this Bishop Gardener bore to the Lady
Elizabeth, by whose only procurement, not only she was kept i^ most hard
durance, but a Warrant was at last framed under certain Councillors hands, to
put her to death, and had been done, but that Master ^ridges L^ev^enant of the
Tower, pitying her case, went to the Queen to know her pleasure, who utterly
denied that she knew any thing of it; by which means here life was preserved.
Indeed the Bishop would sometimes say, how they cut off boughs and branches,
but as long as they let the root remain, all was nothing: and it is not
unworthy the remembering what ^raines were laid to ens^are her. The common net
at that time for catching of Protestants, was the Real Pres^nce, and this net
was used to catch her; for being asked one time, what she thought of the words
of Christ, This is my Body; whether she thought it the true body of Christ,
that was in the Sacrament. It is said, that after some pawsing, she thus
answered: Christ was the Word that spoke it:
He took the Bread, and brake it:
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe, and take it.


Which though it may seem but a slight expression, yet has it more solidnesse
then at first fight appears; at lest it served her turn at that time to escape
the net, which by direct answering she could not have done.

On the seventeenth of April Thomas Lord Gray, the Duke of Suffolkes brother
was beheaded, the last, and indeed the lest in delinquency, that suffered, for
having any hand in Wyats conspiracy. There remained yet a fagge end, and was
indeed but a fagge end, as nothing worth; for on the same day Sir Nichol^s
Thr^gmorton, being accused to have been a party in Wyats conspiracy, was at
the Guild Hall arraigned before Sir Thomas White Lord Mayor, the Earls of
Shrewsbury and Derby, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord chief Justice of England, Sir
Nicholas Hare Master of the Roles, Sir Francis Englefield Master of the Wards,
Sir Richard Southwell and Sir Edward Walgrave Privy Councillors, Sir Roger
Chomley, Sir William Portman one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir Edward
Sanders one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Master St^^ford and Master
Dyer Sergeants at Law, Master Edward Griffin Attorney ge^erall, Master Sendall
and Peter Titch^orne Clerks of the Crown, where the said M^ster Nicholas
Throgmorton so fully and discreetly answered all objections brought against
him, that he was found by the Jurie, Not Guilty, and was clearly acquitted, but
the Jury notwithstanding was afterward troubled for acquitting him, and sent
prisoners, some of them to the Tower, and some to the Fleet, and afterward
fined to pay a thousand makes a piece at lest, and some 2000. l. though these
sums were afterward something mitigated.

More of Wya^s accomplices had been taken, arraigned and adjudged to dye, but in
judgment the Queen remembered mercy, and gave them their Pardon; of which
number were Master Rudston of Kent, Sir James a Crofts, the Lord John Gray
brother to the Duke of Suf^olke, and some others.

About this time, a little before and after, were advancements in honor, the
Lord William Howard, Lord Admiral of England, was created Baron Ho^ard of
E^^ingham, Sir John Williams was created Baron of Tames, Sir Edward North was
created Ba^on of Chartleigh, Sir John Bridges was created Baron Chandowes of
Sudeley, Gerrard Fitz Garret was created Earl of Kildare and B^ron of Ophelley,
and not long after Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Horse, was created Viscount
Mountag^^.

It is scarce worth remembering, that in the end of this fir^^ year of ^he
Queens reign^, one Elizabeth Cro^t, a wench of eighteen years old, was by
pr^ctice put into a Wall, and thereupon called the Spirit in the Wall, who with
a whistle made for the purpose, whistled out many seditious words against the
Queen, the Prince of Spain, the Mass, Confession, and such other Points; for
which she did Penance, standing upon a skaffold at Paul's Cro^^e all the Sermon
time, where she made open confession of her fault.

There had been good store of Laymens blood shed already, and now the times is
coming to have Clergy men's shed, and for a preparative to it, on the tenth of
April, Cranm^r Archbishop of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridley la^e Bishop of
London, and Hugh Latimer late Bishop of Worcester, are conveyed from the Tower
to Oxford, there to dispure with Oxford and Cambridge men in points of
Religion, but specially of the Eucharist; the Oxford men were Cole, Cha^scy,
Pie, Harpsefield, Smith and Doctor Weston Prolocurour: the Cambridge men Young,
Seaton, Watson, Atkinson, Fecknham and Sedgewicke: the Disputation ended, which
(we may well think, as the matter was carried) went against the prisoners; on
the twentieth of April they were brought again on the Stage; and then
demanded, whether they would persist in their opinion, or else recant; and
affirming they would persist, they were all three adjudged Heretics, and
condemned to the fire; but their execution we must not look for till a year
or two hence; but in the mean time we have John Rogers, the first Martyr of
these time, burnt at London the fourth of February; after whom the ninth of
February, John Hooper late Bishop of Worcester, burnt at Gloucester; after him,
Robert Ferrar Bishop of Man, burnt at Carmarden; after him John Bradford, with
many others; and then the two famous men Ridley and Latimer, no less famous
for their constant deaths, then their religious lives, both burnt at Oxford the
sixteenth of October.

This rising of Wyatt had been a Remora to the Queens marriage, and now to
avoid all such obstacles hereafter, the Queen in April called a Parliament;
wherein were p^opounded two things; one for confirmation of the Marriage, the
other for restoration of the Popes Primacie. This latter was not assented to,
but with great difficulty; for the six years reign of King Edward had spread a
plantation of the Protest^nt Religion, in the hearts of many; but the
Proposition for the marriage was assented to readily, but yet with the adding
of some conditions, which had no^ been thought of in the former Articles:
First, that King Phillip should admit of no Stranger in any Office, but only
Natives^ secondly, that he should innovate nothing in the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom. Thirdly, that he should not carry the Queen out of the Realm,
without her consent, nor any of her children without consent of the Council.
Fourthly, that surviving the Quee^, he should challenge no right in the
Kingdom, but suffer it to descend to the next heir. Fifthly, that he should
carry none of the Jewels of the Realm out of the Kingdom, nor suffer any
Ships or Ordnance to be removed out of the Realm: and lastly, that neither
directly nor indirectly, he should cause the Realm of England to be entangled
with the war between Spain and France.

All things being thus agreed on, the Earl of Bedford Lord Privy Seal, the
Lord Fitzwaters, and diverse other Lord and Gentlemen, are sent into Spain to
fetch over Prince Phillippe, who arrived at Southampton the twentieth of July
in the year 1554. and the three and twentieth came to Winchester, where the
Queen met him, and the five and twentieth, the marriage between them there
was openly solemnized: (the desparity of years, as in Princes, not much
regarded, though he were then but seven and twenty years of age, she eight
and thirty) at which time, the Emperors Ambassador being present, openly
declared; that in consideration of that marriage, the Emperor had given to
Prince Phillippe his son, the Kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem; and
thereupon (the solemnity of marriage being ended) Garter King of Heralds
openly in the Church, in the presence of the King, the Queen, and the Lords
both of England and Spain, solemnly proclaimed, the title and style of these
two Princes, as follows: Phillip and Mary by the grace of God King and Queen
of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
Princes of Spain and Scicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Millany,
Burgandy, and Brabant, Counts of Habspurge, Flanders and Tyroll. After this the
King and Queen by easy journeys came to Winsor Castle, where the King was
instal'd Knight of the Garter, and the Earl of Sussex with him: The eleventh
of August they removed to Richmond, the seven and twentieth to Suffolk-place in
Southwark, and the next day to London (where the stately shows that were made,
may well enough be conceived without relaring) from hence after four days
they removed again to Richmond, where all the Lords had leave to depart into
their Countries, and indeed so many departed, that there remained not an
English Lord at the Court, but the Bishop of Winchester: from Richmond they
removed to Hampton Court, where the Hall door within the Court was continually
kept shut, so as no man might enter unless his errand were first known, which
might perhaps be the fashion of Spain, but to Englishmen seemed very strange.

About this time Cardinal Poole, sent for by the King and Queen, came over
into England; and had come sooner, but that the Emperor fearing he might prove
a corrivall with his son Phillip, had used means to stop his passage, but
now that his Sons marriage was past, he was content to let him pass, who
though he came from Rome with the great authority of a Legate ^ Latere, yet he
would not but come privately into London, because his Attaindour was yet upon
Record; an Act therefore was presently passed to take it off, and to restore
him in blood; for passing of which Act, the King and Queen in person came to
the Parliament house; whither a few days after, the Cardinal came himself,
which was then kept in the great Chamber of Whitehall, because the Queen by
reason of sickness, was not well able to go abroad; and here the King and
Queen sitting under the cloth of Estate, and the Cardinal on their right
hand, all the Lords, Knights and Burgesses being present, the Bishop of
Winchester Lord Chancellor, made a short speech unto them; signifying the
presence of the Lord Cardinal, and that he was sent from the Pope as his
Legate a Latere, to do a work tending to the glory of God, and the benefit of
them all; which (says he) you may better hear from his own mouth. Then the
Cardinal rose up, and made a long solemn Oration, wherein he first thanked
them for his restoring, by which he was enabled to be a member of their
society; then exhorting them to return into the bosom of the Church, for
which end he was come; not to condemn, but to reconcile; not to compel, but
to call and require; and for their first work of reconcilement, requiring them
to repeal and abrogate all such Laws as had formerly been made in derogation
of the Catholic Religion. After which Speech, the Parliament going together,
drew up a Supplication, which within two days after they presented to ^he King
and Queen; wherein they showed themselves to be very penitent for their former
errors, and humbly desired their Majesty's to intercede for them to the Lord
Cardinal and the Sea Apostolic, that they might be Pardoned of all they had
done amiss, and be received into the bosom of the Church; being themselves
most ready to abrogate all Laws prejudicial to the Sea of Rome. This
Supplication being delivered to the Cardinal, he then gave them Absolution, in
these words; We, by the Apostolic authority given unto us, by the most Holy
Lord Pope Julius the third (Christ's Vicegerent on Earth) do Absolve and
deliver you and every of you, with the whole Realm and Dominions thereof, from
all Heresy and Schism, and from all Judgments, Censures and Pains for that
cause incurred, and also We do restore you again, to the unity of our Mother
the holy Church, The report hereof coming to Rome, was cause that a solemn
Procession was made, for joy of the conversion of England to the Church of
Rome. And now the Queen had a great desire to have King Phillip crowned, but
to this the Parliament would by no means assent.

In October this second year of her reign, a rumor was spread of the Queens
being with child, and so forward that she was quick; and thereupon were
Lettes sent from the Lords of the Council: to Bonner Bishop of London, that
Prayers of Thanksgiving should be made in all Churches; and the Parliament it
self was so credulous of it, that they entered into consideration of the
education of the child, and made an Act; desiring the King (our of (...)
confidence they had in him) that if the Queen should fail, he would be
pleased ^o take upon him the Rule and Government of the child; but after ^ll
this, in June following, it came to be known, that it was but a Tympany, ^r at
lest the Queen so miscarried, that there came no child, nor the Queen likely
ever after to have any. But howsoever, in hope of the joy that was expected; in
Ianu^ry of this year, diverse of the Council, as the Lord Chancellor, the
Bishop of Elye, the Lord Treasurour, the Earl of Shrewsb^ry, the Controlour of
the Queens house, Secretary Bourne and Sir Richard So^thwell Master of the
Ordinance, were sent to the Tower, to discharge and set at liberty a great part
of the Prisoners in the Tower; as ^amely, the late Duke of Northumberlands
sons, Ambrose, Robert and Henry, also Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir James Cro^ts,
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Sir John Rogers, Sir Nicholas Arnold, Sir George
Harper, Sir Edward Warner, Sir William Sentlow, Sir Gowen Carow, William Gybbs
Esquire, Cutbert Vaughan, and some others.

About this time, one William Fetherstone, a Millers son, of the age of
eighteen years, named and bruted himself to be King Edward the sixth; for
which being apprehended and examined, he answered as one lunaticke; and
thereupon was whipped at a Carts ^ayle, and banished into the North; but the
year after, spreading abroad again, that King Edward was alive, and that he
had talked with him, he was arraigned and condemned of treason, and at Tyburn
hanged and quartered.

In the month of March, the Queen was taken with a fit of Devotion, and
thereupon called unto her four of her Privy Council, namely, William
Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurour, Sir Robert Rochester Comptrolour, Sir
William Peter Secretary, and Sir Francis Englefield Master of the Wards, and
signified unto them, that it went against her conscience, to hold the Lands and
Possessions as well of Monasteries and Abbeys as of other Churches, and
therefore did freely relinquish them, and leave them to be disposed, as the
Pope and the Lord Cardinal should think fit; and thereupon charged them to
acquaint the Cardinal with this her purpose. And shortly after in performance
hereof, John Fecknam late Deane of Paul's, was made Abbot of Westminster, and
had possession delivered him, and with him fourteen Monks received the Habit
at the same time: and on the twentieth of November, Sir Thomas was instituted
Lord of Saint John's of Jerusalem, and was put in possession of the Lands
belonging unto it. And when it was told her^ that this would be a great
diminution of the Revenues of her Crown; she answered, she more valued the
salvation of her soul, then a thousand Crowns: a most religious speech, and
enough, if there were but this, to show her to be a most pious Prince.

The fourth of September this year, King Phillip waited on with the Earl of
Arundell Lord Steward, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of Huntington and
others, went over to Callice, and from thence to Brussels in Brabant, to visit
the Emperor his Father; who delive^ing him possession of the Low Countries, in
March following he returned into England; but then, on the sixth of July
following, by reason of wars with France, he passed again over to Callic^ and
so into Flanders, from whence he returned not till eighteen months after;
which made great muttering amongst the common people, as though he took any
little occasion to be absent, for the little love he bore to the Queen.

In the third year of the Queen dyed Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester at
his house in Southwarke; of whose death it is memorable, that the same day in
which Bishop Ridley and Master Latimer suffered at Oxford, he would not go to
dinner till four a clock in the a^ternoone, though the old Duke of Nor^olke
was come to dine with him; the reason was, because he would first hear of
their being burnt, and as soon as word of that was brought him, he presently
said, Now let us go to Dinner; where sitting down and eating merrily, upon a
sudden he fell into such extremity, that he was feign to be taken from the
Table and carried to his bed, where he continued fifteen days, without voyding
any thing either by urine or otherwise, which caused his tsongu to swell in his
mouth, and so dyed; after whose death, Nicholas Heath Archbishop of York was
made Lord Chancelour.

And now comes the time of Archbishop Cranmers execution, who the year before
had been condemned and degraded by Commission from the Pope; after which,
being by the subtlety of some, put in hope of life, out of frailty, he
subscribed to a Recantation, which yet did him no good; for whether it were,
that Cardinal Poole would no longer be kept from being Archbishop (which he
would not be as long as he lived) or that the Queen could ^ot be gotten to
forget, his being the chief instrument of her Mothers di^orce; his ex^cution
was resolved to be the 14. of Febr. in the same place at Oxford where Ridley
and Latimer five month before had bin: before the execution D^ct. ^^le
preached, who to make use of Cranmers Recantation, told the people, they do
well to harken to this learned man's confession, who now at his death, and with
his death would testify which was the true religion, never thinking that
Cranmer would have denied his former Recantation; but Cranmer being brought to
the stake (contrary to expectation) acknowledged, that through frailty he had
subscribed it, praying God heartily to forgive it; and now for a punishment,
that hand which had done it should first suffer, and therewithal thrusting his
right hand into the fire, he there held it, till it first and then his whole
body was consumed; only (which was no small miracle) his heart remained whole
and not once touched with the fire. The same year also, no fewer then 84. of
both sexes were burnt for Religion; and it was a cruelty very far extended,
that the bones of Bucer and Ph^gi^^ some time before dead and buried, were
taken up and publicly burnt in Cambridge. No sooner was Cranmer dead, but the
very same day was Cardinal Poole made Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the fourth year of the Queen, exemplar Justice was done upon a great
person; for the Lord Sturton, a man much in the Queens fa^our, as being an
earnest Papist, was for a murder committed by him, arraigned and condemned,
and he with four of his servants, carried to Salisbury, was there in the
Marketplace hanged, having this favor to be hanged in a silken halter, his
servants in places near adjoining to the place where the Murder was committed.

The four and twentieth of April, Thomas Stafford second son to the Lord
Stafford, with other, to the number of two and thirty persons (set on by the
French King) attempted to raise Sedition against the Queen, for marrying with
King Phillip, and coming out of France, arrived at Scarborough in Yorkshire,
where they took the Castle, but within two days were driven out by the Ea^le
of Westmerland, and then taken and arraigned: the eight and twentieth of May
Stafford was beheaded on the Tower Hill, and the next day three of his
associates Strelley, Bradford and Proctor were drawn from the Tower to Tyburne
and there executed. The first of May Thomas Percy was first made Knight, after,
Lord, and the next day was created Earl of Northumberland, to whom the Queen
gave all the Lands that had bin his Ancestors.

At this time the Queen entangled her self (contrary to her promise) in her
husbands quarrel, sent a defiance to the French King, by Clarenti^^ king at
Arms; and after on the Monday in Whitsonweeke, by sound of trumpet, proclaimed
open war against him in Cheapside, and other places of the City; and shortly
after, caused an Army of a thousand Horse, and four thousand foo^, to be
transported over, to the aid of her husband King Phillip, under the leading of
the Earl of Pembrooke Captain General, Sir Anthony Bro^ne Viscount Mountague
Lieutenant General, the Lord Gray of Wilton Lord Marshall, the Earl of
Rutland General of the Horse, the Earl of Lincoln Coronel of the Foot, the
Lord Ro^ert Dudley Master of the Ordnance, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord De
la VVare, the Lord Bray, the Lord Chandowes, the ^or^ Ambrose Dudley, the Lord
Henry Dudley, with diverse Knights and Gent^ement; who joining with King
Phillips Forces, they altogether ^et down before S^int Quint^ns, a town of the
French Kings of great importance. To the res^^^ whereof, the French King sent
an Army, under the leading of the Constable (...) France, which consisted of
nine hundred men at arms, with as many light (...), eight hundred Reystres,
two and twenty Ensigns of Lancequene^s, and (...) Ensigns of French footmen;
their purpose was not to give battle, but to (...) more succors into the
Town; which the Philippians perceiving, encountered them, and in the ^ight slew
John of Burbon Duk of Anghien, the Viscount of T^^rain, the Lo of Ch^denier,
with many gentlemen of account; they took prisoners the Duk of Memorancy
Constable of France, the Duk of Montpensyer, Duk Longuevile, the Marshall of
Saint Andrews, the Lord Lewis brother to the Duke of Mantova, the Baron of
Curton, the Rhinegrave Colonel of the Almaynes, Monsieur d'Obigny, Monsieur de
Biron, and many others; and then pursuing the victory, under the government of
the Earl of Pembrooke, on the seven and twentieth of August they took the
town of Saint Qintyns; in the assault whereof, the Lord Henry Dudley, youngest
son to the Duke of Northumberland, was with a piece of great Ordnance slain,
and some other of account. The saccage of the Town King Phillip gave to the
English, as by whose valor chiefly it was won.

The joy was not so great for this winning of Saint Qintyns, but there will be
greater sorrow presently for other losses. Many of the Garrison of Callice had
been drawn from thence, for this service of Saint Quintyns, and no new supply
sent, which being perceived by the French King, a Plot is laid how to surprise
it, which yet was not so secretly carried, but that the Officers of Callice had
intelligence thereof; who thereupon signified it to the Council of England,
requiring speedy succors, without which, against so great an Army as was raisd
against them, they should not be able to hold out. But whether they gave no
credit to their relations, or whether they apprehended not the danger so
imminent as indeed it was, they neglected to send supplies till it was too
late. For the Duke of Guyse, with no less speed then Policy, took such a
course that at one and the same time, he set both upon Newnambridge and also
Ricebanke, (the two maine Skonces for defense of the Town,) and took them
both, and then fell presently to batter the Walls of the Castle it self, and
that with such violence of great Ordnance, that the noise was heard to
Ant^erp^, being a hundred miles of. But having made the walls assaultable, the
English used this stratagem, they laid trains of Powder to blow them up, when
they should offer to enter, but this stratagem succeeded not; for the French in
passing the Ditch, had so wet their clothes, that dropping upon the train,
the Powder would take no fire, (so all things seemed to concur against the
English) and thereupon the Castle was taken also, and with it the Town also
had been taken, but that Sir Anthony Ager, with the loss of his own life and
his eldest sons, valiantly defended it, and for that time repelled the
French, but their numbers increased so fast upon the Town, that the Lord
Wentworth the Deputy, seeing no other way of safty, demanded Parlee, where a
composition was made, that the Town should presently be yielded to the French
King, the lives of the Inhabitants only saved, with safe conduct to pass
away, saving the Lord Deputy with fifty other, such as the Duke should name.
And here to be quit with the English for their hard usage at Saint Quintins,
the Duke caused Proclamation to be made, that all and every person of the
Town, should bring their money, jewels and plate; to the value of a groat, and
lay it down upon the high Altar of the Church; by which means an inestimable
sum of treasure was there offered, enough ^o enrich an Army, which had before
enriched a Town: and now to make it appear how unable the Town was to hold
out against so great an Army. It is said, there were in it but only five
hundred soldiers of ordinary, and scarce two hundred more of able fighting
men; but of other people, men, women and children four thousand and two
hundred, all which were suffered to depart, saving the Lord We^tworth the
Deputy, Sir Ralph Chamberlain Captain of the Castle, John Hu^^ston Captain
of Ricebruke, Nicholas Alex^nder Captain of New^hambridge, Edward Grimston the
Controlour, John Rogers the Surveyour, with others to the number of fifty, who
were al carried prisoners into France. And thus Callice, which had bin in
possession of the English above two hundred years, was won from the English in
eight days, which King Edward the third had not won from the French in less
then a year. The Lord Wentworth was suspected, and in Queen Elizabeth's time
arraigned for betraying it, was acquitted by his Peers. Callice thus won, the
Duke with his Army marched to Guysnes, five miles distant, whereof was Captain
the Lord Gray of Wilton, who held out the siedge and batteries five or six
days with so great valor and resolution, that he appeared in nothing
inferior to the Enemy but in multitude, yet a^ last overlaid with their
numbers, and importunde by his soldiers, much against his own will, he made
composition, that the Town and Castle should be wholly rendered, himself and
all Officers remain prisoners, all other to depart with their Armor and
Baggage. The Lord Gray afterward ransomed for four and twenty thousand
crowns. And now the Duke of Guise considering that Guysnes would be too costly
a Castle to be kept, and too dangerous a neighbor to Callice, if it should be
recovered, raced it with the Bulwarks and Fortifications to the ground.
Guysnes thus won, there remained nothing within the English pale, but the
little Castle of Hammes, whereof was Captain the Lord Edward Dudley, who
considering that though it were naturally strongly situate, as being environed
with Fens and Marshes, yet it had but little helpe^ by Art of Fortifications,
and being assured that the Duke of Guyse would speedily come upon him, he
secretly in the night with all his garrison, departed into Flanders, so as the
Castle was not won, but taken by the Duke of Guyse; and with the loss of this
Castle, the English lost all their footing in Terra firma, and the Kings of
England all the reality of their Title in France, having nothing left but nudum
nomen.

Presently after this, the French King caused the marriage between his eldest
son Francis the Dolphin, and Mary Steward sole heir of James the fifth King
of Scotland to be solemnized: whereupon great wars insued soon after between
England and Scotland.

Queen Mary being infinitely troubled in mind for the loss of Callice, sent
presently forth her Admiral the Lord Clinton, with a Fleet of more then a
hundred sail, to recover, at lest reparation in honor, by doing some exploit
upon France, who not finding opportunity to set upon Breast, as he was
appointed, fell upon the town of Conquest, which he took and bur^t, and also
diverse Villages thereabouts, and then returned. In which mean time, many great
conflicts having been between King Phillip and the King of France; at last, by
mediation of the Duchess of Lorraigne, a treaty of Peace is agreed on, where
all things seemed to be well accorded, but only that King Phillip by all
means required restitution of Callice, to which by no means the French would
assent; but whilst they stood upon these terms, it happened that first the
Emperor Charles King Phillips father dyed, and shortly after Queen Mary, and
the day after her Cardinal Poole, and shortly after Sir John Baker of
Sissingherst in Kent, who had been a Privy Counselor to Henry the eight,
Edward the sixth and Queen Mary. And so our Story has no further relation to
either War or Peace, between the two Kings of France and Spain.

Of her Taxations.
SHE began with a rare Example; for in the first year of her Reign, wa^
pardoned by Proclamation, the Subsidy of four shillings the pound of Land,
and two shillings the pound of goods, granted in the last Parliament of King
Edward the sixth. In her second year in a Parliament then holden, was granted
to the King and Queen, a Subsidy of the Layitie, from five pounds to ten
pounds, of eight pence in the pound; from ten pounds to twenty pounds, of
twelve pence in the pound; and from twenty pounds upwards, sixteen pence in the
pound; all Strangers double; and the Clergy six shillings in the pound. If
this were all, then upon the matter, in all her time, there came to new charge
upon her people; for one Subsidy r^mit^ed and one received, made but even. In
her last year she borrowed twenty thousand pounds of the City of London, and
paid twelve pounds a year interest for every ^undred pound.

Laws and Ordinances in her time.
IN her first year, on the fourth of September, were proclaimed certain new
Coins of gold and silver, a Sovereign of gold of thirty shillings; the half
Sovereign fifteen shillings; an Angel often shillings; the half Angel five
shillings. Of silver, the groat, the half groat and penny; all these Coins to
be current as before. In her second year, Proclamation was made, forbidding the
shooting in Hand-guns and bearing of weapons. The year in which she was married
to King Phillip, a straight charge was to all Victuallers, Taverners and
Alehouse-keepers, that they should sell no Meat nor Drink nor any kind of
Victuals, to any Serving-man whatsoever, unless he brought a testimonial to
show whole servant he was. Also in a Parliament holden this year, amongst
other Acts, the Statute Ex Officio, and other Laws made for the punishment of
Heresies, were revived; but chiefly the Popes Bull of Dispensation of Abbey
Land was there confirmed. In her second year, on Michaelmas Eeven, the
Prisoners that lay in the Counter in Bredstreet, were removed to a new Counter
made in Woodstreet, of the City Purchase and building; the which removing was
confirmed by the Common Council of the City.

Affairs of the Church in her time.
IN the first year of this Queens reign, all Bishops which had been
deprived in the time of King Edward the sixth, were restored to their
Bishopriks, and the new removed; also all Benefized men that were married, or
would not forsake their opinion, were put out of their Livings; and other of a
contrary opinion put in their rooms. Also this year, on the seven and
tweetieth of August, the Service begun to be sung in Latin in Paul's Church.
Also this year the Popes authority was by Act of Parliament restored in
England; and the Mass commanded in all Churches to be used. In her second
year, the Realm is Absolved, and reconciled to the Church of Rome, by
Cardinal Poole; and first Fruits and Tenths are restored to the Clergy: but
this was soon revoked, the Council finding the necessity of it for the
Queens support. In her fourth year, Monasteries were begun to be reedified;
of which number were that of Westminster, that of Sheene and Sion, that of the
Blackfriars, and the Friars of Greenwich. Of the number of those that dyed for
Religion in her time, there are recorded five Bishops, one and twenty Divines,
and of all sorts of men and women, two hundred threescore and seventeene.

Works of Piety done by her or others in her time.
THis Queen restored a great part of Abbey-lands that were in her possession,
and if she had lived longer, very likely she would have restored more. In her
first year, Sir Thomas White then Major, erected a College in Oxford, now
called Saint John's College, before, Bernard College; he also erected Schools
at Bristow and Reading, and gave two thousand pounds to the City of Bristow to
purchase Lands, the profits whereof to be employed for the benefit of young
Clothiers for ten years, and after that to be employed in like manner, to the
benefit of two and twenty other shires and Cities. In her third year dyed Sir
John Gresham, late Major of London, who founded a free School at Holt in
Nor^olke, and gave to every Ward in London ten pounds, to be distributed to the
poor; also to Maids marriages two hundred pounds. Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of
Du^ham, erected a goodly Library in Cambridge, storing it with many excellent
both Printed and written Books: he also bestowed much upon building at Durham,
at Alnewicke and at Tunbridge.

Casualties happening in her time.
IN her first year, on the seven and twentieth of August, the goodliest Ship
in England, called The Great Harrye, being of the burden of a thousand tun,
was burnt at Woolwich by negligence of the Mariners. In her second year on the
fifteenth of February, appeared in the sky a Rainbow reversed, the bow turned
downward, and the two ends standing upward: also two Suns shined at one time,
a good distance asunder, which were taken for ill signs. This year also in
the month of August, at a place in Suffolk by the Sea side, all of hard stone
and pibble, lying between the Towns of Oxford and Alborough, where never
grass grew, not any earth was ever seen, there chanced suddenly to spring up
without any tillage or sowing, so great abundance of Peason, that the Poor
gathered above an hundred quarters, yet there remained some ripe, and some
blossoming, as many as were before. In her fourth year, hot burning Agues and
other strange diseases, took away much people; so as between the twentieth of
October and the last of December, there dyed seven Aldermen, namely, Henry
Heardson, Sir Richard Dob^s la^e Major, Sir William Laxton late Major, Sir
Henry Hobblesterne late Majors, Sir John Champneys late Major, Sir John Aleph
late Sheriff, and Sir John Gresham late Major. In her fourth year, before
Harvest, Wheat was sold for four Marks the quarter, Malt at four and forty
shillings the quarter, and Pease at six and forty shillings eight pence; where
after harvest, Wheat was sold for five shillings the quarter, Malt at six
shillings eight pence, Rye at three shillings four pence the quarter. In the
Country, Wheat was sold for four shillings the quarter, Malt at four
shillings eight pence, and in some places a bushel of Rye for a pound of
Candles, which was four pence. In her fifth year, within a mile of Nottingham,
so mervailous a tempest of thunder happened, that it beat down all the Houses
and Churches in two Towns thereabouts, cast the Bells to the outside of the
Churchyard, and some webs of Lead four hundred foot into the field, writhen as
if it had been leather; the rive^ of Trent running between the two Towns, the
water with the mud in the bottom was carried a quarter of a mile, and cast
against trees; with the violence whereof the trees were pulled up by the the
roots, and cast twelve score off; also a child was taken forth of a man's hand
and carried two spears length high, and then let fall two h^ndred foot off, of
which fall it dyed; five or six men thereabouts were slain, and neither flesh
nor skin perished; also there fell some Hale-stones that were fifteen inches
about. This year also in Harvest-time was great mortality, and specially of
Priests, so as many Churches were unserved, and much corn was lost in the
field for want of Workmen; whereupon ensued a great scarcity, so that corn was
sold for fourteen shillings a quarter, and Wood sold in London for thirteen
shillings a thousand of Billets, and Coals ten pence a sack. Also this year on
the last of September, fell so great store rain, that Westminster Hall was full
of water, and Boats were rowed over Westminster-bridge into Kings-street.

Of her Personage and Conditions.
OF her Personage we can make no particular description, only we may say, she
was none of the most amiable, but yet without deformity; but of her Conditions
we may say, she was not without deformity, and yet was very amiable. If we
account her Religion a deformity, yet her constancy and devotion in it, we must
needs count a beauty: if it were a deformity to promise the Suffolk men, not
to alter the Religion which King Edward had established, yet it was certainly a
Pious dissem^ling, Cretizare cum C^etensibus; and equivocation (will some say)
was there a virtue, where she deceived them into truth, and did them good
against their wills. And as for her sister Elizabeth, if she did not love her,
it was but a quality hereditary in her; for their Mothers did not love one
another before; and indeed not without some cause in both; for as those
upbraided each others marriage, so these, each others birth. We shall not do
her right, if we deny her to be of a merciful disposition, seeing oftentimes
she pitied the person, where she shed the blood; she could have found in her
heart to have spared the Lady Ianes life, if Ragion di^stato had not been
against it^ and she did spare her Father the Duke of Suffolkes life, till his
second offense gave her just provocation. The goodness of her nature might be
seen in the badnesse of her fortune; who took nothing so much to heart, as
unkindnesse of friends; the revolt of Callice, and the absence of King Phillip,
being the two chief causes that brought her to her end.

Of her Death and Burial.
THE conceit of her being with child, had kept Physicians to look into the
state of her body; so as her distemper at first neglected, brought her by
degrees into a Dropsy, to which was added a burning Feavour, brought upon her
by a double grief; one for the long absence of King Phillip (who had now been
away a year and a half;) the other, and perhaps the greater, for the loss of
Callice; as she forbore not to say to some about her, that if they looked into
her Heart, being dead, they should find Callice there. She began to fall sick
in September, and dyed at her Manor of Saint James the seventeenth of
Novemb^r, in the ^eer 1558. when she had reigned five years four months and
eleven days. Lived three and forty years. Her Body was interred in a Chapel
in the Minster of Saint Peter's Church at Westminster, without any Monument or
other Remembrance.

Men of note in her time.
OF Men of Valor in her time, there were many, as may be seen in the Story of
her Re^gne; but to name some for example, there was William Herbert Earl of
Pembrooke, the chief assistant of King Phillip in the winning of Saint
Quintins; there was William Lord Gray of Wilton, Captain of Guysnes, who
though he yielded the Town, yet more out of tenderness to his Soldiers, then
out of fear of his Enemies, which he would never else have yielded up; and to
speak of one of a meaner rank, there was Sir Anthony Ager, who in defense of
the Town of Callice lost his life, but not till he made the Enemy turn their
backs and fly. O^ learned men also there were many, as John Rogers borne in
Lancashire, who Translated the Bible into English with Notes, Richard Moryson
Knight, borne in Oxfordshire, who wrote diverse Treatises, Robert Record a
Doctor of Physic, who wrote a Book of Arithmaticke, C^^bert Tunstall, of a
worshipful Family in Lancashire, though base borne, who^e Ancestors came into
England with the Conqueror, as his Harbor, and therefore has three Combs his
Arms; Bishop first of London, and after of D^^ham, who wrote diverse learned
Works: Richard Sampson, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, who wrote certain
Trea^^ses: Luc^s Shephea^d borne a^ Colechester in Essex an English Poet: Jane
Dudley, daughter ^o Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, wrote diverse excellent
Treatises: William Thomas a VV^lshman, who w^ote the History of Italy, and
other things: James Brooks and John Standish, both of them writers in defense
of the Popes Doctrine: William Peryn a black Friar, who wrote in defense of
the Mass, and also diverse Sermons: Henry Lord Stafford, son to Edward Duke
of Buckingham, who amongst other things which he wrote, Translated a Book out
of Latin into English, entitled Vtriusque Potestatis Differentia^ which Book
(as some think) was first compiled by Edward Fox Bishop of Hereford: John
Hopkins who translated diverse of David's Psalms into English Meeter, which are
to be found amongst those appointed to be sung in the Church.

THE REIGN OF Queen Elizabeth.
QUeen Mary dying on Thursday the seventeenth of November, in the Year 1558,
her sister, the Lady Elizabeth, of the age of five and twenty years, the only
surviving child of King Henry the eighth, by undoubted Right, succeeded Her in
the Crown; which happened in a time of Parliament: Nicholas Heath, Archbishop
of York, and Lord Chancellor, sent to the Knights and Burgesses in the Lower
House, to repair immediately to the Lords of the Upper House; to whom he
signified, That Queen Mary was that morning dead, and therefore required their
Assents to join with the Lords in proclayming Queen Elizabeth; which
accordingly was done, by the sound of Trumpet, first at Westminster, and after
in the City of London. The Queen was then at Ha^field^ from whence, on
Wednesday the three and twentieth of November, she removed to the Lord North's
house in the Charter House, where she stayed till Monday the eight and
twentieth of November, and then rode in her Chariot through London to the Tower;
where she continued till the fifth of December; and then removed by water to
Somerset House in the Strand; from whence she went to her Palace at
Westminster; and from thence, on the twelfth of January, to the Tower; and on
the fourteenth of January, to Westminster, to her Coronation^ where it is
incredible, what Pageants and Shows were made in the City, as she passed: On
Sunday the five and twentieth of January, she was Crowned in the Abbey Church
at Westminster, by Doctor Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, with all Solemnities
and Ceremonies in such case accustomed. At this time, to honor her Coronation,
she conferred more Honor, then in all her life after: William Parre, degraded
by Queen Mary, she made Marquess of Northampton; Edward Seymor, whose father
had been Attaynted, she made Earl of Hertford; Thomas Howard, second son to
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, she made Viscount Bindon; Sir Henry Carry, her Cousin
German, she made Baron of Hunsdon; and Sir Oliver St. John, she made Baron of
Bletsho.

And now the Queen, though she were her self very wise, yet would not trust
(and it was a great point of wisdom that she would not trust) to her own
wisdom; and therefore she chose Counselors to assist her: In which number
she took Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York; William Pawlet, Marquess of
Winchester, L. High Treasurer; Henry Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundell; Francis
Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; Edward Stanley, Earl of Derby; Will. Herbert, E. of
Pembroke; Edw. L. Clinton, L. Admiral; and William L. Howard of Effingham; Sir
Thomas Cheyney; Sir William Peter; Sir Richard Sackvyle; and Nicholas Wootton,
Dean of Canterbury; all which had been Counselors to Queen Mary, and were of
her Religion: But then to make a counter-poyse of Counselors of her own
Religion, she joined with them William Parre, Marquess of Northampton; Francis
Russell, Earl of Bedford; Sir Thomas Parry; Sir Edward Rogers; Sir Ambrose
Cave; Sir Francis Knolles; and Sir William Cecill, late Secretary to King Edw.
the sixth; and a little after, Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom she made Keeper of the
Great Seal. And having thus provided for her State at home, she seeks
correspondence with Princes abroad: To the Emperor Ferdinand, she sent in
Embassage Sir Tho. Chaloner; to the King of Spain in the Low-Countreyes the
Lord Cobham; to the Princes of Germany Sir Henry Killigrew; Sir Aemygill W^ad,
to the Duke of Holst; and another Ambassador to the King of Denmark. There
were also Ambassadors sent to the Pope, to the State of Venice, and to the
French King; with whom at this time there was a Treaty of Peace holden at
Cambray, between the Kingdoms of France, England and Spain; where for England
was employed, the Earl of Arundell; Thursbey, Bishop of Ely; and Doctor
Wootton, Dean of Canterbury; with whom, William, Lord Howard of Effingham was
joined by a new Commission.

As soon as King Philip heard of the death of his wife Queen Mary, pa^^ly out
of considerations of State, and partly out of affection of love, he solicited
Q. Elizabeth by his Ambassador, the Earl of Feria, to joyni^ Marriage with
himself; which was no more for two sisters to have successively one husband,
then was done before, for two brothers to have successively one wife; and for
this he promised to procure a Dispensation from the Pope. To which motion the
Queen, though she well knew, That to allow a Dispensation in this case to be
sufficient, were to make her own Birth Illegitimate; yet to so great a Prince,
and who in her sisters time had done her many favors, she would not return so
blunt an Answer; but putting the Ambassadou^ off for the present in modest
terms: She conceived there would be no better way to take him off clean from
further suit, then by bringing in an Alteration of Religion; which yet she
would not do all at once, and upon the sudden (as knowing the great danger of
sudden changes) but by little and little, and by degrees: as at first, she
permitted only Epistles and Gospels, the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer,
and the Creed to be read to the People in the English Tongue; in all other
matters they were to follow the Roman Rite and Custom, until order could be
taken for establishing of Religion by Authority of Parliament; and a severe
Proclamation was set forth, prohibiting all Points of Controversy to be meddled
with: by which means, she both put the Protestants in hope, and put not Papists
out of hope. Yet privately she committed the correcting of the Book of Common
Prayer, set forth in the English Tongue under King Edward the sixth, to the
care and diligence of Doctor Parker, Bill, May, Cox, Grindall, Whitehead, and
Pilkington, Divines of great Learning; with whom she joined Sir Thomas Smith, a
learned Knight: but the matter carried so closely, that it was not communicated
to any, but ^o the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir
William Cecile. The two and twentieth of March, the use of the Lords Supper in
both kinds was by Parliament allowed: The four and twentieth of June, the
Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in the English Tongue
established, though, as some say, but with the difference of six voices. In
July the Oath of Supremacy was propounded to the Bishops and others: And in
August, Images were removed out of Churches, and broken or burnt. By these
degrees the Religion was changed; and yet the change, to the wonder of the
world, bred no disturbance: which if it had been done at once, and on the
sudden, would hardly; at least not without dangerous opposition, have been
admitted.

During this time, a Parliament had been summoned to begin at Westminster, upon
the fifteenth of January; and now the Queen, for satisfaction of the people,
appointed a Conference to be held, between the Prelates of the Realm; and
Protestant Divines now newly returned, who had fled the Realm, in the time of
Queen Mary: for the Prelates were chosen John White, Bishop of Winchester;
Ralph Bayne, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield; Thomas Watson, Bishop of
Lincoln; Doctor Cole, Dean of Paul's; Doctor Langdell, Archdeacon of Lewis;
Doctor Harpsefield, Archdeacon f Canterbury; and Doctor Chadsey, Archdeacon
of Middlesex: For the Protestant side were appointed, Doctor Scory, Doctor Cox,
Doctor Sands, Doctor Whitehead, Doctor Grindall, Master Horn, Master Guest,
Master Elmer, and Master Iuell. The place was prepared in Westminster Church;
where, besides the Disputants, were present the Lords of the Queens Council,
with other of the Nobility; as also many of the Lower House of Parliament. The
Articles propounded against the Prelates, and their adherents, were these:
First, That it is against the Word of God, and the Custom of the ancient
Church, to use a Tongue unknown to the people, in common Prayer, and in the
Administration of the Sacraments. Secondly, That every Church has authority to
appoint and change Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical Rites, so they be to
edification: Thirdly, That it cannot be proved by the Word of God, that there
is in the Mass a Sacrifice Propitiatory for the living and the dead. For the
manner of their Conference, it was agreed it should be performed in writing;
and that the Bishops should deliver their Reasons in writing first. The last of
March was the first day of their meeting; where, contrary to the Order, the
Bishops brought nothing in writing; but said, They would deliver their minds
only by Speech: This breaking of Order much displeased the Lords, yet they had
it granted. Then rose up Doctor Cole, and made a large Declaration concerning
the first Point: when he had ended, the Lords demanded if any of them had more
to say; who answered, No: Then the Protestant Party exhibited a written Book;
which was distinctly read by Master Horn. This done, some of the Bishops began
to affirm, they had much more to say in the first Article: This again much
displeased the Lords; yet this also was granted them, to do at their next
meeting on Monday next: but when Monday came, so many other differences arose
between them, that the Conference broke off, and nothing was determined. But in
the Parliament there was better Agreement; for there it was enacted, That Queen
Elizabeth was the lawful and undoubted Queen of England; notwithstanding a Law
made by her Father King Henry the eighth, that excluded both her and her sister
Mary from the Crown, seeing, though the Law be not repealed, yet it is a
Principle in Law, That the Crown once gained, takes away all defects. Also in
this Parliament, First fruits and Tenths were restored to the Crown; and the
Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England was confirmed to the Queen, with
so universal consent, that in the Upper House none opposed these Laws, but
only the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Sir Anthony Brown, Viscount Mountague: and in
the Lower House, only some few of Papal inclination, murmured, saying, That
the Parliament was packt; and that the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Arundel,
and Sir William Cecill, for their own ends, had cunningly begged voices, to
make up their Party.

The Supremacy thus confirmed to the Queen, the Oath was soon after tendered to
the Bishops and others; of whom, as many as refused to take it, were presently
deprived of their livings. And that we may see, how inclining the Kingdom at
this time was to receive the Protestant Religion; It is said, that in the whole
Realm (wherein are reckoned above Nine thousand Spiritual Promotions) there
were no more that refused to take the Oath, but only fourscore Parsons, fifty
Prebendaries, fifteen Masters of Colleges, twelve Archdeacons, twelve Deans,
six Abbots, and fourteen Bishops, (indeed all that were at that time, except
Anthony Bishop of Landaff^ as Nicholas Heath Archbishop of York, Edmund Boner
Bishop of London, Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Thomas Thursby Bishop of
Ely, Gilbert Bourn Bishop of Bath and Wells, John Christopherson Bishop of
Chichester, John White Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln,
Ralph Bayne Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Owen Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle,
James Turbervile Bishop of Exeter, and David Pool Bishop of Peterborough: And
with these Doctor Fecknam Abbot of Westminster: All which were at first
committed to prison, but soon after delivered to the custody of private
friends, excepting those two saucy Prelates, Lincoln and Winchester, who
threatened to excommunicate the Queen. Three only, namely, Cutbert Scot Bishop
of Chester, Richard Pate Bishop of Worcester, and Thomas Goldwel Bishop of
Saint Assaph, changed their Religion of their own accord; as also did certain
Noble Personages, namely, Henry Lord Morley, Sir Francis Englefield, and Sir
Robert Peckham, (who had been Privie-Councellours to Q. Mary) Sir Thomas
Shelley, and Sir John Gage.

In the seas of the Prelates removed, were placed Protestant Bishops, as
Matthew Parker was made Archbishop of Canterbury, (who was consecrated by the
Imposition of the hands of three that formerly had been Bishops; namely,
William Barlow of Bath and Wells, John Scory of Chichester, and Miles Coverdale
of Exeter) and being consecrated himself, he afterward consecrated Edmund
Grindall Bishop of London, Richard Cox Bishop of Ely, Edwyn Sands Bishop of
Worcester, Rowland Merick Bishop of Bangor, Thomas Young Bishop of Saint
Davyes, Nicholas Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln, John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury,
Richard Davis Bishop of Saint Assaph, Edward Guest Bishop of Rochester, Gilbert
Barkeley Bishop of Bath and Wells, Thomas Bentham Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, William Alley Bishop of Exceter, John Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich,
Robert Horn Bishop of Winchester, Richard Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester, Edmund
Scambler Bishop of Peterbo^ough, William Barlow Bishop of Chichester, John
Scory Bishop of Hereford, Young Archbishop of York, James Pilkington Bishop of
Durham, John Best Bishop of Carlisle, and William Downham Bishop of Chester.

Whilst these things were done in England, the Treaty of peace at Cambray
continued still; Wherein King Phillip stood for the restitution of Calice to
the English, as firmly as if it had been his own interest; and without it would
agree to no peace with France: But when by Messages he understood, that his
suit for marriage with Queen Elizabeth was rejected; and that the Protestant
Religion was established in the Kingdom, he then left Queen Elizabeth, seeing
she would not be his, to her self; and though he became not presently a Foe,
yet he became presently less then a Friend, and forbore to do any more good
offices in that business. Queen Elizabeth thus left to her self, agreed with
the French King, to conclude her own peace apart; and thereupon, Delegates on
both sides were appointed to meet at Cambray: For the Queen of England were,
Thursby Bishop of Ely, the Lord Williams, the Lord Howard of Effingham,
Chamberlain to the Queen, and Doctor Wootton Dean of Canterbury and York: For
the King of France were, Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, the first Peer of France,
Annas Duke of Memorancy, James Albon Lord of Saint Andrews, John Morvilliers
Bishop of Orleance, and Claude Aubespine Secretary of the Privy Council. The
Commissioners meeting, the chief point in difference, was the restitution of
Calice; for which, the English Commissioners^ by the Q^eens appointment,
offered to remit two Millions of Crowns, that by just account were due from
France to England; but the Queen was not more desirous to recover Calice, then
the French King was to hold it: And thereupon at last, it was concluded, that
Calice should remain in possession of the French for the term of eight years;
and those expired, it should be delivered to the English, upon forfeiture of
five hundred thousand Crowns^ for which, hostages were given: But all this
notwithstanding, though the Conditions were sealed and sworn to, and though
hostages were assigned to remain in England, till one or other were performed;
yet all was frustate, and came to nothing.

About this time, Henry King of France married his daughter Isabell to Phillip
King of Spain, and his sister Margaret to Emmanuel Phylibert Duke of Savoy; at
the solemnity of which Marriages, he would needs be a Tiltor himself; and
thereupon commended the Earl of Montgomery to run against him, who
unfortunately breaking his Lance upon the Kings Cuyrasse, a splinter thereof
(his Beaver being somewhat open) struck him so deep in the eye, that within few
days he ended his life: After whose death, Francis his son at the age of
sixteen years, succeeded him in the Crown, having by the marriage of Queen Mary
the Title of Scotland, and upon ground thereof laying claim to the Crown of
England also, and giving the Arms of England, as properly belonging to him.

And now begins the game of Faction to be played, wherein the whole estate of
Queen Elizabeth lies at stake, a game that will hold playing the most part of
her Reign, and if not played well, will put her in jeoparey of losing all,
seeing all about her are against her, Phillip King of Spain has a quarrel to
her, for being rejected in his suit; the King of France has a quarrel to her
in right of his wife, which is now his right. The Que^n of Scots has a
quarrel to her for detaining her Inheritance: The Pope has a quarrel to her,
for excluding his Authority: The King of Sweden has a quarrel to her, for
slighting his son in the way of marriage: And all these being against her, whom
has she of her side, but only her own Subjects, Papists yesterday, and to day
Protestants, who being scarce settled in their Religion, how should they be
settled in their Loyalty? And not being Loyal, where can she find to cast
Anchor for her safety? But it is a true saying, Nullum numen abest si sit
prudentia; Wisdom is a s^pply for all defects: And indeed, the Queen being very
wise her self, and having a wise Council about her, she passed all these
difficulties, though not without danger, yet with little or no hazard.

It happened (if at least it happened, and were not rather plotted of purpose)
that a Reformation of Religion was pretended in Scotland; but was indeed an
incroachment upon the Princes Authority; for at the preaching of John Knox, and
other headstrong Ministers, not only Images and Altars were cast down and
burnt, the Monasteries of Saint Andrews, of Stone, of Stryveling, and of
Lynlithew were overthrown; but it was further put into the heads of the
Nobility, that it pertained to them, of their own Authority, to take away
Idolatry, and by force reduce the Prince to the prescript of Laws: Whereupon
there was presently a bandying of the Lords of Scotland, against the Queen
Dowager, Regent of the Country; and in this case each of them ^ought for aid;
The Queen Dowager had aid out of France, the Lords of Scotland sent for aid to
the Queen of England: But this was matter for consultation; It seemed a bad
Example, for a Prince to give aid to the rebellious Subjects of another Prince.
On the other side, it seemed no less then impiety, not to give Aid to the
Protestants of the same Religion; but most of all it seemed plain madness, to
suffer adversaries to be so near neighbors, and to let the French nestle in
Scotland, who pretend Title to England: upon such like considerations, it was
resolved to send them Aid; and thereupon an Army of six thousand Foot, and
twelve hundred Horse, was sent under the Command of the Duke of Norfolk, the
Lord Gray of Wilton his Lieutenant General; Sir James a Crofts, Assistant to
him; the Lord Scroop, L. Marshall; Sir George Howard, General of the men at
Arms; Sir Henry Percy, General of the Light Horse; Thomas Huggens, Provost
Marshall; Thomas Gower, Master of the Ordnance; Master William Pelham, Captain
of the Pyoners; and Master Edward Randoll, Sergeant Major, and diverse others.
These coming into Scotland, joined with the Scottish Lords, and set down before
Leith, where passed many small skirmishes, many Batteries, and sometimes
Assaults: to whom, after some time, a new supply came of above two thousand
Foot; whereof were Captains, Sir Andrew Corbet, Sir Rowland Stanley, Sir Thomas
Hesbith, Sir Arthur Manwaring, Sir Lawrence Smith, and others: yet with this
new supply there was little more done then before; many light skirmishes, many
Batteries, and sometimes Assaults; so long, till at last the young French King,
finding these broyls of Scotland to be too furious for him to appease, he sent
to the Queen of England, desiring that Commissioners might be sent, to
reconcile these differences: whereupon were dispatched into Scotland, Sir
William Cecill, her principal Secretary, with Doctor Wotton, Dean of
Canterbury; who concluded a Peace between England and France, upon these
Conditions, That neither the King of France, nor the Queen of Scotland, should
thenceforth use the Arms or Titles of England or Ireland; And that both the
English and the French should depart out of Scotland; And a general pardon
should be enacted by Parliament, for all such as had been actors in those
stirs. This Peace was scarce concluded, when Francis the young King of France
died, leaving the Crown to his younger brother Charles, who was guided
altogether by the Queen Mother, and molested with the Civil dissentions
between the Princes of Guise and Conde; for whose reconcilement, the Queen sent
Sir Henry Sidney, Lord President of Wales; and shortly after an Army, under
the leading of the Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick; who arriving at
Newhaven, was received into the Town; which having kept eleven months, he was
then constrained, by reason of a Pestilence, to surrender again upon
Composition, and so returned.

About this time when the Parliament was upon dissolving; it was agreed upon by
the House of Commons, to move the Queen to marry, that she might have Issue to
succeed her; to which purpose, Thomas Gargrave, Speaker of the House, with some
few other chosen men, had access to the Queen who humbly made the motion to
her, as a thing which the Kingdom infinitely desired; seeing they could never
hope to have a better Prince, then out of her loins: Whereunto the Queen
answered in effect thus; That she was already married; namely, To the Kingdom
of England: and behold (says she) the Pledge of the Covenant with my husband;
and therewith she held out her finger, and showed the Ring, wherewith, at the
time of her Coronation, she gave her self in Wedlock to the Kingdom: and if
(says she) I keep my self to this husband, and take no other; yet I doubt not
but God will send you as good Kings, as if they were born of me; forasmuch as
we see by daily experience, That the Issue of the best Princes do often
degenerate: And for my self, it shall be sufficient that a Marble stone
declare, That a Queen having Reigned such a time, lived and dyed a Virgin.
Indeed before this time, many Matches had been offered her: First, King Philip:
and when he was out of hope of matching with her himself, he then dealt with
the Emperor Ferdinand his Uncle, to commend his younger Son Charles, Duke of
Austria, to her for a husband. And when this succeeded not, then John, Duke of
Finland, second Son to Gustavus King of Sweden, was sent by his father, to
solicit for his eldest Brother Erricus^ who was honorably received, but the
Match rejected. Then Adolphus Duke of Holst, Uncle to Frederick King of
Denmark, came into England, upon a great hope of speeding; but the Queen
bestowed upon him the Honor of the Garter, and a yearly Pension, but not her
self. Then James Earl of Arran, was commended to her by the Protestants of
Scotland; but neither the man nor the motion was accepted. Of meaner Fortunes
there were some at home that pleased themselves with hope of her Marriage:
First, Sir William Pickering, a Gentleman of a good House, and a good Estate;
but that which most commended him, was his studiousnesse of good letters, and
sweet demeanor. Then Henry, Earl of Arundel, exceeding rich, but now in his
declining age. Then Robert Dudley, youngest son of the Duke of Northumberland,
of an excellent feature of face, and now in the flower of his age: but these
might please themselves with their own conceit; but were not considerable in
her apprehension: they might receive from her good Testimonies of her Princely
favor; but never Pledges of Nuptial love.

About this time the Earl of Feria (who had married the daughter of Sir William
Dormer) being denied leave of the Queen for some of his wives friends to live
out of England, grew so incensed, that he made means to Pius the fourth, then
Pope, to have her excommunicate, as an Heretic and Usurper: but the Pope
inclining rather to save then to destroy; and knowing that gentle courses
prevail more with generous minds, then roughness and violence; in most loving
manner wrote unto her, exhorting her to return to the Unity of the Catholic
Church; and as it is said, made her great offers, if she would hearken to his
counsel; Particularly, That he would recall the Sentence pronounced against
her mothers Marriage; confirm the Book of Common Prayer in English; and permit
to her people the use of the Sacrament in both Kinds. But Queen Elizabeth
neither terrified with the Earl of Feria's practices, nor allured with the
Popes great offers, according to her Motto, Semper Eadem, persisted constant in
her resolution, To maintain that Religion, which in her conscience she was
persuaded, to be most agreeable to the Word of God, and most consonant to the
Primitive Church.

Whilst these grounds of Troubles are sowing in England, France, and Scotland,
it is not likely that Ireland will lie fallow; though indeed it be a Country
that will bring forth Troubles of it self, without sowing: but howsoever, to
make the more plentiful Harvest of troubles at this time, John Oneal (whose
father King Henry the eighth made Earl of Tyrone) to prevent the punishment of
a private Outrage upon a Brother, broke into open Rebellion against the
Prince: and though his attempts were maturely made frustrate by timely
opposition; yet this was he that in the beginning of the Queens Reign, sowed
the seeds of that trouble in Ireland; which afterward took so deep root, that
till the ending of her Reign it could never thoroughly be rooted out: though this
man a year or two after came into England, and casting himself at the Queens
feet, acknowledged his fault, and obtained pardon.

The Treaty of Edinburgh should by promise have been confirmed by Francis the
French King while he lived: he not having done it, Queen Elizabeth requires his
Dowager the Queen of Scots to confirm it: but she solicited often to it by
Throgmorton the Queens Ligier in France; made always answer, She could not do
it without the counsel of her Nobility in Scotland: whereupon Queen Elizabeth
suspecting that this answer was but to hold her in amuzement, while some
mischief was practicing against her, sent Sir Thomas Randoll into Scotland, to
persuade the Lords there to enter into a League of mutual amity with her, and
other Protestant Princes^ and further, by no means to permit their Queen, now a
widow, to marry again to any foreign Prince; for which she alleged many
great reasons. In the mean while, the Queen of Scots, purposing to return into
Scotland, sent beforehand D'Oysette a French Lord, to entreat Queen Elizabeth,
that with her leave, she her self might pass by Sea into Sco^land, and
D'Oysette might pass by Land. But Queen Elizabeth openly denied both the one
and the other, unless she would confirm the Treaty of Edinburgh; saying, It
was no reason she should do the Queen of Scots courtesy, if the Queen of Scots
would not do her right. The Queen of Scots much troubled with this answer,
expostulates the matter with her Ligier Throgmorton, and much complains of the
unkindness: but in the mean time providing Shipping, she loosed from Calice;
and under covert of a mist, notwithstanding that Ships were laid to intercept
her, she arrived safe in Scotland; where she entreated her subjects in so
loving a manner, that she gave great contentment to the whole Kingdom; as well
to the Protestant Party, as the other: and then sent Letters to Queen
Elizabeth, proferring all observance and readiness to enter League with her;
so she might by Authority of Parliament be declared her Successor; which was
but her Right. To this Queen Elizabeth answered, That though she would no way
derogate from her Right: yet she should be loath to endanger her own security,
and as it were to cover her own eyes with a Grave-cloth while she was alive;
but fell again to her old Admonition, requiring her to confirm the Treaty of
Edinburgh: And now to show the respect she bore her, when her Unkles the Dukes
D'A^male, D' Albeufe, and other Lords of France that had brought her home,
returned through England, she gave them most bountiful and loving entertainment.

These two Queens indeed were both of great Spirits, and both very wise; but
these grew such Jealousies of State between them; (the Queen of Scots doubting
lest Queen Elizabeth meant to frustrate her Succession; Queen Elizabeth
doubting lest the Queen of Scots meant to prevent her succession) that it kept
them more asunder in love, then they were near in blood, and was cause of many
unkind passages between them: in all which, though the Queen of Scots were a
very near Match to the Queen of England in the abilities of her mind; yet in
the favors of Fortune she was much her inferior.

But now for all the courtesy which Q. Elizabeth showed to the Queen of Scots
Unkles at their returning through England, yet new practices were again set on
foot against her at Rome; the Duke of Guise especially laboring to have her be
Excommunicate; but Pope Pius still averse from such roughness, meant now to
try the Queen another way; and thereupon sent the Abbot Martinengi^ and when he
might not be admitted to enter England, then caused the Bishop of Viterbo his
Nuntio in France, to deal earnestly with the Queens Ligier Throgmorton, that
she (as other Princes had done) would send her Orators to the Council of
Trent, which he before had called. But the Queen nothing tender in this point,
made peremptory answer, That a Popish Assembly she did not acknowledge to be a
General Council; nor did think the Pope to have any more Right or Power to
call it, then any other Bishop. This Answer not only exasperated the Pope, but
so alienated also the King of Spain's mind from her, that he was never after
so kind a friend to her as he had been; and none of her Ambassadors ever
after had any great liking to be employed to him. And now at this time, as the
Abbot Martinengi was the last Nuntio that ever was sent from the Pope into
England, so Sir Edward Carne, now dying at Rome, was the last Ligie^ that was
ever sent to the Pope from the Kings of England.

And now Queen Elizabeth knowing well that she had drawn many ill willers
against her State, she endeavored to strengthen it by all the means she could
devise: She caused many great Ordnance of Brass and Iron to be cast; She
repaired Fortifications in the Borders of Scotland; She increased the number of
her Ships, so as England never had such a Navy before; She provided great store
of Armor and Weapons out of Germany; she caused Musters to be held, and youth
to be trained in exercises of Artillery; and to please the people (whose love
is the greatest strength of all) she gave leave to have Corn and Grayn
transported; and called in all base Coyns and Brass Money.

It was now the Fifth year of Queen Elizabeth's Rain: when diverse great
persons were called in question: Margaret Countess of Lenox, Niece to to King
Henry the eight, by his eldest sister, and her husband the Earl of Lenox, for
having had secret conference, by letters with the Queen of Scots, were
delivered prisoners to Sir Richard Sackvile, Master of the Rolls, and with him
kept a while in custody. Also Arthur Poole and his brother, whose great
grandfather, was George Duke of Clarnce, brother to King Edward the fourth:
Antony Fortescue, who had married their sister, and other, were arraigned, for
conspiring to withdraw themselves to the Duke of Guise in France; and from
thence to return with an Army into Wales; to Declare the Queen of Scots, Queen
of England; and Arthur Poole Duke of Clearnce; which particulars they confessed
at the Bar, and were thereupon condemned to die; but had their lives spared,
in regard they were of the Blood Royal. Also the Lady Katherine Gray,
daughter to Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, by the eldest daughter of Charles
Brandon^ having formerly been married to the Earl Pembrookes eldest son; and
from him soon after lawful divorced, was some years after found to be with
child by Edward Seymoure Earl of Hertford: who being at that time in France,
was presently sent for; and being examined before the Archbishp of Canterbury:
and affirming they were lawfully married; but not being able within a limited
time to produce witnesses of their marriage; they were both committed to the
Tower: where she was brought to Bed: and after by the Connivence or Corruption
of their Keepers, being suffered sometimes to come together: She was with
child by him again, which made the Queen more angry then before; so as Sir
Edward Warner Lieutenent of the Tower was put out of his place, and the Earl
was fined in the star chamber, five thousand pounds, and kept in prison nine
years after. Though in pleading of his Case; One John H^les argued; They were
lawful man and wife, by virtue of their own bare Consent, without any
Ecclesicsticall Ceremony. The Lady a few years after, falling through grief
into a mortal Sickness, humbly desired the Queens Pardon, for having married
without her knowledge, and commending her children to her clemency, dyed in the
Tower.

At this time (the King being under Age) dissentions amongst the Peers grew
hot in Erance; of which there were two Factions; Both pretending the cause of
Religion: of the One the Duke Guise, a Paipst, was Head; of the other the
Prince of Conde a Protestant: but while Delirant Reges Plectunter Achiui: while
these Princes are at variance, the people suffer for it: and chiefly, as being
under the weaker protection, the Protestant Party: where upon Queen Elizabeth,
having well learned the Lesson: Tum tua res agitur, partis cum proximus ardet^
and fearing least the flaim of their dissension, might kindle a fire within her
own Kingdom; sent over Sir Henry Sidney Lord Presiden of Wales into France,
to endeavor by all possible means their reconcilement, which when he could
not effect, (and perhaps it was never meant he should effect it, but only to
see what invitations would be made to the Queen for her assistance) she
thereupon, at the moan of the afflicted Protestants, sent over an Army of six
thousand Soldiers, under the Conduct of the Earl of Warwick, in assistance of
the Prince of Conde, and other Protestant Lords, who delivered to him the Town
of Newhaven, to hold in the King of France his name, until such time as Calice
were restored: But the Prince of Conde marching to join with the English
Forces, was by the Duke of Guise interrupted and taken prisoner^ which had been
a great disappointment to the English, but that the Duke of Colin joined with
him, besieged Caen in Normandy, and took it; together with Bayeux, Faleise, and
Saint Lo. The French Hostages that were pledges for the payment of five hundred
thousand Cowns, if Calice were not restored, were remaining still in England;
who perceiving there was like to be War with France, prepared secretly to get
away; but being ready to take Shipping, were discovered, and brought back again.

In the mean while, the Prince of Conde drawn on with a hope, to marry the
Queen of Scots, and to have the chief Government in France, during the Kings
Minority, concluded a Peace with the King, and with the Guises; so as now, all
French, as well Protestants as Papists, required to have Newhaven delivered up:
But the Earl of Warwick perceiving the ^icklenesse of the French Protestants,
First to make su^e to draw him into France, and now upon so slight occasion to
require him to be gone, he shuts all ^rench, both Protestants and Papists,
o^t of the Town, and lays hold of their Ships; the French on the other side
make ready to set upon the Town, saying, They fought not now for Religion, but
for their Country; wherefore it was meet that both Protestants and Papists
should join their Forces, seeing they had already concluded a Peace betwixt
themselves. And hereupon the Duke of Memorancy sent a Trumpetter to the Earl of
Warwick, commanding him yield the Town; who making answer by Sir Hugh Pawlet,
That he would never yield it without the Queens leave: he thereupon besieged
the Town, and with great violence of Battery, sought to get it by force: Which
Queen Elizabeth hearing, she sent a Commission to the Earl of Warwick to yield
it up, if upon honorable Conditions; which soon after was accordingly done,
after the English had held it eleven months; and then the Earl, without any
dishonor for yielding up a Town, which the Pestilence made him no less
unwilling then unable to hold, he returned into England: but that which was
more doleful then the loss of Newhaven, he brought the Pestilence with him
into England. The recovery of this Town not only made the French to triumph,
but hereupon the Chancellor of France pronounced openly, That by this War,
the English had lost all their Right to Calice, and were not to require it any
more, seeing it was one of the Conditions, That neither of the Nations should
make War upon the other; which was the Point stood upon by the King of France
and his mother, when Queen Elizabeth sent Sir Thomas Smith to demand Calice to
be restored.

At this time there were such cross designs amongst the Princes of
Christendom, that a very good Politician could hardly understand their Ayms.
The Duke of Guise being slain in the Civil War, the Queen of Scots Dowry was
not paid her in France, and the Scots were put off from being the Kings Guard:
This exceedingly displeased the Queen of Scots: but then to please her again^
and for fear lest hereupon she should apply her self to the friendship of the
English, her Uncle the Cardinal of Lorrain solicites her afresh, to marry
Charles Duke of Austria, offering her for her Dowry the County of Tyroll. The
Queen of Scots, to make use of her Unkles fear, and perhaps to bring Queen
Elizabeth into an opinion of depending upon her, acquaints her with this
motion, and therein requires her advice. Queen Elizabeth not willing she should
marry with any foreign Prince, persuades her to take a husband out of England,
and particularly commended to her the Lord Robert Dudley (whose wife a little
before had with a fall broke her neck) promising withal, that if she would
marry him, she should then by Authority of Parliament, be declared her
successor, in case she dyed without issue. But when her Unkles and the
Queen Mother were informed of this motion, they so much disdained the Marriage
with Dudley, that so she would refuse that Match, and perseverein the
friendship of the French, they offered to pay her the Dowry money that was
behind, and to restore the Scots to all their former liberties in France. And
as for the King of Spain, he had indeed a Ligier Ambassador here in England;
but rather by way of complement, and to watch advantages, then for any sincere
love; which he began now to withdraw from the English, as suspecting them to
intend a Trade to the West Indies.

And now the French Protestants may see what they brought upon themselves, by
leaving the English at Newhaven, and by trusting to their Countrymen the
French Papists; for their peace was but a snare, and the Marriage of Henry of
Bourbon, Prince of Navarre, with Margaret of Valois, the French Kings sister,
was but a bait to entrap them; for upon the confidence of this Marriage, being
drawn together into Paris, they were the readier for the slaughter; and a few
days after the Marriage, which were all spent in Feasts and Masks, to make
them the more secure, upon a Watchword given, the bloody faction fell upon the
Protestants, and neither spared age, nor sex, nor condition, but without mercy,
and sense of humanity, slaughtered as many as they could meet with, to the
number of many thousands.

It was now the sixth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, a year fatal for the
death of many great Personages: First died William, Lord Gray of We^lon,
Governor of Berwick, a man famous for his great Services in War: then William,
Lord Paget, a man of as great Services in Peace; who by his great deservings,
had wrought his advancement to sundry dignities, and honorable places: and
though zealous in the Roman Religion, yet held by Queen Elizabeth in great
estimation to his dying day: Then Henry Manors, Earl of Rutland, descended by
his mother from King Edward the fourth: And lastly, Francis the Duchess of
Suffolk, daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and mother to Queen Jane.

And now Queen Elizabeth finding how fickle the French Protestants had carried
themselves toward her, intended to make a Peace; and to that end sent Sir
Thomas Smith into France, joining Throgmorton in Commission with him; and in
conclusion a Peace was agreed on; whereof, amongst other Articles, this was
one, That the Hostages in England should be freed, upon the payment of six
hundred thousand Crowns: and this Peace was ratified by the Oath both of the
Queen of England, and the King of France.

About this time the English Merchants were hardly used both in Spain^ and in
the Netherlands, upon pretense of Civil differences, but indeed out of hatred
to the Protestant Religion: whereupon the English removed the seat of their
Trading to Embden in Freezland^ but Gusman the Spanish Liegier, newly come into
England, finding the great damages that the Netherlands sustained by these
differences, endeavored by all means to compose them; and thereupon Viscount
Mountague, Nicholas Wootton, and Walter Haddon, Master of the Requests, were
sent to Bruges in Flanders; who, after many interruptions, brought the matter
at last to some indifferent agreement.

It was now the seventh year of Queen Elizabeth; when making a Progress, she
went to see Cambridge; where after she had viewed the Colleges, and been
entertained with Comedies, and Scholasticall Disputations, she made her self a
Latin Oration, to the great encouragement of the Scholars, and then returned.
Presently after her return^ she made the Lord Robert Dudley Master of her
Horse, first Baron of Denbigh (giving him Denbigh and all the Lands belonging
to it) and then Earl of Leicester, to him, and the heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten: which Honor was conferred upon him with the greatest State
and Solemnity that was ever known. And now Leicester, to endear himself to the
Queen of Scots, accused Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, for being privy to the
libell of Hales, who affirmed the Right of the Crown to belong to the Family of
Suffolk, in case the Queen should die without Issue; and thereupon was Bacon
cast into prison; till afterward, upon his purgation, and the mediation of Sir
William Cecill, he was set at liberty, and restored to his place.

And now for a while we must cast our eyes upon Scotland, for that was now the
Stage where all the great businesses of State were acted: Matthew Steward, Earl
of Lenox, who had married Margaret Douglas, King Henry the eighth's Niece by
his eldest sister, had been kept as an Exile in England now twenty years; him
the Queen of Scots invites to come into Scotland^ under pretense of restoring
to him his ancient Patrimony; but indeed to confer with him about a Marriage
with his son the Lord Darlie, for being reputed heir to the Crown of England,
next after her self; she thought by matching with his son, to strengthen her
own title, and to prevent the hope of any other. Queen Elizabeth, upon suit
made by his wife, gave the Earl leave to go; but soon after, suspecting what
the Queen of Scots intent was in sending for him, she, to hinder the
proceeding, sent Sir Thomas Rand^ll to her, to let her know, That if she
proceeded in this Ma^ch, she would exceedingly wrong her self; for that it was
a Match so much disliked by all the English, that she was fain to prorogue the
Parliament, lest upon dislike thereof, there should something be enacted
against her Right of Succession: But if she would marry the Earl of Leicester,
she should then by Parliament be declared her next Heir. Hereupon, in the month
of November, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir Thomas Randoll for Queen Elizabeth^
the Earl of Murray and Lidington for the Queen of Scots at Barwick, entered into
a Treaty concerning the Marriage with the Earl of Leicester. The English
Commissioners urged the great benefits that by this Match would accrue both to
the Queen of Scots her self, and to the whole Kingdom of Scotland: The Scottish
on the other side, urged the great disparagement it would be to the Queen of
Scots, if refusing the offers made her of diverse great Princes, she should
match her self with so mean a person as the Earl of Leicester. This matter held
long debate, partly for that the English Commissioners were so appointed by
Queen Elizabeth; and partly for that the Scottish Commissioners had a good mind
to hinder her from marrying at all; and perhaps not the least; for that the
Earl of Leicester, being verily persuaded he should at last obtain Queen
Elizabeth her self, by secret Letters warned the Earl of Bedford not to urge
the Marriage with the Queen of Scots too far; and was thought for this cause to
favor Darly under hand. The matter being in this manner protracted for two
whole years together, the Queen of Scots impatient of longer delay, and being
resolved in her mind what she would do^ used means that the Lord Darly got
leave of Queen Elizabeth to go into Scotland for three months only, under
color to be put in possession of his fathers Lands (though it be strange, the
Queen upon any te^^ms would let him go, if she really intended to hinder the
Marriage: but such was the destiny, if there were not a plot in it) and ^o in
Febr^ary he came to Edinburgh; who being a young man, of not above nineteen
years of age, of a comely countenance, and most Princely Presence, the Queen of
Scots as soon as she saw him, fell in love with him, yet in modesty dissembling
it for the present; she sought to get a Dispens^on from Rome, because of their
neernesse in Consanguinity. And now, her inclination being grown so apparent,
that there was no concealing it, she sent Lydington to Queen Elizabeth,
desiring her consent. But she, through the suggestions of the Earl of Murray,
being induced to believe that the Queen of Scots intention was, by this
Marriage, to get the Crown of England, and to bring in Popery, entered into
consultation with her Privy Council, what was fit to be done to hinder the
Marriage; who all concluded, that these were the best ways: First, To have a
Company of Souldi^rs levied for terror ^ake, about the Borders toward
Scotland; then to commit to prison the Countess of Lenox, the Lord Darlies
Mother; and to recall from Scotland the Earl of Lenox and his ^on Darly, upon
pain of the loss of all their goods in England: then that the Scots, who were
known to be averse from the Marriage, should be relieved and assisted: and
lastly, That Katherine Gray, with the Earl of Hertford, should be received into
some grace; about whom only (it was thought) the Queen of Scots was most
solicitous, as being her Rival to the English Crown. Hereupon Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton was sent to the Queen of Scots, to counsel her in the Queens name,
not to proceed in this Marriage; and to show her the many inconveniences that
would accrue unto her by it. But she returned answer, That the matter was too
far passed to be recalled; and that Queen Elizabeth had no cause to be
displeased with i^; seeing herein she followed her advice, Not to match with ^
stranger, but with an English man born. Queen Elizabeth being informed of her
answer, calls home the Earl of Lenox, and the Lord D^rly his son, commanding
them upon their Allegiance to return: The Father modestly by Letters excu^eth
himself; the son humbly intrea^eth her not to be a hinderance to his
preferment; which he vows to employ in her Majesty's Service to the uttermost
of his power. And now, to make him the fitter match for her, the Queen of Scots
honored him first with Knighthood; then with the Dignities of the Lord
Armanack, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay; which Dukedom by Bir^h,
pertains to the eldest sons of the Kings of Scotland. After this, when he had
not been above five months in Scotland, she married him, and with the consent
of most of the Peers, declared him King. At this, the Earl of M^rray, and other
whom he drew to his pa^ty extremely fretted, and fell to moving of turbulent
questions, Whether it were lawful to admit a Papist King? Whether the Queen of
Scots might choose a husband at her own pleasure? and whether the Peers of the
Kingdom might not out of their Authority, impose one upon her? But howsoever,
they raised Arms, and had disturbed the Nuptials, but that the Queen levied an
Army to encounter them; with which she pursued them so closely, that they were
fain to fly into Engl^^d for protection; where Queen Elizabeth made no ^cruple
to receive them, seeing the Queen of Scots had received Yareby, Sta^don, and
Walsh, that were fled out of England; but the Ea^l of Murray especially, who
had always been found addicted to the English. Queen Elizabeth perhaps was not
much troubled at this Marriage; partly as knowing the mild disposition of the
Lord Darly, and how little access of strength it brought ^o ^he Queen of
Scots; but most of all, (...) plain^y ^eeing ^here wo^ld ^^ouble^ (...) in
Scotland upon it; and the troubles of Scotland would be the q^i^tnes^e of
England; which, as a good Mother of her Co^^^rey, was the ^ark she aimed at:
yet she made ^ show of being offended with it; but rather to co^ceal her aim,
then that ^he was offended with it indeed.

At this time the Emperor Maximlian sent to Queen Elizabeth his Ambassador,
Adam Smiricote, renewing the former suit for his brother Charles of Austria;
for which Marriage the Earl of Sussex was very earnest; the Earl of Leicester
as much against it; so as it grew to a quarrel between them, and the Court was
divided into factions about it: but the Queen, who never liked the dissentions
of her Peers (though it be a Rule with some, Divide, and Reign) made them
friends, at least in countenance.

We may now leave Scotland a while, and see the Honor done at this time to
Queen Elizabeth, not much inferior to the Honor done to Solomon by the Queen
of Saba; for now Cecile, the sister of Errick King of Sweden, and wife of
Christopher Marquess of Baden, being great with child, came from the farthest
part of the North (a long Journey) through Germany, of purpose to see her, for
the great fame she had heard of her Wisdom: At her being here, she was
delivered of a child, to whom, in requital of her kindness, Queen Elizabeth
was God-mother, and named him Edward^s Fortunatus; giving to her and her
husband, besides Royal Entertainment, a yearly Pension. At this time also, for
the great Fame of her wisdom, Donald mac Carty More, a great Potentate of
Ireland, came and delivered up into her hands all his most ample Territories;
and then receiving them again from her, to hold them to him and his Heirs males
lawfully begotten; and for want of such Issue, to remain to the Crown of
England. The Queen in requital, invested him with the honor of Earl of
Glenkarne, and Baron of Valence; and besides many Presents given him, paid the
charges of his Journey.

It was now the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; when Sir Nicholas
Arnold, a Knight of Gloucestershire, Governing Ireland under the title of a
Justice, was called home, and Sir Henry Sidney placed in ^his room. And here by
the way it is to be noted, That the Governors of Ireland, after it came under
the English, were at first called Justices of Ireland; afterward, Lievtenants;
and their Vicegerents were called Deputies. Afterward at the Princes
pleasure, sometimes Deputies, sometimes Justices, and sometimes Lievtenants;
which last Title, though it be of greatest honor, yet in power is in a manner
but the same. Si^ Henry Sidney at his coming into Ireland, found the Province
of Munster in much disorder^ by reason of strife between Gyrald Earl of
Desmond, and Thomas Earl of Ormond: whereupon the Queen sending for the Earl of
Desmond into England, ordained a new Government in that Province, appointing a
President to administer Justice, together with an Assistant on the Bench; two
Lawyers and a Notary: and the first President she made in this place, was Sir
William Sent-leger.

And now Queen Elizabeth in a Progress went to Oxford; where she took pleasure
in viewing the Colleges, in hearing Orations, in seeing of Comedies, till the
Comedy of Palemon and Arcett turned to a Tragedy, for by the fall of a wall,
through the multitude of people that pressed in to see it; three men were
slain. At her coming away, she made an Oration in Latin to the Scholars, a
sufficient recompense for all the Orations they had made to her. And this year,
was a call of seven new Sergeants at Law, who kept their Feast at Grayes Inn
in Holborn.

Upon the Queens return from Oxford, the Parliament began, where they presently
fell upon the m^tter of succession; and moving the Queen to marry^ in which
points some went so far, that they spared not to accuse the Queen, as one
careless of Posterity^ to defame Cecill with libells and reproaches, as if he
were her Counsello^^ in this matter; but above all, to curse Doctor Huic her
Physician, who was thought to dissuade her from Marriage, by reason of I know
not what womanish insufficiency. At last in the Upper House it was agreed, That
Sir Nich^la^ Bacon, Lord Keeper, their Orator, should in all their names
beseech the Queen to marry; and withal, to declare a Successor in the Crown,
if she should happen to die without Issue; for which he gave many reasons,
declaring what mischiefs were likely to befall the Kingdom, if she should die
before a Successor were designed. But in the Lower House there were some,
amongst whom, were Bell and Mou^son (two Lawyers of great account) Dutton, Sir
Paul Wentwort^, and other, who grew to far higher terms, disparaging the
Queens Authority, and saying, That Princes were bound to design a Successor;
and that in not doing it, the Queen should show her self no better then a
parricide of her Country. The Queen was contented to bear with words spoken in
Parliament; which spoken out of Parliament, she would never have endured: but
not willing to expostulate the matter with the whole number, she commanded that
thirty of the Higher House, and as many of the Lower, should appear before her,
to whom she delivered her mind to this effect; That she knew what danger
hangs over a Princes head, when a Successor is once declared; she knew that
even children themselves, out of a hasty desire of bearing Rule, had taken up
Arms against their own fathers; and how could better conditions be expected
from kindred? She had by reading observed, That Successors in a collateral
Line, have seldom been declared; and that Lewis of Orleance, and Francis of
Angoulesme were never declared Successors, and yet obtained the Crown without
any noise. Lastly, she said, Though I have been content to let you debate the
matter of Succession, yet I advise you to beware, that you be not injurious to
your Princes patience. With these and the like reasons she gave so good
satisfaction, that they never after troubled her with making any more such
motion. And though she consented not in plain terms to declare a Successor,
yet soon after she gave some intimation of it; for one Thornton, a Reader of
the Civil Law in London, who in his Lectures, called the Queen of Scots Right
in question, was clapped up in prison for his labor.

In the beginning of her ninth year, Charles the ninth, King of Fr^nc^, sent
his Ambassador Ramboulet into England to the Queen, with the Robes and
Ornaments of the Order of S. Michael, to bestow upon which two of her Nobility
she pleased; and she making choice of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of
Leicester, they were by Ramboulet invested with them; an Honor that had never
been conferred upon any English, but only K. Henry the eighth, King Edward the
sixth, and Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, though afterward prostituted almost
to any, without difference.

And now to return to the Affairs of Scotland: The nineteenth of June last
past, the Queen of Scots, in a happy hour, was at Edinborough Castle dilive^ed
of a Son, that was afterward James the sixth of Scotland, and the first Monarch
of Great Britain; whereof she presently sent word to Queen Elizabeth by James
Melvyne; who thereupon sent Sir Henry Killigrew to congratulate her safe
deliverance, and her young son, with all demonstration of love and amity. But
now the love of the Queen of Scots to her husband the Lord Darly, was not so
hot at first, but it was now grown to be as cold; and she had not heaped honor
on him so fast before, but now as fast she takes them off: for where before in
all public Acts, she had used to place her husbands name first, now she caused
it to be placed last, and in the coining of money began to leave it quite out.

This unkindness between them was fomented by one David Rizie an Italian,
whom the Queen had taken into her service, first, as a Musician, and then
taking a liking to him, made him here Secretary for the French Tongue; by means
whereof, he had oftentimes secret conference with her, when the King her
Husband might not be admitted. This indignity the King himself, being given to
his pleasures of Hunting and Hawking, resented not so much, as some Lords that
were his fri^nds; who told him plainly, That it stood not with his Honor to
suffer this fellow to live. By whose instigation the King drawn to plot his
death; One day, taking with him the Earl of Reuven, and other, he rushed into
the Queens Chamber at her Supper time, where finding David Rizie at a Cupboord,
tasting some meat that had been taken from the Table, he seized upon him,
dragged him forth into an outer Chamber, and there murdered him; the Queen at
that time being great with child, and like by that affright to have
miscarryed: But the Fact being done, the King came in to her again, assuring
her there was no hurt at all intended to her Person. The man that had animated
the King to do this fact, was especially the Earl Murray, of whom it is
necessary to say something, because his part will be the greatest of all the
Scottish Actions of this time. He was the base son of King James the fifth,
and so the base brother of the Queen; made at first, Prior of Saint Andrews:
But not liking that Religious Title, he affected rather some Temporal Honor;
which when the Queen, being then in France, denied him, then in an angry mood
returned into Scotland, where, by the advice of Knox, whom he held for a great
Patriark, brought the matter so to pass, that in an Assembly of the States,
the Religion was altered, and the French were banished out of Scotland. Yet
afterward, as soon as the Queen was a Widow, he posted into France, and so
insinuated with her, that she created him Earl of Murray, and promoted him to
an Honorable Marriage. Being thus exalted, he returned into Scotland; where,
for the further growth of his ambitious designs, he sowed seeds of Sedition,
affirming often, what a misery it was to be under the Command of a woman; and
that Royalty was not to be tied to any Stock or Kindred, but to Virtue only,
whether the parties were legitimaie or no; by this course making way to the
Kingdom for himself. To this end, he used all the mea^s he could to keep the
Queen from marrying again; which when he could not effect, he then sought ways
how to make discord between her and her Husband; for which cause he had caused
the King to murder Rizie. Of the foulness of which Fact, when the King had a
while grew sensible, he meant to be revenged of Murray, who had counseled him
to do it: which Murray understanding, prevented it with causing the like to be
done to him, as will presently be seen. For the Queen having been delivered of
a Son, and the day appointed for the Christning being come; where the
Godfathers were Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Savoy; Queen
Elizabeth being requested to be God-mother, sent thither the Earl of Bedford as
her Deputy, and a Font of Massy Gold for a Present, in value 1043 l. but gave
him express Command, That he should not honor Darly with the Title of King.
But before a month or two, after the Christning were passed, The King in a
stormy and tempestuous night, was strangled in his Bed, and then cast forth
into the Garden, and the house immediately blown up with Gunpowder.

The rumor of this murder being spread abroad, the common Fame laid it upon
Murray and Morton, and their Confederates; Murray and Morton upon the Queen:
But we must not here give ear to that which BUCHANAN writes; who to curry
favor with the Earl MURRAY, lays most impudent scandalls upon the Queen;
whereof, before his death, he repented himself extremely. The King thus
murdered, and the QUEEN left alone to her self, she is counseled to marry
with some, that might be able to assist her against all her opposites: JAMES
Hepburn Earl of Bothwell being then greatly in her favor, and of great
eminency for his valor: And though he were the man that had acted the
murder, yet is he by Murray and his confederates, commended to the Queen; to
which motion, as being destitute of friends, and not knowing whom to trust; she
at last consents, but upon these conditions, That above all things, respect
might be had to her young Son; and that Bothwell might be legally quitted,
both from the bond of his former marriage, and also of the Kings murder.
Hereupon a course is plotted, by which, Bothwell is called to the Bar; and
Morton being his Advocate, by the Sentence of Judges he is clearly acquitted.
Upon this, he is created Duke of Orken^y, and by consent of many of the
Nobility, is married to the Queen; which bred a suspicion in many, that the
Queen was conscious of the murder, which was the thing that by the marriage
they intended: And the suspicion once raised, they seek by all means to
increase, that they may have the better color against her; and so, the very
same man who had absolved Bothwell, and consented to the marriage, now takes
Arms against her, as a Delinquent in both; force him to flee, and then seize
upon the Queen, whom, cl^d in a very homely garment, they thrust into prison in
Loch-levyn, under the custody of Murray's mother, who had been the Harlot of
King James the fifth; but boasting her self to have been his lawful wife, and
her son, his lawful Issue. Queen Elisabeth having at length notice hereof,
sent Sir Nicholas Throgmorton into Scotland, to expostulate with the
Confederates, touching this insolent usage of the Queen; and to consult, by
what means she might be restored to her liberty. But Throgmorton coming into
Scotland, found the Confederates in more insolent terms then had been reported;
being divided in opinion, what to do with the Queen, some would have her
banished perpetually, into England or France; some would have her questioned
before the Judges, committed to perpetual custody, and her son proclaimed
King: others, more inhumane, would have her at once deprived of Princely
Authority, of life and all; and this, Knox and some other Ministers thundered
out of the Pulpits. Throgmorton on the other side, alleged many passages out
of the holy Scriptures, touching Obedience to the higher Powers; maintaining,
That the Queen was subject to no Tribunal, but that in Heaven; That no Judge
upon Earth might call her in question; That there was no Office nor
Jurisdiction in Scotland, which was not derived from her Authority, and
revokeable at her pleasure. They again opposed the peculiar Right of the
Kingdom of Scotland; and that in extraordinary cases, they were to proceed
besides order, taking up Buchanans Arguments; who in those days, by
instigation of Murray, wrote that damned Dialogue, De Iure Regni apud Scotos;
wherein, against the verity of the Scottish History, he endeavors to prove,
That the People have power, both to create, and to depose their King. After all
their debating, all that Throgmorton could get of them, was a Writing without
any Subscription, wherein they protested, They had shut up the Queen for no
other intent, but to keep her apart from Bothwell, whom she loved so
desperately, that to enjoy him, she regarded not all their ruins; willing him
to rest satisfied with this Answer, till such time as the rest of the Peers met
together. And notwithstanding all he could say, they shut up the Queen daily,
in more straight custody, though with tears she besought them to deal more
mildly with her, and to let her but once have a sight of her son, which would
not be granted her. At last when fair persuasions would not serve to make her
freely give over the Kingdom, they threatened to question her openly for
incontinent living, for the Kings murder, and for Tyranny, so as through fear
of death, they compelled Her, unheard, to set her hand to three Instruments; In
the first whereof, she gave over the Kingdom to her young son, at that time
scarce thirteen Months old: In the second, she constituted Murray Viceroy
during the minority of her son: In the third, in case he refused the charge,
these Governors were nominated; James Duke of Chasteau, Herald, Giles Spike
Earl of Argile, Matthew Earl of Lenox, John Earl of Atholl, James Earl of
Mo^ton, Alexander Earl of Glencarn, and John Earl of Mar. And presently she
signified to Queen Elizabeth by Throgmorton, that she had made these grants by
compulsion through the counsel of Throgmorton, telling her that a grant
extorted from one in prison (which is a just fear) is actually void and of no
effect.

Five days after the Queen had made this Resignation, James the sixth, the
Queens Son, was Anointed and Crowned King, John Knox preaching at the same
time; but a Protestation was then put in by the Hamiltons, that all this ought
to be no prejudice to the Duke of Chasteau Herald in his Right of succession
against the Family of Lenox; but Queen Elisabeth had forbidden Throgmorton to
be at the Action, that she might not seem by the presence of her Ambassador, to
approve their proceeding in displacing of the Queen.

Fifteen days after this transaction, Murray himself returned ou^ of France
into Scotland, and within three days went to the Queen with some other of the
confederates, who charged her with many crimes, and wished her if she tendered
her Life and Honor, to observe these prescriptions: Not to disturb the peace of
the Kingdom, nor desire to be at Liberty, not to stir up the Queen of England,
or the King of France to m^le^t Scotland with any War, not to think any more of
Bothwells love, or meditate revenge upon Bothwells adversaries.

Murray being now proclaimed Regent of Scotland, he binds himself under his
Hand and Seal to do nothing which shall concern War or Peace, the Kings Person
or his marriage, or the Liberty of the Queen, without the consent of the
confedera^es; and then gives Throgmorton warning by Lyding^on, not to make any
further intercession for the Queens Liberty, for that he and the rest had
rather run any hazard then to suffer it. Soon after he puts to death John
H^pburn, Daglish, and others that were Bothwells servants, for having a hand in
the murder of the King: But they (which he little expected) when they were at
the Gallows, ready to dye, protested before God and his holy Angels, that
Bothwell had told them, that Morton and M^rray were the first authors of the
murder. They freed the Queen from all suspicion, like as Bo^hwell himself
being prisoner in Denmark, both living and dying, often protested with deep
asse^erations, that the Queen was innocent. And fourteen years after, Morton
going to execution, confessed that Bo^hwell dealt with him to consent to the
murder of the King, which, when he refused utterly unless the Queen under her
hand writing would allow of it; Bothwell made answer, that could not be, but
the fact must be done without her knowledge.

A little before this time, upon one and the same day, dyed two of the Privy
Council, Sir John Mason Treasurer of the Queen^ Chamber, a grave and learned
man, but a great Usurper and Encroacher upon Ecclesiastical Livings; and Sir
Richard ^ac^vile Vice-Treasurer of the Exchequer, a man both prudent and
provident, and allied to the Queen by her mother An^e Bol^^. In his room
succeeded Walter Mildmay, a man of wisdom and integrity; In Masons Office came
Sir Francis Knowles, who married Katherine Car^e, the daughter of Mary Bolen,
the Queens Mothers Sister.

It was now the year 1567. And the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when
the Earl of Stolberg came into England from the Emperor Max^millian, to treat
of the marriage of the Queen with the Archduke Charles upon which very occasion
the Queen a little before had sent the E. of Sussex to the Emperor, with the
Order of the Garter: But in the Treaty of marriage, there fell out so many
difficulties, about Religion, maintenance of the Duke, about the Royal Title,
and concerning succession, that after it had been treated of seven whole years
together, it came at last to nothing, and the Duke not long after married Mary
daughter to Albert the fifth Duke of Bavaria; yet both he and the Emperor
continued ever after a good correspondence with the Queen.

About this time, there came from John Basil Emperor of Russia and Muscovia,
Stephen Twerdic^, and Theodore P^gorella, with a Present of rich Furs of Otter,
Miniver, and the like, tendering all service and obsequiousness to the Queen
and the English. The Merchants by virtue of a Grant from Queen Mary, had
combined themselves into a Society, which they called the Muscovie Company; and
having large Privileges granted them from the Emperor, went thither with a
Navy yearly, making a very gainful Voyage; but then it proved most gainful,
when for the Queens sake they obtained at the Emperors hands, in the year
1569. That none but the English of that Company, should Traffic in the
North-parts of Russia. With these Russian Ambassadors there returned into
England, Anthony Ienkinson, who in his Travels had made curious Observation of
Russia, set forth a Geographicall Description of it, and was the first of the
English that sailed through the Caspian Sea. And this year, the 8. of June, Sir
Thomas Sackvile was created Baron of Buckhurst, at Whitehall.

We have seen before, the first Act of the Queen of Scots Tragedy: Now comes in
the second, having been 11 Months kept a prisoner; at last, by the help of
George Douglas, to whose Brother she was committed, she made escape from
Loch-levyn, to Hamiltons castle; where upon the testimonies of Robert Melvyn,
and others, in a meeting of a great part of the Nobility, there was drawn a
sentence declaratory, That the Grant extorted from the Queen in prison, (which
is Iustus metus) was actually void from the beginning. Upon which Declaration,
great multitudes ^locked to her, so as within a day or two she had gotten an
Army of at least six thousand; but when they joined battle with Murray, being
but raw and unexpert Soldiers, they were soon defeated. In this case, the
Queen sought to save her self by flight, journeying in one day threescore
miles, and coming at night to the house of Maxwell Lord Heris, from thence she
sent John Beton to Queen Elisabeth with a Diamond Ring, which she had fo^merly
received from her, as a Pledge of mutual Amity; intimating, that she would
come into England, and implore her aid, if her Subjects offered to prosecute
her any further. Queen Elisabeth returned answer, that she should expect from
her, in abundant manner, all loving and friendly offices. But before the
Messenger was returned, she, contrary to the advice of her friends, entered into
a small Bark, and with the Lords, Heris, and Flemming, and a few others, landed
at Wickinton in Cumberland, near the mouth of the River of Decwent, the
seventeenth day of May; and the same day wrote Letters to the Queen in French
with her own hand, the effect whereof was, That having made an escape from the
the hands of her insolent and rebellious Subjects, she was now come into
England, upon certain hope of her approved clemency; and therefore humbly
desiring, she might forthwith be conducted to her presence. Queen Elisabeth
sending Letters by Sir Francis Knolles, comforted her, and promised her aid and
defense, according to the equity of her cause; but denied her access, for that
she was held guilty of many crimes, giving command to have her brought to
Carlisle, as a place of better safety. The Queen of Scots receiving this answer,
and finding access to the Queen denied her, makes request again by Letter,
that she might have leave, both to unfold the injuries she had received, and to
answer the crimes objected, in her own presence; humbly entreating her, that
either she might be admitted to have conference and assistance, or else have
free leave to depart out of England, to gain supply elsewhere, and not be held a
prisoner in the Castle at Carlile^ for ^s much as she came voluntarily into
England, relying upon her love so often professed. Upon these Letters, Queen
Elisabeth exceedingly commisera^ed her case, and could have fo^nd in her heart
to admit her to her presence, but that her Councillors conceived it to be
matter for consultation, what to do in this case. To detain her in England, had
many mischiefs attending on it; to send her into France; as many; to send her
back into Scotland, many more; so as in conclusion, the most were of opinion,
to have her detained, as one taken by right of War, and not to be dismissed,
till she had made satisfaction for assuming the Title of England, and for the
death of Darly her husband, who was born one of the Queens Subjects. In this
diversity of opinions, Queen Elisabeth out of her own judgment, sent word by
Middemore, to the Regent of Scotland, that he should come himself in person, or
else depute some fit persons to answer the complaints of the Queen of Scots
against him and his confederates, and render sufficient reasons wherefore they
had deprived her; otherwise^ she would forthwith dismiss her, and with all the
forces she could, settle her in her Kingdom. To this Summons, Murray obeys, and
comes to York, the place appointed for this Treaty, accompanied with seven more
of his intimate friends, who stood Delegates for the Infant King, namely, James
Earl of Morton, Ad^m Bishop of the Ork^neys, Robert of Dunferm, Patrick Lord of
Lyndsey, James Mac-gylly, and Henry ^adinary; and with these, Lydington the
Secretary, and Ge^rge Buchanan. And the very same day came thither Thomas
Howard Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Saedler a
Privie-Councellour, appointed Commissioners for Queen Elisabeth. For the Queen
of Scots, (who took it hainously, that Queen Elisabeth would not hear the caus^
her self, but refer her to Subjects, being an absolute Prince, and not ty^d to
their proc^edings) there appeared John Lesley Bishop of Ross, William Lord
Levyng^^on, Robert Lord Boyde, Ga^^^ of Kilwynnin, John G^urd^n, and James
Cock^urn. Being met, Lydingto^ turning himself to the Scots, in a wondrous
liberty of Speech, gave them this advice, Maturely to consider, what prejudice
they should draw upon themselves, by accusing the Queen of Scots, and calling
her Reputation in question publicly before the English, professed enemies of
the Scottish Nation. Likewise, wha^ account they shall be able to give hereof
to the King, when he shall grow to ^iper y^^rs, and shall see what an injury
this was to the Kingdom, his Mother, and his own person. Wherefor^ (said he) it
seems requisite to forbear this business al^ogether, unless the Queen of
England will enter into a ^u^uall league of Offense and Defense, against all
those, which under this pretenc^, shall go about ^o molest us. Upon this Speech
of his, the D^l^gates of the Que^n of Scots made Protestation, That although it
pleased the Qu^^n of Scots, to have the cause between her and her disloyal
Subjects, d^^^ted before the English, yet she being a free Prince, and
obnoxious to no earthly Prince whatsoever, did not thereby yield her self
subject to the Jurisdiction and command of any person. On the contrary, the
English pro^est^d, That they did in no wise admi^ that Protestation, in
pr^judice to the right which the Kings of England have anciently challenged as
superiou^ Lords of the Kingdom of Sco^land. The day after, the Queen of Sco^s
Delegates s^t forth at large the injurious dealing of Morton, Murray, Mar,
Gle^car^, (...), and others, against the Queen; and how they had compelled her,
for fear of death, to resign her Crown; which therefore (they said) was of no
^or^^. Murray and his confederates make answ^r, That they had done nothing, but
by consent of the Peers in Parliament; and tha^ in pros^cu^ing o^ Bothwell, the
author of the Kings murder, whom the Queen protected; and as for her
resignation, that it was voluntarily and freely done. All this the Queen of
Scots Delega^es answered and confuted, affirming in particular, That where
there are 100 Earls, Bishops and Barons, (more or less) that have voices in
the Parliament of Scotland, there were not in that tum^ltous assembly they
speak of, above four Earls, one Bishop, an Abbot or two, and six Barons;
wherefore their earnest request was, that the Queen of England would be
^^nsible of these indignities offered her; and take some course for a speedy
redness. After this, some new Commissioners from Queen Elizabeth were added to
the former, to some of whom, the Queen of Scots took exception; unless the
French and Spanish Ambassadors might be taken in, and her self admitted into
the presence of the Queen and them, publicly to defend her own innocence; and
that Murray might be detained and ^ited, whom she affirmed, she was able to
prove to have been the chief Plotter of the murder of her husband Darley. This
was held to be a just demand by the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Arundell,
Sussex, Leicester, and the Lord Clinton: But Queen Elizabeth waxing somewhat
angry, openly said, that the Queen of Scots should never want an Advocate as
long as Norfolk lived: It was seen here, which is said, that the heart of the
King is inscrutable; for how Queen Elizabeth stood affected in this case of the
Queen of Scots, no man could well discern^ she detested the insolency of her
Subjects in deposing her, and yet gave no assistance to restore her. After long
agitation of this business, and nothing concluded, Murray a little before his
return into Scotland, slyly propounded the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Duke of Norfolk; which he with a modest answer rejected as a thing full of
danger. But withal, Murray the more to alienate Queen Elizabeth's mind from the
Queen of Scots, gave ou^, that she had passed away to the Duke of Andyn her
Right to the Crown of England, and that the transaction was confirmed at Rome;
he showed Letters also which the Queen of Scots had written to some friends whom
she trusted; wherein she accused the Queen for not dealing with her according
to promise, and boasted of succors she expected from some others. This last
clause something troubled Queen Elizabeth, neither could she conjecture from
whence any such succor should come; seeing both France with the Civil Wars,
and the King of Spain in the Low Countries had eno^gh to do at home. But at
last it brake out, that one Robert Ridolph a Florentine under the habit of a
Merchant in London, was suborned by Pope ^ius the fifth, to make a secret
commotion of the Papists in England against the Queen, which he performed
indeed with a great deal of secrecy and much cunning; whereupon the Queen of
Scots was removed from Bolton (a Castle of the Lord Scroops) where all the
neighboring people were Papists^ to Tutbury more toward the heart of the
Country, under the custody of George Earl of Shrewsbury.

About this time the Guises in France, and the Duke D'Alva in the
Low Countries, began to endeavor the utter extirpation of the Protestant
Religion. In France the Ministers of the Gospel are commanded within a
limited time to depart the Kingdom; when Queen Elizabeth forgetting the
^icklenesse of the Protestants at New Haven, once again takes upon her their
protection; supplies them with two hundred thousand Crowns in money, besides
Munition in abundance, and with all humanity receives the French that fled into
England; the rather, for that they made solemn protestation they took not up
Arms against their Prince; but only stood upon their own defense. In the
Low Countries likewise, the Duke D'Alva, breathing nothing but slaughter and
blood; made the Dutch come flocking into England as into a Sanctuary, where
with all courtesy they were received.

And here it will be fit to show how the War in the Low Countries began first,
which was thus: At which time the King of Spain brought in the Spanish
Inquisition^ a small number of the meaner sort of people, in tumultuous manner^
cast the Images out of Churches and brake them in pieces, and although that
tumult was soon quieted, yet the King of Spain taking advantage at the
rashness of a few, to charge the whole Nation with Rebellion: sent amongst
them Ferdinando Alvarez, Duke D' Alva, a bloody and fierce man, (who contrary
to the Ordinances and customs of the Country) took away all authority from the
ordinary Courts of Justice; Erected new consistories; condemned and put to
death the Peers, without trial by their lawful Judges; Placed Garrisons of
Spaniards throughout all their Cities and Villages, and by force exacted the
twentieth part of the fruits of the Earth, and the tenth of movables upon
every Alienation. At that time, a mighty mass of money borrowed from the
Genowayes, and other Italian Merchants was sent out of Spain into the
Low Countries, there to be employed to interest, which being brought by
shipping, was pursued by the French; and forced to fly for succor into the
Havens of England, whom the Queen commanded to be succored; as conceiving the
money to be the King of Spains as it was given out: But at the same time,
Cardinal Odette coming out of France into England, and giving notice to the
Queen that the money was not the King of Spains, but belonged to certain
merchants of Geneva; from whence the Duke D' Alva had taken it against their
will, with a purpose to employ it to the ruin of the Protestants; and
information also being given her by one that had a property in the money that
it was so^ she determined to put in security, and to borrow the money of the
merchants her self, which is an usual thing with Princes when goods are taken
in their Ports; and the King of Spain himself had lately done the like. The
Duke D' Alva being informed of this dealing of thee Queens; by Gerard de Spese
the King of Spains Ambassador in England; seizes presently upon all the goods
of the English in the Low-co^ntries, and kept the men prisoners; The Queen did
the like with the Dutch merchants in England, Letters of Mart were granted on
both sides, and this grew to such a quarrel between the Nations, that being
nourished with other differences afterward, it brought forth in Eighty Eight,
that Spanish Invasion, which is, and will be memorable in all future Ages.

Upon occasion of this Money detained, certain Peers of England, amongst whom,
were the Duke of Norfolk, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Arundell,
Northumberland, Pembroke, Leicester, and others, Accused Sir William Cecill,
for sending away money into France, making this their color, but done indeed
out of envying his great favor with the Queen, and suspecting him to incline
to the house of Suffolk in the matter of succession. Hereupon they consult
sec^etly how to get him be imprisoned; and Throgmorton (who envyed him as much
as they) suggesting that if he were once clapped up, they might soon find out a
way to crush him; But the Queen (by what means it is uncertain) coming to have
notice hereof, gave a check to their purpose, and protected Cecill against
their combined practices.

The Earl Murray being returned into Scotland, makes the Lords believe that he
desires a meeting at Edinbourgh, to consult about restoring the Queen to her
Liberty; but as Hamilton Duke of Chasteau Herald (appointed Vicegerent of the
Kingdom by the Queen) and the Lord Heris were coming thither, he circumvented
them, and before any of the rest came cast them into prison; and forthwith in
an open War, oppresses all her Favorers. It may be thought, the Earl Murray
could have been content, the Queen should have been set at liberty; but that he
knew, her liberty could not be without his servitude; and Queen Elisabeth
perhaps would willingly have had her resto^e^ to her Kingdom, but that she
doubted, her restoring would endanger her own security: And thus, while they
regarded their own ends in the first place, and hers but in the second, she had
the fortune to be pitied, but not the happiness to be relieved; and all she
could do her self, was but to tie the knot of her bonds the faster; if she
could have sat still, they would perhaps have loosened of themselves; but now,
the more she stirred, the more she was entangled.

And now the Destiny of the Duke of Norfolk began to work: It was in every ones
mouth, that the Duke should marry the Queen of Scots; and it is true, there had
been motions made; but the matter not so forward, as the Voice of the People,
which commonly presageth what will follow. It had been motioned to the Duke at
York, by the Bishop of Ros^e; and afterward (in pretense at least.) by Murray
himself at Hampton Court; but the Duke, before he would resolve in the matter,
deliberated with the Earls of Aru^dell, Northumberland, Westmerland, Sussex,
Pembroke, Southampton, and Leicester himself, who all judged it fit, he should
acquaint the Queen with it first, and then leave the matter to her liking.
Within a few days, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton meeting the Duke in the Palace at
Westminster, advised him, to move the Earl of Leicester himself to embrace the
match, seeing he had formerly sued for it; but if he refused it, then at least
to take him along with him, for that himself alone would hereby be able to
procure the Queens consent. A day or two after, the Earl of Leicester
propounded the matter to the Duke, and then communicates it to the Earls of
Arundell and Pembroke; who thereupon, together with Throgmorton, wrote Letters
to the Queen of Scots, commending the Duke of Norfolk to her for a Husband; the
Duke himself likewise writes to her, tendering his singular Love and respect
unto her. Upon this, Articles are drawn, written with Leicesters own hand, and
sent to the Queen of Scots; to which if she consented, they then promised to
procure, that Queen Elisabeth should give her assent, and that forthwith she
should be reinvested in her Kingdom, and the Succession of England should be
confirmed upon her. We may easily believe, the Queen of Scots was not hardly
drawn to give consent to her own desire; but in the mean time, the Duke had
imparted to the Lord Lumley the whole proceeding, and had much ado to get the
Earl of Leicesters consent, that he might advise of it with some other of his
Friends; yet a little after, he opened the matter to Cecill also. The rumor of
this Marriage was soon come to the Queens ears; which the Duke understanding,
he dealt earnestly with the Earl of Leicester, to have the matter propounded
to the Queen out of hand. Leicester makes delays, and pretends causes to put
it off^ which Cecill seeing, he advises the Duke, to go and acquaint the Queen
with it himself. This council Leicester opposed, promising to open it to the
Queen as she went in Progress. At length, at Farnham, the Duke standing by as
the Queen sat at Table, she gave him a tart Admonition, That he were best take
heed, upon what pillow he rested his head. After this, at Tichfield, Leicester
fell sick, or at least counterfeited; to whom the Queen coming, and bidding him
be of good cheer; he with sighs and tears craved pardon for his fault, and
unfolded to her the whole story from the very beginning. Whereupon, the Queen
called the Duke into the Gallery, reproving him sharply, for going about the
Marriage, without acquainting her; and commanding him, upon his Allegiance, to
desist. The Duke made her a free and hearty promise of obedience, and spared
not to say (as if he little regarded the Qu. of Scots) that his Revenues in
England were not much less then hers in Scotland; and that when he was at his
house in Norwich, he thought himself in a sort not inferior to some kings: but
notwithstanding, finding the Queens anger by her countenance, and perceiving
Leicester to be in a manner quite alienated, and most of the Nobility also, as
scarcely saluting him when they met him, he grew extremely dejected, and
prepared presently to leave the Court, meaning to stay at Norfolk, till by his
friends intercession, and his own submissive Letters, the Queens heart might be
mollified toward him: Mean while, the Court was suspitously fearful, lest he
should raise Rebellion, and (they say) it was concluded, that if he did so, the
Qu. of Scots should presently be made away. And now the Duke, who held secret
commerce by Letters with the Bishop of Ross, Throgmorton and Leicester (for
they were sent to and fro in bottles) being examined touching the marriage of
the Qu. of Scots, and certain secret conferences with the Bishop of Rosse,
confessed most of the Objections, and was thereupon committed to the Tower,
under the custody of Sir Henry Nevill; within two days after the Bishop of
Rosse likewise is examined, and together with the Florentine Robert Ridolph, is
delivered to the custody of Sir Francis Walsingham, the Earl of Pembroke is
confined to his house, and examined privately; but his confession was not
committed to writing; It being his request because he could not write himself.
At this time, the rumor of Insurrection in the North, begun in Autumn before,
grew very strong, by reason of some frequent meetings of the Earls of
Northumberland, Westmerland, and others, who thereupon being upon their
Allegiance sent for to repair presently to the Queen, they make delays (for
they stayed waiting for supplies, both from the Scots, and from the Duke
D'Alva) when the Earl of Northumberland, doubtful what to do, was frighted of
purpose by his servants, telling him, that men in Arms were near at hand to
apprehend him; Who thereupon in a tempestuous night, rises out of his bed, and
in great fear gets into his Park at Topcliffe, and the night following to
Branspith to the Earl of Westmerlands house, where a great many were met that
were acquainted with the Enterprise: Here they brake forth into an open
Rebellion, being pressed forward, by one Nicholas Morton a Romish Priest, sent
by the Pope to pronounce Queen Elizabeth an Heretic; and therefore to have
utterly lost all Right of Sovereignty: By and by they send forth a writting,
wherein they declare that they had taken Arms for no other end, b^t that the
Religion of their forefathers might be restored, wicked Counselors removed
from the Queen, the Duke of Norfolk, and others of the loyal Nobility
relieved, who were now in disgrace; but toward the Queen, professing
themselves most dutiful Subjects; withal they send Letters to the Papists all
the Kingdom over, requiring them to come to their assistance^ but they were so
far from joining with them, that many sent both the Letters and the bearers of
them to the Queen, and afforded their aides and purposes against them; no less
then the best Protestants, even the Duke of Norfolk himself was not backward in
it. These Rebels go first to Durham, where they tear in pieces all the Bibles
and Books of Common Prayer they could find in Churches of the English tongue:
when they had been twelve days in Rebellion, they numbered their Army, and
could not reckon above 600 horse, and 4000 foot; whereupon being certainly
informed, that the E: of Sussex with 7000, and the E: of Warwick with 12, were
setting out against them, they betook themselves to Rabie, the chief house of
the E: of Westmerl^^d; going from thence they besieged Bernards castle, which
for lack o^ provision, was yielded to them. At which time, being proclaimed
Traitors and he^ring afresh of the great forces that were coming against them,
the two Earls with a small company, get presently into Scotland hard by, where
the Earl of Northumberland hid himself at Harclow; in a poor Cottage, amongst
the Grayhams (famous Robbers) who afterward betrayed him to the Earl Murray:
Westmerland made a shift to get into the Low-Countryes, where he had a slender
Pension from the King of Spain, and there lived even to old age. Of the rest,
for terror and examples sake, there were hanged at Durham, threescore and six
of the chief; amongst whom, Plomtree, a noted Priest. At York were executed,
Simon Digby, John Fulthrop, Thomas Bishop, Robert Penyman; and at London a few
months after, Christopher and Thomas; and some other in other places. After
this, the heads of the Rebels being convict of High Treason, were proscribed;
namely, Charles, Earl of Westmerland; Thomas, Earl of Northumberland; Anne,
Countess of Northumberland; Edward Dacres of Morton; John Nevill of Leversege;
John Swinborn, Thomas Markenfield, Egremond Ratcliffe, brother to the Earl of
Sussex; Christopher Nevill, Richard Norton, Christopher Marmaduke, Robert and
Michael Tempest, George Stafford, and forty others of good account. Out of the
ashes of this Rebellion, a new fire was kindled at Naworth in Cumberland, by
Leonard Dacres, second son to the Lord Dacres of Gyllisland; He was a Party
with the Earls in their Rebellion; but they breaking forth sooner then he
expected, and he at that time being at the Court, and there admitted to kiss
the Queens hand, tendered his service to go against them; and to that purpose,
was sent home: but in his Journey (branding himself with a double disloyalty)
he consulted with the Rebels, and encouraged them to go on; and by virtue of
Letters of Credence from the Queen, he surprised the Castle of Greystock, and
other houses of the Dacres, and gathered together an Army of three thousand
men: But being encountered by the Baron of Hunsdon, after a great fight,
wherein, though he were crook-backt, he behaved himself valiantly, he was put
to flight, and fled into Scotland, from whence soon after, he passed over into
the Low-Countryes, and in great misery and poverty died at Louvayn.

But though the Queen were thus entangled with Rebellions at home, yet she was
not careless of the afflicted Protestants in France; for she stirred up the
Protestant Princes to defend the common Cause; supplied them with money, taking
in pawn the Queen of Navar's Jewels; and gave leave to Henry Champernoon to
lead into France a Troop of a hundred Horse, Gentlemen all, and Voluntaries;
amongst whom were Philip Butshed, Francis Barkley, and Walter Raleigh, a very
young man, who now began to look into the world. But as the Queen of England
assisted the French, so in revenge thereof, the King of France meant to assist
the Scots, but that he was taken away by death; being slain by a shot, at the
Siege of S. John D'Angelo.

There was at this time a Rebellion in Ireland also, raised by Edmund and
Peter, brothers to Boteler Earl of Ormond; but after many outrages by them
committed: the Earl of Ormond first by persuasions, obtained of them to submit
themselves; and when notwithstanding they were committed to prison, he then
obtained of the Queen they should not be called to the Bar, being exceedingly
grieved that any of his Blood should be attaynted of Rebellion. The rest of the
Rebels were pursued by Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and soon dispersed.

And now the Earl of Murray, Regent of Scotland, when he had wrought all things
to his hearts desire, and thought himself secure, at Lithquo, riding along the
streets, was shot into the belly with a Bullet, beneath the Navill, and there
fell down dead. The actor was a Hamilton, who did it upon a private revenge,
for that Murray had forced him to part with a piece of Land which he had by his
wife; who thereupon falling Lunatic, he in a great rage committed this
slaughter.

After Murrayes death, the Country being without a Regent, was cause of many
disorders. Tho. Carre, and Walter Scot, two principal men amongst the Scottish
Borders, and devoted to the Queen of Scots, made In^odes into England; wasting
all places with fire and sword, till by Forces sent out of England; under the
command of the Earl of Sussex, and the Lord H^nsdon, they were defeated. In
whose pu^suit, three hundred villages were ^ired, and above fifty Holds were
over-turned. For which service the Earl made many Knights, as Sir William
Drury, Sir Thomas Manners, Sir George Carry, Sir Robert Constable and others,
and then returned. And now to prevent further disorders, the Lords of Scotland
being ready to assemble about the election of a new Regent, they asked counsel
of Queen Elizabeth in the matter; but she making answer she would not meddle in
it, because she would not be thought to work any thing prejudicial to the
Queen of Scots, whose cause was not yet tried^ they created Matthew Earl of
Lenox Regent; which Queen Elizabeth did the better like, as conceiving he could
not choose out of natural affection, but have a special care of the young King
being his Grandchild.

But while Queen Elizabeth favored the Kings Party in Scotland, the Earl of
Hun^ley, the Duke of Castle-H^rald, and the Earl of Argyl^, (the Queen of
Scots Li^u^enants) employ the Lord Seton to the Duke D'Alva, Requiting him for
many great reasons, to vindicate the Queen of Scots liberty alleging how
acceptable a work it would be to all Christian Princes and to the whole
Catholic Church: whereunto the Duke made answer; They should find him ready
to the uttermost of his power to satisfy their Request. At which time also the
French King dealt earnestly with Queen Elizabeth to the same purpose; and the
Spanish Ambassador in his masters name urged it no less extremely; but Queen
Elizabeth assaulted with all these Importunities, made answer, That as she
would omit nothing that might serve for the Reconciling of the Queen of Scots
and her subjects, so she must have leave to provide for her own and her
subjects safety; a thing which Nature, Reason, and her own Honor requires at
her hands. And now when these Princes prevailed not with Queen Elizabeth to set
the Queen of Scots at liberty, ou^ comes Pope Pius Quintus with his Bull
Declaratory, which he caused to be fastened in the night time upon the gate of
the Bishop of Londons Palace, wherein all her subjects are absolved from their
Oa^h of Allegiance, or any other duty; and all that obey her, accursed with
Anathem^. He that fastened up the Bull was one John F^lton; who never fled for
the matter, but as affecting Martyrdom, suffered himself to be apprehended,
confessed and justified the Fact, and thereupon arraigned, was condemned and
hanged near the place where he had fastened the writing.

The same day that Felton was Arraigned, the Duke of Norfolk seeming now
extremely pontitent for his fault, and utterly to abhor the marriage, was
delivered out of the Tower, and suffered to go to his own house, but yet to
be in the custody of Sir Henry Neuill still. Indeed Cecill being a good friend
of the Dukes, had told the Queen, That the Law of 25 of Edward the third could
not take hold upon him: And now being in a kind of liberty, Cecill deals
earnestly with him to marry speedily some other; thereby to take away all
suspicion in that behalf: yet some again thought that this liberty of the Dukes
was granted him of purpose to bring him into greate^ danger.

At this time died William Herbert Earl of P^mb^ook the grandchild of an Earl
of P^mbrook, yet the son but of an Esquire, and grandfather to Phillip Earl of
Pembrook and Mountgomery now living, who lies buried in Paul's, under a fair
Monument of Marble, with an Inscription ^estifying his great deservings while
he lived.

Many conspiracies were at this time to set the Queen of Scots at liberty;
amongst others, there conspired Thomas and Edward Stanley younger sons of the
Earl of Derby, with others; but the matter discovered, they were soon
suppressed, and some of them executed. And now the Lords of the Queen of Scots
Party continuing to protect the English Rebels, the Earl of Sussex once again,
accompanied with the Lord Scroop, enters Scotland, burns the Villages all
along the Valley of Anandale, and compasses the Duke of Castle-Herald, and the
Earls of Huntley and Argyle, under a Writing signed with their own Hands and
Seals, to forsake the English Rebels. Whereupon the Earl of Sussex returned
home, he made these Knights; Edward Hastings, Francis Russell, Valentine
Brown, William Hilton, Robert Stapleton, Henry Carwen, and Simon Musgrave.

Queen Elizabeth's mind being now in great suspension, by reason of that Bull
from Rome, and the late conspiracy in Norfolk, sent Sir William Cecill, and Sir
Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots, who was then at Chattesworth in
Derby-shire, to consult with her by what means the breach in Scotland might
best be made up, She re-invested in her former Dignity, and her son and Queen
Elizabeth might be secured^ The Queen of Scots did little deplore her own
afflicted condition, putting her self wholly upon the Queens clemency; when the
Commissioners made unto her certain Propositions of Agreement: First, That the
Treaty of Edinborough should be confirmed: then, That she should renounce her
Right and Title to England, during Queen Elizabeth's life, or any children of
her body lawfully begotten: then, That she should send her son for a Hostage
into England, with other six Hostages; such as the Queen should nominate: then,
That the Castles of Humes and Fast-castle should be held by the English for
three years; with some other. To which Propositions the Queen of Scots for the
present gave a provident answer; but referred the fuller Answer to the Biship
of Rosse her Ambassador in ENGLAND, and some other Delegates; who afterward
allowing some of the Propositions, and not allowing others; the Treaty came to
nothing, but the matter rested in the state it was before.

A^ this time Philip King of Spain had contracted Marriage with Anne of
Austria, Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, his own Niece by his Sister; who
was now setting Sail from Zealand toward Spain; when Queen Elizabeth, to
testify her love and respect to the House of Austria, sent Sir Charles Howard
with the Navy Royal, to conduct her through the Bri^ish Sea.

And now was the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign finished; which certain
Wizards had made Papists believe should be her last: but contrary, as if it
were but her first, a new Custom began, of celebrating the seventeenth day of
November (the Anniversary day of her Reign) with ringing of Bells, Tiltings,
and Bon-fires: which Custom, as it now began, so it was never given over as
long as she lived, and is not yet forborne so long after her death.

At this time in Ireland, Connagher o Brien Earl of Towmond, no^ brooking the
severe Government of Edward Fitton, President of Connaght, entered into
Consultation with some few to raise a new Rebellion; which, being at the point
ready to break forth, was strangely discovered: for the day before they meant
to ^ake up Arms, Fitton knowing not at all of the matter, sent ^h^ Earl word in
friendly manner, That the next day he and a few friends with him, would be his
Guests. The Earl convinced by his own conscience, imagined that his Intendments
were revealed; that Fitton would come as an enemy, rather then a Guest. Out of
which feare^ he presently set Sail into FRANCE; where repenting himself
seriously of his fault, he confessed the whole business to Norris, the Queens
Ambassador in France; and by his intercession, was afterward pardoned and
restored.

In January, the thirteenth year of her Reign, Queen Elizabeth in royal
pomp, entering the City of London, went to see the Burse which Sir Thomas
Gresham had lately built, for the use of the Merchants; and with sound of
trumpets, and the voice of a Herald, solemnly named it the Royal Exchange. A
few days after, for his many great services, she made Sir William Cecill Baron
Burgley.

There were now about the Scottish affairs, in the name of the King of of
Scots, the Earl Morton; Peruare Abbot of Dumformelin; and James Mac-Gray; whom
when Queen Elizabeth required to show more clearly, for what causes they had
deposed the Queen; they exhibited a long and tedious Commentary; wherein with a
certain insolent liberty, they endeavored to prove, by the ancient Right of
the Kingdom of Scotland, that the people of Scotland were above the King: and
urged Calvin's Authority also, That Popular Magistrates are constituted for the
moderation of the Licentiousnes of Princes: and that it is lawful for them,
both to imprison Kings; and upon just causes, to depose them. This writing the
Queen could not read without indignation; but to the Delegates she gave this
Answer; She saw no just cause yet, why they should handle the Queen in such
manner; and therefore willed them to think upon some course out of hand, how to
allay the dissentions in Scotland. Hereupon in Sir Nich. Bacons house, Keeper
of the Great Seal, a Proposition was made to the Bishop of Rosse, the Bishop of
Galloway; and Baron Levingston, delegates for the Queen of Scots, that for the
security of the Kingdom, and the Qu. of England; it were requisite, that before
the Queen of Scots should be let at liberty: The Duke of Castle-Herald the
Earl of Huntley and Argyle, the Lord Humes, Heris, and another of the Barons
should be delivered for Hostages, and the castle of Dumbriton and H^^e^ yielded
up into the hands of the English, for three years. But they made Answer, that
to yield up great personages, and such fortifications as were demanded; were
nothing else; but to leave the miserable Queen utterly destitute of faithful
friends, and naked of all places, fit for guard and defense: yet they offered,
to give two Earls and two Barons for Hostages, till two years were expired:
which not being accepted, they straightway gathered, and spoke it openly; That
now they plainly perceived the English meant to keep the Queen of Scots
perpetually prisoner, and likewise to break off the Trea^y; seeing they
rigorously demanded such security as Scotland was not able to make good. And
now Queen Elizabeth seeing that nothing could be done, for her own, the King
and Queen of Scots safety, unless Both Factions in Scotland consented; she
held it fit that the Lords of Scotland should themselves appoint some chosen
persons to compound the matter.

While matters in England, proceeded in this sort; the Queens party in
Scotland was hardly used: Dumb^tion Fryth^ the strongest castle in Scotland was
taken: and I. Hamilton Archbishop of Saint Andrews; the Duke of Castle-Heralds
brother, as an accessory to the murder of D^^lye, was hanged without being
arraigned according to Law. In England, the Queen of Scots had all her servants
taken from her, except Ten only, and a Priest to say mass: with which
indignities the Queen of Scots provoked, causes a large Commentary of her
Counsels, with certain love letters to the Duke of Norfolk, to be carried to
the Pope, and the King of Spain, by Ridolphu^; which being brought first to the
Duke, Higford (one that waited on the Duke in his bed chamber) had copyed out:
but being commanded to burn them, he hid them under a Matt in the Duke
Bedchamber; and that (it should seem) purposely. Ridolphus to daw on the Duke
to be Head of the discontented Party in England, aggravated to him the wrongs
he had suffered^ how against all law he had been kept a long time in prison:
and now, to his great disgrace, was not Summoned to the Parliament: he
exhibited to him a Catalogue of such of the Nobility, who had vowed to Assist
him: he showed how the Pope, (so the Catholic Religion might be promoted)
would himself undergo all the charge of the War, and had already laid down an
hundred thousand Crowns; whereof himself had distributed twelve thousand
amongst the English that were fled: he promised, that the King of Spain would
send four thousand horse, and six thousand foot to his Assistance; to these
reasons the Bishop of Rosse added, That it was an easy matter for him to
surprise the Queen; whom, when he had in his hands, he might then set the Queen
of Scots at liberty, and might easily obtain of Queen Elizabeth, a toleration
of Religion. The former Reasons took somewhat with the Duke, but this point of
surprising the Queen, he abhorred, as an impious fact, and therefore rejected
as pernicious and Dangerous.

In France a little before this, was the marriage solemnized between Charles the
ninth King of France, and Elizabeth of Austria daughter to the Emperor
Maximilian; in gratulation whereof, Queen Elizabeth sent into France, Thomas
Lord Buckhurst, who with great magnificence was received, and perhaps the more,
in regard of a motion now intended to be made: for the Lord Buckhurst, having
in his retinue, one Guydo Cavalcantius a noble man of Florence, the Queen
Mother of France, as being a Florentine her self, had often conference with
him, when she would many times say, what a happiness it would be to both the
Kingdoms, if a Match were made between the Queen of England and her son Henry
Duke of Angiou; and at last desired him to commend the motion to the Queen of
England, both from her, and from her son the King of France, as a thing they
both exceedingly desired. The Lord Buckhurst returned, having for a present
from the King of France a chayn weighing a thousand French crowns; and
Cavalcantius at his return made the motion to the Queen, who seemed not
unwilling to hearken to it; for by this Match, there should be added to the
Kingdom of England, the wealthy Dukedoms of Angiou, Bourbon, Auverne, and in
possibility, the Kingdom of France it self. Hereupon a Treaty was held, in
which the French propounded three Articles, one concerning the Coronation of
the Duke; another, concerning the Joint Administration of the Kingdom; a third,
concerning a Toleration of his Religion: to which it was answered, that the two
first Articles might in some sort be composed; but the third, scarce possibly:
for though a contrary Religion might be tolerated, between Subjects of the same
Kingdom; yet between a wife and her husband, it seemed very Incongruous and
inconvenient; yet the matter at last came to this conclusion, That if the Duke
would afford his presence with the Queen at divine Service, and not refuse to
hear and learn the doctrine of the Church of England; he should not be
compelled to use the English Rites, but at his pleasure use the Roman; not
being expressly against the word of God. But upon these Punctili^s they could
not accord: and so the Treaty, after it had continued almost a year, brake
utterly off. It was indeed generally thought, that the Ma^ch was never really
intended of either side, but that they both pretended it, for only their own
ends: for the Earl of Leicester (who knew more of the Queens mind then any
man) wrote at this time to Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queens Ambassador in
France, That he found the Queens inclination so cold in the matter, that though
the Point of Religion were ^ully accorded; yet she would find one point or
other to break it off.

At this time the continuance of the Duke of Norfolkes affection toward the
Queen of Scots, came to be discovered by a packet of Letters, sent by Ridolphus
to the Bishop of Ros^e, and by Bailiffs confession (who brought the letters)
being set upon the Rack; so as the Bishop of Rosse was confined to the Isle of
Ely: Thomas Stanlie, Sir Thomas Gerard, and R^l^ton were cast into the Tower:
and H^nry Howard, who had an aspiring mind to be Archbishop, was committed to
the Archbishop of Canterbury's keeping. At the same time the Queen of Scots
sent money to her confederates in Scotland; which being by Higford delivered to
one Brown to carry, and told it was Silver, when he found by the weight that
it was Gold, he began to suspect something; and thereupon went and delivered
both the money and Letters to the Lords of the Council. Upon this, Higford
being examined, confessed the whole matter; and withal gave notice of that
Commentary also of the Queen of Scots which is mentioned before. Two days
after, the Duke himself being examined, and knowing nothing what his servau^s
had confessed, de^yed every particular; and thereupon, was brought again to the
Tower, by Ralph Sadler, Thomas Smith, Henry Nevill, and Doctor Wilson: And
after him Bannester, who was the Dukes Counsel at Law: The Earls of Arun^el
and Southampton; the Lord Lumley, the Lord Cobham; Henry Percy, Louder, Powell,
Goodyer, and others, are committed to prison; who upon hope of pardon,
confessed all they knew concerning the matter. When these things, and
especially the Commentary, which the Duke thought had been burnt, were showed
him, he then cried out, I am betrayed by my own servants; not having learned to
be distrustful, which is the very sinew of Wisdom. And then with all
submission, he besought the Lords to mediate for him to the Queen; toward
whom, he protested he never had the least thought of doing any hurt.

And now seeing it appeared that the Bishop of Rosse had been the
whole-contriver of the business, it was deliberated what to do with him,
because he was an Ambassador. Hereupon diverse Civilians are called; as David
Lewis, Valentine Dale, William Drury, William Aub^y, and Henry Jones; of whom
these questions were asked: First, Whether an Ambassador who raises Rebellion
against that Prince ^o whom he is an Ambassador, may enjoy the Privileges of
an Ambassador, and is not lya^le to pun^shment?

They answered, That such an Ambassador has forfeited the Privileges of an
Ambassador, and is liable to punishment.

Secondly, Whether the Minister or Procter of a Prince, who is deposed by
public Authority, and in whose room another is Ina^gurated, may enjoy the
Privileges of an Ambassador?

They answered, That if such Prince be lawfully deposed, his Proct^r cannot
challenge the Privileges of an Ambassador, forasmuch as none but absolute
Princes, and such as have-Right of Majesty, can appoint Ambassadors.

Thirdly, Whether a Prince who is come into another Princ^s Country, and held
in Custody, may have his Proctor; and if he shall be held an Ambassador.

They answered, If such a Prince have not lost his Sovereignty, he may have his
Proctor; but whether that Proctor shall be reputed as an Ambassador or no,
this depends upon the Authority of his Delegation.

Fourthly, Whether if a Prince give warning to such a Proctor, and to hi^^
Prince who is under custody, that this Proctor shall not from hencef^rth be
accounted for an Ambassador; Whether that Proctor may by Law challenge the
Privilege of an Ambassador?

They answered, A Prince may forbid an Ambassador to enter into hi^ Kingdom,
and may command him to depart the Kingdom, if he ^ontain not himself within
his due limits; yet in the mean while he is to enjoy the Privileges of an
Ambassador.




Upon these Answers, the Bishop of Rosse is warned by the Lords of the
Council, that he shall no longer be esteemed an Ambassador, but be punished
as his fault shall deserve. The Bishop alle^dged for himself, That he had not
violated the Right of ^n Ambassador Via Iuris, but V^^ Fact^, (to use his own
words) and therefore advises them, not to use harder measure to him, then was
used to the English Ambassadors, (...) in France, R^ndoll and T^mwo^th in
Scotland; who had raised Rebellions there, and were open Abettors of the same;
and yet had no greater punishment, then to be gone at a time limited. When
they began to urge him what the English had testified against him, he lovingly
requested them to give no credit to it^ forasmuch as by a received Custom,
which has the force of a Law, The Testimony of an English man against a Scot,
or of a Scot against an English man, is not to be admitted: but after some
other altercations, the Bishop is led away to the Tower, and kept close
prisoner.

At this very season, Matthew Earl of Lenox, Regent of Sco^^and, the Kings
Grandfather was by the adverse party set upon at unawares; who having yielded
himself to David Spense of Wormester, (that was then very careful to defend
him) together with him, was slain by Bell and C^ulder; when with great industry
he had governed the Kingdom for his Grandchild about fourteen months. In
whose room, John Areskin, Earl of Mar^e, by common consent of the Kings
Faction, was chosen Regent of Scotland; who being a man of a quiet disposition,
through extreme grief of the many troubles he sustained in the place, departed
this life when he had governed thirteen months.

And now a Parliament was held at Westminster; wherein, besides a Law for
preventing of the treacherous endeavors of seditious subjects, another Law was
made, That if any one, during the Queens life, by Books written or printed,
shall expressly affirm, That any i^, or ought to be the Heir or Successor of
the Queen (besides the natural Off-sp^ing of her Body) or shall to that
purpose publish, print, or dispers^ any Book or Schedules; he, and his
favour^rs, shall for the first offense suffer a years imprisonment, and the
loss of one half of his goods: and if they offend again, they shall be in a
Pr^munir^. A Law also was made, by which to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome,
was made Treason: and it was pronounced against the Queen of Scots, That if she
offended again against the Laws of England, it might be lawful to question
her, as the wife of a Peer of the Kingdom of England. But here the Queen
interposed her Authority, and would not suffer it to be enacted. About this
time, in May, a solemn Tilting was performed at Westminster; where the
Challengers were Edward Earl of Oxford, Charles Howard, Sir Henry Lee, and
Chri^^^pher Hatt^n Esquire; who all did valiantly, but the Earl of Oxford best.

As Soon as the Parliament was dissolved, a Consultation was held, Whether John
Story, Doctor of the Laws, the Duke D'Alva's Searcher (who sometime before, was
by a wile brought into England) being an Englishman born; and having in Bra^ant
consulted with a for^aign Prince, about the invading of England, were to be
held guilty of high Treason? It was resolved a^firmatively: whereupon he is
called to the Bar, and indicted of Treason^ That he had consulted with one
Pres^all a Conjurer, to make away the Queen; That he cursed her daily, when he
said Grace at Table; That he showed a way to the Secretary of Duke D'Alva how
to invade England, etc. where he affirming, That the Judges had no power to
meddle with him, for that he b^longed not to the Queen of England, but was the
King of Spain's sworn subject^ is nevertheless condemned by the Fo^m of Nihil
dicit (forasmuch as no man can renounce the Country wherein he was born, nor
abjure his Prince at his own pleasure) and finally executed after the manner of
Tray^ors.

Ireland at this time was indifferent quie^; for Sir John Perot, President of
Munster had brought James Fitz Morris to submit himself, and crave pardon.
Sidney the Lord Deputy returned into England, and Sir William Fitz Williams,
who had married his sister, succeeded in his room.

It was now the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; when Thomas Howard,
Duke of Norfolk, on the sixteenth day of January, was brought to his Trial at
Westminster Hall; where sat as Commissioners, George Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury (made High Steward of England for that day) Reynold Gray, Earl of
Kent; Thomas Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex; Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington;
Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford; Henry Herbert, Earl of Pembr^^k; Edward
Seymor, Earl of Hertford; Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick; Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leicester; Walter Devereux, Viscount of Hereford; Edward, Lord Clinton,
Admiral; William, Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlain; William Cecill, Lord
Burley, Secretary; Arthur, Lord Gray of Wilton; James Blunt, Lord Mountjoy;
William, Lord Sands; Thomas, Lord Wentworth; William, Lord Borough; Lewis, Lord
Mordant; John Pawlet, Lord St. John of B^sing; Robert, Lord Rich; Roger Lord
North; Edmund Bruges, Lord Ch^ndois; Oliver, Lord St. John of Bl^tsho; Thomas
Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst; and William West, Lord de la Ware. After silence
bidden, Sir Owen Hopton, Lieutenant o^ the Tower, is commanded to bring the
Duke to the Bar; and then the Clerk of the Crown said, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
late of Keningale, in the County of Norfolk, Hold up thy hand; which done, the
Clerk with a loud voice reads the crimes laid to his charge: That in the
eleventh year of the Queens Reign, he had traitorously consulted to make her
away, and to bring in foreign Forces for invading the Kingdom: Also, That he
dealt with the Queen of Scots concerning Marriage, contrary to his promise made
to the Queen under his hand writing: Also, That he relieved with money the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, that had stirred up Rebellion against
the Queen: Also, That in the thirteenth year of the Queens Reign, he implored
Auxiliary Forces of Pope Pius the fifth, the Queens professed enemy, of the
King of Spain, and the Duke D'Alva, for the freeing of the Queen of Scots; and
restoring of the Popish Religion: And lastly, That he sent supply to the Lord
Heris, and other the Queens enemies in Scotland. These Indictments being read,
the Clerk demanded of the Duke, if he were guilty of these crimes, or not? Here
the Duke requested he might be allowed to have Counsel. But Catiline, chief
Justice, made answer, That it was not lawful. Yet (says the Duke) I have
heard that Humphrey Stafford, in the Reign of K. Henry the seventh, in a Cause
of Treason, had one assigned to plead for him. To which Dyer chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, made answer, That Stafford had Counsel assigned him
concerning the Right of Sanctuary, from whence he was taken by force^ but in
the Indictment of Treason he pleaded his own cause. After this, the Duke
yielding to be tried by the Peers; first Barham, Sergeant at Law; then Gerard
the Queens Attorney; and lastly, Bromley, the Queens Solicitor, enforced the
crimes objected against him: to all which the Duke made colorable answers; but
most of them being proved by sufficient testimony, he asked upon occasion,
Whether the subjects of another Prince, who is confederate, and in league with
the Queen, are to be accounted the Queens enemies^ to which Catiline answered,
They were; and that the Q. of England might wage War with any Duke of France,
and yet hold firm Peace with the French King. When it grew toward night, the
L. high Steward demanded of the Duke if he had any more to say for himself? who
answered, I rely upon the equity of the Laws. After this, the Lords withdrawing
a while, and then returning, the Lord Steward beginning at the lowermost, asked
them, My Lord de la Ware, Is Thomas Duke of Norfolk guilty of these crimes of
High Treason, for which he is called in question? He rising up, and laying his
hand upon his breast, answered guilty, in like manner they answered all. After
this, the Lord Steward with tears in his eyes, pronounced sentence in form as
is used. A few days after were Barnes and Mather executed, who conspired with
one Herle, to make away certain of the Counselors, and to free the Duke; but
Herle revealed the business presently, to whom Barnes (when he saw his
Accuser brought forth) smilingly said, Herle thou were but one hour before
me; else I had been in thy place for the accuser, and thou in my room to be
hanged: at the same time with them was hanged also Henry Rolfe, for
counterfeiting the Queens hand. But though the Duke were now condemned, yet the
Queen was so tender of his case, that it was four Months after before he was
executed, at last on the second of June at eight of the clock in the morning,
he was brought to the Scaffold upon the Tower Hill, and there beheaded.

At this time and upon this occasion, a Parliament was Assembled, wherein
amongst other Laws, it were Enacted, that if any man shall go about to free
any person imprisoned by the Queens express Commandement^ for Treason or
suspicion of Treason, and not yet Arraigned, he shall lose all his goods for
his life time, and be imprisoned during the Queens pleasure, if the said person
have been Arraigned, the Rescuer shall forfeit his life; if condemned, he
shall be guilty of Rebellion.

In the time of this Parliament, the Queen created Walter Devereux Earl of
Essex, being before but Viscount Hereford; because he was descended by his
Great-grand-mothers from the Bourchiers, and made the Lord Clinton (who had
large Revenues in Lincolnshire) Earl of Lincoln; Also she called forth John
Paulet of Basing, the Marquess of Winchester's son, Henry Compton, Henry
Cheyney, and Henry Morris for Barons by Summons.

Within ten days after the Dukes death, William Lord De-la-ware, Sir Ralph
Sadler, Thomas Wilson Doctor of the Laws, and Thomas Brumley the Queens
Solicitour, were sent to the Queen of Scots, to expostulate with her; That she
had usurped the Title and Arms of the Kingdom of England, and had not renounced
the same, according to the agreement of the Treaty at Edinburgh, That she had
endeavored the marriage of the Duke of Norfolk, without acquainting the
Queen, and had used all forcible means to free him out of prison; had raised
the Rebellion in the North, had relieved the Rebels both in Scotland and in the
Low Countries; had implored Aids from the Pope, the King of Spain and others;
had conspired with certain of the English, to free her out of Prison, and
Declare her Queen of England; Lastly, that she had procured the Popes Bull
against the Queen, and suffered herself to be publicly named the Queen of
England in Foreign Countries: All which accusations she either absolutely
denied, or else fairly extenuated, and though (as she said) she were a free
Queen, and not subject to any creature; yet she was content, and requested,
that she might make her personal answer at the next Parliament.

About this time, the King of Spain by his Ambassador here, complained to the
Queen, that the Rebels of the Netherlands were harbored and entertained in
England, contrary to the Articles of the League; whereupon the Queen set forth
a severe Proclamation, That all the Dutch, who could any ways be suspected of
Rebellion, should presently depart the Realm; which yet turned little to
D'Alva's, or the King of Spains benefit: For hereupon, Count Vander-Mark, and
other Dutch going out of England surprised the Brill first, then Flushing, and
afterward drew other Towns to Revolt, and in a short time excluded the Duke
D'Alva in a manner from the Sea. And this error, to suffer the Protestant
party to get possession of the Sea-towns, has been the cause they have been
able to hold out, even all this long time, against the King of Spain. And now
many military men having little to do at home, got them into the Netherlands,
some to Duke D'Alva; but the far greater number to the Prince of Orange: The
first of whom, was Thomas Morgan, who carried three hundred English to
Flushing; then followed by his procurement nine Companies more under the
conduct of Humphry Gilbert; and afterward it became the Nursery of all our
English Soldiers.

At this time, Charles the French King setting his mind wholly (at least seeming
so) upon the Low Country War, concluded a peace and entered into a league with
Queen Elizabeth; which was to remain firm, not only during their two lives, but
between their successors also, if the s^ccessor signify to the surviver within
a year that he accepts it, otherwise to be at liberty. It was likewise
agreed, what aid by Sea or Land, they should each of them afford to other upon
occasion; and for ratification of this League, Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln
and Admiral of England was sent into France, with whom went the Lord Dacres,
Rich, Talbot, Sands, and others. The French King likewise sent the Duke of
Memorancy, and Paul Foix i^to England with a great train; that the Queen in the
presence of them, and the Ambassador in Ordinary might swear to the league,
which she did at Westminster, the seaventeenth of May, in the year 1572. The
day after she made Memorancye Knight of the Garter.

Memorancye whilst he tarryed in England, made intercession in his Kings name,
that what favor could be without danger, might be showed to the Queen of
Scots; and then made much a do again about the marriage with the Duke of
Angiou; but being hopeless to make conclusion thereof, by reason of the
diversity of Religion he returned into France; for now was great provision
making ready for the marriage, between Henry King of Navarre; and the Lady
Margeret the French Kings Sister; to which solemnity with notable
dissimulation, the Queen of Navarre and the chief of all the Protestants were
allured, being born in hand that there should be a renovation of love, and a
perpetual peace established: The Earl of Leicester likewise and the Lord
Burleigh were invited out of England, and out of Germany, the sons of the
Prince Elector Palatine under color of honor: but indeed, that they might be
intrapped, and they, and together with them the Protestant Religion at one
blow, if not clean cut off, yet receive^ deadly wound: For the marriage being
celebrated, there presently followed that cruel Massacre at Paris, and the
terrible slaughter of the Protestants throughout all the Cities of France; but
to set a show of equity upon the fact, Edicts and Proclamations were presently
set forth, that the Protestants had plotted a wicked conspiracy against the
King, the Queen Mother, the Brethren, the King of Navarre, and the Princes of
the blood Royal; and to keep the thing in memory, Coin was presently stamped,
upon the one side whereof was the Kings picture with this Inscription, Virtus
in Rebels, on the other side; Pietas excitavit justitiam; But the King of
France, notwithstanding all the show he made of Piety, escaped not the Divine
revenge, for before the year came about, he fell sick of a bloody Flixe, and
afterward with long and grievous torments ended his life.

A little before this, Mota Fenell Ambassador to the King of France, being in
England, by virtue of an order from the Queen Mother of France, propounds to
Queen Elizabeth at Kenelworth (two days before the Massacre in that Kingdom)
the marriage of her youngest son Francis Duke of Alenson (for the Queen
Mother had been told by some cunning men, that all her sons should be Kings,
and she knew no way for it but this) B^t Queen Elizabeth, by reason of the
disparity of age, modestly excused her self, (For he was scarce ^eventeen years
old, and she was now past eight and thirty) yet she promised to consider of it,
and Alenson did not leave to prosecute the ^^it.

At t^is time, Thomas Percy Earl of North^mberland, who first Rebelled, and
afterward fled into Scotland, was for a sum of money delivered by the Earl of
Morton, to the Lord Hunsdon Governor of Barwick; and a while after was
beheaded ^t York. And now as these two great Personages, the Duke of Norfolk^
and the Earl of Northumberland were taken away by a violent death; so three
other great Personages were at this time taken away by a natural death: First
W^ll^am Paulet, who from a private man came by degree; to be Marquess of
Winchester: lived to the age of within three years of a hundred, and could
reckon a hundred and three of his children, and his childrens issue, after he
had held the p^ace of Lord Treasurer of England above twenty years; in whose
room succeeded Sir W^lliam Cecill, Lord Burleigh, then dyed Edmund Earl of
Darby, famous as well for his hospitality and good housekeeping, as for his
skill in Surgery and Bone-setting; then dyed Sir William Peter, who being
descended from an honest stock at Exceter in Devonshire, was Privy Counselor
and Secretary to King Henry the Eight, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen
Elizabeth; who plant^d himself in Essex, where he purchased great possessions;
whose son John was by King James made Baron of Writle in that Country.

And now Queen Elizabeth having formerly borrowed money o^ her Subjects, she
thankfully repayd it, which won her no less love, then if she had given it,
and more love she gained also at this time by two Proclamations; by one of
which, she commanded Noble men to observe the Law of keeping Ret^iners; by the
other, she restrained Informers, who, under color of spying out Crown Land
concealed by private persons, sacralegio^sly seized upon the Lands of
Parish-Churches, and Almshouses piously endowed by the Queens Ancestors. And
more Love and Honor also she gained at this time by two acts of Justice; the
one, that she satisfied the English Merchants out of the goods which were
det^ined belonging to the Dutch, and restored the rest to the Duke D' Alva, and
make a full transaction with the Merchants of Geneva for the mon^y intercepted;
the other, that she freed England at this time of the debts which her Father
and her Brother had run into in foreign part^, and were increased by yearly
interest, and caused the obligations of the City of London, which had so often
been renewed to be given in, to the great rejoicing of the Citizens.

The Spanish affairs growing now very turbulent in the Netherlands, Flushing
lost, the towns of Holland revolted, and the Spanish Navy vanquished by the
Zelanders, Duke D'Alva against his will, began to show more kindness toward
the English, so as in the month of January, the trade which in Anno 1568. had
been forbidden, was now allowed again between the Dutch and the English for two
yeer^; but those two years expired, the English removed their trading to the
confederates State^.

The last year in the month of November, a daughter was born to the French
King, to whom he requested Queen Elizabeth to be God-mother, who the^eupon sent
William Somerset Earl of Worcester into France with a Font of massy Gold to
stand as her Deputy at the Christning. Hereupon, and for that the Queen
promised to observe the League strictly, the French King and the Queen mother
began to affect her more and more, and the Duke D'Alenson wrote sundry
love letters to her, the French King and His Mother interceding for the marriage
with all earnestness. It is true, the Queen conceived diverse reasons, why it
was fit for her to marry; but the Courtiers for their own ends dissuaded her as
much from it: at last the Queen Mother of France was wonderful importunate,
that her son Alenson might have leave to come and see her^ whereunto, being
wearyed with continual Letters and Messages, she gave her consent; but upon
condition, that he should not take it for any disgrace to him, if he returned
without obtaining his suit: But as soon as Queen Elizabeth had notice, that his
brother Henry was elected King of Poland, and that the King of France was very
sick, she gave intimation to Alenson, by Edward Horsey Governor of the Isle
of Wight, that he should not make too much haste into England; but should
first procure a peace by some means or other in France, and declare by some
notable Argument, his good will toward the Protestants, thereby to be the more
welcome Ghest into England. Hereupon a peace was concluded in France, and in
certain places the Protestants were allowed to exercise their Religion: and
then again the French King and the Queen Mother, used all their endeavor to
have the marriage go forward (for they were very desirous that Alenson, who was
of a crooked and perverse disposition, and prone to raise tumults) might be
removed out of France; and withal, they requested of Queen Elizabeth, that if
the Duke of Angiou took his voyage into Poland by Sea; he might have public
caution to sail through the British Ocean. To this last request, she not only
consented with all alacrity, but also made offer of a Fleet to conduct him
thither. In the mean while, Alenson fell sick of the Meazles, which his mother
signified to Queen Elizabeth by Count Rhets, excusing him thereupon for not
coming into England as he had determined: The Count found the Queen at
Canterbury, where she gave him Royal intertainment: and Matthew Parker
Archbishop of Canterbury, Royal intertainment to them both.

All this while since the death of the Earl of Mar, there had been no Regent
in Scotland, but now by the procurement of Queen Elizabeth chiefly; James
Douglas Earl of Morton, is made Regent; who, when his Authority in a
Parliamentary Assembly was established, Enacted many profitable Laws for the
defense of Religion against Papists and Heretics, in the name of the King: But
the pro^ection and keeping of the Kings Person, he confirmed to Alexander
Areskin Earl of Mar (to whom the custody of the Kings in their tender years,
by special privilege belongs) though he were himself in his Minority: Upon
these conditions, That no Papists, nor factious persons should be admitted to
his presence: An Earl should come with only two servants attending him: A
Baron, with only one: All other, single: and every one unarmed. The French
King in the mean time, sent his Ambassador Mounsier Vyriar, to corrupt the
Earls of Atholl and H^ntley with large promises, to oppose the Regent: Queen
ELISABETH as much labored to defend him: but though by the ministry of
Killigrew, she had drawn James Hamilton Duke of Castle-Herald, and George
Gourdon Earl of Huntley, and the most eminent of that Faction, upon indifferent
conditions, to acknowledge the Regent, yet William K^r^^ld, Lord Gra^nge,
(whom Murray when he was Rege^t, had made Governor of Edingborough Castle)
The Lord Hum^s, Lydington, the Bishop of Dunkeld and others, would by no means
admit of the Regents Government, but held that Castle, and fortified it in the
Queen of Scots name, having Lydington for their Counselor herein, and trusting
to the natural strength of the place, and to the Duke D' Alva's and the F^e^ch
Kings promises, to send them supplies both of men and money. Now when these
persons, could by no means drawn to accept of conditions of peace, and to
deliver up the Castle to the Regent, Queen Elizabeth (who could in no case
endure the French in Scotland) suffered her self at length to be entreated by
the Regent, to send Forces, Gunnes and Ammunition, for assaulting of the Castle
upon certain conditions, whereof one was, that ten Hostages should be sent into
England, to be security for returning the men and Munition, unless by the
common hazard of War they should chance to miscarry. The conditions being
argued on; William Drury Marshall of the Garrison at Barwick, with some ^reat
Ordnance and Fifteen hundred Soldiers, (amongst whom were some noble
Volunteers, George Carry, Henry Carry, Thomas Cecill, Henry Lee, William
Knolles, Sutton, Cotton, Kelway, William Killigrew, and others, entered into
Scotland, and besieged the Castle, which after three and thirty days siege,
was delivered up to the Regent for the Kings use, with all the persons that
were in it; amongst whom Kircald Lord Grange, and James his brother Musman, and
Cook goldsmiths (who had counterfeited Coin in the Castle) were hanged;
although to redeem Granges life, a hundred of the Family of the Kircalds,
offered themselves to be in perpetual servitude to the Regent, besides an
annual Pension of three thousand Marks; and twenty thousand pounds of Scottish
money in present; and to put in caution, that from thence forth he should
continue in duty and homage to the King; but it would not be accepted. Humes
and the rest were spared, through Queen Elizabeth's merciful intercession;
Lydington was sent to Leith, where he dyed, and was suspected to be poisoned:
A man of the greatest understanding in the Scottish Nation, and of an excellent
wit, but very variable; for which, George Buchanan called him the Camelion.

And now from this time Scotland began to take breath, after long Civil
Wars, and as well the Captains of both parties, as the Soldiers, betook
themselves into Swedeland, France and the Low Countries, where they valorously
behaved themselves, and won great commendation. As for John Lesle Bishop of
Rosse he was now set at liberty, but commanded to depart presently out of
England, and being beyond the Sea, he continued still to solicit his
Mistress the Queen of Scots cause, with the Emperor, the Pope, the French
King, and the German Princes of the Popish Religion; who all led him on with
fair promises, but performed nothing: For indeed he in whom he had greatest
confidence, which was the Duke D' Alva, was at that time called away, partly
out of Jealousy of State, as being thought to grow too great, and partly out
of opinion, that by his cruelty he made the people to revolt; and therefore in
his place was sent Ludovicus Zuinga, a man of great Nobility in Spain, ^ut of a
more Peaceable disposition then D' Alva; and ^ow this man did all good Offices
to win Queen Elizabeth to him, and minding his own Affairs only, would not
intermeddle with the Scottish or English matters.

About this a frentick Opinion was held by one Peter Bourche^ a Gent^eman of
the Middle Temple, that it was lawful to kill them that opposed the truth of
the Gospel; and so far was he possessed with this opinion; that he assaulted the
famous Seaman Captain Hawkins, and wounded him with a dagger, taking him for
Hutton, who at that time was in great favor with the Queen, and of her privy
Counsel, whom he had been informed to be a great Adversary to Innovations. The
Queen grew so angry hereat, that she commanded Marshiall Law should be executed
upon him presently, till her Counsel advised her that Marshiall Law was not to
be used, but in the Field, and in turbulent times, but at home and in time of
Peace, there must be Legal proceedings: Hereupon Bourchet was sent to the
Tower, where taking a brand out of the fire, he struck it into the brains of
one of his keepers named Hugh Longwroth and killed him, for which fact, he was
condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off, and nailed to the Gallows,
and then himself hanged.

After the violent death of this Varlet, we may speak of the natural death of
two great persons; First, William Lord Howard of Effingham, Son of that warlike
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, by his second wife Agnes Tilney. This William
was made a Baron by Queen Mary, and Lord High Admiral of England, and by Queen
Elizabeth Lord Chamberlain, till such time that being taken with age, he
yielded up that place to the Earl of Sussex, and was then made Keeper of the
Privy Seal, which is the fourth degree of honor in England. His Son Charles
succeeded him in the Dignity of his Barony, who was after made Lord Chamberlain
to the Queen, and then Lord High Admiral of England. A while after him, dyed
Reginold Gray Earl of Kent, whom the Queen a year before of a private man had
made Earl of Kent, when as that Title, from the death of Richard Gray Earl of
Kent, who had wasted his Patrimony, and was elder brother to this man's
Grandfather; had lain asleep for fifty years together.

At this time many particular Rebellions were in Ireland; The O C^nors, and O
Moors took Arms, and committed many outrages: In Munster, James Fitzmorris, and
Fitz Edmund did the like; but by the industry of Sir John Perrot, President of
Munster, were suppressed. In Ulster, Bryan Mac Phelym burnt Knockfergus, and
many other joined in Rebellion with him. Against these, Walter Devereux, (whom
the Queen had lately created Earl of Essex) desired leave to go; which Sir
William Fitz-Williams Deputy of Ireland opposed, as fearing, that the glory of
so great an Earl would eclipse his light. But for this, the Queen finds a
remedy, by appointing Essex, to take a Parent of the Deputy, whereby to be made
Governor of Ulster. But this remedy for Fitz-Williams, might have made a sore
in the mind o^ E^sex; (to receive his Authority from his inferior) but that
the nobleness of his mind, made him more to regard the virtue, then the
glory. And so, in the end of August, he landed at Knockfergus, having with him
the Lords, Darcy and Rich, and Sir Henry Knowles and his four Brothers, Michael
and John Carves, Henry, William, and John Norreses: At his landing, Bryan Mac
Pheli^ welcomed him, tendering unto him all manner of dutifulness and service;
but presently after, falls from him, and joins with Turlogh Leynigh. After this
revolt, the Ea^l of Essex, finding many difficulties in the business, and
himself not well provided of skillful Soldiers, makes suit to the Queen for
leave to come home; which the Earl of Leicester, (who liked his room better
then his company) opposed; till after expense of a yeer^ time, and much
treasure, he at last obtained leave, and returned home.

The next year, being 1574. and the seventeenth year of Queen Elisabeths Reign,
the Duke of Alenson grew more importunate in his suit, then at any time before;
so as he obtained of the Queen, to come into England, any time before the
twentieth of May; and this she the rather did, because she perceived him now
to be really bent against the Guyses her sworn Enemies. But before this Answer
was brought him, Valentine Dale Doctor of the Civil Law, the Queens Embass^dour
in France, gave intimation to the Queen, That Alenson and Navarre were in
restraint, and committed to Keepers: For the Guyses had suggested, that Alenson
held intimate friendship with Admiral Colin, the chief Leader of the
Protestants in France; and indeed, Alenson being examined, freely confessed,
that he had now for a good while desired the marriage of the Queen of England^
and conceiving, that good correspondence with Colin might be useful to him to
that end, he had thereupon had conference with him thereabout, and concerning
the Low Country War. In the mean time, Thomas W^lks, Dales Secretary, got
cunningly to Alenson, and in the Queens name, made promise both to him, and to
Navarre, that she would omit no opportunity of procuring their enlargement. For
which, the subtle Queen Mother so complained of him to Queen Elisabeth, that
he was fain to go into France, and there to crave pardon for his fault. But
Navarre, not unmindfull of this kindness in Wilks, when about five and twenty
years after, being King of France, he saw him in Normandy, he Knighted him.
Hereupon the Queen sent Thomas Randoll into France, to the Queen Mother, that
if it were possible, he might gain Reconciliation for Alenson her son, and
for the King of Navarre. But before he was landed in France, Charles the then
French King dyed, whose Funeral Rites were solemnly performed in Saint Paul's
Church in London.

As Soon as Henry the third, King of France, was come from Poland, Roger Lord
North was sent into France, to congratulate his return, and his happy
Inauguration into the Kingdom; who thereupon, together with the Queen Mother,
did forthwith send their joint Letters into England, strongly soliciting the
business of marriage, between Alenson and the Queen. In the mean time
notwithstanding, they used all possible devices, (and left no means unsought)
to get the young King of Scotland to be sent into France, and to deprive Morton
who was the Regent, of his Authority, whereof the Queen of Scots also was very
desirous; she being persuaded, that if her son were once gotten safely into
France, she and the Catholics in England should be more mildly used. At
which time, an aspersion was cast upon the Queen of Scots, as if she had made
the match between Charles Uncle to the Queen of Scots (who had lately the
Earldom of Lenox confirmed to him by Parliament) and Elizabeth Cavendish the
Countess of Shrewsburie's daughter by a former husband; upon which ground,
both their mothers and some others also were kept in Prison for a time; and
being doubted whereunto this marriage should tend: Henry Earl of Huntington,
President of the Council in the North, is authorized with secret Instructions
to examine it. It will be fit here to say something of this place of Government
in the North; which from small beginnings, is now become so eminent as it is at
this day, whereof this was the Original. When as in the Reign of Henry the
Eight, after that the Rebellion in the Northern parts, about the subversion of
Abbyes was quieted, the Duke of Norfolk tarryed in those quarters, and many
complaints of injuries done were tendered unto him, whereof some he composed
himself, and others he commended under his Seal to men of wisdom to
determine: Hereof when King Henry heard, he sent down a peculiar Seal to be
used in these cases, and calling home the Duke, committed the same to Tunstall
Bishop of Durham, and Constituted Assistants with Authority to hear and
determine the complaints of the poor, and he was the first that was called
President; and from that time, the authority of his successors grew in credit.

It was now the year One thousand five hundred seventy five, and the Eighteenth
year of Queen Elisabeths Reign, when Henry the third King of France being
returned from Poland, and Crowned at Rheims, was careful to have the League of
Blois confirmed; which, in the Year 1572. had been concluded between his
Brother Charles and that most Illustrious Queen ELIZABETH; Now therefore he
confirmed it with His own Subscription, and delivered it to Dale the Queen's
Legier, as the Queen like wise ratified it at Saint-James near Westminster:
But a little after he demanded by Letters, whether the mutual defense against
all persons mentioned in the League, was intended to comprehend the case of
Religion also? Whereunto she answering, that it did comprehend it; he
thereupon hearing this from the Queen, began presently to prepare War against
the Protestants, and Alenson being drawn to the Adverse party, there was no
speech of the marriage for a long time.

In the Netherlands at this time, Lodovicke Zuinga who was successor unto Duke
D'Alva, was wholly bent to recover the Command of the Seas, which D'Alva had
neglected; but not being sufficiently provided of a Navy, he sent Boischott
into England, that with the Queens leave, he might take up Ships and Mariners
to go against the Hollanders and Zelanders, but this she would not grant: Then
he made suite, that the Queen would please not to take it in evil part, if
the banished persons of the English in the Low Countries served the King of
Spain in a Sea Fight against the Hollanders; and that they might have free
access to the Ports of England, to buy provision for ready money; But this
she would not grant neither: Then he made request, that the Dutch, who were
Rebels against the King of Spain, might be put out of England; but neither
would she grant this, as being an Action void of Humanity; and against the
Laws of Hospitality; yet because she would not be thought to violate the old
Burgundian Law, she Commanded by Proclamation, that the Ships of the Dutch
which were made ready, should not go forth of the Haven; nor yet the Dutch, who
had taken up Arms against the King of Spain, enter into the Ports of England,
and by name, the Prince of Orange, and Fifty other the prime of that Faction;
and this she did the more willingly, because Zuinga at the intercession of
Wilson the English Ambassador, had removed the Earl of Westmerland, and other
English Fugitives out of the Dominions of the King of Spain, and had also
dissolved the English Seminary at Doway; though in stead thereof, the Guises
through the procurement of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, set up another Seminary
at Rhemes.

And at this time the Prince of Orange, perceiving his Forces but small, and
thinking himself too weak for the King of SPAIN, and little hope of aid from
England, he entered into Consultation with the Confederate States, to whose
protection, they were best and in the most security to betake themselves: The
Princes of Germany they knew were not all of one mind, parted from money very
hardly, and did not every way, nor would not by no means possible accord and
concur with them in their Religion; and therefore they were not so fit. Then,
the French they saw, were entangled in a Civil War, and so had enough of their
own to do; besides the old grudges and heart-burnings that were between the
French and Dutch; and therefore neither were they so fit. There remained then
the English, as the fittest of any (if it might be obtained) seeing they were
Neighbouss, of the same Religion, and of a Language not much different, strong
in shipping, and rich in Merchandise. Hereupon (considering the commodiousnesse
of the English Nation) they send into England, Philip Marnizie of S. Aldegond;
Ianus Dowsa, William Nyvell, and Doctor Melsen; who in an honorable Embassage,
offer the Countries of Holland and Zealand to be possessed or protected by the
Queen, forasmuch as she was descended from the Princes of Holland, by Philip
wife of Edward the third, daughter of William of Bavaria, Count of Hanonia and
Holland; by whose other sister, the hereditary Right of those Provinces came to
the King of Spain. To this offer, the Queen takes time to answer; and at last,
having maturely advised of the matter, her Answer was this, That as yet she
conceived not how with safety of her honor, and an upright conscience, she
could receive those Provinces into her protection, much less assume them into
her possession; but promised, She would deal earnestly with the King of Spain,
that a well conditioned Peace might be concluded. Presently upon this, Zuinga,
Governor of the Low Countries died; after whose death, the States of Brabant,
Flanders, and the other Provinces, took upon them the ancient Administration,
and Authority in the Commonwealth; which the King of Spain was fain to confirm
to them, till such time as John of Austria were come, whom he determined to
make Governor there. In the mean time, Queen Elizabeth in behalf of the King
of Spain, sent William Davyson in Embassage to those Provinces, to exhort them
to be peaceable and quiet, which yet, by reason the Spanish Soldiers, were so
outrageous, little prevailed.

In England all was calm and quiet for all this year, only a difference fell
out between Sir John Forster, Governor of Berwick, and John Cormichill, Keeper
of Liddesdale in Scotland: In composing whereof, the Regent of Scotland, having
given Queen Elizab^th some coffeehouse, was fain to come unarmed before the
Earl of Huntington, appointed the Legate for England, at Bonderod, and so the
matter was taken up, and the Regent ever after continued constant in observing
the Queen, and to his great commendation, restrained the Freebooters of the
Borders, to the great good of both Kingdoms.

This year there died in Scotland, James Hamilton, Duke of Castle-Herald, and
Earl of Arran, who was great Grandchild to James the second, King of Scots,
by his daughter, appointed Tutor to Mary, Queen of Scots, and designed Heir and
Governor of the Kingdom, during her minority.

At this time the Earl of Essex is come into Ireland again, wh^re having done
good services, and being in the midst of Victory, he was on a sudden commanded
to resign his Authority in Ulster; and as though he were an ordinary
Commander, is set over three hundred Soldiers; which disgrace was wrought by
his adversaries in Court, to the continual pe^plexing of his mild spirit. And
now is Sir Henry Sidney the third time sent Deputy into Ireland; who going into
Ulster, there came to him and submitted themselves Mac Mahon, Mac Guyre,
Turlogh Leynigh, the O Conors and O Moors, the Earl of Desmond, and the
rebellious sons of the Earl of Clanricard, all whom he received into favor,
and with great commendation administered the Province.

At this time the Spaniard in the Low Countries began to deal roughly with the
people, and haryed the Inhabitants with all manner of spoil and injury;
Antwerp, the most famous Town of Traffic in all Europe, was miserably
pillaged, the English Merchants houses rifled, insomuch that the States were
enforced to take up Arms, and Messengers were sent to all neighboring Princes;
and to Q. Elizabeth was sent Monsieur Aubig^y, both to show her upon how
necessary and just causes they had taken up Arms, and also to borrow of her a
great sum of money, the better to enable them to resist the Spaniard. But she
being certainly informed, That they first sued to the French King for help,
denies the request, yet promises to intercede earnestly with the King of
Spain^ for peace. And in that employment, she addressed into Spain, John
Smith, cosen German to King Edward the sixth, a man of Spainsh behavior: and
well known to the King of Spain, who was liberally received by the King; and
with such wisdom retorted the contumelious speech, of Gasper Quiroga
Archbishop of Toledo, and the Spanish Inquisitors, who would not admit in the
Queens Title, the Attribute of Defendor of the Faith; that he had gained great
thanks from the King of Spain himself, who requested him, not to speak of it
to the Queen, and gave severe command, That the Title should be admitted.

And now by this time was John of Austria come into the Low Countries, with a
large Commission: for he was the Natural son of the Emperor Charles the
fifth; to whom the Queen sent Edward Horsey, Governor of the Isle of Wight, to
Congratulate his coming thither, and to offer help, if the States called the
French into the Netherlands; yet at the same time, Swevingham being exceeding
importunate on the States behalf, she sent them twenty thousand pounds of
English money; (so well she could play her game of both hands) upon condition,
they should neither change their Prince nor there Religion, nor take the French
into the Low Countries, nor refuse a Peace, if John of Austria should
condescend to indifferent Conditions, but if he embraced a Peace, then the
money should be paid back to the Spanish soldiers, who were ready to mutiny
for lack of pay. So careful she was to retain these declining Provinces in
obedience to the King of Spain.

At this time a Voyage was undertaken, to try if there could be found any sea
upon the North part of America, leading to the wealthy coast of Cathaia,
whereby in one Comerce, might be joined the riches of both the East and West
parts of the world, in which voyage was employed Martyn Frobysher, who set
sail from Harwich the eighteenth of June, and the ninth of August, entered into
that Bay, or sea, but could pass no further for Snow and Ice. The like
expedition was taken in hand, two years after, with no better success.

About this time died the Emperor Maximilian, a Prince that Deserved well of
Queen Elizabeth and the English, who thereupon sent Sir Philip Sidney to his
son Ridolphus King of the Romans, to condole his Fathers death, and
congratulate his succession: as likewise to do the like, for the decease of
the Count Electour Palatine, named Frederick the third, with her surviving
son.

And now Walter Deveruex Earl of Essex, who out of Leicesters envy, had bin
recalled out of Ireland, was out of Leicesters fear, (as being threatened by
him) sent back again into Ireland, but with the empty title of Earl Marshall of
Ireland; with the grief whereof, he fell into a bloody Flux, and in most
grievous torments ended his life. When he had first desired the standers by to
admonish his son (scarce ten years old at that time) to have always before
his eyes, the six and thirtieth year of his age, as the utmost term of his
life, which neither himself, nor his father before him could out-go, and the
son indeed attained not to it, as shall hereafter he declared. He was
suspected to be poisoned, but Sir Henry Sidney, Deputy of Ireland, after
diligent search made, wrote to the Lords of the Counsel, That the Earl often
said, It was familiar to him upon any great coffeehouse to fall into a Flux,
and for his part, he had no suspicion of his being poisoned, yet was this
suspicion increased; for that presently after his death, the Earl of Leicester,
with a great sum of money and large promises, putting away Dowglasse Sheffield,
by whom he had a son openly married Essex his widow. For although it was given
out, That he was privately married to her, ye^ Sir Francis Knolles his father,
who was well acquainted with Leicester's roving loves, would not believe it,
unless he himself were present at the Marriage, and had it testified by a
public Notary. At this time also, died Sir Anthony Cook of Gyddy-Hall in
Essex, who had been Schoolmaster to King Edward the sixth, and was no less
Schoolmaster to his own daughters, whom he made skillful in the Greek and
Latin Tongues; married all to men of great Honor; one to Sir William Cecill,
Lord Treasurer of England; a second, to Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal; a third, to Sir Thomas Hobby, who died Ambassador in France; a
fourth, to Sir Ralph Lowlet; and the fifth to Sir Henry Killigrew.

At this time, the sons of the Earl of Cla^ricard, who scarce two months before
had obtained pardon for their Rebellion, fell into Rebellion again; but were by
the Deputy soon suppressed; and William Drury newly made President of Munster,
reduced the whole Provice to good Order, except only the County of Kerry,
whither a number of Vagabonds were gotten, trusting to the Immunities of the
place. For King Edward the third made Kerry a County Palatine, and granted to
the Earls of Desmond all the Royal Liberties which the King of England had in
that County, excepting Wreckby Fire, Forestall, and Treasure Trou^e. The
Governor notwithstanding, who wisely judged that these Liberties were granted
for the better preservation of Justice, and not for maintenance of outrageous
malefactors, entered into it, and violently put to flight and vanquished the
mischievous crew, which the Earl of Desmond had placed there in ambush. The
Earl in the mean while made great complaints of Drury to the Deputy; and
particularly, of the Tax which they call Cease, which is an exaction of
provision of Victuals at a certain rate, for the Deputies Family, and the
Soldiers in Garrison. This Tax, not he only, but in Leinster also many Lords
refused to pay, alleging that it was not to be exacted but by Parliament; but
the matter being examined in England, it appeared by the Records of the
Kingdom, That this Tax was anciently imposed; and that, as a certain Right of
Majesty, a Prerogative Royal, which is not subjected to Laws, yet not
contrary to them neither, as the wise Civilians have observed. Yet the Queen
commanded to use a moderation in exactions of this nature, saying, She would
have her subjects shorn, but not devoured.

It was now the year 1577, and the twentieth of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when
John of Austria, pretending to Queen Elizabeth nothing but Peace, yet is found
to deal secretly with the Pope, to peprive her of her Kingdom, and himself to
marry the Queen of Scots, and invade England: of which his practices the Prince
of Orange gives Queen Elizabeth the first intelligence. Whereupon (finding his
deep dissembling) she enters into a League with the States, for mutual defense
both at Sea and Land, upon certain Conditions; but having concluded it (because
she would not have it wrongfully interpreted, as though she meant to foster a
Rebellion in the Netherlands) she sent Thomas Wilkes to the King of Spain with
these Informations; That she had always endeavored ^o keep the Low-Countryes
in obedience to the King of Spain; had persuaded (even with threatenings) the
Prince of Orange to accept of Peace; but withal, if the King of Spain would
have his Subjects obedient to him, she then requests him to restore their
Privileges, and to remove John of Austria from the Government, who not only
was her deadly enemy, but labored by all means to bring the Netherlands into
utter servitude. If this be granted by the King of SPAIN, she then faithfully
promises, That if the States perform not their Allegiance to him, as by their
Promise to her they are engaged to do, she will utterly forsake them, and bend
her self with all her Forces to compel them. While Wilkes in Spain unfoldeth
the^e matters, John of Austria sends to Queen Elizabeth, in most grievous
manner accusing the States for disobedience, and making a large declaration of
the causes for which he had taken up Arms again. Thus Queen Elizabeth (like a
fortunate Princess) sat as an Honorable Arbitresse between the Spanish, the
French, and the States; insomuch that it was not untrue which one wrote, That
France and Spain were Balances in the Scale of Europe; and England the Beam
to turn them either way; for they still got the better, to whom she adhered.

About this time, when the Judges sat at the Assizes in Oxford, and one
^owland I^nkes a Bookseller was questioned for speaking approbrious words
against the Queen, suddenly they were surprised with a pestilent favor;
whether rising from the noisome smell of the prisoners, or from the dampe of
the ground, is uncertain, but all that were there present, almost every one,
within forty hours died, except Women and children; and the Contagion went no
further. There died Robert Bell Lord chief Baron, Robert D'Oylie; Sir William
Babington: D'Olye Sheriff of Oxfordshire, Harcourt, Weynman, Phetiplace, the
most noted men in this Tract; Barham the famous Lawyer; almost all the Jurours,
and three hundred other, more or less.

This year the title of the Lord Latimer, (which had flourished in the Family
of the Nevills, ever since the days of King Henry the sixth) was extinct in
John Nevill, who died without issue male, and left a fair estate to four
daughters, whereof the eldest married Henry Earl of Northumberland, the second,
Thomas Cecill, who was afterward Earl of Exceter; the third, Sir William
Cornwallis; and the fourth Sir John Daverse.

In Ireland the O-Moores and O-Conors, and others, whose Ancestors the Earl of
Sussex in Queen Mary's days, had for their rebellion, deprived of their
Patrimony in Loyse and Oph^li^, did now break forth into a new Rebellion,
under the conduct of Rori^ Oge, that is, Roderick the younger: set on fire the
village of Naasse, assault L^chlin, from whence being driven back by the valor
of George Care^ the Governor, he was afterward slain.

Out of England at this time there went into the Low Countries, John North, the
Lord Norths eldest sonne^ John Norris, second son to the Lord Norris, Henry
Cavendish, and Thomas Morgan Colonells, with many voluntaries, to learn
Military experience. Thither also came Caesamire the Elector Palatines son,
with an Army of German Horse and foot, at the Queens charges: upon the^e Don
John, assisted by the Prince of Parma, Mondragon, and other the best Commanders
of Spain, confident of victory, flies furiously, before they expected him,
yet after a long fight, was forced to retreat; but then turning again, and
thinking to break through the Hedges, and Brakes where the English and
Scottish voluntaryes had placed themselves, was again repulsed; for the English
and Scottish were so hot upon the matter, that casting away their garments, by
reason of the hot weather, they fought in their shirts, which they made fast
about them. In this battle N^^^^^ fought most valiantly, and had three horses
s^ain under him, as also (...) the Scot, Bingham, and William M^r^ham.

Now for comfort ^o the afflicted Provinces, there came at that ^^me into the
Netherlands, the Count Sw^^zenberg from the Emperor, M^nsie^^ Be^^^^^re from
the French King, and from the Queen of England, the Lord Cobham and Wal^ingham,
with Commission to procure conditions of Peace, but returned without doing any
thing, for that Don John refused to admit the Pro^estan^ Religion, and the
Prince of Orange refused to return into Holland.

About this time Egr^m^^d R^^cliffe, son to Henry Earl of Susse^, by his second
wife, who had been a prime man in the rebellion of the North, and served now
under Don John, was accused by the English fugitives, that he was sent under
hand to kill Don John; which (whether true or false) he was thereupon taken and
put to death. The Spaniards have affirmed, That Ratcliffe at his last end,
confessed voluntarily, That he was freed out of the Tower of London, and moved
by Walsinghams large promises, to do this Fact; but the English that were
present at his death, deny that he confessed any such thing, though the English
Rebels did all they could to wrest this confession from him.

At this very time, Don John, in the flower of his age, died of the Pestilence,
or (as some say) of grief, as being neglected by the King of Spain his brother;
a man of an insatiable Ambition, who aimed first at the Kingdom of Tunis, and
after, of England; and who, without the privity of the French King, or King of
Spain, had made a league with the Guises, for the defense of both Crowns.

Alanson, although very busy about the Belgic War, yet now began again to
pursue the Marriage with Queen Elizabeth; for renewing of which suit, first was
Bachervyle sent to the Queen; and soon after Ramboulet, from the French King;
and within a month after that, Simier, a neat Courtier, and exquisitely learned
in the Art of Love, accompanied with a great number of the French Nobility;
whom the Queen at Richmond entertained in such loving manner, that Leicester
began to rage, as if his hopes were now quite blasted. Certainly a little
before, when Ashley, a Lady of the Queens Bedchamber, mentioned the Earl of
Leicester to her for husband, she, with an a^gry countenance, replied, Do
thou think me so unlike my self, and so forgetful of Majesty, as to prefer my
servant, whom I my self have advanced, before the greatest Princes of the
Christian world?

But it is now time to return to the Scottish Affairs. The Earl of Morton,
Regent of Scotland, though a man of great wisdom and valor, yet was now so
overcome of covetousness, that he grew universally hated; and thereupon, with
the joint consent of the Nobility, the Administration of the Commonwealth was
translated to the King, though he was yet but twelve years old, and twelve of
the chief Lords were appointed to attend him in Council, three of them by
course for three months; amongst whom, the Earl of Morton for one, that they
might not seem to cast him quite off. The King having taken upon him the
Administration, sent presently the Earl of Dumformelin to Queen Elizabeth,
acknowledging her great deserts toward him, and requesting to have the Treaty
of Edinburgh, agreed on in the year 1559, to be confirmed, for the more happy
restraining the robbers about the borders; and withal, That his ancient
Patrimony in England; namely, the Lands granted to his Grandfather Ma^^hew,
Earl of Lenox, and the Countess his Grandmother, might be delivered into his
hands^ who was the next Heir. The Queen readily promised the former demands,
but stuck a little at the last, concerning the Patrimony; For she would not
grant, That Arbella, the daughter of Charles the King of Scots Uncle, Born in
England, was the next Heir to the Lands in England; neither would she grant the
Ambassadors proof out of History, That the Kings of Scots, born in Scotland,
did anciently (without question) hold the Earldome of H^ntington by Right of
Inheritance. Yet she commanded a Sequestration to be made of the Revenues of
those Lands, by B^rleigh Master of the Wards; and wills the King, That out of
the goods of the Earl of Lenox in Scotland, satisfaction might be made to his
Grand-mothers Creditors here. For she too^ it in ill part, that the King had
recalled the In^^o^^ment of the Earldom of Lenox (made to his Uncle Charl^ and
his Heirs) after the death of Charles, to the prejudice (as was suggested to
her) of Arbella; although indeed, it be a Privilege of the Kings of Scotland,
That they may recall Donations made in their minor^ty.

The Earl of Morton in the mean while, not enduring the disgrace to be outed of
his Regency, regarded not the prescript Form of Government lately set down, but
drew the Administration of all matters to himself, and kept the King in his own
power, at the Castle of Sterling, admitting none to his presence, but whom he
pleased. At this presumption, the Lords growing angry, made the Earl of Atholl
their Captain, and in the Kings Name levied a great Army, and were ready to
encounter Morton; but by the intercession of Robert Bows, the English
Ambassador, they were stayed from fighting; and Morton presently betook
himself home, and the Earl of Atholl soon after died, not without suspicion of
being poisoned.

At this time the King of Spain, and Pope Gregory the thirteenth, held secret
Consultation, to invade at once both England and Ireland, and to work the
absolute ruin of Queen Elizabeth; The Pope to gain the Kingdom of Ireland for
his son James Buen of Compagno, whom he had made Marquess of Vincola. The King
of Spain secretly to relieve the Irish Rebels, as Queen Elizabeth did the
Dutch, while friendship in words was upheld on both sides: and being known,
That the greatest strength of England consisted in the Navy Royal, and
Merchants Ships, it was advised, that the Italian and Dutch^Merchants should
hire these Ships for long Voyages; to the end that while they were absent, the
Queens Navy might be surprised with a greater Fleet: and at that time Thomas
Stukeley, an English fugitive, should join himself to the Irish Rebels with
new Forces. For he making great boast, and promising the Kingdom of Ireland to
the Popes bastard son, had so insmuated himself into grace with the ambitious
old man, that he adorned him with the Titles of Marquess of Leinster, Earl of
Wexford and Caterlogh, Viscount M^rogh, and Baron of Rosse (the principal
dignities of Ireland) and made him Commander over eight hundred Italian
Soldiers, to be employed in the Irish War. With which Forces Stuckeley setting
Sail from (...) Vecchia, arrived at length in Portingall, where he and his
Forces^ were by the divine providence, diverted another way. For S^^a^^ia^ King
of Porti^gall (to whom the chief Command, in this Expedition against England
was assigned) being first to dispatch a War in Africa, in Aid of Mahomet
Abdall, son to the King of Fesse, persuaded Stukeley to go along with him into
Maure^ania, together with his Italian Soldiers; and then afterward they would
go together against Ireland: To this motion Stukeley soon agreed, and therein
agreed with his destiny; for in that memorable Battle where three Kings were
slain, both he and Sebastian lost their lives.

At this time Sir Henry Sidney (who had been Deputy of Ireland at several
times eleven years) delivered up his Deputy-ship to Sir William Drury,
President of Munster: Such a Deputy, for good Government, that if any have
equalled him, none have exceed him.

It was now the year 1579, and the two and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign; when John Casimire, son of Frederick the third, Count Pala^ine of the
Rhyne, came into England; where, after he had been entertained with Tiltings
and Justs, made Knight of the Garter (the Queen tying the Garter about his leg)
and rewarded with a yearly Pension, he returned. And now was Alexander ^^rnise,
Prince of Parma, made Governor of the Netherlands by the King of Spain: and
Queen Elizabeth supplied the States with a great Sum of money; for which
William Davyson brought into E^gland the ancient precious Habilliments of the
Family of Burgundy, and their costly Vessels, laid to pawn by Matthew of
Austria and the States.

Si^ier in the mean time herein England, cea^eth not by all amorous devices to
persuade the Queen to marry Alanson; wherein he drew her so far, that the Earl
of Leicester gave ou^, He crept into the Queens affection by love Potions and
unlawful Arts: and Simier on the other side endeavored by all means to cast
down Leicester, discovering his marriage with the Earl of Essex widow, whereat
the Queen grew so angry, that she consined him to the Castle at Greenwich, and
had meant to have him Committed to the Tower, but that the Earl of Sussex
(though his greatest Adversary) dissuaded her: telling her that none ought to
be molested for contracting lawful Matrimony. But Leicester notwithstanding
was so provoked for his confining, that he was bent to revenge it, and if it be
true, as some said^ he had suborned on Teud^r a Yeoman of the Guard to murder
Simier, sure it is the Queen by Proclamation commanded that no person should
offer injury to the Ambassador or any of his servants. At which time it fell
out that as the Queen, together with Simier, the Earl of Lincoln, and Hatton
Vice-Chamberlaine were rowed in a barge to Greenwich, a young man shooting off
a Harquebus out of a boat, shot one of the rowers in the Queens Barge
thorough the arm with a bullet, who was presently taken and led to the
Gallows, but upon solemn Protestation, that he did it unwillingly, and out of
no malicious Intent, he was let go and Pardoned. Some would have persuaded the
Queen that was purposely suborned to shoot either her or the French
Ambassador: but she was so far from suspecting her Subjects; that she would
often say, She would not believe any thing against them which a mother would
not believe against her children.

After a few days Alanson himself came privately into England with only on or
two attendants, and came to the Queen at Greenwich, at a time when she thought
not of it; they had secret conference together, all parties being sent away,
after which, being seen of very few, he returned home; but within a month or
two after the Queen enjoined the Lord Burleigh treasurer, the Earl of Sussex,
Leicester, Hatton and Walsingham, seriously to weigh both the dangers, and the
Commodities likely to arise from the marriage with him, and to consult with
Simier concerning the marriage Covenants.

As in England there was some fear of this Frenchman: So in Scotland at this
time of another Frenchman, called Esme Steward, Lord of Aubigny, who came now
into Scotland to visit the King his cosen. He was the son of John Steward
brother to Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox the Kings grandfather, and had
denomination from Aubigny in France, which title Charles the seventh King of
France had anciently conferred upon John Steward of the Family of Lenox, who
being constable of the Scottish Army in France, vanquished the English in one
battile, and was slain by them in another: and from that time the title
belonged to the younger descent of that house. This Esme Steward, the King
embraced with exceeding great love, made him Lord Chamberlain of Scotland, and
Captain of the Castle of Dumbriton, and created him first Earl and then Duke
of Lenox. The fear from this man was; because he was devoted to the Guises and
the Popish religion, and that which increased the fear from this man; because
he applied himself to Mortons adversaries, and mediated to have Thomas Carre
Lord of Fernishurst called home, who of all men was most addicted to the Queen
of Scots.

About this time Queen Elizabeth, at the request of William Harbou^ne an
Englishman, procured a grant from the Turkish Emperor for the English
merchants to exercise free traffic in all places of his dominions, as well as
Venetians, Polanders, and other neighboring Nations; whereupon they set up
first the Company of Turkey Merchants, managing a most gainful Trade at
Constantinople, Alexandoria; Egypt, Aleppo, Cyprus, and other parts of Asia,
bringing home Spices, Perfumes, unwrought Silks, Tapistry, Indico, Corrants,
and the like.

This year died Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; but who, by
virtue of an Act of Parliament, always exercised the Jurisdiction of Lord
Chancellor; a very fat man, but singularly wise, and a chief prop of the Queens
Privy Council: In whose place succeeded Sir Thomas Bromley, the Queens
Solicitor, with the Title of Lord Chancellor of England.

In Ireland at this time, in the Province of Munster, James Fitz Morris kindled
a new fire of Rebellion; for after his former submission upon his knees, vowing
all Obedience to the Queen, he stole away into France, and promised the French
King, if he would lend him assistance, to make him King of Ireland. But being
by him slighted, he went into Spain, and made the like offer to the King there.
The King of Spain sent him to the Pope, from whom (by means of Nicholas
Sanders, an English Priest, and Alan an Irishman, both Doctors of Divinity) he
obtained a little money, a Legates Authority for Sanders, a consecrated Banner,
and Letters of Commendation to the Catholic King. And returning from Spain
with those Divines, three Ships, and a few men, he landed at Smerwick Kerry, a
Demi Island in the West part of Ireland, about the first day of July, where
(the place being first of all consecrated by the Priests) he built a Fort, and
brought the Ships close under it; but these were presently set upon and carried
away, by Thomas Courtney, and thereby the Spaniards deprived of their
opportunity of coming thither by Sea. But now John and James, brothers to the
Earl of Desmond, gathering together a small number of Irish, join themselves
presently with their kinsman Fitz Morris. Yet the Spaniards seeing that but a
very few Irish, and those unarmed, came unto them, they began to distrust the
estate they were in, and to cry out, That they were undone; whom Fitz Morris
heartened the best he could, telling them that Supplies were presently to come.
And going himself to get more company, he passed through the Land of his Cousin
William a Burgh, who though he had been a Rebel before, yet was now grown
loyal, so as there fell out a Skirmish between them; in which Fitz Morris
being stricken through with a Pike, and shot into the head with a Leaden Bullet,
died in the place, and most of his Company with him; but withal, two of
William Burghs sons were in that Skirmish slain also; when the Queen, to
comfort him for the loss of his sons, adorned him with the Dignity of Baron of
Castle Conell, and rewarded him with a yearly Pension besides: which favors so
overwhelmed him with joy, that he lived but a short while after. And now Sir
William Drury the Deputy growing very sick, appointed Sir Nicholas Malby then
Governor of Connaght, to be President of Munster, and General of the Army; at
which time, the Earl of Desmond, who had all this while made a show of Loyalty,
breaks openly ou^ into Rebellion; when now Drury the Deputy dying at Waterford,
and by his death Malbyes Authority ceasing, Sir William Pelham is by the
Counsel chosen Justice of Ireland, with Authority of Viceroy, until such
time as a Deputy were appointed, and the Earl of Ormond is made President of
Munster. Pelham goes into Munster, and sends for the Earl of Desmond, who
refusing to come, is thereupon proclaimed Traitor, and an enemy to the State;
and this being published, the Justice committed the following the War to the
Earl of Ormond, who slaying most of the Spaniards, and adherents to Desmond,
compels him to send his wife to the Justice, to beg his pardon.

The Lord Justice Pelham now certified, that Arthur Lord Gray was landed with
authority to be Deputy of Ireland, at Munster delivers the Army to George
Bour^hier, the son of John, second Earl of Bathe, of that name, and himself
returns to Dublin, to deliver up the Province to his Successor. The Lord Gray
at his landing, before he received the Sword, hearing where the Rebels had
their Randevouz, marches toward them, who presently betake themselves to
Glandilough, a grassie Valley, and beset thick with Trees, where they who dwell
near, scarce know the winding out; yet the Deputy (taking one C^sbie an old
man, well acquainted with the place, to be is leader) entered into it, where he
lost diverse of his men; namely, Peter Carew the younger, George Moore, Audeley,
and Cosbie himself that was his Leader.

A short time after, there landed at Smerwick in Kerry, under the command of
San Joseph an Italian, about seven hundred Italian soldiers, who fortify the
place, and name it Fort del Or. Whereupon the Deputy sent a Trumpetter to the
Fort to demand who they were, what they had to do in Ireland, and who sent
them; withal commanding them to depart immediately. But they replied, That
some of them were sent from his Holiness, other from the Catholic King, upon
whom the Pope had bestowed the Kingdom of Ireland, for that Queen Elizabeth
(by reason of heresy) has forfeited the Right unto her; and therefore what
they had gotten, they would maintain. Upon this the Deputy prepares for
Battery, lets fly his Ordnance four days together; in which time the
Spaniards once or twice make sallyes out, to their own loss much, but not an
Englishman slain, but only John Cheek, a courageous young Gentleman, son to
Sir John Cheek, a learned Knight. And now San Joseph, who commanded the Fort, a
white-liver'd soldier, terrified with the continual Battery, and having no
hope of relief, either from the King of Spain, or Desmond (contrary to the will
of all his soldiers) he set up a White Flagge, and desired Parlee, but Parlee
was denied, because he had combined with Rebels, with whom it is not lawful
to hold Parlee. Then he demanded that his Company might pass away with their
Baggage, but neither would this be granted. Then he required that some of the
chiefer sort might have leave to depart; but neither could this be obtained. At
last, when they could prevail in nothing, they hanged out the white Flagge
again, and submitted themselves absolutely, without any condition, to the
Deputies mercy, who presently consulteth how to deal with them, and this was
the Case; Their number was well near as great as the English; there was present
fear of danger from the Rebels; and the English were so destitute of meat and
apparel, that they were ready to mutiny, unless they might have the spoil
granted them; and besides, there were no ships neither to send them away if
they were spared: For these Reasons it was concluded (the Deputy gainsaying,
and letting tears fall) That only the Leaders should be saved, the rest all
slain, and all the Irish hanged up; which was presently put in execution; to
the great disliking of the Queen, who detested the slaughter of such as yielded
themselves, and would accept of any excuses or allegations.

And yet more cruelty then this was at that time committed in the Netherlands;
for John Norris, and Oliver Temple, English Commanders, together with some
Companies of Dutch, setting out early one morning, took Mechlyn a wealthy Town
of Brabant, at an assault with ladders, where they promiscuously murdered both
Citizens and Religious Persons, offering violence even upon the dead, taking
away Grave-stones, which were sent into England to be sold.

About this time certain English Priests, who were fled into the Netherlands,
in the year 1568, by the procurement of William Allen, an Oxford Scholar,
joined themselves to study at Doway, where they entered into a Collegiate Form
of Government; to whom the Pope allowed a yearly Pension. But tumults arising
in the Low Countries, and the English Fugitives being commanded by the King of
Spains Deputy to depart from thence, other the like Colleges, for the trayning
up of the English youth, were erected, one at Rheims by the Guises, and another
at Rome by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, which always afforded new ^upplyes of
Priests for England, when the old failed, who should spread abroad the seeds of
the Romish Religion here amongst us; from whence, those Colleges had the name
of Seminaries, and they called Seminary-Priests who were trained up in them. In
these Seminaries, amongst other Disputations, it was concluded, That the Pope
has such fullness of Power, by Divine Right, over the whole Christian world,
both in Ecclesiastical and Secular matters, that by virtue thereof, it is
lawful for him to excommunicate Kings, absolve their subjects from their Oath
of Allegiance, and deprive them of their Kingdoms. From these Seminaries at
this time, there came two into England, Robert Parsons, and Edmund Campian,
both of them Englishmen, and Jesuits. Parsons was born in Somersetshire, a
fierce and rough conditioned fellow; Campian was a Londoner, of a milder
disposition. They had been both brought up in Oxford; Campian a Fellow of St.
John's College, and had been Proctor in the year 1569; and when he was made
Deacon, counterfeited himself to be a Protestant, till such time as he slipped
out of England. Parsons was of Baylioll College, where he made open profession
of the Protestant Religion, till for dishonest carriage, he was expelled the
House, and then fled to the Popish Party. Both these came privily into England,
in the disguise one while of Soldiers, another while of Noblemen; sometimes
like English Ministers, and sometimes in the habit of Apparitors. Parsons, who
was made the Superior, brake forth into such open words amongst the Papists,
about deposing the Queen, that some of themselves had a purpose to complain of
him to the Magistrates. Campian, though something more moderate, yet in a
Writing provoked the English Ministers to a dispu^e; and published in Latin an
Elegant Book of his ten Reasons, in maintenance of the Doctrine of the Romish
Church; as Parsons in like manner, set forth another violent Pamphlet against
Clark, who had written modestly against Campians Provoca^ion. But Doctor
Whitaker soundly confuted Campian, who being after a year apprehended, and put
upon the Rack, was afterward brought out to a Disputation; where he scarcely
made good the great fame that went of him.

In this year was the return of Captain Drake from his incredible Voyage round
about the World (which Magellan had before attempted, but died in the Voyage)
whereof to rela^e all particular accidents, would require a large Volume: It
may suffice in this place, to deliver some special Passages. He was born of
mean Parentage in Devon-shire, yet had a great man (Francis Russell, after Earl
of Bedford) to be his Godfather. His father, in K. Henry the eighth's time,
being persecuted for a Protestant, changed his Soil, and lived close in Kent.
K. Henry being dead, he got a place amongst the Mariners of the Queens Navy,
to read Prayers, and afterward bound his son Fran^is to a Ship-Master, who in
a Ship which went to and fro upon the Coast with Commodities, one while to
Zealand, another while to France, trayning him up to pains and skill at Sea;
who afterward dying, took such a liking to him, that he bequeathed his Barque
to him by his Will: This Barque Drake sold, and then in the year 1567, went
with Sir John Hawkins into America; in which Voyage, he unfortunately lost all
he had. Five years after, having gotten again a good sum of Money by Trading
and Pyracy, (which the Preacher of his Ship told him was lawful) he bought a
Ship of War, and two small Vessels, with which he set Sail again for
America, where his first Prize was great store of Gold and Silver, carried over
the Mountains upon Mules; whereof the Gold he brought to his Ships, but left
the Silver, hiding it under ground: After this, he fired a great place of
Traffic, called, The Cross, at the River Chiruge, when roaming to and fro
upon the Mountains, he espied the South Sea; where falling upon his knees, he
craved assistance of Almighty God, to find out that passage, which he
reserveth for another Voyage; and for the present, having gotten much riches,
he returned home. Afterward, in the yee^ 1577, the thirte^^th day of November,
with five Ships, and Seamen, to the number of 163, he set Sail from Plimmo^th,
for the Southern Sea, and within five and twenty days, came to Cantyne, a Cap^
in Ba^b^ry, and then sailed along by the Isl^ of F^g^, which sends forth ^^emes
of Sulphur; and being now un^e^ the Line, he let every one in his Ships blood.
The sixteenth of Ap^^l, entering into the mouth of the Plate^ they espied a
world of Sea-Calves; in which place Iohn-^oughty, the next to Drake in
Authority, was called in question for raising Sedition in the Navy, w^o being
found guilty, was beheaded. Some report, That Drake had charge given him from
the Earl of Leicester; to make away Doughty upon some pre^ence or other, for
that he had said, that the Earl of Essex was craftily made away by Leicester^
The twentyeth of August, two of his Ships he turns off, and with the other
three came to the Sea, which they call^ The Straight of Magell^n. The sixth of
September, entering into the wide Southern Ocean, which they call^ The Pacifique
Sea, he found it out of measure troublous, so that his Ships were here by
Tempests dispersed; in one of which, John Winter was Master, who returned back
into England; Drake himself, with only one Ship, coasted along the Sho^e, till
he came to the Isle Mo^cha, from whence loosing, he lighted upon a fellow
fishing in a little Boat, who showed him where a Spanish Ship laden with
Treasure ^ay; Drake making toward it; the Spaniards thought him to be their
own Country man, and thereupon invited him to come on; but he getting aboard
presently shut the Spaniards (being not above eight persons) under ^atches, and
took the Ship, in which was four hundred pound weight of gold. At Taurapasa,
going again on shore, he found a Spaniard ^leeping by the Seaside^ who had
lying by him twenty bars of mass^e Silver, to the value of four thousand
Ducats, which he bid his follower^ take amongst them, the Spaniard still
sleeping. After this, going into the Port of Africa, he found there three
Vessels without any Mariners in them; wherein, besides other wares, were seven
and fifty silver bricks, each of which weighed twenty pound; From hence, Tyding
it to Lime, he found twelve Ships in one Road, and in them great store of
Silks, and a Chest full of money coined, but not so much as a Ship-boy aboard;
(such security there was in that Coast:) Then putting to Sea with those Ships,
he followed the rich Ship called Cacofoga^ and by the way met with a small
Ship, without Ordnance or other Arms, out of which he took fourscore pound
weight of gold, a golden Crucifix, and some Em^aulds of a fingers length. The
first day of March, he overtook the Cacofoga, set upon her, and took her^ and
in her, besides jewels, fourscore pound weigh^ of gold, thirteen Chests of
silver ready coined, and as much silver as would ballast a Ship. And now
thinking he had gained wealth enough, he resolved to return home^ and so on the
third of November 1580. he landed at Plimmouth, having sailed round about the
World, in the space of three years; to the great admiration of all that know
what compass the World is of.

The Queen welcomed him home, but made a sequestration of the goods, that they
might be ready if the King of Spain required them; and commanded the ship to be
drawn on shore near Detford for a monument (where the carcass of it is ye^ to
be seen) and her self feasted in it, at which time She Knighted Captain
Dr^ke. But Bernardine M^ndoz^, the KING of Spaines Ambassador in ENGLAND began
to rage; and earnestly demanded Restitution of the Goods, and complained, that
the ENGLISH sailed upon the INDIAN Sea. To whom it was answered, That the goods
were sequestered, and ready to make the King of Spain satisfaction, although the
Queen had expended against the Rebels, whom the Spaniard had excited in
England and Ireland, more money then that which Dr^ke brought home. And as for
sailing on the Indian Sea^ that it was as lawful for the Queens subjects as
his, seeing the Sea and the Air are common for all to use. Notwithstanding, to
Pedro S^^^^a, the King of Spain's Agent in this business, a great sum of money
was re-paid^ which was not ^estored to them ^o whom it belonged, but employed
to the Spaniards Wars in the Low-Co^^^ries, as was known after^ when it was too
late.

But at this time, when Iackman and Pett, two skillful Pilots, were sent forth
with two Ships by the Londoners, to find out ^ shorter cut to the East Indies,
by the North-West Passage; they had not the like success; for a few Leagues
beyond the Isles of ^aygat^, they met with such uncertain Tides, so many
Shallows, and such Mountains of Ice, that ^hey could go no further, and had
much ^do to return home.

About this time, Henry Fitz Allen, Earl of Arundel died, in whom the Surname
of a most Noble Family ended, which had flourished in this Honor for above
three hundred years, from Richard Fitz Alan; who being descended from the
Al^anets (ancient Earls of Arundel and Sussex, in the Reign of King Edward the
first) obtained the Title of Earl, by re^so^ of the possession of Arundel
Castle, without Creation. He had ^hree daughters by his wife Katherine,
daughter to Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorset, all whom he outlived; H^nry, a
young man of great hope, who died at Brussells; Joan, wife to the Lord Lumley;
and Mary, who being married to Thomas Howard, Duke of N^^folke, brought forth
Philip, in her Right, Earl of Arundel.

In Ireland, Arthur Lord Gray the Deputy, going against the O Conors, who
^aised stirs in Ophalie, puts to death Hugh O Moley, quieteth all that
Quarter, even the Families of the Mog^hig^ns, and O Charles, and in the very
beginning suppresseth a conspiracy which was breaking forth, by putting to
death the Lord N^g^n^^ who being confident in his own innocence, when the
Deputy promised to save his ilfe, if he would but confess himself guilty,
chose rather to die and be held guiltless, then to live in infamy, by
betraying his own Innocence. With whose death the Queen was extremely
displeased, as by which she was made a Patroness of cruelty, to her great
dishonor. But the Deputy knew with what kind of people he dealt, and by this
example of severity, brought Turl^gh Leymigh to accept conditions of Peace; and
the O B^i^s, and Cavenaghs (rebellious Families in Leinster) humbly to crave
Peac^ also, and to offer Hostages.

In Scotland at this time, great jealousy was ^ad of Lenox, Lord of Obig^y,
lest, being in so great favor with the King, he should allure him to marry
into France, and bring into Scotland the Popish Religion. Whereupon (although
he purged himself by Letters to Queen Elizabeth, and proferred himself to be a
Protestant) yet many courses were taken to sequester him from the King^ but so
far from taking effect, That on the contrary, the Earl of Morton (who among all
other was most addicted to the English) was soon after accused of Treason by
the Earl of Arran, and cast into prison^ and not long after (notwithstanding
all the means the Queen could use to save him) was beheaded, as convicted to be
accessory to the murder of the Kings Father. Whereupon the Earl of Angus, and
other, who labored for M^rt^^, fled straightwayes into England.

In the Low Countries about this time, the Count Rheinberg proceeded
victoriously for the King of Spain, and beleaguered St^nwick in Freezland;
against whom the States sent Norris General of the Field, who put the
^^einburghs Company to the worst^ and raised the Siege: but afterward (...)
with Verdugo the Spaniard at N^rthone, even when the Vi(...) gotten ( Roger
Williams having put the enemies to flight) (...) of the War turned, Norris is
vanquished, wounded, and a great (...) his men slain; amongst whom were Cotton,
Fitz^ Williams, and (...) Commanders. Here it must not be omitted^ That the
English (...) the dwellers in the Northern parts of the World, were hither(...)
Drinkers, and deserved praise for their sob^iety) in these Dutch (...) to be
Drunkards; and brought the vice so far to overspread (...) ^ome, that Laws
were fain to be enacted for repressing it.

(...) whilst the States and the King of Spain con^end about a few (...) the
Low Countries, he seizes upon the whole Kingdom of Por^^^ (...) For the last
year, Henry, King of P^^tingall dying, many Compe(...)allenge the Kingdom; as
the Duke of Savoy; the Prince of Par(...) Natharine Bracant, and the Queen of
France. But Philip King of (...) son of Henry's eldest sister, putting the case
to his Divines and (...) and adjuring them to pronounce to whom of Right it
belonged, (...), For him: whereupon he sent Duke D'Alva, who put to (...)
^^tonio, whom the people had elected King, and within seventy days (...) all
Portingall. The Queen of France angry hereat, and enviously be(...) the King of
Spain's Dominions thus enlarged (being now Master (...) gall, the East Indies,
and many Islands besides) advises, amongst (...) P^^^ces, Queen Elizabeth, to
bethink themselves in time, of restrayn(...) ^o excessive Dominions. Whereupon
the Queen received Don (...), and l^vingly relieved him, which she thought
might be done without (...) breath of the League with Spain, seeing Don Antonio
was descended of (...) Blood, and of the House of Lancaster; and that no
Cau^ion was (...) ^eague; That the Portuger should (...) be admitted into
England.

And now the Queen Mother of Frano^, and the King her son, mo^e (...) then
ever, pursue the Ma^ch with Alanson, now Duke of A^gio^; (...) transacting
whereof, they sent in Embassage into England^ Francis (...), Prince of
Daulphine; Arthur C^sse^ Marshall of France, and many (...) Hono^rable
Personages, who were entertained with great respect (a (...) being purposely
built at Westminster for that use, Royally furnished; ^^tings and Justs
proclaimed, by Philip Earl of Arundel, Frederick Baron (...) Windsor, Sir
Philip Sidney, and Sir Fulk Grevill, against all come^s^ The ^^^^gates that
were to confer with the French concerning the Marriage, (...) Sir William
Cecill Lord Treasurer; Edward, Earl of Lincoln, Lord Ad^^^^ll; Robert Dudley,
Earl of Leicester; Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir (...) Walsingham, Secretary^
by whom, Covenants of Marriage were at ^^th agreed on; First, That the Duke of
Angio^, and the Queen of Eng^^^^, within six weeks after the ratification of
the Articles, should contract ^^trimony^ and the rest, most of them such as
were before agreed on, in the ^arriage between Queen Mary and King Philip,
chiefly consisting in confer^^ng Honor upon the Duke, but Power upon the
Queen. It was also ar^^ed, That all pa^ticulars should be ratified within two
Months^ by the ^^^thfull Promise and Oath of the French King, for him and his
Heirs, and ^eservation also was added apart, with the Hands and Seals of every
(...) (...) Delegates, That Queen Elizabeth is not bound to finish the
Marriage, ^^till she and the Duke have given each other satisfaction in some
(...), and have certified the French King of the same within six we^ks^ Before
those six weeks were expired, Simier, Secretary to the Cou^^^ll, is (...) into
France, to require the King of France his Confirmation^ The (...) will not hear
him, but presses to have the Marriage accomplished, (...) was contracted, and
that nothing else was to be done. ^i^^ier on the (...) side, shows by the
Articles, That a League offen^^^e and defensive (...) first be concluded: This
the French King disclayme^h: Whereupon W^lsinghams is presently sent ^o compose
this differan^e, who jointly with Henry C^bham, the Embass^^our in ordina^^^^
and Simier, alleges to the French King these Partic^l^^s, That Queen
Elizabeth for no other reason was willing to marry, but for the ^atisfaction of
he^ people; and seeing many Impediments were come in the way since the first
Treaty, namely the Civil War in France and the Dukes engagement in a war
with Spain, w^^ makes the wi^est of her subjects to be now against the Ma^ch.
This has made her to defer the accomplishment of it, although her affection
be still constant toward the Duke^ For this cause the Queen would have no
further Treaty to be held^ till the French Duke be freed from the Spanish
war, and a Leauge of mutual offe^^^ and defense be agreed on. The French
King willingly accepted of ^^e L^agu^ defensive; but of the offensive he would
hear no speech, till the marriage were finished.

No^ long aft^r^ the French D^k^ himself came into England, having with good
success raised the Si^ge of C^^bray; he was here received with as great
humanity as he cou^^ w^sh, and nothing omitted^ where by he might judge himself
to be truly welcome. Insomuch th^^ in November, when the Anniversari^ of the
Qu^^^s Inauguration came to be solemnized, the Q. (while they were in Love
conference) drew a Ring off from her finger, and put it upon his, upon some
private conditions. The standers by imagined, that by this Ceremony the
Marriag^ was confirmed between them; and Aldeg^nd Governor of Antwerp being
there, presently dispatched messengers into the Low-Countries^ to give notice
of it; and thereupon Bonfires were made, and all shows of Rejoycing^ But the
Earl of Leicester (who priv^ly plotted to cross the Ma^ch) H^^ton the
Vice-Chamberlain, and Secretary Walsingham, fr^^ and are enraged, as if the
Kingdom, the Queen and Religon, were now utterly ov^^throwne. The Maids of
Honor, and Ladi^s that were familiar wi^^ the Queen, made grievous
lamentation, and so (...) and daunted her, that she could take no rest that
night. The nex^ day^ she calls to her the French Duke, and causing all
company to go aside, they privately ^n^er^ain a long discourse. At length the
Duke returning to his lodging, cast the Ring away from him, and after a while
takes it up again, terribly exclayming against the Levity and inconstancy of
Women.

The Queen at this time was much troubled at a Book lately put forth, with this
Title, The Gulf wherein England will be swallowed, by the French Marriage:
whereof, conceiving that some Puritan was the Author, it made her highly
displeased with the Puritans: whereupon within a few days, John Stubbes of
Lincolnes-Inne, a Zealous Professor, and the Author of this book, (w^ose
sister, Thomas Cartwright, the father of the Puritants, had married) William
Page that dispersed the copies, and Singleto^ the Printer, were apprehended^
against whom Sentence was pronounced, That their Right hand should be cut off^
by virtue of a Law made in the Reign of Phillip and Ma^ie, against the A^thors
and dispersers of Seditious Writings; (though the chief Lawyers and Judges of
the Kingdom could not agree concerning the f^^ce of that S^a^ue:) Hereupon
Stub^^s and Page were brought to the Scaff^ld, made of purpose, in the Market
place at Westminster, and their right hands, with a Butchers knife and a
malle^, cut off by the wrest; the Printer was p^^doned^ At that time, Stubbs
when his right hand was cut off, uncovered his head with the left, and cried
out, God save the Queen, to the great amazement of all the beholders.

At this time the Queen, upon importunate suite of her Counsel, gave way,
that Edmund Campian, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexander Bryant, Priests, should be
called to the ^arre, who being accused by virtue of a Law made in the five and
twentieth year of King Edward the Third, to have plotted the ruin of the
Queen and Kingdom; to be adhering to the Pope, the Queens enemy, and coming
into England, to raise Forces against the State, were then condemned of
High Treason, and accordingly executed. Campian after he was convicted, being
demanded; First, whether Queen Elizabeth were a lawful Queen? would make no
answer; afterward, Whether he ^ould stand for the Queen, or for the Pope, if he
should send an Army against the Queen; he plainly professed, That he would be
of the Popes side, and witnessed so much under his hand. After this, some other
Papists upon the like occasion were also put to death, which the Queen rather
necessa^ily, than willingly assented to, as being unwilling to force the
conscience of any. These, and the like exorbitancies of Papists, were cause,
that new ^^d strict Laws were enacted against them the Parliament following,
which began the next January.

The French Duke after three months abode in England, took his journey in
February, into the Low Countries, whom the Queen her self brought on his way as
far as Canterbury^ and then commanded the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Charles
Howard, Hunsdon, Willoughby, Windsor, Sheffield, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis
Russell, Sir George Bourchier, and some other prime knights, to accompany him
to Antwerpe, where he is made Duke of Brabant, Limb^^rg, and Lorraine; for the
Dutch had long before removed the King of Spains Government, and quitted the
people from their oath of Allegiance, that it might be in their power to choose
any other Prince. He^e the Duke of Anjou gave free leave to exercise the Roman
Religion, to as many as would swear Fealty to him, and abjure the King of
Spains authority: but after all, having spent a great mass of money, with
which he was supplied from England; and observi^g, that only vain and empty
titles were conferred upon him, while the States held all the Dominion in their
own hands, he rashly enterprized an assault upon Antwerpe, and some other
Towns, and shortly departed without any great matter performed.

At this time Queen Elizabeth, as well to get her some friends, as she had
procured her self many enemies; received into the Order of the Garter,
Frederick the Second King of Denmark; to whom she employed Sir Peregrine
Bertye (whom she had lately made Lord Willoughby of Eresby) to Invest him.

But now to prevent the Duke of Guyses design in Scotland, which was to make
use of the Duke of Lenox favor with the King, to withdraw his affection from
the English: William Reuthen, whom the King had lately made Earl of Gowry,
endeavored with others, by all means to remove Lenox, and the Earl of Arran
from the King; and so, while Lenox was gone from Ferth (where the King at that
time was) to Edinburgh, and Arran was also absent on a journey: The Earls
Gowry, Mar, Lindsey, and other, taking the opportunity, invited the King to
the Castle of Reuthen, and there detained him, not permitting him to walk
abroad: All his trusty servants they removed from about him, Arran they cast in
prison, enforced the King to call home the Earl of Angus, and to send away
Lenox into France, who being a man of a soft and gentle disposition, for the
Kings safety readily consented; and not content with all this, they compelled
the King by his Letters to Queen Elizabeth, to approve and allow of this his
thraldom. The Queen of Scots in the mean while, bewailing her own hard
fortune, and the distress of the King her Son, lays open the same in a large
letter, written to the Queen in French: With which letter, Queen Elizabeth
being somewhat affected, sent unto her Robert Beale Clerk of the Council, to
expostulate with her concerning the querulous writing, and jointly with the
Earl of Shrewsbury, to treat of the setting her at liberty. And indeed,
serious consultation was held at the Council Table about it, and the most were
of opinion^ that upon certain conditions she should have her liberty; but the
Scottish of the English faction opposing it, nothing was effected.

Soon after this, the King sent Colonel William Steward, and John Colvill to
Queen Eliz^beth, profering all manner of respect and observance, and requesting
her advice for quieting the tumults in Scotland, and also for his contracting
of marriage. At which time, news was brough^, that the Duke of L^nox was dead
in France, who departing this life ^t Paris, even at the very point of death,
as oftentimes before, made open profession of the Pro^^stant Religion; thereby
confuting those who had maliciously traduced him for a Papist. After whose
death, when the surprizers of the King were lift up in their own conceits, as
thinking they had him safe enough. He on a sudden (though scarce eighteen years
of age) with some few others, conveyed himself to the Castle of St. Andrews,
to whom the Nobility presently repaired, bringing Armed Bands with them, as
fearing some danger might befall him. Afterward, in fair words, he advised
some of his surprizers to go from the Court, for avoiding of tumults, and
promised them pardon, if they wo^ld crave it. But Gowry only asked pardon, and
submitted himself, using this distinction, That he had not offended in matter,
bu^ in form only; and then the King sent for the Earl of Arran to the Court,
and respected him as his intimate friend, employing him to compose the
differen^es amongst the Nobility, and to purge the kingdom and his own Court
from civil dissensions.

Whiles he is sedulous in these cares, comes Sir Francis Walsingham from Queen
Elizabeth, to advise him not to be led away by evil Councillors, to the
destruction of both kingdoms. He finds the King accompanied with the flowr of
the nobility, and beholds another manner of Majesty than he looked for in
Scotland: Pla^ing Audience given him, he put the King in mind, of what the
Queen out of Isocrates, in private Letters had formerly admonished him: That a
Prince must be such a lover of Truth; that more credit may be given to his bare
word, than to another oath; and in many words advised him, to beware now in
his youth of evil Councillors, and always to be like himself. The King
answered, That he was an absolute Prince, and would not that others should
appoint him Counselors whom he liked not; but that he had long since devoted
the first fruits of his amity to the Queen of England, his deer Sister, and
does now willingly make profer of the same. Walsingham now dealt with him
farther; not to lay to the Queens charge what broyls had lately fallen out in
Scotland; shows, how beneficial to him, and to both kingdoms Amity had been
hitherto, and would be in time to come also, so it were not neglected; and that
the same might the better be confirmed, if the variance between the Nobility
were laid asleep, by a Law of oblivion Enacted in Parliament, The Peers which
now were removed from the Court called back again, Religion looked into, and a
firm League concluded between both kingdoms. The King made answer, that he
gladly embraced Amity with England, and that he would constantly defend the
Religion already established: Afterward he lovingly dismissed Walsingham,
though he held him no good friend to him and his Mother; and carefully looking
to matters, with undestanding, even above his years, proposed and proffered
reconciliation to those that had surprised him, if within a limited time they
asked Pardon; which they were so far from doing, that the entered into new
consultations to surprise him again; whereupon they are commanded within a set
time to leave the kingdom, of which number, Mar, Glames, Paslet and some
other, betook themselves into Ireland; Boyde, Zester, Weeme, Lochlevin, into
the Low Countries; Dumfermilin into France, the Earl of Angus is confined to
his Earldome, Gowry only to his own ruin stays behind after the limited
time, hatching new devises.

About this time happened a difference, and thereupon a War, between the
Emperors of Muscovia, and the King of Sweden; when John King of Sweden,
doubting himself to be no fit Match for the Emperor, sent a Roy^^l Embassage
to Queen Elizabeth, requesting her to intercede for him to ^^e Emperor; which
she did without delay, and by her Ambassador drew the Muscovian to a Peace
upon reasonable Conditions. B^t the Muscovian ^^ortly after dying, and
Theodorus his Successor, granting free Traffic to ^^rchants of all Nations
that would come thither; the Queen importuned him to admit of none but English
Merchants, requiring him to confirm the Privileges which his Father had
granted them: Whereto, by way of Answer, he demanded Free Trading for all the
English, saying, It was not fit that a small Company should exercise a
Monopoly, and all other be ^estrayned: But as for Customs, he promised to take
less by one half of that Company, then of any other, because they first opened
the way thither.

The next Summer, Albertus Alasco, a Palatine of Poland, of a comely personage,
and great learning, came into England to see the Queen, who was nobly
entertained, both by her, and the Nobility, as also by the Scholl^rs of Oxford,
with learned Orations, and other Recreations: but having ^^rryed here four
Months, and run i^to much debt, he secretly withdrew himself and departed. This
man I saw my self afterward in Crakow, very bare, though it was reported of
him, That he had in a Dowry with a wife, fif^y Castles of great value: but what
Mine can bear the charges of prodigality?

This year proved fatal to diverse great men; for there died this year, ^^^st,
Thomas Ratcliffe, the third E^rl of Sussex of this Family; a man of great
spirit, and great faithfulness to his Country. There died also Henry
Wriothsley Earl of Southampton; one exceedingly devoted to the Romish Religion,
and a great favourer of the Queen of Scots, which cost him Queen Elizabeth's
displeasure, and imprisonment besides. There died also Sir Humphrey Gilbert,
who was cast away at Sea, in his return from the North p^rt of America, whither
he lately sailed with five Ships, having sold his Patrimony, in hope to plant a
Colony t^ere. There died also Edmund Grindall, Arch-^ishop of Canterbury, being
blind through age, a gra^e and pious P^elate, who stood highly in the Queens
favor for a long time, till he lost (...) last, by favoring (as was said) the
Puritans Conventicles; but the ^^ue cause indeed was, for disallowing the
Marriage of Iuli^ an Italian Physician, with another man's wife, against the
Earl of Leicester's pleasure. Grind^ll dying, John Whiteguyft succeeded in the Sea of Canterbury, being transla^ed thither from the Sea of Worcester.

At this time, certain popish Books written against the Queen, and Princes
Excommunicate, withdrew diverse from their Allegiance, and particularly, so
intoxicated one Somervile, an English Gentleman, that he went privately ^o the
Court, and breathing out nothing but blood and death against all Protestants,
set upon one or two by the way, with his drawn Sword. Being apprehended, he
stuck not to say, That he would murder the Queen with his own hands. Hereupon
he, and upon his intimation, Edw^rd Arden ^is father in Law (a man of an
ancient House in Warwickshire) Ardens wife, their daughter; Somerviles wife,
and Hall a Priest, were brought to the Bar, and all condemned; Somervile as
principal, the rest as accessaries. Th^ee days after, Somervile was found
strangled in the prison; Arden was ^^^cuted and quartered; the women and the
Priest were spared. Many pi^ied the old Gentleman Arden, as misled by the
Priest, and (as it was gen^rally believed) brought to his end through the envy
of Leicester, whom he used to call Whore-master, Upstart, and many such
opprobrious ^^mes.

In the Netherlands, the English Garrison at Alost in Flanders being neglected,
the Governor Pigot, and the other Captains, for want of pay, upon Composition,
yielded up the Town to the Spaniard, and then fearing disgrace at home, joined
themselves to the Prince of Parma; at whose hands finding themselves slighted,
by degrees they stole all away, and came all to unlucky ends.

In Ireland the famous Rebel, Gyrald-Fitz Gyrald, the eleventh Earl of Desmond
of this Family, having a long time in lurking places escaped the English, was
now by a common Soldier found out in a poor Cottage, and slain. His head was
sent into England, and set upon London Bridge. This end had this great Lord,
descended from Ma^rice, the son of Gyrald of W^ndsore, an Englishman, famous
amongst those who first set upon Ireland, in the year 1170. He possessed whole
Countries, together with the County Palatine of Kerry, and had of his own Name
and Race, at least five hundred Gentlemen at his command. All whom, and his own
life also, he lost within the space of three years, very few of his House being
left alive. And this disaster he fell into, by proving Traiterous to his
Prince, at the instigation of certain Popish Priests. Of whom, the chief was
one Nicholas Sanders an Englishman, who at the same time died miserably of
Famine, being starved to death, when as being forsaken, and running mad upon
his ill success, he roamed up and down the Mountains and Groves, finding
nothing to sustain him. In his Scrip were found certain Orations and Letters,
written to hearten the Rebels, and promising large rewards from the Pope and
King of Spain. Upon the Rebels ill success, James Fitz Eustace, Viscount
Baltinglas, fled into Spain, where he pined away with grief. He out of zeal to
the Roman Religion, a little before he had taken up Arms with the Rebels, and
exhorting the Earl of Ormond his neighbor to do the like, (who drew his Lineage
from St. Thomas of Canterbury) he used these w^rds to persuade him, That if
Saint Thomas of Canterbury had not dyed for the Church of ROME, thou had
never been Earl of Ormond, for King HENRY the second, to expiate the murder of
THOMAS B^CKET, gave large Lands in Ormond to his Predecessors.

The beginning of the next Spring, certain Scots, together with Gowry, plotted
again to surprise the King, pretending only a care of Religion, and to remove
ill Counselors from him: but the King having intelligence of their practice,
used means by Colonel Steward, to have G^^ry taken and cast into prison:
whereupon Mar, Glames, Angus, and other of the confederates, fly into
England, and beseech the Queen to commiserate their estate, who had incurred
the Kings displeasure, to do her and the Kingdom of England service. The King
on the other side, accuses them to the Queen of heinous crimes, and requires
to have them delivered up into his hands. But Secretary Walsingham, who bore
great good will to these men, sent Letters with a Command, That they should be
safely admitted into Linds Ferme, otherwise called, The holy Island; where
Hu^sdon being Governou^ there, and great addicted to the King of Scots,
resisted Walsinghams Command, alleging he could not satisfy the Secretary in
this point, unless the Queen gave express Command. Hereupon grew a Dispute,
Whether a Secretary of State might not transact a business of State, without
special Commission from the Prince. How this Case was determined, is
uncertain; but sure it is, the Scots came not thither, though some favor they
had showed them here in England. In the mean time, Gowry was tried by his
Peers, at S^eclyn; where, being accused of many Treasons, though he gave
colorable answers to them all, yet was found guilty, condemed, and beheaded;
whose head his servants sewing to his body, committed to the Grave.

About this time were practices plotted against Queen Elizabeth, in behalf
(...) the Queen of Scots, chiefly by Francis Throgmorton, eldest son of John
^^^^gmorton, Justice of Chester, who came to be suspected, by reason of ^etters
sent to the Queen of Scots which were intercepted. Upon his ap^^^hension,
Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel, privately stole away (...) France,
grievously complaining against Leicester and Walsingham, for ^^ienating the
Queen from them, and using such wiles, that scarce any m^n was able to live in
safety. Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Philip Earl of Arundel, were confined
to their houses, his wife committed to the ^^stody of Sir Thomas Shirley;
William Howard, the Earls brother, and He^^y Howard their Uncle, brother to the
Duke of Norfolk, were examined about Letters from the Queen of Scots; and many
Statagems were set on foot, dangerous to some particular persons, but necessary
(as should (...)) for the Queens security. Certain it is, That now the malice
of the Papists against the Queen, brake forth more violently than ever before;
for in printed Books they stirred up the Queens own servants to ^ttempt the
like upon her, that Judith did on Olephernes. The Author of these Books could
not be found, but the suspicion lay upon one G^egory Martin, sometime of
Oxford; and Carter a Statio^er, who printed the Books, suffered for it. And
whereas the Papists every where ^^aduced the Queen for cruelty, she desirous
always to leave a blessed ^^membrance behind her, grew extremely offended
with the Commissioners for Popish causes, taxing them of too much cruelty,
insomuch that they were fain, in a printed Declaration, to clear themselves,
protesting; That they questioned no man for his Religion, but only for
dangerous attempts against the Queen and State^ and that C^^pian himself was
never so Racked, but that he could presently walk up and down. But all this
gave not the Queen satisfaction, but she commanded the Commissioners to forbear
tortures, and the Judges other ^u^ishments; and not long after, when seventy
Priests were taken, and some of them condemned, and the rest in danger of the
Law, she caused them all to be Shipped away, and sent out of England: The chief
of whom: were Gaspar Heywood, the great Epigrammatist's son, the first ^esuite
that ever set foot in England; James B^sgrave, John Heart, and Ed^^^d Rishton.

At this time Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, was thrust out of England, for
joining with Throgmorton, in his Treason against the Queen; whereupon Sir
William Waad was sent to the King of Spain, to satisfy him how ill Mendoza had
discharged the Office of an Ambassador here in England; who, when the King
admitted him not to his Presence, but in a slighting manner, putting him off to
his Counselors; Waad taking it in great disdain, boldly said, That it was a
declared Custom among Princes (though in heat of War) to give Ambassadors
audience, and thereupon stou^ly refused to ^^clare his Embassage, and so
returned into England unheard. The greatest matters laid to Mendoza's charge,
were gott^n out of Throgmorton's Confession; for when he was in danger to be
apprehended, he sent to Mendoza a box of Writings; and when his Ch^sts were
searched, there were found two Scrowls, one with the names of the Ports of
England, and in the other the names of the Nobility and Gentry in England that
favored the Romish Religion. These, when Th^ogmorton saw brought forth, he
said they were counterfeited, and ^tood to it upon the very Rack; but being
brought to the Rack the second time^ he then confessed all, That Morgan by
Letters out of France, had given him information, that the Catholic Princes
had decreed to invade England, and with the help of the Duke of Guise, to free
the Q. of Scots; and that nothing was now wanting, but money and aid in England:
and that for procuring of this, Charles Pa^e^, under the counterfeit name of
Mope, was sent into Sussex, where the Duke of Guise intended to land; and that
he had imported all this matter to Mendoza, and intimated the names of the
Ports, and of the Noblemen that should assist. But being arraigned at the
Guild Hall, he denied all this again, saying, He had spoken so, because he
would not be Racked again. Yet being condemned to die, he flying to the Queens
mercy, confessed in a manner all he had before related^ and then at the Gallows
went about to deny it again. So false to it self is the mind of man when it is
divided between hope and fear, and lies under the burden of a guilty conscience.

Sir William Wade being returned from Spain, was employed to the Queen of
Scots, about a Treaty begun two years before: To whom, the distressed Queen
sincerely professed, That she devoted her service and her self to the Queen of
England; and made solemn promise, That if the former Treaty might go on, she
would mediate with the King her Son, to receive into favor the Earl of Angus,
and the other Scottish Lords, and would charge the Bishops of Rosse and Glasco,
her Agents in France, to have no further to do with the English Fugitives.
These things Queen Elizabeth heard gladly, and thereupon sent Beale to the
Queen of Scots, who jointly with the Earl of Shrewsbery should signify unto
her, That if she continued still in the same mind, as she had delivered to
Waad; Sir Walter Mildmay should come out of hand ^o her, and Treat concerning
her liberty: but withal she commanded Mildmay and Beale to dive into her as
well as they could, to know what practices the Duke of Guyse had on foot. To
that which she had spoken to sir William Waad, the Queen of Scots made a wary
answer; but to that concerning the Duke of Guyse, she plainly confesses; That
being sickly he^ self, and weak of body, she had committed her self and her
Son, to the Protection of the Duke of Guyse, her dear Cosen, of whose
intendments she knows nothing; nor if she did, would she disclose them,
unless she might be sure of her own liberty. Lastly, she requesteth, That
being a free and an absolute Prince, she may not be worse handled, than Queen
Elizabeth her self was, when she was a subject, and kept in prison by her
Sister. These things had a hearing, but no feeling, and the rather by a strange
accident; for Creighton a Scottish Jesuit, sailing from the L^w-Countries, and
taken by Dutch Pirates, had certain papers which he tore and thre^ away, which
thrown over-boord, and by the wind blown back into the ship, miraculously (as
Creighton himself said) they were brought to sir William Waad, who patching
them together with much labor and cunning, discovered by them some new
intendments of the Pope, the King of Spain^ and the Guyse, about the Invading
of England: Whereupon, and upon diverse other rumors, the better to provide for
the safety of the Queen, a number of her Subjects (the Earl of Leicester being
the foremost) men of all ranks and conditions, bound themselves mutually to
each other, by their oaths and subscriptions, to persecute all those to the
very death, that should attempt any thing against the Queen; which league of
theirs, they called the Association.

The Queen of Sco^s who presently apprehended, that this Association was entered
into for her destruction; makes this proposition by Nave her Secretary, to the
Queen and the Councell^ That if she might have her liberty granted, and be
assured of the Q^een^ love, she would enter a strict league and ^mity with her,
and passing by all matters of offense, esteem and honor ^er, above all the
Princes of the Christian World; yea, and (saving the ancient League betwixt
France, and Sc^^la^d) she would her self be comprehended in the Association,
and a League defensiv^, against all that should go about to injure the Queen.
Herewith Queen Eli^abeth was wonderfully pleased, and at that time cer^^^nly
had an inclination to grant her freedom. B^t see what malice can do; for many
in England^ but specially the Sco^s of (...) ^dverse party, endeavored by all
means to hinder it; exclaiming, That (...) Queen could be no longer in safety,
if the Queen of Scots were set at liberty, That both Kingdoms were utterly
undone, if she were admitted into (...) ^oynt Government of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and that the reformed ^^^^gion lay a bleeding, if Papists were
admitted within the Court walls; (...) was this all, but the Scottish Ministers
in their Pulpits, loaded the (...) of Scots with all manner of contumelies,
slandred the King himself, and (...) Council in most bitter manner; and being
cited to appear before him, (...), saying, That the Pulpits were exempted from
all Regal Authority, and that Ecclesiastical persons, were not to be censured
by the Prince, but (...) their own Consistory (directly against the Laws made
the year before in Pa^liament) whereby the Kings Authority over all persons,
whether Eccle^^^s^icall, or Secular, was confirmed; and namely, That the King
and his Council, were Supreme Judges in all Causes; and that whosoever refused
(...) b^ tried by them, should be holden guilty of High Treason; all
Presby^^^^^s and Lay-conventicles forbidden, Parity of the Clergy taken away,
(...) the authority of Bishops restored, whose Calling the Presbyteries had
condemned as wicked and Antichristian: And lastly, all scurrilous Libels
^^^inst the King and his mother, prohibited, namely, the Scottish History of
George Buchanan, and his Dialogue, De Iure Regni apud Scotos.

At this time, upon her adversaries suggestion, the Queen of Scots is taken
from the Earl of Shrewsbery, and committed to the custody of sir Amiss Pawlet
and sir Drue Drury, and that on set purpose (as some were persuaded) to drive
her into abrupt and desperate attempts; and indeed upon this, she grew more
importunate with the Pope and King of Spain, to hasten their in^^ndment,
whatsoever became of her, as ill indeed was like to become of her, if it be
true (as some said) that Leicester sent out assasinats to make her ^way, but
that Drury detested the villainy, and would grant them no ^^cesse.

And how to alienate Queen Elizabeth utterly from her; it is suggested to
(...), That Allen for the Catholics of the Clergy, Inglefield for the Layity,
and the Bishop of R^sse for the Queen of Scots, with consent of the Pope and
the King of Spain, had jointly combined to depose her, and to bar the King of
Scotland from his hereditary Right to the Crown of England, and to marry the
Queen of Scots to an English Nobleman of the Romish Religion, and him the
English Catholics should choose King of England, and the Pope confirm the
Election; and all this upon the credit of Heart the Priest: but who this English
Nobleman should be that should marry the Queen of Scots, could not be found,
though Walsingham were very busy to seacrh i^ out: the fame went upon Henry
Howard, the Duke of Norfolks brother, ^ho was a single man, a great Papist, and
of high estimation amongst the Catholics.

This year died in Exile and misery, Charles N^vill, who was in the Rebellion
of the North, the last Earl of Westmerland of this Family; a House from whence
descended many Noble Personages, six Earls of Westmerland, ^wo Earls of
Sali^^^^y and War^i^k, an Earl of Kent, a Ma^quesse Mount^cut^, (...) Duke of
Bedford, Baron Ferrers of (...), the Lord Latymer, the Lord of (...), one
Queen, and five Dutchesses (to let pass Counte^^es and Baronne^ses) an
Archbishop of York, and a numerous company of other Lords. In E^gl^nd died
none of ^eckoning this year, but only Pl^^den the famous Lawyer; but in
France, ^he Duke of Angi^^ died of grief^ and in Holland, William Prince of
Orange, shot into the body with ^hree Bullets, by one B^lth^s^r Gerard, a
Burgundian.

It was now the year 1585, and the eight and twentieth of Queen Eliza^^^^^
Reign, when, to ti^ the French King more nearly to her, whom the (...) ^^fore
she had received into the number of the Knights of the ^arter, she sent the
Earl of Derby into France, to invest him with the Robes and Ornaments,
according to the due Solemnity; which he kindly accepted, and at Evening
Prayer was invested with them.

At this time a Parliament was assembled at Westminster, wherein William Parrie
a Welsh-man, a Doctor of the Laws, when in the Lower House a Bill was read
against the Jesuits, he alone stood up, and exclaimed that it was a cruel and
bloody Law: and being asked his reason, he stoutly refused, unless he were
required by the Lords of the Council. Hereupon he was sent to the Gate House,
but upon submission, was received into the House again. Soon after, he was
accused by Edward Nevill, for holding secret consultations about making the
Queen away; Who thereupon apprehended, upon his examination, confessed in
effect thus much, That out of discontent he went beyond the Sea, where, by the
encouragement of Campegio the Popes Nuntio at Venice, and grant of a plenary
Indulgence from the Pope, he undertook to kill the Queen; but coming into
England to that intent, he altered his mind, and disclosed to the Queen the
whole matter. After this, he received a Letter from the Cardinal of Com^,
persuading him to go forward with the Enterprise; and this Letter also he
showed the Queen. After this, he chanced to see a Book of Doctor Allens,
written contra Iustitiam Britannicam, wherein was declared, That Princes who
were for heresy excommunicate, might lawfully be deprived of their life and
Kingdom. This book wonderfully confirmed him, and he read it to Nevill; who,
though he took an oath of secrecy, yet now upon a hope of the Earldom of
Westmerland^ betrayed him. This was his confession, before Baron Hunsdon, Sir
Christopher Hatt^n, and Sir Francis Walsingham: as likewise in his Letters to
the Queen, to the Lord Burleigh, and the Earl of Leicester, acknowledging his
fault, and craving mercy. A few days after, he was called to the Bar in
Westminster Hall, where he confessed himself guilty, and thereupon was
condemned. After the Sentence of death pronounced, he furiously cited the Queen
to Gods Tribunal: five days after he was laid upon a Hurdle, and dragged
through the City to Westminster, where at the Gibbet he made a vainglorious
boasting of his faithfulness to the Queen, but not so much as in a word
commended himself to God; and in the great Palace at Westminster was executed
as a Traitor, the Nobility and Commons sitting then in Parliament.

In this Parliament, the Association before spoken of, was universally
approved, and enacted in this Form; That four and twenty, or more, of the
Queens Privy Council, and Peers of the Realm, should be selected and
authorized, under the Great Seal of England, To make enquiry of all such
persons as shall attempt to (...) the Kingdom, or raise Rebellion, or shall
attempt any evil against the Queens Person; f^r whomsoeve^, and by whomsoever,
that lays any claim to the Crown of England; and that person for whom, or by
whom they shall ^ttempt any such thing, shall be altogether incapable of the
Crown; and more to this purpose. Laws also for the Queens safety, were enacted
against Jesuits and Popis^ Priests, and against all that shall receive or
relieve them. These Laws ter^ified many, and particularly out of fear of them,
Philip Ea^l of Arundel; the Duke of Norf^lks eldest son, purposed with himself
to travel beyond Seas^ for having been once or twice cited before the Lords of
the Council, and confined to his house, and after six months set at liberty,
he ^hereupon wrot^ a Letter to the Queen, That for the Service of God, and hi^
souls health, he purposed to leave his Country, but not his loyal ^ffection
toward her^ but as he was taking Shipping, by his own servants treachery he
was discovered, apprehended, and laid in the Tow^r.

At the same time lay in the Tower, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland^ a man
of a lofty spirit, being suspected by reason of secret consultation (...)
Throgmorton, the Lord Paget, and the Guises, about the invading of Eng^^^^^ and
freeing of the Queen of Scots (whose cause he ever highly favou^^d) but in the
m^neth of June, he was found dead in his bed, shot into the body with three
bullets, under his right pappe, and the door bolted on the ^^de: The Corroners
Inquest examining the matter, found and pronoun^^d, that he had killed
himself. Three days after, the Lords meeting in ^he Star Chamber, Bromeley
Lord Chancellor, declared this fact of the Earls, and then commanded the
Attorney General to show the causes of his im^^^sonment, and the manner of his
death; whereupon, Popham first, and then Egerton the Queens Solicitor, in long
Orations, lay open all his Treasons, and how for fear of the Law, he had laid
violent hands upon himself.

And now the Queen knowing that the seeds of these Treasons proceeded from the
Duke of Guise, and his adherents, she sought for the strengthening of her self,
to enter into League with the Princes of Germany; and to this end, she sent Sir
Thomas B^dley to the King of Denmark, to the Count Elector Palatine of the
Rhine, to the Duke of Saxony, Wittenberg, Brunswicke, L^^ceburg; the Marquess
of Brandenburg, and the Lant grave of Hessia; and into Scotland, she sent Sir
Edward Wootton, to let the King understand how sincerely she was affected
toward him, and withal to draw the King (if he could) into a League of
mutual defense and offense, and to commend to him the Match of the King of
Denmarks Daughter. The King was very inclinable to the matter of the League,
but for the present the business was interrupted, by the death of Francis
Russell, Son to the Earl of Bedford, slain at a meeting to compound a
difference between the Borderers, by a sudden tumult of the Scots, but who it
was that slew him, was not known. The English laid it upon the Earl of Arran,
and the Lord Fernihurst Governor of the middle Borders; whereupon, at the
Queens complaint, the Earl of Arran was confined, and Fernihurst committed to
prison at Dundee, where he dyed; a man of great valor and resolution, and one
that was always f^rm for the Queen of Scots. But Queen Elizabeth not thus
satisfied, gave leave by way of connivance to the Scottish Lords that were fled
into England, namely, the Earl of Angus, the Hamiltons, John and Cladius, the
Earl of M^rre, Glames, and other, that they should steal away into Scotland
(she sup^lying them with money) there to master and subdue the Earl of Arran.
For Maxwell, who was lately made Earl of Bothwell, Baron Humes, Coldingkn^lls
and other in Scotland, had already promised them their assistance, even ^n the
very Court. Sir Patrick Gray ( Arrans great Rival for the Kings favor)
Belenden, and Secretary Maitland (by Woottons craft) were made against Arran.
These men, upon their first entry into Scotland, command all persons in the
Kings name, to aid them for conserving the truth of the Gospel, for freeing
the King from corrupt Counselors, and for maintaining of Amity with the
English, so as there presently joined with them about eight thousand men. The
Earl of Arran hearing hereof, makes haste to the King, and accuses Patricke
Gray as author of this commotion: but whiles Arran was making provision for
defense of the Town, the enemies were ready to scale the Walls: whereupon,
Arran being advised, that only his life was sought, gets secretly away with
only one servant, the rest betook themselves to the King in the Castle. Then
the Rebels get into the Marketplace, and display their Banners against the
Castle: the King sends Gray to know the reason of their coming; they answer,
to submit themselves, and in humble manner to kiss the Kings hands: the King
offers restitution of all their goods, if they would depart; They desire to
be admitted to his Pre^ence, which upon these conditions the King granted. That
they should not attempt any thing against his li^e, or those whom he should
nominate, nor make any innovation in the Government. They protest, They are
ready to sacrifice their lives for the Kings safety, and of any Innovation they
had not so much as a thought; only they request to have their adversaries, and
the Fortifications of Scotland delivered up into their hands. Hereupon after a
days Consultation, they are admitted into the Kings Presence and forthwith the
Earls of Mount Rosse, Crawford, and Rothsay; Colonel Steward, Downs, Arran's
brothers, and others, were delivered to them: The Earl of Arran, who was fled
into the Western Islands, is called home; the assaulters were pardoned, and
pronounced good subjects. Hamilton is set over Dumbriton Castle; Goldingknolls
over Edinburgh; the Earl of Angus over Tantallon; the Earl of Mar over
Stelyn; and Glames is made Captain of the Guard. Upon this, all Proscriptions
and Outlaries whatsoever against all persons, since the Kings Inauguration)
saying some few proscribed for the murder of the Kings Father) are called in,
and with an unanimous consent of all parties, the Treaty of a League with the
Queen of England is agreed upon, and Delegates nominated to that purpose.

In Ireland likewise was a Combustion this year; first the Burkes (descended of
the ancient Family of the Buroughs in England) provoked by the severe
Government of Richard Bingham, Governor of Conn^ght, raise Rebellion; but this
was soon suppressed, for Thomas Burk dyed fighting; M^yler, and Theobald Burke,
were taken and hanged. After this, the Clan-Gibbons, Clan-Donells, and Joys,
combined together in great numbers, and say plainly, They will have a
Mac-William of their own, one of the Burks to rule over them, or some other
Lord out of Spain; they will admit of no Sheriff into their Country, nor
appear before the English Courts of Justice; and thereupon harryed all the
Country with Fire and Sword, and neither by the persuasions of the Archbishop
Tuan, nor by the entreaties of the Earl of Clan-ricard (the chief of the House
of the Burks) would be quieted, till John Bingham the Presidents brother,
following them into the Woods, drove away five thousand Head of their Cattle,
so as after forty days, half starved, they came forth and submitted
themselves. But this was not yet an end; for now the President understood, That
two thousand Scottish Islanders were landed, and ready to break into Connaght;
whereupon he Musters his men to give them Battle; but they flying to Bogs and
Woods, he retires back as though in fear, thereby to draw them from the Bogs to
firm ground, and then with his whole Forces set upon them, slew three thousand
of them (indeed all but fourscore) amongst whom were Donell Garmy, and
Alexander Garmy, the sons of James Mac-Conell, who had long disquieted this
part, and those Burkes who were the first authors of this Rebellion. This was a
famous Victory, for the good of the present and future times; for hereby the
name of the Mac-Williams in Connaght was utterly extinct, and the insolent
attempts of the Scottish Islanders absolutely crushed.

In the Low Countries at this time the States were very hard beset, so as they
held a Consultation, Whether to fly for protection, either to the French King,
or to the Queen of England. Monsieur Prunie the French Ambassador showed many
advantages, and gave many reasons why they should fly rather to the French
King; the English on the other side, alleged many reasons why they should
fly rather to the Queen of England: but in conclusion, they have first
recourse to the King of France, and afterward being by him neglected, to the
Queen of England. But then in England it was consulted, Whether it were meet to
protect them; wherein the Council was divided; some were of opinion, That it
were good to receive and aid them, lest the Spaniard first conquering them,
might have the better way to annoy England; other again thought, They were to
be held no better then Rebels to their lawful Sovereign, and therefore
unworthy of assistance. After long deb^^ing the matter, the Queen refuses to
take into protection, much less to exercise Sovereignty over them.
Neverthe^esse, to raise the Siege of Antwerp, which was then beleaguered by the
Prince of Parma, she was content to supply them with four thousand Soldiers,
so as the Town of Sluice, and the Ordnance belonging to it, were given up into
their hands: but while this matter was discussing^ the Town of Antwerp was fain
to yield it self.

But the Queen better bethinking herself, partly, as fearing the growth of the
King of Spain's power, and partly, as commiserating the afflicted of her own
Religion, at last resolves to undertake their protection, upon condition of her
part, to supply them with five thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, under a
sufficient General, paying them during the War; And afterward the expenses to
be paid back, upon condition on their part, by way of Pledge, to deliver
Flushing, and the Fort of Ramekyn, the Town of Brill, with the two neighboring
Forts: and for the justifying of this her action, ^he set forth a large
Declaration. And knowing that herein she incensed the King of Spain, she
thought best to turn his anger further from home, and thereupon sent out Sir
Francis Drake, and Christopher Carlisle, with a Navy of one and twenty Ships
(wherein were two thousand Voluntaries and Mariners) toward the West Indies;
who first surprised the Town of St. ^ago, afterward St. Dominick (where five
and twenty thousand Crowns were given them, to spare the Town from burning)
afterward Cartagena, which they held seven weeks, till the Spaniards redeemed
it for a hundred and ten thousand Crowns. After this, the Calenture waxing hot,
and diminishing their Forces, they returned homewards, passing by Virginia, a
Colony which Sir Walter Raleigh had there planted; from whence Drake brings
hom^ with him Ralph Lane, who was the first that brought Tobacco into England,
which the Indians take against crudities of the Stomach. At this Expedition
were lost about seven hundred men, who for the most part died of Calentures:
their Booty amounted to the value of threescore thous^nd pounds Sterling,
besides two hundred and forty Brass and Iron Pieces. These things were done
under the Torrid Zone in America; when in the mean while, Captain John Davis,
with two Ships (at the charges of William Sanderson, and other Citizens of
London) found out away to the East Indies, ^y the higher part of America, under
the Frigid Zone.

At the end of this year, the Earl of Leicester is sent General of the
Queens Forces into Holland, accompanied with the Earl of Essex, the Lords
Audley, and North, Sir William Russell, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Arthur Basset,
Sir Walter Waller, Sir Gervase Clifton, and diverse other Knights, besides five
hundred Gentlemen. Landing at Flushing, he was first by Sir Philip Sidney the
Governor his Nephew and after by the Towns of Zeland and Holland, entertained
in most magnificent manner, and coming to the Hague in January; the States by
Patent committed to him the command and absolute authority over the united
Provinces, with the Titles of Governor and Captain General of Holland,
Zeland; and the Confederate Provinces: So as being now saluted with the Title
of his Excellency, he began to assume unto him Princely spirits. But the Queen
took him soon off from further aspiring, Writing to him in most peremptory
manner; That she wondered how a man whom ^he had raised out of the dust, could
so contemptuously violate her commands, and therefore charged him upon his
Allegiance, to put in ^xecution the Injunctions she sent him by HENNAGE her
VICE-CHAMBERLAINE; Withal, in Letters apart, She expostulateth with the
States, that to her great disparagement, they had cast upon the ^arle of
Leicester her Subject, the absolute command over the united PROVINCES without
her privity, which she her self had utterly refused; and therefore wills them
to Divest him of that absolute authority, to whom she had set bounds, which he
should not pass. The States return Answer, That they are heartily sorry they
should incur her displeasure by conferring upon the Earl that absolute
Authority, not having first made her acquainted, but they beseeched her to
consider the necessity of it; seeing, that for avoiding of confusion, that
Authority must needs be cast upon some one or other; Neither, was there any
great matter in the word Absolute, seeing the Rule and Dominion resided still
in the people. By these Letters, and Leicesters own submissive writing, the
Queen was soon satisfied; Leicester all this while receives Contributions and
Rewards from all Provinces, makes Martial Laws, and endeavoring likewise to
raise new Customs upon Merchandises, incurred great dislike amongst the common
people. His first service was to relieve Grave, a Town in Brabant, which the
Prince of Parma, by Count Mansfield had besieged: Hither he sent the Count
Hohenlo a German, and Norris General of the English Foot; but notwithstanding
all the great service they did there, the Town in the end was taken; but Hemart
the Governor, for his cowardly yielding it up, lost his head. From hence the
Prince of Parma marched into Gelderland, and pitched his Tents before Venlow,
where Skenkic a Friezlander, and Roger Williams a Welshman performed great
service, yet that Town in a short time was taken also. But in the mean while,
the Lord Willoughby Governor of Bergen ap Zome, cut off the enemies Convoyes,
and took away their victuals; and Sir Philip Sidney, and Maurice the Prince of
Oranges Son, upon a sudden onset, took Axale a Town in Flanders. From Venl^
the Prince of Parma goes to Berke, where there were twelve thousand English,
under the command of Colonel Morgan; he notwithstanding laid Siege to the
Town, which the Earl of Leicester came to raise, but finding his Forces to weak
to raise it, he seeks to divert it, by Beleaguering Duisbourgh; which before
the Prince of Parma could come to relieve, he took. And now the Prince of
Parma, fearing least Zutphin should come in danger, commands victuals to be
carried thither, which the Spaniards carrying along in a fogge, the English by
chance lighted on them, vanquished a Troop of their Horse, slew Hannibal
Gonzaga, and diverse other, bat then on the English side was one slain, more
worth than all the English and Spaniards put together; Sir Philip Sidney, who
having his horse slain under him, and getting upon another, was shot into the
thigh, and 25 days after, in the ^loure of his age, dyed: A man of so many
excellent parts of Art and Nature, of Valor and Learning, of Wit and
Magnanimity; that as he had equalled all those of former Ages, so future Ages
will hardly be able to equal him. His Funerals were in sumptuous manner
solemnized at St. Paul's Church in London. James King of Scotland made his
Epitaph, and both Universities celebrated his death with Funeral Verses.

After this, Leicester assaulteth Zutphen, where setting upon a Fort, he takes
it in this manner; Edward Stanley (of the Stanlies of Elford) catching hold of
a Spaniards Lance, which was brandished at him, held it so fast, that by it he
was drawn into the very Fort; whereupon, the Spaniards being affrighted (as
thinking all the enemies were coming up) forsook the place; Leicester knighted
Stanly for this act, gave him forty pounds in present money, and yearly Pension
of an hundred Marks during his life. And now though in this forwardness to
win the Town, yet winter being already come on, he thought it unseasonable to
besiege it any longer (especially so many English Garrisons lying round about
it, which were in nature of a siege) but returned to the H^g^e, where the
States entertained him with complaints, that their money was not carefully
husbanded, that the number of the English supplies was not full, that foreign
soldiers were levied without their consent, that the privileges of the united
Provinces were set at naught, and new devises for contribution invented; for
all which evils, they entreat him to provide some present remedy. To which
complaints (having a purpose to go for England) he gave a friendly answer; but
upon the very day in which he was to depart, he commits the government of
the Province, to the deliberation of the States; and the same day, made another
private instrument of writing, where he reserved to himself the whole authority
over the Governors of the several Provinces, Cities, and Forts; and more than
this, takes away the wonted jurisdiction from the States Council, and
Presidents of the Provinces; and came into England the third day of December.
And thus passed the affairs of the Nether-lands for this year.

But in England, Philip Earl of Arundel, who had lain in Prison a whole year,
was at last brought to the Starchamber; and being charged with fostering of
Priests, and having correspondence with Allen and Parsons the Jesuit, and
offering to depart the Kingdom without license, was fined ten thousand pounds,
and imprisonment during the Queens p^easure.

At this time, the Queen, by Sir Horatio Palavicino, supplied with a large
sum of money the King of Navarr^; through whose side, the Guyses opposed the
reformed Religion in Scotland, but her most intentive care was how to unite
England and Scotland in a solid friendship: To which end, she sent Thomas
Randoll into Scotland, who making Propositions to the King, touching a League
offensive and defensive, though the King at first required some additions, and
though the French Ambassador infinitely opposed it, yet at last he consented to
it; and in July following, there met at Barwick, Edward Earl of Rutland,
William Lord Ever, and Thomas Randoll for the Queen of England; Francis Earl of
Bothwell, Robert Lord Boyde, and Humes for the King of Scots, and there the
League (which was called the League of strict Amity; for that the word
offensive liked not the Scots) was upon certain points concluded: First, for
the maintenance of the reformed Religion, and then other such Articles, as
commonly in Leagues are usual.

The very same month that this League was agreed on, a most dangerous
conspiracy against the Queen was discovered. For first, one John Savage, was by
the persuasions of Gifford, Doctor in Divinity, induced to believe, that it was
a meritorious work, to take away the lives of Princes Excommunicate, who
thereupon vowed to kill Queen Elizabeth: but to make the Queen and her Council
secure, at the very same time they wrote a book^ exhorting the Papists in
England, to attempt nothing against their Prince, and to use only the Christian
weapons of Tears, Prayers, Watching, and Fasting. About Whitsuntide, one
Ballard a Seminary Priest of Rheims, acquainted with the vow of Savage (having
dealt in France with Mendoza and Charles Paget, about invading of England)
arrived here in a soldiers habit, and by a counterfeit name, called Captain
Fos^^; with these matters he acpuaints one Anthony Babington, a gentleman of
Darbyshire, who by the Bishop of Glasco, the Queen of Scots Ambassador in
France, had been commended to her, as one worthy of her love; so, as between
them, there passed often letters in unknown characters. In short time,
Babington had drawn into the Plot, other gentlemen as zealous of the Romish
Religion as himself; namely, Edward Windsor, brother to the Lord Windsor,
Thomas Salisbery of a good Family in Devonshire, Charles Tilney one of the
Queens Pensioners, Chydiock Tichburne of Hamshire, Edward Abington (whose
father was Coferer to the Queen) Robert Gage of Surrey, John Travers^, and John
Charnock of Lancashire, John Iones^ Savage formerly spoken of, Barnwell of a
noble Family in Ireland, and Henry Dunne a Clerk in the Office of First Fruits
and Tenths, one Pollie also served himself into their company, a fellow
thoroughly acquainted with the affairs of the Queen of Scots, who was thought to
have revealed all their consultations to Walsingham day by day. To these
Gentlemen, Babington communicates his affairs, but not every particular to
every one, but to Ballard, Tichburne, and Dunn^, he shows the Letters which
passed between him and the Queen of Scots; with Tilney and the rest, he deals
to be the Assassinates; of whom, some at first loath, at last consented, and in
a foolish vaingloriousnesse, a picture of the Assassinates was made to the
life, and Babington in the midst, with these words; Quorsum haec alio
properentibus? This Picture (they say) was gotten and privately showed to the
Queen, who knew none of them by face, but only Bernwell (who had oftentimes
come to her in the causes of the Earl of Kildare, whose servant he was) Certain
it is, that the Queen one day walking abroad, spyed this Bernwell, and turning
to Hatton said, Am not I well Guarded, that have not so much as one man in the
company with a sword by his side? Thus much Bernwell himself told the rest of
his confederacy, and how easy a matter it had bin to have dispatched her at
that time, if the rest had been present. The chief discoverer of the Plot, was
the aforesaid Gifford: This man was a gentleman of a good Hou^e at Chellington
in Staffordshire, not far from Chartley, where the Queen of Scots was kept
prisoner, and was now sent by the English fugitives in France, under the
counterfeit name of Luson, to put Savage in mind of the vow he had made, and
to convey letters between them and the Queen of Scots. But he, whether pricked
in conscience, or dismayed in mind, came to Walsingham privately, revealing
who he was, and for what end, and by whom sent into England. Walsingham
courteously entertained him, and sent him down into Staffordshire, to do the
work he had undertaken. Here Gifford bribing the Brewer of the House, where the
Queen of Scots lay, contrived the matter in such sort with him, that by a hole
in the wall, in which a loose stone was put, he should give in, and receive
forth Letters, the which by messengers purposely laid by the way, came evermore
to Walsinghams hands, who broke them open, copied them out, and by the rare
cunning of one Thomas Philips, found out the meaning of the private Characters,
and by the singular Art of Arthur Gregory, sealed them again so curiously, that
no man would imagine them to have been opened, and ever sent them to the
parties, to whom the superscription directed them. In like manner were the
former letters from the Queen of Scots to Babington intercepted; as also, other
letters written at the same time to Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, Charles
Paget, the Lord Paget, the Archbishop of Glasco, and Francis Englefield. The
Queen as soon as she understood by these letters of the storm hanging over her
head, both at home and abroad, commanded Ballard to be apprehended, who on a
sudden is taken in Babingtons house. Babington hereupon goes to Walsingham,
with whom he had long been a suitor, for license to go into France, promising
to do great matters in discovering the practices of the Fugitives; Walsingham
with fair promises drives him off from day to day; and now persuades him, that
for a small space till he could get his license sealed, he would lodge at his
house in London, where they might have secret conference without suspicion.
This Web Walsingham himself had spun hitherto, and no other of the Queens
Council were made acquainted; and longer yet he would have drawn the thread
out, but that the Queen was unwilling; least (as she said) by not avoiding
danger when she might, she should seem rather to tempt God, than to trust in
him. Whereupon, Walsingham sent a Note to his man Scudamore from the Court, to
look carefully to Babington: This Note was delivered in such manner, that
Babington sitting by at Table when Scudamore read it, overlooked him, and read
it likewise; Hereupon, suspecting that all was discovered, the next night he
and Scudamore, and one or two more of Walsinghams servants supping at a Tavern,
and being very merry, he made an excuse that he must needs step aside, and rose
up, leaving his Cloak and his sword, and so made haste through the dark to
Westminster, where Gage and he changed apparel, and then together withdrew
themselves (...) S. John's wood near the City, whether Barnwell also and Dun
betook them^^^ves. In the mean space they were proclaimed Traitors all England
over^ Hereupon they lay lurking in Woods and by-places; they shave Babingtons
(...), disfigure the beauty of his countenance (for he was of an extraord^^ary
beauty) with the husks of green Wall-nuts; and when they were hal^ starved,
went to the houses of the Bellamies, near Harrow on the hill, who were great
Papists; There they were hid in Barns, and put into a Coun^^ey habit: but
notwithstanding all their shifting, within ten days after they were discovered
and brought to London. The other Accomplices were soon after taken, most of them
in the Suburbs of the City, Salisbury and Trav^^se in Cheshire, and Jones in
Wales, who harbored them in his house, after he knew they were Proclaimed
Traitors, Windsor only was never heard of. Many days were spent in the
examination of them, who cut one the others throats with their own confessions.
All this while, the Queen of Soits and her servants are so narrowly looked to
by Pawlet, that she knew nothing of all these passages: As Soon as they were
apprehended, Thomas Gorge was sent to acquaint her with the whole matter, which
yet he did not do, till she was got on horseback to Ride a hunting, and was
not then suffered to return, bu^ in show of courtesy was carried up and down,
to see the Houses of the Gentry thereabouts. In which mean while, John Manners,
Edward Acton, Richard Bagot, and Sir William Waad, took Nave and Curle the
Queen of Sc^^s Secretaries, and the rest of her servants, and delivered them to
Keepers apart, that they might have no speech between themselves, nor with
their Lady the Queen of Scots. Then they break open all doors, and such Desks
and Boxes as they found with any papers in them, they set their seals upon, and
sent them to the Court: In which, being broken open before the Queen, were
found a number of Letters from Foreign parts, the copies likewise of Letters
sent to several persons, and threescore Alphabets at least of private
Characters; as also, Letters to her from some of the English Nobility,
containing great proffers of love and service, which the Queen notwithstanding
took no notice of, but passed over in silence, according to her Motto, Video,
and Taceo, I see, and say nothing, Gifford now, who had all this while served
their turn, is sent into France; but ere he went hence, left an Indenture with
the French Ambassador here in England, with instructions, that he should
deliver no Letters to the Queen of Scots, or the Fugitives in France; but to
him that exhibited an Indenture matching with that, the which he sent underhand
to Sir Francis Walsingham.

The twentieth o^ September, seven of the forenamed Conspirators were
Arraigned, and pleading guilty, were condemned of High Treason. Two days
after, seven other were called to the Bar, who pleaded not guilty, but
notwithstanding were found guilty by their own confessions, and condemned;
Pollie only, though he were privy to all passages, yet because he had
disclosed many things to Walsingham, was not called in question. The twentieth
day of the month, the first seven in St. Giles Fields, where they were wont to
meet, were hanged, cut down instantly, their privy members cut off, and
themselves yet living and beholding it, were in cruel manner bowelled and
quartered; namely, Ballard, Babington, Savage (who, the roap breaking, fell
dowd from the Gibbet, and was presently taken by the hangman, his privy
members cut off, and bowelled, while he was perfectly living) Barnwell,
Tichburne, Tilney, And Abbington. The next day, the other seven were drawn to
the same place, and executed in the same fashion, but in a more gentle manner,
by the Q^eens special charge, who detested the former cruelty, for they were
to hand till they were quite dead. Salisbery first, then Dun, then Jones,
Cherno^k, Traverse, Gage, and with them Hierome Bellam^, who had concealed
Babington after he was Proclaimed Traitor (whose brother being guilty of the
same fact, had strangled himself in Prison.

When these men were executed, Nave a Frenchman, and Curle a Scotsman,
Secretaries to the Queen of Scots, were examined concerning the Letters, the
copies of Letters, and priviate Characters found in the Queen of Scots Closet;
who under their own voluntary subscriptions acknowledged, that they were their
own hand writings, dictated in French by the Queen her self, taken by Nave;
turned into English by Curle, and copied out in secret Characters. Hereupon,
Sir Edward Wootton was sent out of hand into France, to make known to the King,
the order of the Treason, and to show him the copies of the Queen of Scots
Letters, confirmed by the testimony of sundry of the English Nobility, that the
French King might see what dangerous plots were by Charles Paget, and the
English Fugitives contrived against the Queen of England.

And now, what should be done with the Queen of Scots, was a great
consultation, wherein the Councillors were not all of one mind; some
conceived, That it were not good to take any rigorous course against her, but
only to hold her in fast custody; both for that she was not Author of the
Treason, but only conscious to it, and because she was crazie, and not likely
to live long. Others, out of a care of Religion, were of opinion, To have her
forthwith Arraigned and put to death according to the Law; Leicester thought it
better to have her poisoned, and sent a Divine to Walsingham to prove it
lawful, but Walsingham protested against that course. A difference then arose
amongst them, by what Law to proceed against her; Whether by the Law of the 25.
of Edward the Third? (In which they are Pronounced guilty of Treason, who plot
the destruction of the King or Queen, raise War in his Dominions, or adhere to
his Adversaries.) Or else by the 27. of the Queen, Enacted a year since: Their
opinion at last prevailed, who thought best to proceed against her by this
latter Law, as being indeed in this case provided. Whereupon, diverse of the
Lords of the Privy Council, and other of the Nobility, are Authorized by the
Queens Letters, to enquire by virtue of that Law, and pass sentence against
all such as raised Rebellion, Invaded the Kingdom, or attempted any violence
against the Queen. These Commissioners therefore upon the 11. day of October,
repaired to Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, where the Queen of Scots
was then held prisoner; and the next day, sent unto her Walter Mildmay, Pawlet
and Edward Barker, public Notary, who delivered her the Queens Letters; which,
having with a settled countenance read, She said, It seems to me strange^ that
the Queen should lay her Command upon me, to hold up my hand at the Bar; as
though I were a Subject, seeing I am an absolute Queen, no less than her
self; but howsoever, I will never do any thing prejudicial to Princes of my
degree, nor to my Son the King of Scotland. After many meetings, she standing
still upon her innocence, and upon her exemption from answering, as being an
absolute Prince, and specially for yielding to be tried by the English Laws; of
which, One (she said) had lately been made of purpose for her destruction. It
was at last told her plainly, by the Chancellor and Treasurer, That if she
refused to answer to such crimes as should be objected, they would then proceed
against her, though she were absent. Being brought at last, with much ado to
consent, the Commissioners came together in the Presence Chamber; a Chair of
Estate was set for the Queen of England, in the upper end of the Chamber, under
a Canopy; beneath over against it, was placed a Chair for the Queen of Scots;
on both sides of the Cloth of Estate, stools were set, upon which on the one
side sat the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Earls of Oxford, Kent,
Derby, Worcester, Rutland, Cumberland, Warwick, Pembrooke, Lincoln, and
Viscount Mountacute^ On the other side sat the Lords Aburgavany, Zouch,
Morley, St. John of Bletsho, Compton, and Cheyney; Next to these, sat the
Knights that were Privy Counselors, Sir James Crofts, Sir Christopher Hatton,
Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Walter Mild^^, and Sir Amiss
Pawlet; Foreward, before the Earls, sat the two Chief Justices, and the Lord
chief Baron; on the other side, the two Barons, and the other Justices; Dale,
and Foord, Doctors of the Civil Law, at a Table in the midst, Popham the
Queens Attorney General, Egerton her Solicitor, ^^^die her Sergeant at Law,
the Clerk of the Crown, and two Notaries. When the Queen of Scots was come, and
had placed her self, silence being made, Bromely Lord Chancellor turning
toward her, said; That the Queen had appointed these Commissioners, to hear
what she could Answer to crimes laid to her charge, assuring her, that nothing
would be cause of more joy to the Queen, then to hear, that she had proved her
self innocent. Upon this, she rising up, said; That although, being an
absolute Prince, she could not be compelled to appear before the De^egates, yet
to manifest her innocence, she was now content to appear. Then Gawdie, opened
every speciality of the Law lately made (against which she had taken
excception) showing, By Babingtons confession, by Letters passed between them,
by the confessions of Ballard, and Savage, by the confessions of her
Secretaries, Nave, and Curle, that she was privy to their Treasons, and
consented to the Invasion of England, and destruction of the Queen. To which
she answered, That Letters might be counterfeited, her Secretaries might be
corrupted, and rest, in hope of life, might be drawn to confess that which was
not true: In this she stood peremptorily, That she never consented to any
Attempt against the Queens Person; though for her own delivery, she confessed
she did. After many other charges by the Commissioners, and replies by the
Queen of Scots; At last, she requested, that she might be heard in a full
Parliament, or before the Queen her self, and her Council. But this request
prevailed not; for on the 25. day of October following, at the Star Chamber in
Westminster, the Commissioners met again, and there pronounced sentence against
her; Ratifying by their Seals and subscriptions, that after the 1. day of June,
in the seven and twentieth year of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, diverse
matters were compassed and imagined in this Kingdom, by Anthony Babington, and
others, with the privity of Mary Queen of Scots, pretending Title to the Crown
of England, tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the Royal Person,
of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen.

After a few days, a Parliament was holden at Westminster, the which was begun
by Authority from the Queen, derived to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Treasurer, and the Earl of Derby; and the same, not without some Presidents. At
this Parliament, the Proscriptions of the Lord Paget, Charles Paget, Francis
Inglefield, Francis Throgmorton, Anthony Babington, Thomas Salisbury, Edward
Jones, Chyd^ock Tichburne, Charles Tilney, and the other accomplices, was
confirmed, and their goods and possessions adjudged confiscate. Also the Peers
of the Kingdom, with an unanimous consent, exhibit a Petition to the Queen by
the Lord Chancellor, that for the preservation of the true Religion, and safety
of the Queen, of themselves, and their Posterity, the Sentence passed against
Mary Queen of Scots, might according to Law be presently Promulged: They put
the Queen in mind of the fearful examples of Gods Judgments extant in
Scripture, upon King Saul, for sparing of Agag, and upon Ahab, for not putting
Benhadad to death. But the Queen answers them to this effect: First,
acknowledging Gods miraculous preservation of her, and then their constant
affections toward her, for whose sakes only she desires to live: Otherwise,
when she calls to mind things past, beholds the present, and expects what may
happen in time to come, that she accounts them most happy, who go soonest
hence. That the Law lately made, by which the Queen of Scots is condemned, was
not made (as some maliciously have imagined) to ensnare her; but cont^ariwise,
to forewarn and deter her from attempting any thing against it, which though
it had not been made, yet were there other ancient Laws enough to condemn her.
Nothing could have been more grievous to me, than that a Prince, and one so
near Allied unto me, should deserve the Sentence pronounced against her; and
seeing the matter is of rare example, and of a very weighty consequence, I hope
you will not expect, that I should at this present determine any thing; Yet
that there may be no danger in delay^ I will in due time signify my mind unto
you; and in the mean time, would have you to expect from me, whatsoever good
Subjects may look for, from a Gracious Prince.

Twelve days after, having deeply weighed the matter in her mind, she sent
the Lord Chancellor to the Peers, and Puckering to the Lower House, entreating
them to advise more diligently concerning so weighty a matter, and to bethink
themselves of some wholesome remedy, by which the life of the Queen of Scots
might be spared, and their security also provided for. They, when they had a
long time in most serious manner deliberated hereof, Return at last this
Verdict; That the Queens life could not be in safety, while the Queen of Scots
lived, unless she either repented and acknowledged her crimes, or were kept in
straight custody, or bound by her oath and obligations, or gave Hostages, or
lastly, departed the Kingdom. And seeing none of these were likely to be
remedies; It remained, that only her death would be a remedy. Repentance in her
they could little hope for, who would not so much as acknowledge her self
faulty: Close Imprisonment, Obligations, Oath, and Hostages they accounted as
nothing, which all vanished, if the Queens life were once taken away; and if
she departed the Kingdom, they feared she would straightway go about to Invade
it again. These things the Lord Chancellor, and Puckering the Speaker of the
Lower House, declared to the Queen at large, and urged her in their names, to
have the Sentence put in execution. Hereupon, the Queen after a short pawse,
spoke at last to this effect: I protest, my chief desire has been, that for
your security, and my own safety, some other way might be devised, than that
which is now propounded; but seeing it is now evident and certain, that my
safety without her destruction, is in a more deplorate estate, I am most
grievously affected with inward sorrow; That I, who have pardoned so many
Rebels, have neglected so many Treasons (either by connivance, or silence)
should now at last exercise cruelty, upon a Prince so nearly Allied to me. As
for your Petition, I beseech you to rest in an Answer, without an Answer: If I
say I will not grant your Petition, I shall happily say what I mean not; I^ I
should say, I will grant it, then cast I my self into destruction headlong,
whose safety you so earnestly desire, And that I know, you in your wisedoms
would not I should do.

After this, the Parliament was Prorogued, and then were the Lords Buckhurst
and Beale sent to the Queen of Scots, to let her understand that Sentence was
pronounced against her, and confirmed by Parliament, and that the execution of
it was earnestly desired, by the Nobility and the Commons; and therefore
persuaded her, that before her death, she would make acknowledgement of her
offenses, against God and the Queen; Intimating, That if she lived, the
Religion received in England, could not subsist. Hereupon, she was taken with
an unwonted alacrity, and seemed to triumph for joy, giving God thanks, and
gratulating her own felicity, That she should be accounted an Instrument, for
establishing Religion in this Island; and therewith requested, She might have
some Catholic Priest to administer the Sacrament to her; but was denied, which
some deemed, not inhumane only, but tyranicall and heathenish. The Bishop and
the Dean, whom for this cause they commended to her, she utterly rejected, and
jeered at the English Nation, saying; The English were ever and anon wont to
murder their own Kings, and therefore, no mar(...) they should now thirst
after her destruction. In Dcember following the Sentence against her was
Proclaimed, in London first, and after, over all the Kingdom, wherein Queen
Elizabeth seriously protested, that this Promulgation of the Sentence was
extorted from her, to her great grief, by the importunity of the whole Body of
the Kingdom. The Queen of Scots being told hereof, seemed not a whit dejected
with it; but writing to the Queen, never makes intercession for her self, nor
expostulateth her death, but only makes three small requests, one, That she
might be buried in France, by her Mother; another, That she might not be put
to death privately, but her servants to be present; the third That her servants
might freely depart, and enjoy such Legacies as she had given them. Of which
Requests, she desires the Queen to vouchsafe her an answer; but whether this
Letter ever came to Queen Elizabeth, is uncertain.

This condemnation of the Queen of Scots, as a thing strange, and scarce
credible, was soon spread far and near; so as intercessions came thick in
her behalf to Queen ELIZABETH, but specially from the King of Scots, and the
King of FRANCE, who sent their several Ambassadors, using all the reasons that
natural affection in the one, and likeness of condition in the other, could
urge, for sparing of her life; but when the necessity of the State, seemed to
obstruct all ways of clemency, the French Ambassador L' Aubespine, falls from
reasons to action, and thinks no way so effectual for saving the Queen of
Scots life, as to take away Queen ELIZABETH'S life; and thereupon, First, he
deals covertly with William Stafford, a young Gentleman, and prone to embrace
hopes (whose Mother was of the Bedchamber to Queen ELIZABETH, and his brother
at that time, Ambassador Lieger in France) and afterward, more openly by Trappe
his Secretary, to murder the Queen. Stafford, though not daring to act such a
villainy himself, yet commended one Moody to him, a resolute fellow, and one
that for money would be sure to do it. Upon this, Stafford brings Trappe to
Moody, being then in the common Jail, who upon Trappes offers, undertakes it:
But then the consultation was, by what way it should be done? Moody propounded
poison, or else to lay a bag of Gunpowder under the Queens Bed, and suddenly
fire it. But Trappe liked of neither of these ways, but would rather have it
done, as was done to the Prince of Orange. But while they are thus consulting
about the way of doing it; Stafford discovers all to the Lords of the Council.
Whereupon Trappe, who was now bound for France, was apprehended, and being
examined, confessed the whole matter. Upon this, the Ambassador himself was
sent for to Cecills house, the twelveth of January; where met him by the Queens
appointment, Cecill Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Christopher
Hatton Vice-Chamberlain, and Davyson one of her Secretaries; who declare to the
Ambassador every particular which Stafford, Moody, and Trappe his Secretary had
confessed. As Soon as Stafford was brought forth, and began to speak, the
AMBASSADOR interrupted him, and revyling him, made asseveration, that St^fford
first propounded it; when Stafford falling on his knees, made fearful
imprecations, that the AMBASSADOR first propounded it himself. But whosoever
propounded it (says BVRLEIGH) It appears, that you were made acquainted with
the matter. To which he presently Replied; That if he had known of any such
thing, yet, being he was an AMBASSADOVR, he o^ght not to give notice of it, but
to his own King. After much reasoning in this manner; The Lord Burleigh
admonished him, to beware how he offended hereafter in this kind; and let him
know, That he is not quitted from the offense, though for this time the Queen
be pleased to forbear him.

But upon this Treason, the Queen of Scots Adversaries put many terrors into
Queen Elizabeth's mind, giving out, That the Spanish Navy was come to Milford
Haven, That the Scots were broken into England, That the Duke of Guyse with a
great Army was landed in Sussex, That the Queen of Scots was escaped out of
Prison, and had gotten a Company up in Arms, and many other such feigned
suggestions; Through which, at length they drew the Queen to this: That she
sealed Letters, for executing the Sentence against the Queen of Scots; and one
of her greatest perswaders to it (as the Scots reported) was one whom the King
of Scots had sent to dissuade her from it; namely, Patricke Gray, who sounded
often in her ears, Mortua non mordet; when she is dead, she cannot bite.

The Queen notwithstanding, began to weigh with her self, whether it were
better to rid her out of the way, or else to spare her; and many great reasons
offered themselves on both sides, but where only speculative reasons presented
themselves for sparing her; many practical reasons, and those pressed both by
Courtiers and Preachers, were presented to her; so as long holden in suspense,
she would oftentimes sit speechless, and her countenance cast down: At last,
her fear prevayling, she delivered to Secretary Davyson, Letters under her hand
and Seal, to get the Commission made under the Great Seal of England, for the
Execution of the Queen of Scots, which might be in a readiness upon any fear
of danger; charging him not to disclose the matter, to any whomsoever. But the
next day her mind was altered, and sent Sir William Killegrew to Davyson, to
countermand the making of the Commission. Whereupon Davyson goes to her, and
lets her know, That the Commission was already made, and the Seal put to it;
Whereat, the Queen extremely angry, rebukes him sharply for his hastiness;
yet Davyson imparteth the matter to Privy Counselors; and persuades them, That
the Queen Commanded, the Commission should be put in execution. Hereupon, Beale
Clerk of the Council, is sent down with Letters, wherein authority is deputed
to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby, Cumberland, and others, that she
should be put to death according to the Law; with which proceeding, the Queen
was not once made acquainted; and more than this, Although she had intimated to
Davyson, That she would take some other order concerning the Queen of Scots,
yet did not he stay Beale from going.

And now comes in the last Act of the Queen of Scots Tragedy^ for as soon as the
Earls were come to Fotheringay; They, together with Sir Amiss Pawlet, and Sir
Drue Drurie, with whom she was then in custody; go unto her, and reading the
Commission, signify the cause of their coming; and in a few words, admonish
her to prepare her self for death, for that she must dye the next day.
Whereto, without any change of countenance or passion of mind, she made
Answer; I had not thought that my Sister the Queen, would have consented to my
death, who am not subject to your Laws; but since it is her pleasure, death
shall then be to me most welcome. Then she requesteth that she might confer
with her Confessor, and Melvyn her Steward, which would not be granted: The
Bishop or Deane of Peterborough they offered her, but them she refused. The
Earls being departed, she gave order that Supper should be hastened, where
she eat (as she used to do) soberly, and sparingly; and perceiving her men
and women servants to lament and weep, she comfort them, and bid them
rejoice rather, that she was now to depart out of a world of misery. After
supper, she looks over her Will, read the Inventory of her Goods and Jewels,
and writ their names severally by them, to whom she gave any of them; at her
wonted hour she went to bed, and after a few hours sleep, awaking; spent the
rest of the night in her devotion. And now the fatal day being come, which was
the 8 of February, she gets up, and makes her ready in her best Apparel,
and then betook her self in her Closet to Almighty God, imploring his
assistance with deep sighs and groans; until Thomas Andrews Sheriff of the
County gave notice, that it was time to come forth, and then with a Princely
Majesty, and cheerful conntenance, she came out, her head covered with a
linen Vayl, and carrying an Ivory Crucifix in her hand; In the Gallery the
Earls met her, and the other Gentlemen, where Melvyn her servant upon his
bended knees, deplored his own fortune, that he should be the messenger to
carry this sad news into Scotland; whom she comforted saying, Do not lament
Melvyn, Thou shall by and by see Mary Steward freed from all cares. Then
turning her self to the Earls, She requested that her servants might stand by
her at her death, which the Earl of Kent was very loath to grant, for fear of
superstition; To whom she said, Fear nothing, these poor wretches desire only
to give me my last farewell. I know the Queen my Sister, would not deny me so
small a request. After this, the two Earls, and the Sheriff of the County
leading the way, she came to the Scaffold, which was set up at the upper end of
the Hall, where was a Chair, a Cushion, and a Block, all covered with
Mourning. Then the Dean of Peterborough going to Prayers, she falling upon her
knees, and holding up the Crucifix in both her hands, prayed with her Servants
in Latin, out of the Office of the blessed Virgin. Prayers being ended, she
kissed the Crucifix, and signing her self with the Sign of the Cross, said, As
thy arms, O Christ, were spread forth upon the Cross, so embrace me with the
open arms of thy mercy, and forgive me my sins. Then the Executioner asking her
pardon, she forgave him. And now her women helping off her outer Garments, and
breaking forth into shrikes and cries, she kissed them, signed them with the
Cross, and willed them to leave lamenting, for now an end of her sorrows was
at hand; and then shadowing her face with a Linen Cloth, and lying down on the
Block, she repeated the Psalm, In te Domine speravi, ne confundar in aeternum;
at which words she stretching forth her Body, her head at two blows was taken
off. Her Body was afterward Royally buried in the Cathedral Church at
Peterborough; but since that, her Noble Son James, King of Great Britain,
erected a Royal Monument for her, in King Henry the seventh's Chapel at
Westminster. This end had Mary Queen of Scots, in the six and fortieth year of
her age, and of her Imprisonment in England the eighteenth; a Lady so complete
in all excellent parts of body and mind, that must needs have made her a happy
woman, if she had not been a Queen; and perhaps a happy Queen too, if she had
not been Heir to the Crown of England: For why did all her endeavors want
success, but only from the fear of that Succession; and no Innocence of heas
could be a Defense, where the fury of Jealousy made the Assault.

As Soon as it came to the Queens knowledge, that the Queen of Scots was put to
death, her countenance grew dejected, and her speech failed her; insomuch that
all in mourning weeds, she gave her self over to sorrow, Commanded her
Counselors from her Presence, and caused Davyson to be cited to the
Starchamber. And as soon as grief would suffer her, She wrote a Letter with her
own hand to the King of Scots, and sent it by Sir Robert Carry, to this effect;
That her mind was infinitely disquieted, in regard of this lamentable event,
against her meaning and intent; entreating him to believe, That if she had
commanded it, she would never have denied it, and withal, Protesting her true
affection toward him, and her assiduous watchfulness for the prospering of
his affairs.

While Carye was on his journey, Davyson is cited to the Star Chamber before
these Delegates, Sir Christopher Wray Chief Justice of the King's Bench, for
that time made Lord Privy Seal, the Archbishop; of Canterbury and York, the
Earls of Worcester, Cumberland, and Lincoln, the Lords Gray, and Lumley, Sir
James Croft, Comptroller of the Queens House, Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Sir Edmond Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
Sir Roger Manwood, Lord Chief Baron (where note, That Bromely Lord Chancellor,
Burleigh Lord Treasurer, Leicester, and Hatton, who were indeed more guilty of
the fact, than Davyson, were none of the number.) Before these Delegates,
Popham the Queens Attorney lays to Davysons charge, Contempt of the Queen;
Majesty, violating of his trust, and neglect of his duty, laying open all
particulars of his fact; which after Egerton the Queens Solicitor, Gaudy, and
Puckering her Sergeants at Law, urged also against him with great aggra^ation:
To which Davyson mildely answered, That he would not contest with the Queen;
only protests, That if he had done any thing otherwise than he ought, it was
out of ignorance and mistaking, and not out of any purpose to disobey her
Majesty. It seems the Queen had carried her self, as one that would have it
done, and yet was loath to do it, scarce knowing her one mind, and yet would
have another know it; meaning to make it the work of mistaking, rather than of
purpose, that so at least she might leave some place of satisfaction to her
self, that it was not absolutely of her doing.

The Pleadings ended, the Commissioners went to censure; Manwood began, and
gave his opinion, That Davyson, for the inconsideratnesse of his fact^ should
be fined ten thousand pounds, and Imprisonment during the Queens pleasure; the
rest went on in that Sentence, only the Lord Gray excused Davyson so far, That
he tho^ght him worthy of reward, rather than of punishment: The conclusion was,
the first Sentence for his Fine and Imprisonment, was by Wray keeper of the
Privy Seal confirmed; and Davyson never after recovered the Queens favor,
though she relieved him sometimes in his necessity. A man ingenious indeed, but
not thoroughly acquainted with the ways of the Court; and thought to have been
raised to this place, of purpose to Act this part, and for nothing else.

By this time Sir Robert Carry, Son to the Lord Hunsdon, who was sent to excuse
the Queen, was come to the Borders; but being come thither, was not suffered to
set foot in Scotland, The King would scarce hear him by another, and with much
ado received his Letters. He called home his Ambassador out of England, and
thought of nothing but revenge.

But the Queen still laying the fault upon Davyson, and the unadvised credulity
of her Councellros, by little and little allayeth his passion; and expecting,
till time had somewhat assuaged his grief, that it would endure to be touched,
at length, by her Agents in Scotland; And soon after by the Lord Hunsdon
Governor of Berwicke, She admonished him, How dangerous it would be for him, to
break out into War against England, and what little help he could justly expect
from either Spain or France, but if he persisted in the amity with England, he
might be sure the Queen of England, would most lovingly account him for her
Son. And to the end, that he should assure himself, that the Queen his Mother
was put to death without her privity, she sent him the Sentence against
Davyson, under the Seals of all the Delegates, and attested under the Great
Seal of England; and another Instrument likewise signed with the hands of the
Judges of England; in which they aver, That the Sentence against the Queen of
Scots, could in no wise be prejudice to his right in the Succession.

Having now by these and the like courses, somewhat assuaged the King of Scots
indignation; to prevent the War which they foresaw was imminent from the King
of Spain, they send forth Drake with four of the Queens ships and others, unto
the Coast of Spain, to set upon their ships in the Have^s, and to intercept
their Munition. Drake entering into the Port of Cales, sunck, took, and fired,
about an hundred ships, wherein was great store of Munition and Victuals: Then
returning to the Cape of St. Vincent, he set up three Forts, and compelled them
to yield. Thence setting sail toward the Western Islands, called Azores, under
the great Meridian; by great good fortune he happened upon an huge and wealthy
Carack, called St. Philip, returning from the East Indies, and easily
vanquished it; Whereupon the Mariners on both sides, from the name of Philp,
portended no good luck to Philip King of Spain.

At the same time, Thomas Cavendish of Suffolk, in the other part of the
World, who two years before had set sail from England with three ships, passing
thorough the Straights of Magellan, in the Coast of Chily, Peru, and Nu^va
Hispania, fired a great number of Spanish Towns, took and pillaged ninteen
great ships, and amongst them a wealthy ship of the Kings, nigh unto
Caliphornia, in North America; and so by the Philippine Isles, the Mol^cce, the
Cape de Bone Esperance, and the Island of St. Helene, returned home the next
year, being the third after Magellan, that sailed about the World.

As Drake and Cavendish at this time gained great fame and renown^ so two other
men in the Netherlands ( Stanley and York) purchased as great infamy and
disgr^ce: This York was a Londoner, a bold fellow, and of loose behavior;
famous for bringing first into England, the manner of turning the point upon
the Adversary in single Combats, whereas the English till this time, were wont
to be armed with Bucklers and swords, and to strike with edge, and it was held
no manhood to turn the point, or strike below the girdle. He suffering some
affront from the Earl of Leicester, fled away, and for a time, served under the
Spaniards in the Netherlands, till at length being reconciled to Leicester, he
was sent over the Fort near Zutphen; but being bribed, he not only yielded up
the place to the Enemy, but drew to the like villainy one Stanley, who with
great valor had served in an Irish expedition; to yield up Daventry to the
Spaniards, a wealthy and well Fortified Town. But what got they by their
treachery, The Spaniards set York and Stanley at variance, they poison York
and seize upon his goods, his carcass was three years after dug up by the
States commandment, and hanged upon a Gibbet till it rotted away^ Stanley went
into Spain, where there was no credit given to him; for the Spaniards have a
saying, It is lawful to give honor to a Traitor sometimes, but never to trust
him.

These late treacheries, wrought the Earl of Leicester much envy with the
Confederate Netherlands, because the Traitors were very intimate with him;
whereupon the States in large letters to the Queen, accuse Le^cester for his
ill managing of the Weal-Publick, in the matter of money, Merchandise, and
Military affairs; and to his credulity, They impute the harm which accrewed by
York and Stanley. The Queen, for the narrow sifting of the matter, and
composing it; sent thither Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckehurst (lately taken i^to
her Privy Council in Leicesters absence) Norris, and Bartholmew Clerk: B^t
when as the officious diligence of Buckhurst, seemed to trench upon Leicesters
re^utation; his grace with the Queen proved so forcible, that Buckhurst at his
return, was for certain months confined to his house.

Afterward, Sluice being beleaguered by the Prince of Parma, Leicester was by
the States sent for out of England, to succor it; the Town was furiously
a^saulted, with seventeen thousand great shot, and a mighty breach was made
into it; which nevertheless, Roger Williams, Franis Vere, Nicholas Baskervile,
with the Garrison of the English and Wallons, were valiantly defended for a
while, but at last were enforced to yield it up^ Leicester, that came to
relieve it, finding himself too weak for the Besiegers, being gone away. And
indeed, the States would not commit any great Army to his Command; who (they
knew had a determination to se^ze L^yden, and some other Towns into his own
hands, and had a purpose to surprise the absolute Government. Whereupon, the
States used means, that Leicester was called home; gave up the Government to
the States, and in his room succeeded Maurice of Nassaw Son to the Prince of
Orange, b^ing now but twenty years of age.) Peregrine Lord Willonghby, was by
the Queen made Gene^all of the English Forces in the Low Countries, to whom she
gave command to reduce the English Factions into the States obedience; the
which, with the help of Prince Maurice, he easily effected.

Leicester being now come home, and perceiving that an accusation was preparing
against him by Buckhurst and others, for his unfaithful managing of affairs in
Holland; privately with tears he cast himself down at the Queens feet,
entreating her, that she would not receive him with disgrace, at his return,
whom she had sent forth with honor; and so far prevailed with her, that the
next day being called to examination before the Lords, he took his place
amongst them, not kneeling down at the end of the Table, as the manner of
Delinquents is; and when the Secretary began to read the heads of his
Accusation, he interrupted him, saying; That the public instructions which he
had received, were limited with private restriction; and making his appeal to
the Queen, eluded the whole crimination, with the secret indignation of his
Adversaries.

This year was famous for the death of many great Personages: In the month of
February, dyed Henry Nevill Lord of Aburgaveny, great Grandchild to Edward
Nevill, who in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, got this Title in the right
of his Wife, only Daughter and Heir to Richard Beauchamp Earl of Worcester, and
Lord of Aburgaveny; In which right, when as the only Daughter of this Henry,
Wife to Sir Thomas Fane, challenged the Title of Baroness of Aburgaveny; a
memorable contention arose concerning the Title between her, and the next Heir
Male, to whom by Will (and the same confirmed by Authority of Parliament) the
Castle of Aburgaveny was bequeathed. This question being a long time debated;
at last in a Parliament holden in the second year of King James, the matter was
tried by voices; and the Heir Male carried the Lordship of Aburgaveny, and the
Barony Le Dispencer, was ratified to the Female. This year also, in the month
of April, dyed Anne Stanhope Duchess of Somerset, ninety years old, who
being the Wife of Edward Seymer Duke of Somerset, and Protector of England,
contended for precedence, with Katherine Parre, Queen Dowager to King Henry the
Eight. There dyed also, Sir Ralph Sadler, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the last Baneret of England, with which dignity he was adorned at
the Battle of Musselborough in Scotland. After him dyed Thomas Bromley Lord
Chancellor of England; and six days after, He, whom the Queen meant should
have succeeded him, Edward Earl of Rutland; but he now failing, Sir Christopher
Hatton was made Lord Chancellor, who though he were a Courtier, yet the Queen
knowing him to be an honest man, thought him not unfit for that place, where
conscience has, or should have more place than Law; although some were of
opinion, That it was not so much the Queens own choice, as that she was
persuaded to it by some that wished him not well; both thereby to be a cause of
absenting him from the Court, and thinking that such a sedentary place, to a
corpulent man that had been used to exercise, would be a means to shorten his
life, and indeed he lived not full out three years after.

This year Sir John Perot was called home out of Ireland, and left all in (...)
quiet to Fits Williams his Successor. For hitherto the English (...) it no hard
matter to vanquish the Irish, by reason of their unskil^ulnesse in Arms; eight
hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, was ^^ld an invincible Army: but after
that by Perots command, they were ^^^^cised in Feats of Arms, and taught to
discharge Muskets at a Mark, (...) had in the Low Countries learned the Art of
Fortification, they held the English better to it, and were not so easily
overcome.

And now we are come to the one and twentieth year of Queen Eliza^^^^s Reign,
being the year 1588, long before spoken of by Astrologers, (...) be a
wonderful year, and even the Climactericall year of the World. And yet the
greatest Wonder that happened this year, was but the wonderful Fleet that
Spain provided for invading of ENGLAND, if the defeat of that wonderful Fleet
were not a greater Wonder.

It is true, there was at this time a Treaty of Peace between England and
Spai^; and the Earl of Derby, the Lord Cobham, Sir James Crofts, Dale and
Rogers, Doctors of Law, Commissioners for the Queen: for the Prince of Parma,
the Count Aurenberg, Champignie, Richardot, Ma^s, and Garvyer, Doctors, had
many meetings about it near to Ostend; but it seemed on the p^rt of Spain,
rather to make the English secure, that they should not make provision for War,
than that they had any purpose of real proceeding, seeing they accepted not of
any reasonable Conditions that were offered, but trifled out the time, till the
Spanish Navy was come upon the Coast, and the Ordnance heard from Sea, and then
dismissed the English Delegates.

The Spanish Navy consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships; whereof Galeasses
and Galleons, seventy two, goodly Ships, like to floating Towers; in which were
Soldiers, 19290; Mariners, 8350; Gallyslaves, 2080; Great Ordnance, 2630: For
the greater holiness of their Action, twelve of their Ships were called, The
twelve Apostles. Chief Commander of the Fleet, was Don Alphonso, Duke of
Medina; and next to him, John Martin Recalde, a great Seaman. The twentieth of
May they weighed Anchor from the River Tagus, but were by Tempest so miserably
dispersed, that it was long ere they m^t again: but then they sent before to the
Prince of Parma, That he with his Forces, consisting of fifty thousand old
Soldiers, should be ready to join with them, and with his Shipping conduct
them into England, and to land his Army at the Thames Mouth.

The Queens Preparation in the mean time, was this; The Lord Charles Howard,
Lord Admiral, with all her Navy; and Sir Francis Drake, Vice Admiral, to be
ready at Plymouth; and the Lord Henry Seymor (second son to the Duke of
Somerset, with forty English and Dutch Ships, to keep the Coasts of the
Netherlands, to hinder the Prince of Parma's coming forth. Then for
Land-Service, there were laid along the Southern Coast, twenty thousand
soldiers, and two Armies besides of Trained men were levied; over one of
which, consisting of a thousand Horse, and two and twenty thousand Foot, the
Earl of Leicester commanded, and pitched his Tents at Tilbury, near the Thames
mouth: Over the other, appointed to Guard the Queens Person, and consisting of
four and twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, the Lord Hunsdon was
General. Arthur Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir John Norris, Sir Richard
Bingham, Sir Roger Williams, and other Military men, were chosen to make a
Council of War, and consult how the Land-service should ^e ordered. These
declared, amongst other things, That the places which lay fittest for the
enemies landing, as Milford Haven, F^lmouth, Plymouth, Portland, the Isle of
Wight, Portsmouth, the Downs, the Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, and
such other, should be fortified with Works and Garrisons; the Trained Soldiers
of those Shires which lay near the Sea Coast, should defend those places, and
be ready at the Alarm to hinder the Enemy from Landing; but if he did land,
then to spoil the Country round about, that he might find no food; and by
continual crying, Arm, Arm, give the Enemy no rest, but yet should not give
Battle, till good store of Commanders were come together.

At this time many fearing the Papists at home, no less than the Spa^iards
abroad, persuaded the Queen to take off the heads of some of the greatest of
them; but she detesting such cruelty, took order only, That some few of them
should be committed to custody in Wisbych Castle.

And now all things on both sides prepared, the Spanish Navy set forth out of
the Groyne in May, but was dispersed and driven back by weather. The English
Navy set forth somewhat later out of Plymouth, bearing up toward the Coast of
Spain; but partly by occasion of contrary winds, partly by advertisement that
the Spaniards were gone back, and upon some doubt also that they might pass by
toward the Coast of England, whilst they were seeking them afar off, they
returned to Plymouth; At which time, a confident (though false) advertisement
came to the Admiral, That the Spaniards could not possible come forward that
year: whereupon the E^glish Navy was upon the point of disb^nding, and many of
the men were gone on shore; when suddenly the invincible Armada (for so it was
called in a Spanish ostentation) was discovered upon the Western Coast: whereof
the Lord Admiral being informed, had much ado to get the Queens Navy out of
the Haven (the wind being contrary) yet at length he haled it forth. The next
day, the English beheld the Spanish Ships, in height like to Castles, sailing
slowly along, whom they suffered peaceably to pass by, that they might have
the benefit of the wind to follow after. The one and twentieth day of July,
the Admiral of England sent a Pinnace before, called, The Defianc^, which by a
great shot, challenged the Spaniards to fight, and by and by they fell to it.
Then Drake, Hawkins, and Forbisher let fly against the outmost Squadron, which
Recalde commanded, making him glad to fly to their main Navy for succor. The
night following^ a mighty Biskayner of Oquenda's (in which the King of Spain's
Treasure was) was by chance fired with Gunpowder, but was timely quenched by
other Ships sent to her succor; one of which Ships, was the Galleon of Don
Pedro, whom Sir Francis Drake took prisoner, and sent him to Darthmouth. The
Biskayner it self (the Treasure being taken out by the Spaniards) they left
behind them, which the English brought into the Haven at Weymouth.

The three and twentieth day of this Month, they had a second Fight, in which
most of the Spanish Shot flew over the English Ships, and never hurt them;
Only Cock an Englishman, being with his little Vessel in the midst of the
enemies, died valiantly. The four and twentieth day, they rested on both sides;
in which time the Lord Admiral ranked his whole Fleet i^to four Squadrons: The
first he ruled himself, Drake the second, Hawkins the third, and Forbisher the
fourth.

The five and twentieth day (which was the Saint James day) they fell to it the
third time; in which Fight, the English had again the better, so as after this
time, the Spaniards would no more turn upon the English, but holding on their
course, dispatched a Messenger to the Prince of Parma; Requiring him forthwith
to join himself to the Kings Fleet, and withal to send them Bullets.

The day following, the Lord Admiral Knighted Thomas Howard, the Lord
Shefield^ Roger Townsend, John Hawkins, and Martin Frobisher; and holding a
Council of War, they decreed not to set again upon the Enemy, till they came
to the straight of Calice, where the Lord Henry Seymor and Sir William Winter
waited for their coming. And now so far were the English from being terrified
with this invincible Navy, that many of the Nobility and other of special
note, hired Ships at their own charges and came to the Admiral; as the Earls
of Oxford, Northumberland, Cumberland, Thomas and Robert Cecill, Henry Brook,
Sir Charles Blunt, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William Hatton, Sir Robert Carry, Sir
Ambrose Willoughby, Sir Thomas Gerard, Sir Arthur Gorge and others.

The seven and twentieth of July toward the Evening, the Spaniards cast
Anchour near unto Calis, and not far from them rode the English Admiral,
within shot of a great Ordnance, to whom Seymor and Winter joined themselves,
so as by this time there were in the English Navy a hundred and forty Ships,
nimble and serviceable for Fighting or Sailing, yet only Fifteen of them bore
the stroke of the Battle. And now again the Spaniards sent Post after Post to
the Prince of Parma to send them forty Flye-boates, without which they were not
able to skirmish with the English, by reason of the greatness and unweldinesse
of their Ships, and importune him presently to put to Sea with his Army; But he
was unprepa^ed, and his Flat-bottomed Boats were full of chinks and leaked,
and besides, the Hollanders hovered before the Ports of Dunkerk and Newport, in
such sort, that he durst not look forth.

The eight and twentieth day; the Lord Admiral made ready eight of his worst
Ships, on the outside dawbed with wildfire, Rozin and Brimstone, within, full
of combustible matter, and under the conduct of Young and Prowse, sent them
down with the wind in the silent time of the night toward the Spanish Fleet;
the which when the Spaniards saw approach them, and the Sea as it were all on a
light fire; imagining withal, that those Fireships might carry in them some
murdering Engines, they made ^ hideous noise, took up Anchours, cut Cables,
spread Sails, and betook themselves to their Oars, but more to flight: One of
the Spanish Galleasses having lost her Rudder, and floating up and down, was
held in fight by Annias Preston, Thomas Gerard, and Harvie, who ^lew Captain
Hugh Moncada, cast the Soldiers over board, and carried away a great deal of
Gold, but the Vessel and Ordnance was wreck to the Governor of Calice.

Drake and Fencz in the mean while perceiving the Spanish Fleet to gather
togethea again before Graveling, set upon them with great violence, to whom
str^ightwayes, Fenton, Southwell, Beeston, Cross, and Riman join themselves,
and soon after the Admiral himself, Sir Thomas Howard, and the Lord Sheffield,
the Galleon called Saint Matthew, was sorely battered by Seymor and Winter,
driven toward Ostend, and set upon again by the Zelanders, and at last was
taken by the Flushingers.

And now the Spanish Navy having want of many nec^ssaries, and no hope of the
Prince of Parma's coming, they resolved to return Northward for Spain; in
which passage they lost both many Ships and men, the English Navy still
following them close, till they were feign to give them over for want of
Powder. Whilst these things passed at Sea, the Queen ^n Person came to Tilbury
to view the Army and Camp there, where she showed such undaunted Courage and
Resolution, that it wonderfully animated the spirits of them all.

And thus this Navy, which was three whole Years in preparing, in the space of
a month was often beaten, and at length put to flight, many of their men being
slain, more then half of their Ships taken and sunk (of the English not above
a hundred at the most missing, nor so much as a Ship, but Cocks little Vessel)
and Sailing about all Britain by Scotland, the Orkeneys and Ireland, they
returned into Spain with as much dishonor as they came out with boasting, for
indeed Mendoza in France by a Book in Print, Triumphed before the Victory.

For the happy success of this Action, Queen Elizabeth appointed prayers and
thanksgiving over all the Churches of England, and she (as it were in triumph)
came in Person, attended with a great Troop of the Nobility into the City, and
went into the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul (where the Banners taken from the
Enemy was placed in view) and there in most humble manner gave thanks to
Almighty God. And that which increased the public joy, was the news which Sir
Robert Sidney brought out of Scotland, That the King had over-past all
injuries, was lovingly affected toward the English, and desired to embrace
sincere and perfect amity with the Queen. For as for the King of Spain, he
wittily told the Ambassador, that he expected no other courtesy from him, but
such as Polyphemus promised Ulisses, that he should be the last whom he would
devour.

And now dyed the great Earl of Leicester the fourth day of September, at his
Manor of Killingworth of a violent Fever; I may well say the great Earl,
considering the many great Honors he enjoyed, which are extant in the Story;
yet one honor greater then any he had before, he effected even then when he
was ready to go out of the world, and that was^ To be Vicegerent in the high
Government of England and Ireland, for which the Patent was already drawn, and
had been sealed; but that Burleigh and Hatton showed the Queen how dangerous a
thing it might prove, for so great Authority to reside in one Subject. He was
while he lived in so great favor with the Queen, that some thought (and
himself not the least) that she meant to marry him; yet when he dyed, his
goods were sold at an Outcry to make payment of the debts he owed her.

About this time Philip Earl of Arundell, who three years before had been cast
in prison, was now cited in Westminster Hall, to the judgment of his Peers,
and Henry Earl of Derby was made High Steward of England for the time. The
matters laid to his charge were these: That he had contracted friendship with
Cardinal Allen, Parsons the Jesuit, and other Traitors, exciting diverse both
abroad and at home to restore the Romish Religion, promising his assistance
thereunto: and for that reason had a purpose to depart the Kingdom. That he was
privy to the Bull, in which Pope Sixtus Quintus had deposed the Queen, and
given England to the Spaniard; that being imprisoned in the Tower he caused
Mass to be said for the prosperous success of the Spanish Fleet, and for that
purpose had framed peculiar prayers for his own private use. Being demanded
whether he were guilty of these things; turning himself to the Judges, he asked
them these questions: First, whether it were lawful to heap up so many crimes
together in one Bill of Indictment? They answered that it was: Then whether
Arguments taken from presumptions were of force? They answered, that it was
lawful for him to interpose exceptions if he saw cause. Then again, if he
might be Arraigned for those things which were Capital, by the Law made the
thirteenth year of the Queen, after that the time expressed in the Act was
expired? They promised, they would proceed against him by no Law; but the old
Statute of Treason, made in the Reign of King Edward the Third. But now again
asked if he were guilty or not^ He pleaded not guilty, whereupon Puckening the
Queens Sergeant at Law, Popham Attorney General, Shuttleworth Sergeant at Law,
and Egerton the Queens Sollicitour, in their turns, urged and proved the
crimes objected; some whereof he denied, some he extenuated; but in conclusion
was by his Peers found guilty and condemned; yet the Queen spared his life, and
was content with thus much done in terror to the Papists.

It was now the year 1589. And the two and thirtieth of Queen Eliza^eths Reign;
when to be in some sort revenged of the Spaniards for their invasion, she gave
leave to Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake to under^ake an Expedition at
their own private charges, requiring nothing of her but a few Ships of War, who
took along with them Anthony the bastard, laying claim to the Kingdom of
Portingall, and of Souldidrs to the number of eleven thousand, of Seamen about
fifteen hundred: setting Sail from Plimmouth the fifth day of April, they
arrived at the Groyne in Ga^acia; whereof, with great valor they took first
the Lower town, and afterward the Higher, and from thence sailing toward
Portingall, they met Robert Earl of Essex, who without the Queens leave had put
to Sea: After two days they arrive at Penycha a Town of Portingall, which they
took; and left the Castle to Don-Antonio, and from thence they march by land
toward Lisbon threescore miles off: The Foot Companies led by Norris, whom
Drake promised to follow with the Fleet. Being come to the West Suburbs of
Lisbon, they found no body there but a few poor disarmed Portugalls who cried
out, God save King Antonio. The day following the Spaniards made a sail out,
in which Skirmish Bret, Caresley, and Carre, (stout Commanders) were slain; yet
did the Earl of Essex drive the Spaniards to the very gates of the City. And
now having tarryed here two days, and seeing no sign of the Portingalls
revolting; which Don-Anthonio had assured them would be, finding fresh supplies
come into the Town, their own Army sickly, Victuals and Powder failing; and
that which most of all Sir Francis Drake not bringing the great Ordnance as he
promised, they departed from the Suburbs of Lisbon toward Cascais, a little
Town at the mouth of the River Tagus, which Town Drake had taken this mean
while, who excused his not coming to Lisbon, by reason of the Flat^ he must
have passed, and the Castle of Saint Julian, Fortified with fifty pieces of
great Ordnance. Near this place they found threescore Hulke^ of the Hause towns
of Germany, laden with corn and all manner of Munition, which they took as
good prize toward their charges, in regard the Queen had forbidden them to
carry Victuals or Munition to the Spaniard. From hence they set sail toward
Virgo, a forlorn Town by the Seaside, and pillaging all along that Quarter,
returned for England, having lost in the Voyage of Soldiers and Mariners
about six thousand; yet not so much by the Enemy, as by eating of strange
fruits and distemper of the Climate.

It concerns the state of England, to look at this time into the state of
France; for while those things were in doing between Spain and England, the
Popish Princes of France, under pretext of defending the Catholic Religion,
entered into a combination, which they called, The holy League: The purpose
whereof was, to root out the Protestants, and to divert the Right of Succession
to the Crown of France; For they bound themselves to each other by oath, to
suffer no person but a Catholic to be King of France; which was directly to
exclude the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, if the present King,
without issue male, should fail. The head of this League, was the Duke of
Guise, who having given some overthrows to the German Forces, that came into
France in aid of the Protestants, was immeasurably extolled by the Clergy and
others; and grew to such a height of reputation, that entering into Paris, he
made the King glad to leave the City, and in an Assembly at Bloys, to make him
great Master of the French Cavalery, and to consent by Edict, to the cutting
off the Protestants. So as the King standing now in fear of him, used means at
last, even in the very Court, to have him murdered; and soon after, the
Cardinal his brother to be strangled. Hereupon so great a confusion followed,
that the people every where disobeyed the Magistrates, and spoiled the Kings
very Palace at Paris. Some Cities affected a Democr^cie, others an
Aristocracie, but few liked of a Monarchy. The Confederates in the mean while,
made a new Seal, usurped the Royal Authority, seized into their hands the best
fortified places, intercept the Kings Revenues, call in Spanish Soldiers, and
in all places denounce war and violence against the King. And the King in this
case being forced to fly to the Protestant^ for succor, they then most
wickedly, by one James Clement a Monk, made him away. The King being ready to
dye, Declares the King of Navarre to be his lawful successor, but the
Confederates would exclude him as an open Heretic; and yet whom to make choice
of they cannot well agree, some would have the Duke of Lorraine, as being
descended from the ancient Kings of France, some the Duke of Savoy, as borne of
the French Kings daughter, a Prince Po^e^t and Courageous; others would have
the Duke of Guises brother that wa^ murthered^ others the King of Spain; but
the greatest part gave their voices for the C^rdinall of Bourbon, who was one
degree nearer al^yed to the slain King, then the King of Navarre his Nephew. He
therefore was presently proclaimed King of France, with the Title of Charles the
Tenth; but he being a Priest, the King of Navarre also was at the same time
proclaimed King of France, who abode at Diepe a Sea Town of Normandy, and
doubted not to drive the Cardinal easily out of France.

The King of Navarre being thus raised in Dignity, but weak in means, implored
Aid of the Queen of England, offering to make a League Offensive and Defensive;
the Queen out of a pious respect to a King of her own Religion, sent him
presently two and twenty thousand pound sterling in Gold (such a sum of Gold,
as he professed he had never seen at one time before) and withal supplied him
with four thousand Soldiers, under the command of Peregrine Lord Willoughby;
for Colonells, she appointed Sir Thomas Wilford, who was made Marsh^ll of the
Field, John Boro^ghs, Si^ William Drury, and Sir Thomas Baskervyle, and gave
them a months pay in hand. Hereupon the Confederates (whom the King had
vanquished ^ little before at Arques beyond all expectation) began to quail,
and the day before the Arrival of the English they vanished away, with this
addition of Forces the King marches to Paris, and being ready to enter the
City, causes a retreat to be ^ounded, as loath to have spoil made of a
City, which he hoped shortly should be his own. Afterward by the assistance
of the English he won many Towns, and then having marched at least five
hundred miles on foot, he gave them leave after a long winters service, to
return into England. In which Voyage of men of note, dyed Captain Hunnings,
but of a natural death, also Stubbs (he whose right hand was cut off for
writing the book against the Queens marriage) and Sir William Drury slain by
Master Boro^ghs in a single Combat, where the quarrel was, that he being but a
Knight, would take place of Boroughs that was the younger son of a Baron,
contrary to the Laws of the English Gentry.

About this time, James King of Scots (with Queen Elizabeth's good liking)
Espoused Anne the daughter of Frederick the second King of Denmark by his
Deputy; but she afterward sailing for Scotland, was by tempest cast upon
Norway, and there, through continual storms forced to stay, so as the King in
the winter season set sail thither, that the marri^ge according to his vow
might be accomplished within the year: some were of opinion that those storms
were caused by witchcraft, and was confirmed indeed by some witches taken in
Scotland; who confessed they had raised those storms to keep the Queen from
landing in Scotland, and that the Earl of Bothwell had asked Counsel of them
concerning the Kings end; who was thereupon cast into prison, but in a short
time breaking loose, occasioned new stirs in Scotland.

This year, many Noble personages dyed; Frances Countess of Sussex, sister to
Sir Henry Sidney, Sir Walter Mildway, Chancellor and Vice-Treasurer of the
Exchequer, William Somerset Earl of Worcester, so numerous in his offspring,
that he could reckon more children of both Sexes, then all the Earls of
England. Also John Lord Sturton, Henry Lord Compton, and at Bruxels the Lord
Paget.

At this time, the Queen who was always frugall, strained one point of
Frugality more then ever she had done before; for upon the information of one
Caermarden, (though Burleigh, Leicester, and Walsingham were offended, that
credit should be given to such a one, and themselv^s neglected) she raised
Thomas Smith the customer from thirteen thous^nd pounds yearly, to two and
forty thousand pounds, and at last to fifty thousand.

It was now the year 1590. and the three and thirtieth of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, in which, the Earl of Cumberland made a Voyage to the Indies, where he
laid level to the ground the Fort of the Isle of ^iala, and brought away eight
and fifty Pieces of great Ordnance.

This year was fatal to many Noble personages; first dyed Ambrose Dudley Earl
of Warwick, (son to John Duke of Northumberland) without issue. After him Sir
Francis Walsingham, Secretary, a man more skillful in the Politics, then in
the Oeconomicks; more cunning in managing matters of the public State, then of
his own private estate, which he left so mean, and dyed so much indebted, that
he was fain to be buried by night, without a^y Funeral pomp, in the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul; leaving behind him one only daughter, famous for her
three husbands, all of them the goodliest men of their time; the first, Sir
Philip Sidney; the second, Robert Earl of Essex; the third, Richard Burgh Earl
of Clanricard, by King Charles made Earl of Saint Albans. Within two Months
after W^lsingham, dyed Sir Thomas Randol^, who had been fourteen times sent in
Embassage to several Princes, yet was never rewarded with any greater
dignities, then the Chamberlainship of the Exchequer, and the Postmastership of
England. Soon after him dyed Sir John Crof^s, who had done good service in
Scotland, in Edward the sixths time; in Queen Mary's time was condemned of high
Treason; in Queen Elisabeths time set at liberty, and made Comptroller of her
house. After him dyed George Talbot, the seventh E. of Shrewsbury of this
house; he was made Earl Marshall of England, and left behind him a memorial
of Wisdom and Integrity. Lastly dyed Thomas Lord Wentworth, the last of the
English that had been Governor of Calice.

In Ireland at this time Hugh Gaveloc (so called, because he had been long kept
in Fetters) the natural son of Shan O Neale, accused Hugh Earl of Tir-Oen, for
holding private consultations with certain Spaniard, who in 88 were by
Shipwreck cast upon the coast of Ireland: Tir-Oen to prevent the Accusation,
took the said Hugh, and when others refused to do it, took a cord and with his
own hands strangled him. Hereupon he was sent for into England, and came, and
upon pardon obtained, solemnly undertook in presence of the Queen at Greenwich,
to maintain the peace with Turlogh Leynigh; Not to usurp the Title of O-Neale,
nor any authority over the Gentry about him; to reduce the Territory of Tir-Oen
to the form of a County, and civil behavior, and many such matters; giving
hostages for his true performance; and indeed for a time he observed all things
very duly. This trouble allayed, another arose; for soon after this, Hugh Roe
Mac-Mahon, a Potentate in the Territory of Monaghan, compelled those under his
jurisdiction to pay him tribute; whereupon the Deputy caused him to be taken,
and tried by a Jury of common Soldiers, and then to be hanged up, dividing his
lands amongst certain English; and some of the Mac-Mahons, reserving a certain
yearly Rent to the Crown of England, by this means thinking to extinguish the
Power and Title of Mac-Mahon. But hereupon, O-Rork, fearing he should be
served in like manner, took up Arms against the Queen, whom Bingham President
of Connacht soon distressed, and drove into Scotland, and at the Queens
request, was by the King delivered up into his hands.

It was now the year 1591. and the Four and thirtieth of Queen Elisabeths
Reign, when she, careful lest Britain should come into the Spaniards hands,
sent Edmund York into France, to advertise the King to take care thereof; and
promising to send him Forces to that end, if he would, some Towns, where they
might be in safety. Hereupon he named Cherburg, Granvile, or Breast, as the
fittest; and it was agreed, that Three thousand English should be sent into
Brittainy and Picardy; but in the mean time, Henry Palmer was sent to Sea, with
certain Ships, who seized upon Thirteen Spanish Ships, as they were returning
from Nova Francia. And now Roger Williams, with a Company of Six hundred
Soldiers, passes over to Diepe in Normandy; and Sir John Norris with the rest
of the Forces, hasted into Britain soon after. Roger Williams, with his own Six
hundred, and the help of Charter Governor of Diepe, put to rout the
Confederates, that had blocked up the passages; whose valor, the French King
in his Letters to the Queen, highly extolled. Whereupon growing more
courageous, and not minding his charge, which was to stay at Diepe, he
accompanied the King to the very Suburbs of Paris, where in honor of his
Nation, he sent a Challenge to the Spaniards, to encounter Two hundred Pikemen
of the English, and a hundred Musketeers, with as many Spaniards in open Field.

After this, the King of France acquainted the Queen, that he had a purpose to
set upon Roan, or New Haven, before the Prince of Parma should come into
France, and thereupon requested her, to send Four thousand English into
Normandy, which upon certain conditions she willingly did, and sent them under
the Command of Robert Earl of E^sex, accompanied with Sir Thomas Leighton, and
Sir William Killegrew, as his Counselors. When the Earl came into France, he
found that the King was at Noyon, and in Normandy no preparation for the War at
all, which seemed strange, and much troubled him; but by and by Sir Roger
Williams comes to him from the King, requesting him to come to Noyon, that they
might confer concerning a course of War. Thither the Earl made a tedious
journey, and being come thither; the King told him, he was now of necessity to
go himself into Champaigne; but promises to send Marshall Biron, and the Duke
of Montpensier forthwith to him, to lay siege to Roan. Hereupon the Earl
returned to his Tents, expecting their coming, but neither of them ^^me, which
troubled the Earl more then before; so as being weary now (...) doing nothing,
he made himself one approach to Roan, where hi^ Brother W^lt^^ Devereux was
unfortunately slain. Indeed the affairs of the ^ing of Fr^nce were at this time
upon so uncertain terms, that before he could ^^t (...) h^ had resolved,
something still intervened, that diverted him; for which, by his Letters he
excused himself to the Queen of England, and by the mediation of the Ea^l, and
Mornay Lord du Plessie, whom to that end he sent into England, obtained new
supplies, and then besieged Roan.

At this time was memorable the prodigious carriage of one Hacket, born at
Oundale in Northamptonshire, a mean fellow of no learning, whose first prank
was this; That when, in show of Reconciliation to one with whom he had been at
variance, he embraced him, he bit off his Nose, and the man desiring to have
his Nose again, that it might be sowed on, while the wound was green, he most
villanously eat it up, and swallowed it down before his face. After this, all
on a ^udden, he took upon him a show of wonderful holiness, did nothing but
hear Sermons, and getting Scriptures by heart, ^^d counterfeting Revelations
from God, and an extraordinary calling, and ^rew to be so magnified by certain
zealous Ministers, and specially of one ^^^ard Coppinger, (a Gentleman of a
good house) and one Arthington, a great admirer of the Geneva Discipline; that
they accounted him as sent from Heaven, and a greater Prophet then Moses or
John Baptist, and finally, that he was Christ himself, come with his fan in
his hand, to judge the world. And this they proclaimed in Cheapside; giving out
that Hacket participated of Christ's glorified body, by his especial Spirit,
and was now come to propagate the Gospel over Europe, and to settle a true
Discipline in the Church of England; and that they themselves were two
Prophets, the one of Mercy, and the other of Judgment; with many other such
incredible blasphemies; whereupon Hacket was apprehended and arraigned; and at
last, hanged, drawn and quartered, continuing all the time, and at his death,
his blasphemous Assertions. Coppinger a while after starved himself to death in
prison, Arthington repented, and made his Recantation in a public writing.

Besides these, other also at this time opposed the established Government of
the Church of England, crying down the calling of Bishops, with whom sided some
Common-Lawyers also, affirming, that the Queen could not depute, nor these men
exercise any such Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and that the Oath Ex Officio
was unchristian. But the Queen conceiving, that through the sides of the
Prelates, she her self was shot at, suppressed them what she could, and
maintained the Government formerly established.

About this time, the Lord Thomas Howard, with six of the Queens ships, having
waited at the Azores six whole Months, for the coming of the Spanish Fleet
from America, was at last set upon by Alphonso Bassano, with three and fifty
ships, sent out for the Convoy of the American Fleet, where Richard Granvile
Vice Admiral, being in the Revenge, and separated from his company, was so
hemmed in by the Spanish ships, and so battered with great shot; that most of
his men being slain, his Mainmast cut off, himself sore wounded in the head,
he commanded to sink the ship, that it might not come into the Spaniards hands;
but this being countermanded by most voices, it was agreed, to yield it to the
Spaniards, upon condition that the men should be set at liberty. Granvile
himself was carried into the Spanish Admiral, where within two days he dyed,
not without praise of his very enemies: Thus the great ship called the Revenge,
was yielded, but had so many leaks in the Ke^l, that soon after it was cast
away in a storm; and the loss of this one ship the English soon made good upon
the Spaniards, by taking many of theirs.

About this time also, Cavendish, who in the year 1578. had sailed round about
the world, now with five ships bent his course toward the Magellan Straits, but
by reason of foul weather, was not able to pass them, being driven to the
coast of Brasile, was there cast away.

And now, enmity increasing daily between Spain and England, two Proclamations
were set forth; one, prohibiting upon pain of High Treason, to carry Victuals
or Munition into any of the King of Spains dominions: Another, forbidding all
persons to entertain any in their houses, till inquiry made, what they were,
lest they might entertain Popish Priests, who at this time came swarming into
England, by reason the King of Spain had lately founded a Seminary at
Valledolid for the English.

At this time dyed Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord Chancelour, whom of a mean
Gentleman's house, the Queens favor had raised to this height of Dignity; a
goodly personage of body, of Noble, but no aspiring spirits; the only of all
the Queens special Favorites, that dyed a Batchelour; and therefore left
William Newport his sisters son his heir, who erected for him, in Paul's Church,
a sumptuous Monument. After his death, the keeping of the great Seal was for
certain Months committed to the Lord Burleigh Treasurer, Hunsdon, Cobham and
Buckhurst: Afterward, Puckering the Queens Sergeant at Law was elected, not
Chancelour, but Keeper of the great Seal.

At this time also, Brian O-Rork, the Irish Potentate, was arraigned at
Westminster; his Indictments were, For raising Rebellion against the Queen, for
dragging her Picture at a horse tail, for giving the Spaniards entertainment;
which things being told him by an Interpreter, (for he understood no English)
he said, He would not be tried, unless the Queen her self in person sat to
judge him. Yet being told, that it was the Law; he only said, If it must be
so, let it be so; and so condemned, was executed at Tyburn as a Traitor,
whereof he seemed to make as little reckoning, as if it had but been in jest.
And now this year, the Queen made the College of Dublin in Ireland, an
University, which was formerly the Monastery of All Saints, endowing it with
power to confer Scholasticall Dignities.

At this time, Sir John P^rot, who had been Deputy of Ireland, and done good
service there, was yet by the malice of Adversaries, of whom Hatton was one,
called in question, before the Baron Hunsdon, the Lord Buckhurst, Sir Robert
Cecill, (lately made a Counselor) Sir John Fortescue, Sir John Wolley, and
some of the Judges: His Accusations were; first, that he had spoken opprobrious
words against the Queen, saying, She was illegitimate and cowardly; secondly,
that he had fostered notorious Traitors, and Popish Priests; thirdly, that
he held correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and the Queens enemies. To
the first of which he confessed, that in his passion he had spoken of the Queen
unadvisedly, for which he was infinitely grieved; the rest he denied: And all
men knew, he was never Popishly affected. His Accusers were, one Philip
Williams, sometime his Secretary; Denis O-Roghan an Irish married Priest, whose
life he had saved; and one Walton, a fellow of no worth or Reputation. Yet the
crimes being urged against him, by Popham and other Lawyers, till eleven a
clock at night; he was at last condemned of high Treason, but Sentence wa^ not
pronounced till twenty days after; and yet was not put to death, but dyed a
natural death in the Tower; he was a man of a goodly personage, stout and
chollerick, and one whom (many thought) the Queen had the more reason to
respect, for her father King Henry the Eighths sake.

The Earl of Ess^x, after a tedious Winters siege in Normandy, challenged
Monsieur Villerse Governor of Roan to a single combat, who refusing to meet
him; he then returned into England, being called home by the Queen, whose
favor, by his long absence, might else have suffered prejudice.

And now the King of France, hearing that the Prince of Parma was coming i^to
France, once again was fain to fly to the Queen for succor, to whom, upon
certain conditions, she granted an Army of four thousand men, and some great
Ordnance, with which Sir John Norris was sent into France; whom yet the French
King employed not, as was agreed, to the great displeasure of the Queen. But as
for the Prince of Parma's coming into France, he was prevented by death, when
he had governed the Netherlands under the Spaniard fourteen years; a Prince of
many excellent parts, and whom Queen Elisabeth never mentioned but with honor.

And now Queen Elizabeth considering that the King of Spaines chief strength
was in his Gold of America, sends forth Sir Walter Ralegh with a Fleet of
fifteen Ships to meet with the Spanish Fleet; who passing by a Promontory of
Spain, received certain intelligence, that the Spa^ish Fleet was not to come
forth that year: Whereupon, dividing his Navy into two parts; whereof, the one
he committed to Sir John Bur^^^ghs, the other to Sir Martin Forbysher; he
waited other opportunities, when soon after, a mighty Caraque came in view,
called The Mother of God, which from the Beak to the Stern, was a hundred
threescore and five foot long, built with seven Decks, and carrying six hundred
men, besides rich Merchandise. This great Vessel they took, and in it, to the
^^lue of a hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, over and above what the
Commanders and Seamen pilfered.

This year, the Queen going in Progress, passed through Oxford, where she
was entertained by the Scholars with Orations, Stage-Pl^yes, and Disputations;
and by the Lord Buckhurst Chancellor of the University, with a sumptuous Feast.
At her departure, She made a Latin Oration, wherein she vowed a vow, and gave
them counsel; Her vow was, That as she desired nothing so much, as the
prosperity and flourishing estate of her Kingdom, so she as much wished to see
the Universities and Schools of learning to flourish likewise. Her Counsel
was, That they would serve God above all, not following the curiosity of some
wits, but the Laws of God, and the Kingdom, That they would not prevent the
Laws, but follow them, nor dispute whether better Laws might be made, but
observe those which were already Enacted.

This year, dyed Anthony Brown Viscount Montacute, whom Queen Mary honored
with this Title; because his Grandmother was Daughter, and one of the Heirs of
John Nevill Marquess Montacute; who, though he were a great Roman Catholic,
yet the Queen finding him faithful always, loved him, and in his sickness
went to visit him. There dyed at this time also, Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton,
Knight of the Garter, and long time Governor of the Western Border toward
Scotland.

At this time Henry Barrow, and his Sectaries, condemning the Church of England
to be no Christian Church, and derogating from the Queens Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical; he the said Barrow, as Ringleader of the rest, was put to
death, in terror to all such disturbers of the peace of the Church.

About this time, by reason of the Queens correspondence with the Turk, to the
end, her Subjects might have free Trading in his Territories; It was
maliciously given out by some, that she had excited the Turk to a War against
the Christians; which caused the Queen to write to the Emperor, showing him
the falsenesse of this report, wherein she gave him full sa^^sfaction.

And now a constant report came into England, That the King of France had
already embraced, or was ready to embrace the Romish Religion, which so much
troubled the Queen, that she presently sent Thomas Wilkes into France; with
reasons (if it were not too late) to divert him from it. But before Wilkes
came, the King indeed had openly professed the Romish Religion, at the Church
of Saint Denis in Paris; of which his Conversion, he declared the causes to
Wilkes at large, showing, the necessity of it, unless he would suffer himself
to be utterly thrust out of the Kingdom. And the French AMBASSADOR signifying
as much to the Queen, in great perplexity, She writ to him to this effect.

Alas, what grief? what anxiety of mind has befallen me, since I heard this
news? was it possible that worldly respects should make you lay aside Gods
fear? ^^uld you think, That He, who had hitherto upheld and kept you, would
now at the last, leave you? It is a dangerous thing to do evil, that g^od may
come thereof. But I hope your mind may alter; In the mean while, I will pray
for you, and beg of God, That the hands of Esau, may not hinder the blessing of
Jacob.

To this the KING Answered, That though he had done this in his own Person out
of necessity; yet, He would never be wanting to those of the Reformed Religion,
but would take them into his special care and Protection.

And now was Richard Hasket, condemned and executed for Treason, being sent
from the English Fugitives beyond Sea, to persuade Ferdinand Earl of Derby,
Son to Henry newly deceased, to assume the Title of the Kingdom; by right of
Descent from Mary, Daughter to Henry the Seventh; and threatening him, that
unless he undertook this enterprise, and withal, concealed him the Abettor,
he should shortly dye in most wretched manner. But the Earl fearing a trap was
laid for him, revealed the matter; yet the fellows threating proved not
altogether vain, for the Earl within four Months, dyed a most horrible
death. This year, Death had his tribute paid him from the Nobility; for there
dyed Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, and three renowned Barons, Arthur Gray of
Wilton, Henry Lord Cromwell, and Henry Lord Wentworth; besides Sir Christopher
Carlisle, whose Warlike Prowess at Sea and land, deserves to be remembered.

In IRELAND, at this time, diverse great men in Connaght Rebelled; and Tu^logh
Leynigh being dead, Tir-Oen assumed to himself, the title of O-Neale, (which
in IRELAND is more esteemed, than to be called EMPEROVR) But upon a sudden,
dissembling his disconte^t, he submitted himself to the DEPVTY, and promised
all obedience.

I^ was now the year 1594, and the seven and thirtieth of Queen ELIZABETH^
Reign; when the good correspondence between the King of Scots and Queen
ELIZABETH, gave the Papists small hope that ever he would prove an Instrument
to restore the Catholic Religion. Whereupon, they began to bethink themselves
of some English Papist, that might succeed the Queen; but finding none of
their own Sect, a fit person, they fixed their thoughts upon the Earl of
Essex, who always seemed a very moderate man; and him they devised to have
some right to the Crown, by Descent from Thomas of Woodstocke, King EDWARD
the Thirds Son. But the English Fugitives, were for the Infanta of Spain,
and desiring to set the King of Scots and the Earl of Essex at ods; they set
forth a Book, which they Dedicated to Essex, under the name of Doleman, but was
written indeed by Parsons ( Dolemans bitter Adversary) Cardinal Allen, and
Francis Englefield. The scope of which Book was, to exclude from Succession,
all persons whatsoever, and how near soever Allied to the Crown, unless they
were Roman Catholics; Contending further, for the right of Isabella, Infanta
of Spain, as being descended from Constance, Daughter of WILLIAM the
Conqueror; from Eleanor eldest Daughter to HENRY the Second, Married to
Alphonso the ninth King of Castile; from Beatrix, Daughter to King HENRY the
Third, Titles obsolete, and which exceed the bounds of Heraldry to discuss.
This year, the nineteenth of February, was Henry Prince of Scotland born, to
whom the Queen was Godmother, and sent Robert Earl of Sussex for her Deputy.

But now greater matters were in hand, Plots were laid against the Queens
life; some Spaniards thinking to make her away by Poison, and not daring to
trust any Englishman in such a business; they treat to that purpose, with
Rodericke Lopes a JEV^, and Physician to the Queen, wi^h Stephen Ferreir^,
Emmanuel Loyfie, and other Portugalls; for diverse of that Nation came into
England at this time, in relation to Don Anthonio^ who being discovered by
letters of theirs, that were intercepted, were Arraigned at Guildhall, and by
their own confessions convinced, to have conspi^ed against the life of the
Queen, they were all condemned, and Exe^^^ed at Tiburne; LOPES professing that
he loved the Queen, as well as Jesus Christ, which was cause of laughter to
them that knew him to be a JEVV. The next day after them, was condemned
Patrick C^llen^ an Irish Fencer, sent hither by the English Fugitives, to kill
the Queen, who was straightway executed, though he were at that very time sick
and ready to dye.

About this time, Sir John Norris having been in a hot conflict at sea against
the Spaniard, where Sir Martin Forbysher received his deaths wound, was now
called home, with a purpose to send him into Ireland. In which mean while,
Richard Hawkins, Son of Sir John Hawkins the famous sea Captain, had been set
forth a year since, with three of the Queens ships, and two hundred men in
them; whereof, one of them at the Isle o^ St. Anne, was by chance fired,
another of them separated by tempest, returned into England; himself in the
third, passed the Straights of Magellan, being the sixth man in the Spanish
account, that had ever done it; and being now come into the wide Southern sea,
he took five ships laden with Merchandise; one whereof he took away, the rest
he suffered to redeem themselves for two thousand Ducats: But at last, being
set upon by Bertrandus a Castro, who was sent out by the Viceroy of those
parts, with eight ships against him; after three days battery, he yielded, and
though upon composition, yet was nevertheless sent into Spain, and there for
diverse years kept prisoner.

But James Lancaster in another part of America, had better success; for being
set forth by some London Merchants (whose goods the Spaniards had seized) with
three Ships and a long Boat, He took nine and thirty Spanish Ships, and at
Fernanbucke in Brasile, where the wealth of an East-Indian Caraque was lately
unloden; he desperately venturing upon the Shore, Loaded Fifteen Ships with
the wealth of the Indian Caraque; Sugar, Reed, Redwood called Brasill, and
other Merchandise, and then safely and victoriously returned home.

At ROME, about this time dyed Cardinal ALLEN, borne in Lancashire of an
honest Family, brought up in Oxford, in Oriall College. In Queen Mary's days
he was Proctor of the University, and after Canon of the Cathedral Church at
YORK. Upon the change of Religion in ENGLAND, he left the Kingdom, and was
Divinity Professor at Doway in Flanders, and made Canon of the Church at
Cambray. He procured a Seminary to be set up in Doway, for the English, another
at Rheims, and a third at Rome; and through zeal of the Romish Religion, forgot
whose subject he was born.

At home, at this time, dyed John Peers Archbishop of York, in whose place,
succeeded Matthew Hutton, translated from the Sea of Durham. There dyed also
Ferdinand Stanley Earl of Derby, being in the flower of his age, miserably
tormented, and vomiting ^tuffe of a dark rusty color, being thought to have
been poisoned or bewitched. There was found in his chamber a little image of
wax, with hairs of the color of his hairs, thrust into the belly; which some
thought was done of purpose, that men should not suspect him to be poisoned;
his vomit so stained the silver Andirons, that it could never be gotten out,
and his body though put in searcloathes and wrapped in lead, did so ^tinck and
putrify, that for a long time none could endure to come near where he was
buried. The Master of his Horse was much suspected, who the same day the Earl
took his bed, took one of his best Horses, and fled away. About this time also
dyed Gregory Fines Lord Dacres, a man somewhat crazed, the Son of Thomas Lord
Dacres, hanged in the Reign of King Henry the Eight.

And now Sir William Fitz Williams Lord Deputy of Ireland was called home, and
William Russell youngest Son of Francis Earl of Bedford, was sent in his room;
to whom presently came the Earl of Tir-Oen, and in humble manner craved pardon
of his fault, that he had not presented himself at the call of the late Lord
Deputy. Bagnall Marshall of the Irish Forces, exhibited many Articles against
him, but he so pleaded for himself with promise of loyalty hereafter, that he
was dismissed. But see the subdolousnesse of this man, for he would never after
be gotten to come again, though the Deputy sent for him with many kind
messages.

It was now the year 1595, and the eight and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign; when Ed^ond York, and Richard Williams who were formerly apprehended,
came to their trial, and were executed at Tiburn, for being bribed to kill the
Queen.

At this time a constant rumor was blown abroad from all parts of Europe, that
the Spaniards were coming again against England, with a far greater Fleet
than that in Eighty Eight, and that it was already under sail; whereupon,
Soldiers were levied, and placed on the Seacoast. Two Navies were made ready,
one to expect them at home in the Channel; the other, to go for America, under
Hawkins and Drake; but when all came to all, it was but certain Spaniards, who
loosed from the seacoast of France, with four Galleys, which betimes in the
morning landing in Cornwall, fired a Church standing alone in the fields, and
three Villages of Fishermen, Neulyne, Moushole, and Pensaus, and then presently
retired, not taking or killing any one person; And these were the first and
last Spaniards, that in hostile manner ^ver set foot upon English ground.

And now mischiefs growing daily in France, a great number persuaded the King,
to conclude a Peace with Spain, and the Queen her self began to mistrust him;
especially, having lately received intelligence out of the Popes Conclave; that
he was received into the bosom of the Church of Rome, with the Popes
Benediction, and that upon conditions prejudicial to the Protestants.

And therefore at this time, were diverse undertakings of the English against
Spain; Sir Walter Rawleigh Captain of the Guard, having defloured a Maid of
Honor (whom afterward he married) had lost the Queens favor, and was held in
Prison for certain months; but afterward being set at liberty, though banished
the Court. He undertook a Voyage to Guyana, setting sail from Plimmouth in
February, he arrived at Trinidada, where he took St. Joseph's Town, but found
not a jot of money there: From hence, with Boats, and a hundred soldiers, he
entered the vast River Orenoque, ranging up in Guyana four hundred miles, but
getting little, but his labor for his travel. In like manner, Amyas Preston
and Summers, Pillaged sundry Towns of the King of Spains in the Western parts;
and three ships of the Earl of Cumberland, set upon a huge Caraque, which by
casualty was fired when they were in fight, and these were the enterprises of
private persons: but the Queen being informed, that great store of wealth for
the King of Spains use, was conveyed to Port Rico, in St. John's Island; sent
thither Hawkins, Dr^k^, and Baskervile with land Forces, furnishing them with
six ships out of her own Navy, and twenty other men of War. They set sail from
Plimmo^th the last of August, and seven and twenty days after, came upon the
Coast of the great Canarie, which being strongly Fortified, they forbore to
assault. A month after, they came to the Isle of St. Dominicke, where five
Spanish ships being sent forth to watch the English, lighted upon one of the
small English ships which was strayed from the Company, and ^^^ting the Master
and Mariners upon the Rack, understood by them, That the English Navy was bent
to Port Rico; whereupon they make all possible speed to give notice thereof,
that being forewarned, they might accordingly be armed. And thereupon, as soon
as the English had cast Anchors (...) the Road at Port Rico, the Spaniards
thundered against them from the shore; si^ Nicholas Clifford, and Brute Brown
were wounded as they sat at ^upper, and two days after died. Hawkins also,
and Drake, partly of dis^^se, and partly of grief for their ill success, died
soon after. At the end of eight months, the Fleet came home, having done the
enemy little hurt, fired only some few Towns and ships, but received infinite
damage themselves; lost two such Seamen, as the Kingdom, I may say, all Europe
had ^ot their like left. For the Spaniards having of late years received great
^^rms by the French and English, had now provided for themselves with
Fortifications which were not easy to be won.

At this time the Queen made known to the States in the Low Countries, the
great charges she had been at in relieving them ten years together; for which
she requiteth some considerable recompense: The States again allege the great
charges they were at in Eighty Eight, in repelling the Spaniards in her cause;
yet (not to fall out about the matter) they were content to allow some
reasonable retribution; but yet for the present, nothing was concluded.
Likewise at this time, the Hanse Towns in Germany make complaint to the
Emperor, and the Princes of the Empire, That the Immunities from customs
anciently granted them by the Kings of England, began to be Antiquated, and
that a Monopoly of English Merchants was set up in Germany; to which, the Queen
by Sir Christopher Perkins, first showing the cause of the first Grant, and
then the Reason of Queen Mary's prohibiting it afterward, makes them so
satisfactory an answer, that those very Hanse-Towns which complained, brought
into England at this time, such store of Corn, that it prevented a mutiny,
which thorough dearth of Corn, was like to have happened in London.

This year was famous for the death of many great Personages, Philip Earl of
Arundel, condemned in the year 1589. The Queen had all this while spared, but
now death would spare him no longer, having since that time been wholly given
to contemplation, and macerated himself in a strict course of Religion, leaving
one only son, Thomas, by his wife Anne Dacres of Gillis^and. He had two
brothers, Thomas Lord Howard, whom Queen Elizabeth made Baron of Walden, and
King James afterward Earl of Suffolk; and William Lord Howard of the North, who
yet lives; and one sister, the Lady Margaret, married to Robert Sackvile,
afterward Earl of D^rset, and father of Edward Earl of Dorset now living; a
Lady so mild, so virtuous, and so devout in her Religion, that if her brother
macerated himself being in prison, she certainly did no less, being at
liberty; whom I the rather mention, because I had the happiness to know her
living, and the unhappiness to be a Mourner at her Funeral. There died this
year also, William Lord Vaulx, a zealous Papist, and Sir Thomas Hineage,
Vice-Chamberlain, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, whose only
daughter married to Sir Moyle Finch of Kent, was no small advancer of that
House. There died also William Whitaker, Master of S. John's College in
Cambridge, and Divinity Professor: As likewise Sir Roger Williams, and Sir
Thomas Morgan; so as this year was honored with the deaths of two great Lords,
one exquisite Courtier, one great Scholar, and two famous Soldiers.

In Ireland at this time, Russell the Deputy doubting a storm of War from
Tir-Oen, sent into England, requiring to have some experienced soldier sent to
him with Forces, who though he desired Baskervyle to be the man, yet Sir John
Norris was sent, with thirteen hundred old soldiers, besides a further supply;
whom Tir-Oen hearing to be coming, set presently upon the Fort of Blackwater,
and in the absence of Edward Cornwall the Governor, took it. But now being
doubtful of his case, in a subdolous manner (as he was a double dealing man)
he both offers his help to the Earl of Kildare, against the Deputies
servants; and at the same time, makes promise to the Earl of Ormond, and Sir
Henry Wallope, of loyalty and obedience; but notwithstanding he was forthwith
proclaimed Traitor, under the name of H^gh O Neal, bastard son to Con O Neal.
There was at this time with the Rebels in Ulster, a thousand Horse, and 6280
Foot: and in Connaght, two thousand three hundred, all at Tir Oens command; and
the Forces of the English under Norris, not much fewer, with whom the Deputy
himself joined, and marched together to Armagh; which so terrified the Rebels,
that Tir Oen forsaking the Fort of Blackwater, began to hide himself. Whereupon
the Deputy returned, leaving Norris to follow the War, with the Title of
General of the Army. But this satisfied not Norris, and therefore out of
emulation betwixt himself and the Deputy, he performed nothing worth the
speaking of, and seemed to favor Tir Oen, as much as the Deputy hated him;
insomuch, as he had private conference with him (a thing not lawful with
proclaimed Traitors) and upon his submission, and Hostages given, a Truce was
granted both to him and Odonell, till the first of Ian^ary. When the Truce was
expired, Tir Oen exhibited certain Petitions, protesting, if they were granted,
he would then perform all duties of a loyal subject. In consulting about which
Petitions, another Truce was concluded, till the first of April: during which
Truce, Tir Oen dealt secretly with the King of Spain for Aid to be sent him,
making nevertheless a fair show of willingness to obedience, so far, that by
the procurement of Norris and Fenton, a pardon was granted him; the which he
pretended to receive more joyfully, than the Instrument whicd conferred the
Earldome upon him; yet all this was but dissimulation, to win the time for his
own ends.

In the midst of these Irish Affairs, Albertus Archduke of Austria, and
Cardinal, whom the King of Spain had newly set over the Netherlands, mustered
together the Spanish Forces, upon pretense of raising the Siege of La Fere in
Picardie; but upon a sudden turns aside, and besieges Calice; and taking
Newnham Fort, the very first day became Master of the Haven. The Queen informed
hereof, forthwith, upon the very Sunday, in time of Divine Service, commands
to leuy soldiers, whom she commits to the Earl of Essex; but before they
could be shipped, certain News came, That the Town and Fort were taken by the
Spaniard: Whereupon, the Queens Army was dismissed, and only some money lent
to the French King.

But a few days after, a far greater, and more select Army is raised in
England, wherein many of Noble Houses served as Voluntaries: For the Queen, to
divert the King of Spain from invading her Borders, thought it the best way to
invade his: Whereupon a Navy of a hundred and fifty Ships was made ready; where
were soldiers under pay, 6360; Voluntaries of the Nobility and Gentry, 1000;
Mariners, 6772, besides the Dutchmen, who brought two and twenty ships.
Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Howard Lord Admiral of England, were made
Generals with equal Authority; but the Admiral to hold Prerogative at Sea,
Essex at Land. To these, for a Council of War, were joined, the Lord Thomas
Howard, Walter Raleigh, Francis Vere, George Carew, and Conyers Clifford. The
whole Fleet was divided into four Squadrons; the Admiral commanded the first,
Essex the second, the Lord Thomas Howard the third, and Raleigh the fourth. The
Officers of the Army were Francis Vere, Sergeant Major General, or Marshall;
John Winkfield, Quartermaster General; George Carew, Master of the Ordnance;
Conyers Clifford Sergeant Major. Colonells were, Robe^t Earl of Sussex, sir
Christopher Blunt, sir Thomas Gerrard, sir Richard Winkefield; William
Winkefild was Commander of the Vo^untaries, and Anthony Ashley, Secretary to
the Council of War, was to Register their Acts and Consultations. The
Commission being drawn, the Queen gave them private Instructions, and withal,
a Prayer of her own making, to be d^ily used in every Ship.

This F^eet set forth from Plymouth at the beginning of June. Nigh un^o Cabo S.
Vincent they lighted upon an Irish Barque, which told them, That at Cales they
were secure, and that in the Haven there were at Anchor Galleys, ships of War^
and a great many Merchants Vessels. The twentieth of June, they cast Anchor on
the West side of the Island; within two days they were agreed to set upon the
Spanish ships, whereat the Earl of Essex cast up his Cap for joy. This
business was alot^ed to the lesser ships, because the Road was too shallow for
the great. The Gallyes quickly fled, and creeping along the shore, shifted
away, but the Spanish ships that lay at Anchor at Puntall, turned their broad
sides; so as the English Fight with them, lasted from break of day till noon;
at which time, the Spaniards having their Gallons miserably tor^, and many of
their men slain, resolved to fire the the ships, or run them ashore. The
Spanish Admiral, being fifteen hundred Tun of Burden, was fired by a Moor,
and two other ships which lay next her took the fire, and were lost likewise.
When this Sea Fight was ended, Essex landed eight hundred soldiers at Puntall,
a league from the Town of Cales, when half a mile from the Town, the Spanish
Horse and Foot showed themselves, and presently gave back again; but
straightway comes forth a greater number: Then Essex commanded his Forces to
make a fair Retreat; and having enticed forth their enemies, they turned upon
them with such violence, that they forced them back into the Town. Then the
Earl got up to a Bulwark newly raised, near the Gate, where he spyed a passage
into the Town^ but so high from ground, that they must leap a Spears length to
get down. Yet Evans the Earl of Sussex his Lieutenant, Arthur Savage, and
other, leaped down; and the mean while Sir Francis Vere broke the Gate, and
rushed in, and the rest with him. In the Market place John Winkfield was shot
in the head, and with stones from the tops of the houses diverse were wounded;
amongst whom, Samuel Bagnall received eight wounds, and Arthur Savage was
bloody all over; which two were Knighted in the place. The next day the Castle
was yielded, upon condition, That the Inhabitants might depart with the clothes
on their backs, the rest to be left for spoil. For five hundred and fourscore
thousand Ducats the Castle was to be redeemed; and for the payment, forty of
the chief Citizens to be sent Hostages into England. Now Raleigh was commanded
to fire the Merchants Ships lying at Port Real, when they promised two
Millions of Ducats to redeem them: but this the Admiral would not hear of,
saying, He was sent to destroy Ships, not to dismiss them upon Composition. A
world of Munition was found in the City, and great store of money privately
carried away, every one shifting for himself. It was thought by the wiser sort,
That the Spaniard could not be damnified less by this Expedition, than twenty
Millions of Ducats. None of note was slain amongst the English, but only
Winkfield, who also slew a Spanish Captain; and now at last, threescore
Military men were honored with Knighthood. After this, having spoiled the
whole Island^ and demolished the Forts^ they returned into England, much
against the will of Essex, who would fain have bin attempting some other
enterprise.

The Queen received them home with much affability, giving many thanks to those
of principal note, but extolling the Earl of Essex and the Admiral, above the
rest. And now bethinking her self of a fit man to be Governor of the Bryll,
which was given by the States as a Caution Town for money due, she made choice
of Sir Francis Vere, although Essex commended other to her for the place: but
another thing he took with great indignation, That in his absence she had made
Sir Robert Cecill Secretary, whereas he had formerly with great instance
commended Sir Thomas Bodley to her^

And now the King of Spain, to recover his honor lost at Cales, sets forth
a Navy for England and Ireland, with a great number of Irish Fugitives^ but
being at Sea, most of his ships were either run upon Rocks, or cast away in
storms; so as this Expedition came to nothing.

But the Queen at this time, for her better security, entered a League of
Defense and Offense with the French King, against the Spaniard, upon certain
Conditions; which League, she confirmed by Oath, in the Chapel at Greenwich,
the nine and twentieth of August, laying her hand upon the hand of Henry de la
Tour, Duke of Bulloign, and Marshall of France; the Bishop of Chichester
holding forth the Evangelists, and a great company of the Nobility standing
round about. In September following, Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, was
sent on Embassage into France, to take the French Kings Oath, and to present
Sir Anthony Mildmay for the Queens Ambassador in Ordinary, in the room of Sir
Henry Unton lately there deceased, and to invest the King with the Order of the
Garter. Soon after, Baskervile wafted into Picardy with two thousand soldiers;
for no more were by agreement to be sent this year.

It was now the year, 1596, and the nine and thirtieth of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when Thomas Arundel of Warder returned into England, from the Wars in
Hungary against the Turk; whom, for his good service done there^ the Emperor
by his Letters Patents, had created Earl of the sacred Empire, and all and
singular his Heirs and their Posterity, Males or Females, lawfully descended
from him, to be Earls and Countesses of the holy Empire for ever. Those who are
graced with this Title, have a Place and Voice in the Imperial Diets, May
purchase Lands in the Emperors Dominions, May take up voluntary soldiers, And
are not bound to answer any matter before any Judge, but only in the Chamber
of the Empire. At his return, a great Question came in agitation, Whether
Titles of Honor given to the Queens subjects without her privity, ought to be
accepted by them, or admitted by her. For this new Earl stuck in the stomachs
of the English Barons, who inwardly grudged to give him place. The matter was
long disputed on both sides, but what issue it had, or whether he were
permitted this Honor here at home, I find not: Certain it is, That Sir
Nicholas Clifford, and Sir Anthony Shirley, whom the French King two years
since received into the Order of S. Michael, were laid in prison at their
coming home, and charged to resign their Robes of the Order.

This year many great persons died; John Puckering, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, whom Thomas Egerton succeeded; Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London; who
for marrying the Lady Baker (as goodly a Lady as he was a Prelate) incurred the
Queens displeasure; and to cure his cares, fell immoderately to drinking of
Tobacco, and so expired. Henry Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain of her
Majesty's House, and her Cousin German. Sir Francis Knolls, who married
Hunsdons sister, in Queen Mary's days an Exile in Germany for the Gospel, by
Queen Elizabeth made first Vice-Chamberlain, then Captain of the Guard,
afterward Treasurer of the Household, and Knight of the Garter. Henry Hastings
Earl of Hu^tington, and President of the Counsel in the North, who spent his
estate upon Puritan Ministers: Francis Lord Hastings, Nephew to him by his
brother George, who succeeded him in the Earldom, and Margaret Clifford
Countess of Derbie, (who descended of the blood Royal, from Charles Brandon)
consulted with sorcerers and cunning men, and thereupon a little before her
end, was in a manner excluded from the Queens favor.

The Queen at this time was told, that the King of Spain was preparing a new
Fleet against Ireland; whereupon to encounter him, she also prepared a Navy of
a hundred and twenty Ships, seventeene of the Queens, Three and forty lesser
Ships of War, the rest for the carriage of provision: They were parted into
three Squadrons: Essex Commanded the first, who was also chief Commander in
the expedition; The Lord Thomas Howard the second, and Raliegh the third. In
this Fleet were sundry of the Nobility and Gentry, Charles Blunt, Lord Mountjoy,
Vere, Carew, Sir Christopher Blunt, the Earls of Rutland and Southampton; the
Lords, Gray, Crumwell, Rich, and many other. The ninth of July they weighed
Anchour from Plimmouth and were to direct their course to Ferall and the
Groyne, to sieze upon the Spanish Fleet in the Harbor, and toward the Isles
called Azores, to intercept the Indi^n Fleet at their return into Spain; but
this expedition was crossed and overthrown by Tempests, for they had not
sailed forty Leagues from Plimmouth, when they were shaken with such a terrible
Tempest for four days together, that the Mariners themselves were at their
wits end, and the Fleet had much a do to recover Plimmo^th; the Navy being
mended, then hoise up sail the second time, but the wind ^ell presently
again so cross, that for a whole Months time they could not get out of the
Haven, returning to Plimmouth the seventeenth of August they got out of the
Haven; and now the third time, with a side wind hoyse up sail, but before they
came in view of Spain, they were dispersed by another horrible Tempest^
wherein of the two great Ships which were taken at Calis, one was dashed in
pieces, the other wandered no man knew whither. At the Island Flores the Fleet
met again, where Rawleigh being distressed for water, went on shore without
leave; and ere he had watered, had charge to follow Essex to Fay^ll: but not
finding him there, he observed the Port, and calling a Council, the
Commanders wished him to set upon the place, and not let slip so fair a
booty. Upon this, Rawleigh with some of the prime Voluntaries, got to shore,
and won the Town, but found no booty in it. The next day Essex came thither,
whom Merrick informs what Rawleigh had done, affirming spitefully, that he
had done it only to prevent his Lordshippe in the honor of the exploite:
whereupon, some persuaded the Earl to call a Council of War and than
d^^place him, others again? to take of his Head for going to Land, without the
chief Commanders leave; saying, he was never like for to have such another
opportunity to be rid of his Adversary; upon this, Sidney, Brett, Berry, and
other of Rawleighs company were displaced, and laid by the heels; Rawleigh
himself was sent for, and entertained with a grimme look by Essex and all his
Party; Essex rebukes him angerly, for landing his Forces, which none upon
pain of death might do, without the Generals command; Rawleigh made answer,
that the Captains indeed, Ship-masters and the rest were within the compass
of that Law; but not the Three prime Commanders, of whom himself was One: That
he had a long time waited his coming, and longer would have waited, but that
the Islanders provoked him to fight. And now the L. Thomas Howard mediated,
that no severity might be used against Rawleigh, and persuaded him to
acknowledge his fault; which being done, all were friends, and the displaced
Captains were restored to their places, for the Earl was of a placable
disposition; easily apt to take offense, and as easily ready to remit it.

From hence they sail to Gratiosa, where the Inhabitants crave mercy and
obtained it; and here Essex would have tarried, in expectation of the Indian
fleet; but that Graves the Pilot dissuaded, because the harbor was not good:
and now see the unluckinesse of ill counsel, for the English were not gone
above an hour, or two, from this place; when lo, the American fleet;
(wherein were forty Ships, and seven of them laden with treasure) comes
thither; which, hearing that the English were there abouts, directed their
course to Tezcera, where they gained the haven, all but three ships,
indifferent wealthy; which English took: and then were minded to set upon the
rest, in the Port; but finding the attempt not forcible, they passed from
hence, to Saint Michaells; where Southampton, Rutland, Evers, Bredon and
Dockwray, were Knighted^ and then Essex landed within six miles of the Town;
nigh unto Villa Franca, a fair Town, and well furnished with merchandise;
wine, wood, and corn; where they tarried six days: and the common soldiers
found good booty. And now a Caraque was espied, coming out of the east Indies;
which, by a warning piece shot off in a Dutch ship, perceiveing that the
English were there; run herself a shore, unloaded her merchandise, and then
fiered herself. Thus the English had ill luck every where in this expedition:
And the ninth of October they hoysted sail for England; but within two days,
a terrible tempest, from the northward dispersed them; and the Spanish Fleet
also at the same time, so as they never came in view of one another: one
Spanish ship was cast upon Dertmouth, the Mariners and soldiers half
starved in her; who intimated, that the Spanish fleet intended to seize upon
some haven in Cornwall, which being nigh the mouth of the channel; might be
convenient to receive forces from Spain: but the divine providence frustrated
the designs both of the Spaniard and the English.

But now at his return, the Earl of Essex found that done in England, in his
absence, which infinitely discontented him: Sir Robert Cicill made Chancelour of
the Duchy of Lancaster; and which was more, Charles Lord Howard, created Earl
of Nottingham, with relation in his patent to the Victory in eighty eight; and
his good service at Cales: This glory he envyed him, and besides stomacked it;
that he must now take place of him. It being enacted in the Reign of Henry the
eighth, that the chief Officers of the Kingdom, should have Presidence of all
men of their degree. Whereupon the Queen, to give him content, was feign to
create him Earl Marshall of England; by which he recovered his place again.

About this time, an Ambassador came into England, from the KING of Poland;
who, when the Queen expected he should give her thanks for having procured a
Peace between the King his Master, and the Turk, he clean contrary
expostulated unkindnesse, for breach of Privilege in trading with Spain,
requiring a present remedy, or else the King would otherways right himself.
The Queen not a little offended, suddenly replied, ^ow was I deceived? I
expected an Ambassador, and behold a Herald; such a speech I never heard in
all my life time: And after some further checking of him for his boldness, she
referred him to her Council; and then retired into her Closett. The
Ambassador afterward, in private conference with some of the Council, excused
himself, saying, that his speech was penned by others, and then given him in
wrighting. To his Message, the Council gave the like answer; as they had given
before the Hanse-Townes, upon the like occasion: though now again, the
Hanse-Townes obtain of the Emperor, to prohibit the English from trading in
Germany, which made the Queen to prohibit the Hause towns from trading in
England, and put them out of the Stilyard till this difference was accorded.

This year the Chancellor of Denmark came into England to restore the Garter,
which she had bestowed upon the Kings Father, and withal offering the Kings
help, to make a peace for the Queen with the Spaniard. The Queen thanked him;
but meant not to use his help for that which she did not desire, and
especially not now, when he had newly molested the King of France her Allye,
and had taken Amyens the strongest Town of Picardie: Though why should the
Queen be so tender of the French King, when now to get an aid of four thousand
Soldiers from her, he fell to Devises; intimating unto her, that he was now
offered by the Popes Nuntio a very commodious peace, if he would but forsake
her. But while these things were in Treaty, Amyens was recovered again by the
valor of Baskervile (who dyed at the seige) and of Sir Arthur Savage, as the
King in His Letters to the Queen thankfully acknowledged.

About this time a Parliament was holden at Westminster, where Subsidies were
willingly granted; and to this Parliament was called the Lord La Ware and
restored to his blood, which by Act of Parliament in the Reign of King Edward
the sixth was tainted; Also to this Parliament was called Thomas Lord HOWARD,
by the Title of Baron Howard of Walden.

In Ireland at this time, a great part of Ulster, and almost all Connacht was
in Rebellion; Whereupon Russell the Deputy was called home, and Thomas Lord
Borough sent in his place, a man very stout and courageous, but no soldier:
This infinitely discontented Norris, who thought himself sure of the place
himself, and now to see his Rival preferred before him, and himself to be
under him, President of Munster, drove him into such a melancholy, that in a
very short time, (and as he thought to himself with much disgrace) he ended
his life.

And now the Farle of Tir-Oen craveth, and obtains a months Truce of the new
Deputy, at the months end, the Deputy marches against the Rebels, and gains
the Fort at Blackwater, when suddenly the Rebels sl^w themselves upon a hill
hard by, against whom the Earl of Kildare marches and puts them to flight;
but yet with some loss of his own side, as Francis Vaughan the Deputies
brother in Law, Turner a Sergeant Major, and two Fosters, brothers of the Earl
of Kildare, whole death he took so heavily, that within a few days he dyed
himself.

As soon as the people had fortified the Castle at Blackwater and withdrawn
his Army, the Rebels began to besiege it again; (for this was the main place
of their strength) which caused the Deputy with all possible speed to make
thither, but unhappily dyed by the way. Whereupon the Rebels set upon the Fort
more fiercely then before; but being still reppelled; they comforted themselves
with this, that there was not many days provision left in the Fort; yet the
admirable fortitude of Thomas Williams the Captain, and the Garrison Soldiers
saved the place, who, when their horseflesh was all spent, fed upon weeds
growing within the Trenches, and endured all kind of misery. And now the Lord
Borough the Deputy being dead, the Army by direction from England, was
committed to the Earl of Ormond, and the Government to two Lords Justices,
Adam Lofthouse Archbishop of Dublin and Chancellor, and Robert Gardyner: To
this new Lieutenant, Tir-Oen exhibiteth a Bill of his oppressions and
greivances with request of pardon, and at the same time stirs up Mac-Hugh to
a new Rebellion in Leinster.

In France at this time, the French King being importuned by the Pope, and by
his own Subjects, began to incline to a Peace with Spain, which the Queen
understanding, she sent into France, Sir Robert Cecill, Herbert and W^lks, (who
dyed at his landing in France:) The States likewise sent thither, Iustine of
Nassaw, and Barnevolt, and others likewise into England to dissuade the Peace:
but notwithstanding all they could say, or do, the French King shortly after
concluded a Peace, to the great coffeehouse of the Queen and the States, but
to the great good, and establishment of the French Commonwealth.

And now the Queen providing for her own and her peoples safety, sent Sir
Francis Vere to the States, to know if they were willing to join in a Treaty of
Peace with the Spaniard; if not, what they would afford toward a War; and to
deal earnestly with them, about repayment of money due to her from them. At
home in the mean time, a great Consultation was holden, whither a Peace with
Spain were convenient for England, or no; and many Reasons were on both sides
alleged. Burleigh Lord Treasurer was for Peace, Essex for War, and so
vehement in it, that the Treasurer, after a long debating, in a strange manner
of Presage, reached forth the Book of the Psalms to him, pointing him to that
Verse, The bloody minded man shall not live out half his days. Which made
Essex afterward to set forth an Apology, with Reasons for justification of his
opinion.

But now another Consultation was held, about a fit man to be Deputy of
Ireland; The Queen intended to send Sir William Knolles, Essex his Uncle; but
Essex was violent for Sir George Carew, whom he had a mind to remove from the
Court; and when he could not by any means persuade the Queen to it, he then,
forgetting himself and his duty, uncivilly and contemptuously turned his back
upon the Queen, mutteri^g certain words. Whereupon she growing impatient, gave
him a box on the ear, and bid him be gone with a vengeance; Essex laid his hand
upon his sword hilt, and swore a great oath, That he could not, nor would not
put up such an Indignity; and that he would not have taken it at King Henry
the Eighth his hands; and so in a rage flun^ away from the Court. But
afterward, admonished by the Lord Keeper, he became more mild, and in a
short time, returned into the Queens favor.

About this time, William Cecill Lord Burleigh, and high Treasurer of Eng^and,
finding himself to droop with age, (for he was now threescore and seventeen
years old) sent Letters to the Queen, entreating her to release him of his
public charge; whereupon she went to visit, and comfort him, but within a few
days he ended his life, after he had been the principal stay of the English
Commonwealth for many years together. One great good he did to his country, a
little before his death, that he brought the States of the Low Countries to a
Composition, for the payment of Eight hundred thousand pounds, by Thirty
thousand pounds yearly; likewise, a new League to be concluded with them.

The King of Denmarks Subjects having lately seized upon some goods of the
English as Prize, to the value of a hundred thousand Dollers; the Queen sent
the Lord Zouch, and Christopher Perkins Doctor of Law, in Embassage to the
Dane, both to congratulate his late marriage with the Electors daughter of
Brandenburg; and also to crave restitution of the English goods; who obtained,
that in lieu thereof, Threescore thousand Dollers were repaid. And now George
Clifford Earl of Cumberland, having with a Navy of eleven ships, waited for
Portingall Cariques, and the American Fle^t, till the season of the year was
past (they not daring to stir forth) he at last set upon Port-Rico and took
it; but seven hundred of his men falling sick of Calentures, and dying within
forty days, he was feign to return home with some honor, but little profit.

About this time, one Edward Squire was Arraigned of high Treason, he had been
at first an ordinary Scrivener, afterward a Groom in the Queen; stable, and
going as a Soldier in Drakes last expedition, was taken prisoner and carried
into Spain, there he came acquainted with one Wallpoole an English Jesuit,
who caused him to be put into the Inquisition for an Heretic, and the fellow
tasting of misery, was easily drawn to become a Papist, and afterward to
attempt anything for the Catholic cause. His ghostly father persuaded him it
were meritorious to make away the Queen and the Earl of Essex, and sent him
into England with a certain poison, wherewith to anoint the pommell of the
Queens Saddle, and the chair in which the Earl should sit, which he
accordingly performed, but neither of them took effect, whereupon Wallpoole
suspecting Squires fidelity was bent to revenge it, and sent one into England,
who in general terms should lay this aspersion upon him; whereupon Squire is
called in question, and never thinking that his Confessor would detect him,
directly denied all at first; but after seeing himself betrayed, confessed all
the matter and was executed.

This whole year the Rebellion was hot in Ireland; For Tir-Oen notwithstanding
his pardon lately obt^ined, all on a sudden besieged the Fort at Blackwater,
to the raising of which siege, the Lieutenant General (for there was as yet no
Deputy) sent 13 Companies under the command of the Marshall, Tir-Oens sworre
adversary, him Tir-Oen slew, and put his whole Army to rout, and achieved such
a Victory, with so great loss to the English, as they had never ^elt the like
since they first set footing in Ireland^ for thirteen valiant Commanders; and
fifteen Hundred Common Soldiers were slain at this Skirmish, and soon after
the Fort of Blackwater was yielded up. And now Tir-Oens fame began to resound,
as the Assertor of the Liberty of the Nation, and upon a sudden all Munster
brake forth into rebellion. For the cherishing whereof Tir-Oen sent thither
O^ny Mac-Rorye and Tyrell (who originally an Englishman, was grown a deadly
enemy to the English Nation) with four hundred Kernes. Against these; Thomas
Norris President of the Province, marches to Killmallock with a good force;
but finding that the Irish Soldiers of his Company were ready to revolt, he
was feign to disperse his Army and retire to Cork. Hereupon the Rebels grew
insolent, spoiled the Country, and in cruel manner put all the English to the
sword. Furthermore they declare Fitz Thomas to be Earl of Desmond^ but upon
condition he should hold of O-Neal^, that is, of Tir-Oen, who now dispatched
Letters to the Spaniard, relating his victories to the full, and vowing to
accept no terms of peace with the English, and yet at the same instant (after
his wonted treacherous manner) proffered some kind of submission to the
Lieutenant; but withal made unreasonable demands.

The State of Ireland being thus in combustion, a serious consultation is
holden whom to send to quench it, the Queen and most of the Counsel thought
Sir Charles Blunt Lord Mountjoy the fittest man^ but Essex covertly intimated,
that he had no military experience, and besides was too bookish to prove a good
Commander, he seemed to aim at the place for himself, though he made a show
modestly to refuse it, and yet still ready with his exceptions if any other
were nominated^ many thought it dangerous to have an Army put into his hands,
for his followers talked of great matters, that he (forsooth) was descended of
the blood Royal of Scotland and England, and had better Right to the Crown,
then any other of the Competitors. In Conclusion, he is appointed Viceroy;
with ample Authority, to make War or conclude Peace, and pardon all
offenders, even Tir-Oen himself. An army is allotted him as great as he
desired: Indeed greater then ever Ireland had seen before; Twenty Thousand
Foot, and Thirteen Hundred Horse: with these, and a great Retinue besides of
the Nobility, he passes into Ireland; where as soon as he had taken the Sword,
contrary to his Commission (which was to go immediately against the
arch-Rebell) he marches toward Munster, against the petty Rebels, takes the
Castle of Cahir, and drives the Rebels into the Woods and Groves adjoining.
His Forces being now impaired, he tarrieth to make them up; but in the mean
time sends directions to Sir Coniers Clifford, President of Connacht, to set
upon the Rebels in one place, (thereby to sever their forces) while he
assaulted them in another; Clifford marches toward Belike, with 1500.
Soldiers, where the Rebels are upon them at unawares, under the conduct of
O-Rorke, (his Son that was hanged here in England) The English repel them at
first with ease, and march along, but the Rebels finding they wanted Powder,
set upon them again, and put them to flight; in which Skirmish, Clifford and
many of the old Soldiers were slain.

Essex having by this time received new supplies out of England, and a check
for neglecting the Queens Command, sets forth at length toward the Borders
of Ulster, with Thirteen hundred Foot, and five hundred horse, being come
thither, Tir-Oen by a Messenger requesteth Parley, Essex refuses saying, he
might speak with him the next morning, between the two Armies; the next day,
word is brought to Essex, that Tir-Oen craved the Queens mercy, and that he
might only be heard speak, appointing the shallow of Balla Clinch for a most
convenient place; thither came Essex alone, with whom Tir-Oen (riding his horse
up to the girts) had private conference a full hour; A while after, Con
Tir-Oens base Son came to Essex, requesting in his Fathers name a second
Parley, and that some of the chief on both sides might be present: Essex
consented, so there came not more then six. At the day appointed, many words
had not passed, but it was argued, that their Delegates should Treat the next
day concerning a Peace: between them it was concluded, that a Truce should be
held from six weeks to six weeks, till May^day.

By this time, the Qu. understanding that no more was done, after so much time
and money spent, in a great anger taxes the Earls proceedings, and I know not
how, it fell from her to some others that stood by, that he had other thoughts
in his mind, then the good of his Prince and Country: And thereupon dispatched
very sharp Letters to him, blaming his delay, and letting slip every fair
opportunity: with which Letters Essex was so netled and chiefly troubled, that
the Queen had now made Cecill Master of the Wards, which he expected himself:
that he began to cast strange Projects within his mind, and held private
consultations of returning into England with part of his Forces, to surprise
his Adversaries; But from this course, the Earl of Southampton, and Sir
Christopher Blunt dissuaded him, as being dangerous and wicked. Yet within a
month, over he went, and came to the Court at Nonesuch; to inform the Queen
of the State of Ireland. By the way, the Lord Gray of Welton crossed him, but
saluted him not; whom one of his followers offered to kill for his contempt:
but Essex would not suffer him: And made such have, that early in the Morning
he was upon his Knees, before the Queen in the Privy Chamber. She enteriained
him courteously, but not with the countenance She was wont: and after a little
talk, bid him keep in his Chamber; And soon after, Committed him to Custody,
in the Lord Privy Seals House; where entering into Consideration of his case,
he gives himself wholly to Divine Contemplation, and writes wonderful
Letters to his friends, of the vanity of the things of this life.

It was now the year one thousand six hundred, and the two and fortieth of
Queen Elizabeth's Kaign, when after the departure of the Earl of Essex, Tir-Oen
began to carry himself as Monarch of Ireland, and sends Kernes to make
spoil in the possessions of such as continued in their loyalty to the Queen,
under Mac-Guir their Captain, who lighting casually upon Sir Warham Saint
Ledger, thrust him thorough with a speer, and was himself thrust thorough
withal. Whereupon the Queen sent Sir Charles Blunt Lord Montjoy, to take upon
him the Deputies place, who loses no time, but first of all marches toward
Ulster builds a fort, within eight miles of Armagh, which, in hononr of Sir
John Norris, under whom he had his first military schooling, he calls by the
name of Mount N^rris; there he placed Edward Blanye who kept the Rebels in awe
in those pa^^s, from thence back he goes into Leynster, wherein the Glynnes he
reduces into order, Donell-Spaniah, Phelim Mac-Pheoph, and the Rebelling
Nation of the O-Tooles, taking hostages of them, then back into Ulster again,
being victor wheresoever he comes, and at Tradagh, receives into protection
Mac-Henry, Mac-Cowly, and other rebels who fell at his feet for mercy. All this
and more he did in his first year, and no less successful was Carew
President of Munster, who drove out of the County the Titular Earl of Desmond,
and having found Munster a turbulent Province in April, he overcomed and made
it so quiet by December following, that the Rebels maintained not one Fort in
it against the Queen.

And now a new consultation was holden in England, touching a peace with the
King of Spain, the which he sought both by the French King, and by Alb^rtus
the Archduke, who was now returned into the Netherlands out of Spain, where he
was married to the Infanta. The Queen consenting to a Treaty, left it to the
French King to nominate both the time and place for the meeting of the
Delegates, who set down the Month of May, and Bulloigne in France; But now
foreseeing that a question would arise about Precedence, some were appointed to
search Ancient Records concerning that point. These men found in the Book of
the Ceremonies of the Court of Rome, which (according to the Canons) gives
Rule to the rest, as the Lady and Mistress; that amongst Kings, the first
place is due to the King of France, the second to the King of England and the
3. to the King of Castile; That the English quietly held this privilege in the
General Counsels of Basil Constance, and others, besides the Kingdom of
Castile, which is the Spaniards first Title, is but an upstart in regard of
England, which had Earls, but no Kings till the year one 1017. In like
manner, that Pope Julius the third, gave sentence for Henry the seventh of
England, against Ferdinand, who was then King of Castile.

At the day appointed, the Delegates met at Bulloign, Sir Henry Nevyll, Legier
Ambassador, Sir John Herbert, Robert Beale, and Thomas Edmunds for the
English, and other fot the King of Spain and the Archduke. The English had
Instructions, first concerning Precedence, in no case to give way to the King
of SPAIN; yet if they contended, to put the matter to the devision of Lots,
rather then the Treaty should be dissolved; and for the rest, to propose and
mention the renewing of the ancient Burgundian League, freedom of commerce,
etc.

At the meeting, when the had severally showed their co^missions; the English
challenge the Precedence, the Spaniards do the like, and in so peremptory a
manner, that without it they would dissolve the Treaty: hereupon the English
made a proposition, to let pass the question of Precedence; and to transact
the business by wrighting, and Messengers between them: Or that the Treaty
might be intermitted only for threescore days, not quite brooken off; but all
was to no purpose; And at three months end, they parted.

The States the mean while, were so far from regarding a Peace, that at this
time, they thought upon reducing the Sea Coast of Flanders into their command^
and thereupon they landed an Army there, of Fourteen thousand Foot, and three
thousand horse under the conduct of Maurice of Nasaw; and Fifteen hundred of
the English under the command of Sir Francis Vere, and his Brother Horatio: At
which true happened the famous Bataile of Newport, against the Archduke,
wherein nine thousand of the Spaniards were slain; and the Victory by the
valor of the English, fell to the Dutch, for so forward were the English in
this Battle, that of their fifteen hundred, eight hundred were slain and
sore wounded, eight Captains killed, and of the rest every man hurt.

All this year, and the year past, sundry quarells and complaints arose
between the English and the French, touching reprisalls of goods taken from
each other by Pirates of either Nation: Also touching Customs and Impositions,
contrary to the Treaty of Bloys, and deceit in English Clothes, to the great
infamy of our Nation. In Denmark likewise arose controversies touching
Commerce, and the Fishing of the English upon the coast of Island and Norway.
The Queen also either time, for the increase of Navigation and Commerce,
Founded the Company of East India Merchants, allowing them large Privileges:
but whether, thi^ has proved beneficial to the Commonwealth, (there having
been by this means such a mass of money and great store of other commodities
c^rried out of the Kingdom, and so many Mariners lost every year) wise men
make a question.

About this time also, Pope Clement the eight, perceiving the Queen to be in
her declining age, sent two Breeves into England, the one to the Popish C^ergy.
the other to the Layity, to suffer no person whatsoever, to take the Kingdom
upon him after the Queens death, but one that should promise by Oath to
promote with all his might, the Roman Catholic Religion, how near soever
otherwise, he were allied to the Blood Royal of the Kings of England.

This year by reason of intemporate weather, happened a great scarcity of Corn
in England, and thereby many grievous complaints was occasioned. The common
people cast out reproachful slanders, against the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, as
the granter of Lycences for transportation of Corn; but he appealing to the
Queen, she forthwith defended his Innocence, and made it known by open
Proclamation, imputed the fault, upon the Broggers of Corn, and Forestallers
of Markets, and gave order that the slanderers should be reprehended and
punished.

The Earl of Essex, who had now been Prisoner six months in the House of the
Lord Privy Seale^ he then began to repent in good earnest, resolving to put
away his perverse Counselors, Cylly Merick and Henry Cuffe, and then he showed
so much patience and great submission, that the Queen then sent him to his
own house, and to be there confined, always protesting that she would do
nothing that should be for his ruine^ but only that, which should be for his
amendment. Nevertheless, when as the common people extolled his Innocence, she
could not, for the removal of suspicion of injustice, free her self and her
counselors, but bring him to a trial, not in the Star Chamber, lest the
Censure should fall too heavy on him; but in the house of the Lord Privy Seal,
where the cause should have a plain hearing before the Lords of the Council,
four Earls, two Barons, and four Judges of the Realm. The objections were, That
contrary to his Commission, he had made the Earl of Southampton, General of
the Horse, had drawn his Forces into Munster, neglecting the Arch-Rebell
Tir-Oen, entertained a Parlee with him, against the Dignity of the Queens
Majesty, and the person of a Viceroy, which he represented; and that the said
Parlee was suspicious, in regard it was private. Some aggravations the Lawyers
added from abrupt sentences, in his Letter to the Lord Privy Seal, written two
years since, as these; No storm is more fierce than the indignation of an
Impotent Prince. What? Cannot Princes err? May they not injure their Subjects,
and such like.

He falling upon his knee at the end of the Board, professed he would not
contest with the Queen, nor excuse the faults of his young years, either in
whole, or in part, Protesting that he always meant well, howsoever it fell out
otherwise, and that now he would bid the World farewell, withal, shedding many
tears, so as the standers by wept also. Yet could he not contain himself, but
began to plead excuses, till the Lord Privy Seal interrupted him, advising him
to proceed as he had begun, to fly to the Queens Mercy, who would not have him
questioned for disloyalty, but only for a contempt; and that he did not well to
pretend obedience in words, which in deeds he had not performed. At length, in
the name of the rest, he pronounces this Sentence against him; That he should
be deposed from the office of a Privy Councellor, suspended from the functions
of the Earl Marshall, and Master of the Ordnance, and be Imprisoned during the
Queens pleasure. She had given express charge, not to suspend him from the
office of Master of the Horse (minding to take him shortly into favor) and that
his Censure in no case should be Recorded. After this, he made show of
wonderful humility and mortification, which so affected the Queen, that
shortly she removed Barkeley his keeper, and gave him leave to go at large;
only admonishing him, To make his own discretion his keeper, and not to come at
the Court, or in her Presence.

After this Sentence, Cuffe, who always persuaded the Earl to stand stoutly
in his own defense, began so plainly to tax him of cowardice and pusillanimity;
that the Earl in anger, commanded his name to be put out of the Roll of his
servants, yet Merrick the Steward did it not, as being of Cuffes mind himself.

Essex, being now ready to go into the Country, remembered himself to the
Queen, by the Lord Henry Howard, in these words; That he kissed the Rod, and
the Queens hands, which had ^nely corrected, not overthrown him; yet he should
never enjoy solid comfort, till he might see those blessed eyes, which had been
his load-stars, whereby he had happily steered his course, whiles he held on
his way at lawful distance; But now he resolved to eat grass with
Nebuchad-nezzar, till it please the Queen to restore his senses. She being
greatly joyed with these his speeches; Would to God (said she) his deeds might
be answerable to his words; he has long tried my patience, I must now make
trial of his humility.

And now the Earl grew so confident of thee Queens favor, That he became a
suitor to her for the Farm of sweet Wines; but she to try his temper, and with
what mind he would bear a repulse, made him Answer; That she must first know
what it was worth, and not give away things hand over head; and had oftentimes
in her mouth, the Aphorism of Physicians, That foul bodies, the more you
nourish them, the more you corrupt them. And indeed, this was the right way to
find, whether the ulcer of his mind were thoroughly cured or no; for being not
thoroughly cured, it would endure no touching; and no more did his, but as
though every denial of a courtesy, were an injury that required revenge; his
melancholy was presently turned into choler, and now began to hearken to Cuffe
again; telling him, That it was now plain, the Queen determined to make him as
poor as Job, that he should live of the basket, and gather crumbs under the
Ta^^e. Hereupon he returned to London, Southampton is sent for out of the
Low Countries, his doors are set open for all comers, Merricke his Steward
receives to his own table decayed soldiers, discontented and audacious
persons; Sermons are made there every day by Puritan Ministers, to which the
Citizens flock, and all signs of popularity appeared; which matters coming to
the Queens ears, Alienated her affection from him daily more and more; but
especially she was exasperated, that her Person was despised by him; for (not
to say the worst) he had muttered, That the Queen was now old and decrepit, and
withered as well in mind as body.

And now again, he runs upon desperate counsels, for the removal of his
adversaries from the Court, seeks to scrue himself into the King of Scots
favor, to whom he traduceth his adversaries, by name Raleigh, Cobham, Carew,
Cecill, and the Admiral, as inclined to the Spanish Faction, and at one and
the same time, seeks to win to him both Puritans and Papists. Many were of
his party, but few of his counsel; and these were the Earl of Southampton, Sir
Charles Davers, Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Captain of the Garrison of Plimmouth, Sir
Christopher Blunt, and some other. With these he met privately in Drury House
to avoid suspicion, where he first gives them a Catalogue of the Nobility and
gentry that favored him, to the number of a hundred and twenty. Then they
consult, whether it were better to set upon the Tower of London, or the Queens
Palace; this latter they resolve upon, which should be done in this manner.
Blunt should keep the great Gate, with a selected number of men, and Danvers
seize upon the Presence Chamber: Then Essex with his company should come from
the Mues, and present himself before the Queen. But now suspicions arising
from diverse circumstances, Secretary Herbert was sent to call him before the
Council, at the Treasurers House; but he doubting the matter, excuses
himself, that he was not very well. And now the Plot of seizing upon the
Court, which had been four months in contriving, was by this means quite
dashed, for they had ready at the present, neither Soldiers, nor muition, so
as some speedier course must now be thought on; at which time very opportunely
comes one to them (set on no doubt by Essex his Adversaries) as if he had been
sent on purpose from the Citizens, to promise him their Aid, which made Essex
to applaud his own great good fortune.

And now were four of the Lords, namely the Lord Keeper, the Earl of
Worcester, Sir William Knolles, and the Lord Chief Justice of England, sent by
the Queen to Essex house, who could hardly be suffered to come, in, all their
Attendants were kept out, save he that carried the Seal before the Keeper. In
the Court, they found a confused number of people, and the Earls of Essex,
Rutland, and Southampton in the midst of them. The Keeper turning himself to
Essex, tells him, The Queen had sent him and the rest to understand the cause
of this concourse, promising Justice, if any person had done them wrong. Essex
with a loud voice cries out, They lie in wait for my life, we are met to
defend our selves. The Keeper urging Essex again to unfold some part of his
grievance; the unruly multitude cries out, Away, let us be gone, they come to
betray you, Kill them, cast away that Great Seal. Essex retireth into the
house, the Lords follow him, he charge them to make the doors fast, and
turning him to the Lords, Have patience for a while (says he) I must go into
the City, to dispatch a little business with the Mayor and Sheriffs, I will
return presently.

There the Lords are kept prisoners; Essex makes haste into the City, with a
Troop of 200 men at his heels; the E. of Bedford, the L. Cromwell, and ^^her
Lords meeting him by the way, join themselves: coming into London, ^e cries
out aloud, For the Queen, for the Queen, they lay wait for my life. The
Citizens came running to gaze, but not so much as one person took Arms to take
his Part. Passing along the City, he came all in a sweat to the Sheriff Smith's
house, who shifteth himself forth at a back door, and goes to the Lord Mayor.
By this time, certain of the Nobility entered the City with a Herald, declaring
Essex and his adherents Traitors. Hereupon, hearing also that the Lord Admiral
made toward him with an Army, he began to be dishear^ned; Gorge takes care
for himself, requesteth he might be sent to release the Counselors, and with
them to crave the Queens mercy, whiles the issue was yet doubtful. The Earl
content, that Popham only should be freed; but he refused, unless the Keeper
also might be dismissed. Then Gorge freeth them all, and goes along with them
to the Court by water.

Now when Essex thought to return, he found a Chain fastened cross the street,
at the West end of Paul's, and men in Arms on the other side: then he began to
draw his sword; and having once given the word, Blunt lets fly at them, slew
one of them incontinent, himself being sorely wounded and taken. Essex himself
had his Hat shot through; whereupon retiring, he took Boat at Queen Hythe, and
went to Essex House; where finding the Counselors all dismissed, he grew
extreme angry and dismayed, and cast certain papers into the fire, saying, They
should tell no tales. By and by the Admiral besieges the house, commanding
them to yield. Southampton offers, if the Admiral would give Hostages to
secure them, they would present themselves to the Queen. The Admiral answers
him by Sidney, That Rebels are not to profer Conditions. Within an hour, Essex
finding the case desperate, resolved to rush forth; and the Lord Sands (the
most aged in the company) greatly urged it, saying, It were better to die
valiantly, than by the hands of a Hangman. But Essex his mind, upon a little
deliberation altering, they fell upon their knees, and deliver their weapons to
the Admiral, when it was ten a clock at night. Owen Salisbury, and one or two
more were slain with Musket Shot, and as many of the Besiegers. The next day,
Thomas Lea, Commander of a Company of Soldiers in Ireland, who to one Cross a
Sea-Captain (that detected him) intimated, how noble an exploit it were, for
six stout fellows to go to the Queen, and compel her forceably to release
Essex and Southampton, was presently apprehended, examined, found guilty and
executed. Essex and Southampton were carried first to Lambeth, to the
Archbishops house, because it was a dark night; but anon were sent to the
Tower, by the Queens direction; and with them, Rutland, Sands, Cromwell,
Mounteagle, Danverse, and Bromley, the rest were put in common prisons.

On the nineteenth of February, Essex and Southampton were called to their
Arraignment, before their Peers in Westminster Hall, where Buckhurst Lord
Treasurer, was appointed Lord High Steward of England for that time. The Peers
being severally called by their names, Essex demanded, If it were not lawful
for them to except against some of the Pee^s, as private persons might do
against the Jurors. The Judges made answer, That the credit and fidelity of the
Peers of England was presumed to be such, that in Trials they were not bound
to take an Oath, nor are they liable to any exception. Then were they jointly
indicted of High Treason; namely, That they plotted to deprive the Queen of her
life and Kingdom, To surprise her in her very Palace; And that they brake forth
into open Rebellion, by imprisoning the Counselors of the Kingdom, By exciting
the Londoners to Re-bellion with vain Fictions; By assaulting the Queens
loyal Subjects in the City, and by defending of Essex House against the Queens
Forces. Hereunto they pleaded, Not guilty. Essex withal averring, That they
had done nothing but of necessity, and the Law of Nature. Yelverton aggravateth
the specialties; and Edward Cook Attorney, argues, That the Earl could not
excuse himself from the Law of Nature, seeing Majesty is not to be affronted
for private revenge. The Earl of Essex with great confidence made answer, That
to his Prince and Country, he always had and would bear a loyal affection.
The Francis Bacon (one that was little expected to speak against Essex, by whom
he had been raised) in defense of Cobham, Cecill, and Raleigh, aggravateth his
crying out, That the Crown of England was sold to the Spaniard: whereto Essex
replied, that he heard indeed, that Cecill the Secretary should say to one of
the Lords of the Council, That the Right of the Infanta of Spain to the
Kingdom of England, was as good as any of the Competitors. Upon this Cecill
(who stood by as an Auditor) steppeth in, and falling upon his knees,
beseeches the Steward that with his good leave, he might quit himself from
this foul aspersion: which leave being granted him, he provoked Essex, if he
durst, to name the Counselor; but he would not: therefore (says Cecill) It is
a Faction: still Essex averreth it. Then Cecill turning himself to Southampton,
besought him, by all manner of Obtestations, to name the man. He refers it
to the Honorable Assembly, and to Cecill himself, if in Honor and good Reason
he ought to do it: they affirming, He might, Southampton names Sir William
Knolles, Essex his Uncle. He being sent for, at Cecills entreaty, said, That
Cecill two years since told him, that one Dolman, in a Book, had asserted the
Right of the Infanta, and had spoken no otherwise than so.

Now after the Judges had delivered their opinion what was Law in the matters
alleadge^, the Earls, by the Stewards direction, were taken aside: Then the
Peers rose, and went apart, and having consulted about an hour, returned to
their seats, and in their order, pronounced the Earls guilty of high Treason.
Then the high Steward, advising Essex to implore the Queens mercy, gives
Sentence, and that done, brake his Staff and departed.

The next day, Sir Robert Vernon, Sir William Constable, Sir Edmund Baynham,
Littleton, Cluff, Captain Whitlock, John and Christopher Wright and Orell an
old Soldier, were called to their Trial: but the Queen (informed by Sir Fulk
Grevill, That most of them were drawn unwittingly into the danger) commanded
that only Littleton, Baynham, and Orell should have their Trial, the rest to
be sent back to prison. These were all condemned, but their lives spared; which
favor, Raleigh (for a good sum of money received of Baynham) procured.

Essex in the mean while, requested he might speak with some of the
Counselors, to whom he reconciled himself, and to Cecill especially; and then
intimated, That the Queen could not be in safety while he lived; he requesteth
he might be executed privately in the Tower: He grievously inveigheth against
some of the Conspiracy, and wished to speak with some of them, but specially
with Blunt and Cuffe; whom as soon as he saw, he brake forth into these words;
O Cuffe, ask pardon of God and the Queen, for thou have chiefly provoked me to
this disloyalty. Also he intimated Sir Henry Nevill, ordinary Ambassador in
France, to have been acquainted with the Conspiracy; and that other in
Scotland, France, the Netherlands, and the Lord Mountjoy, Deputy of Ireland,
knew of his purpose, and other in England; who being many in number, and the
Lord Mountjoy ordering the Affairs of Ireland in good fashion, the Queen wisely
would take no notice of it.

The five and twentieth day of February, which was to be the fatal day, there
were sent to the Earl diverse Ministers, to give him ghostly comfort. The Queen
now wavering in her self, one while remembering the ^^ci^nt kindness she had
showed him, she commanded he should not be ^xecu^ed; then again, thinking of
his stubbornness, That he would not once ask her mercy, and had said openly,
That he could not live, but she must perish; countermanding her former word,
she gave order that he should ^e executed.

Then was he brought forth into the Yard, where a Scaffold was erected, and
sundry of the Nobility present, amongst whom Raleigh also; but being ^old, It
was an inhumane thing to stand by and behold the death of his adversary, he
withdrew himself into the Armory, and from thence beheld the Tragedy. Essex
being ascended the Scaffold, uncovered his head, cast up his eyes toward
Heaven^ and cried God mercy for the manifold sins of his youth, but this last
specially, which he said was a bloody, crying, and contagious sin; craved
pardon of the Queen and her Counselors, commended his Spirit into the hands of
God, and had his head taken off at the third blow, though the first bereft him
both of sense and motion.

The fifth of March, Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Charles Davers, Sir John Davis,
Sir Gyllie Merrick, and Cuffe, were brought to their Trial in
Westminster Hall, before the Queens Delegates. The Heads of their Inditements,
were the same which were objected to Essex and Southampton. The others said
little in their defense, only Cuffe stood upon these two Answers; Whereas
(says he) I am challenged of Treason, because I was in Essex house the day of
the Rebellion; by the same Argument the Lion in the Celler might be indicted;
all that day I lamented the Earls Fortune, and dealt with him to fly to the
Queens mercy. And as for the Consultation in Drury House, it is no more to be
called High Treason, than an Embryon may be accounted a perfect man. The
Lawyers on the other side demonstrated, That no necessity lay upon him to tarry
in the House; and that the Consultation in Drury House was it self a Treason,
though it had never broke forth into act. Merrick said only this, The Earl of
Essex raised me, and he has overturned me.

The thirteenth of March, Merrick and Cuffe are drawn to Tyburn, where Cuffe
entering into a long Speech, was by the Sheriff interrupted; and then, after
prayers to God, and desiring God and the Queen to pardon him, he was cast from
the Ladder: a man of great Wit and Learning, but of a boisterous and turbulent
disposition. In the same manner died Merrick.

The fifteenth of March, Sir Charles Davers, and Sir Christopher Blunt were
beheaded on the Tower Hill; albeit Davers offered ten thousand pounds to redeem
his life, though with perpetual Imprisonment. The Earl of Southampton, and the
Sheriff Smith, were kept prisoners; though Smith, after some time, was upon
sureties suffered to go at large. The eighth of July, Sir Henry Nevill was
cited before the Lords of the Counsel, where it was laid to his Charge, That
he was present at the Consultation in Drury House, yet had not revealed their
sinister purpo^es; and had imparted to Essex the secrets of his French
Embassage. He confessed, That at the Earls entreaty, he showed him the
Commentaries of the French proceedings, was present at one of their
Consultations only, but contemned their counsels, yet durst not be an
Informer against so great Personages. Hereupon he had a grievous check given
him, and was committed to prison.

One Act of the By, is not here to be omitted. Essex at his Arraignment had
complained, That his handwriting was counterfeited. It happened, the Countess
of Essex being fearful in her husbands behalf, gave a Letter which she had
received from him, to the custody of one Ri^ove, a Dutch-woman that waited on
her: this Dutch-womans husband, named Daniell^ lighted by chance upon the
Letter, and perceiving some passages in it which might bring the Earl of Essex
into danger, got a cunning fellow to draw a counterfeit Copy of the said
Letter; with this he comes to the fearful Lady, who was newly brought to bed,
threatening to give the same to her husbands adversaries; unless she would
presently give him three thousand pounds. She to shun the danger, paid him
eleven hundred and seventy pounds at the very instant; yet did he deliver her
the counterfeit Copy only meaning to make use of the true one, to get another
sum of the Earls adversaries. This imposture being found out, he was censured
to perpetual Imprisonment, condemned in three thousand pounds (two of which
were to go to the Countess) and his ears nailed to the Pillory, with this
Writing over his head; A notorious Cheater.

Soon after, a Parliament was assembled, wherein grievous complaints being
tendered to the lower House touching Monopolies; the Queen, by way of
prevention, sends out Proclamations, declaring the said Licenses and Patents
to be void in part, leaving some part to the discussion of the Laws: which
thing was so acceptable to the Lower House, that they presently sent 80
selected persons; together with the Speaker, to give the Queen thanks; and she
on the other side, gave them thanks, for being such faithful Monitors to her,
to recall her from an error, whereinto through ignorance, not wilfulness, she
was fallen.

In Ireland, the Deputy, at the entry of the Spring, draws his Forces
together and drives Tir-Oen from where he had fortified himself; Carew,
President of Munster, takes the titular Earl lurking in a Cave, and receives
intelligence, That the Spaniards, invited by Tir Oen, had a purpose to land in
Munster, yet could not persuade the Deputy they had any design for Ireland;
but in the midst of September, certain news was brought, The Spaniards were in
sight, who wanting wind to carry their Fleet to Cork, put in to Kinsale, the
three and twentieth of September, and land their Soldiers without resistance.
Richard Percy, having but few Soldiers to defend the Town, is commanded to
come away, and leave Kinsale to the Spaniards, into which they enter with
Ensigns displayed, and by the Magistrates and Inhabitants, were bidden welcome.

D'Aquila, who commanded the Spaniards, publishes a Declaration, wherein he
shows, That Queen Elizabeth was deposed from her Kingdom by sentence of the
Pope, her subjects absolved from their Allegiance; And that the Spaniards were
now come to deliver Ireland from the Jaws of the devil. Tir Oen joyneth his
Forces with them, so as they were now six thousand Foot, and five hundred
Horse, and promised themselves assured Victory, the English being not near so
many. The four and twentieth of December, a Battle is joined; where, after a
long Fight, the Victory inclined to the English. Tir Oen, O donell, and the
rest, cast away their Weapons, and save themselves by flight. Alphonso O Campo,
chief Leader of the Spaniards, together with three other Captains, was taken
prisoner, and six Ensigne-bearers, twelve hundred were slain, nine Colors
taken, whereof four belonged to the Spaniards: of the English not many were
slain, but a great number wounded.

After six days, D'Aquila sends Letters to the Deputy by a Drummer,
requesting that some person of account might be sent to him, with whom to
confer; Sir William Godolphine is sent, to whom he complained of cowardice, and
(he feared) treachery of the Irish; and therefore, although he wanted nothing
to hold out the Siege, and did daily expect great Forces from Spain, yet was
willing to make a Composition: whereupon, at last it was agreed, The Spaniards
should yield up Kinsale to the Deputy, as also the Castles and Forts at
Baltimore, Bere-Haven, and Castle-haven, and should depart with life and goods,
and Colors displayed. The English, at a reasonable price, should furnish them
with Ships and provision into Spain; and that they should not carry Arms
against the Queen of England, till they were arrived in Spain, etc.

And now the Spaniards being driven out of Ireland, the Queen, to prevent their
coming again, sends out Sir Richard Levison, and Sir William M^^son, with
eight Ships of her own, and some smaller Ships of War, to attempt something
upon the Coast of Spain. On the nineteenth of March, Levis^n hoyseth Sail, and
Monson afterward, having in vain tarryed behind, for some Dutch Ships to join
with them. Levison in the mean time lighted upon the Spanish Navy of eight and
thirty Ships, which brought the Treasure from America, and set upon them, but
to no purpose. When Monson was come with the rest of the Fleet, they had
certain notice, That a mighty Indian Caraque of sixteen hundred Tun, and richly
laden, was upon the Coast of Portugal. There indeed they found it, but it lay
close under a Fort, attended with eleven Galleys; and the Caraque it self
appeared as big as a Castle; yet they resolved to fire it, if they could not
take it. The next day, they thundered so violently against the Galleys, that
within seven hours the Marquess of St. Cross, together with Portugal Galleys
which he commanded, withdrew themselves; two of them were taken and fired; and
in them was great store of Powder, which was going for the Low Countries. And
now Levison signified to the Captain of the Caraque, That the Galleys which
they trusted to, were driven away, and therefore, if they now refused mercy,
they must expect none hereafter. After much speech to and fro, it was at last
agreed, That the Caraque, with the Ordnance and Merchandise, should be yielded
up. Thus the English, having a fair wind, returned homeward with a Booty, to
the value of a Million of Ducats, by the Portugal account, and not past five
of their men lost in the Voyage.

At this time there arose a Contestation amongst the Popish Clergy here in
England; for the Jesuits and the Secular Priests, made bitter Invectives in
their writings, one against the other. The original of the Priests quarrel
was, That Blackwell, one wholly at the beck of the Jusuites, was set over them
as Arch-Presbyter, who first of all despoiled them of their Faculties; and when
they appealed to the Pope, caused them to be declared Schismatics and
Heretics. They in sundry Books extolled the Queen very highly, as one that
dealt mildly always with the Catholics, till such time as they set all in a
combustion in England; and by their Treasons, caused most severe Laws to be
enacted against the Catholics. Parsons they traduced, as a Bastard, an
Equivocator, and a Traitor. Whether they contended thus in good earnest, or in
jest only, is hard to say; but the Bishop of London politickly nourished the
contention; and all he gained, was this, That the Queen and her Council,
finding them dangerous to the Commonwealth, both the one and the other, upon
Penalty of the Laws, were by Proclamation commanded to depart out of the
Kingdom presently.

In France, the Marshall Biron, for entering into dangerous attempts against the
public Peace, was arraigned, and lost his head. His confession brought some
other into danger; and amongst them, the Duke of Bulloign, of the Protestant
Religion, that when he was cited, he durst not appear, but fled into Germany.
Hereupon the King of France sends to Queen Elizabeth, complaining that the
Duke held his Marriage unlawful, and the Popes Dispensation nothing worth,
pronouncing his son Illegitimate; had destined the Prince of Conde to the
Succession of the Crown, and conspired the destruction of the prime of the
Nobility. The Queen, by her Legier Ambassador, advises the King not too
credulously to entertain those reports, as doubting these suggestions might
proceed from some of the Spanish Faction. Hereupon the King grew very angry,
saying, The Queen held a better opinion of the Duke then he deserved, and that
he was one of the chief Architects of Essex his Treason; and being questioned
by the King about it, was not able to deny it. About this time also, the Duke
of Savoy, by cunning slights, and open force, practiced against the State of
Geneva; and the Queen relieved them with a great sum of money, gathered amongst
the Clergy and Laity all over England.

And now the Earl of Tyrone, perceiving himself in a desperate estate, resolved
to sue for mercy, and promised at last to submit his life and Fortunes to the
Queens pleasure, absolutely without condition. Hereupon, being admitted to the
presence of the Deputy, at the very entry of the room, he fell on his knees;
and then passing on a few steps, prostrated himself again, saying, I confess
and crave pardon for my great fault, against God, and a most bountiful Prince,
my dread Sovereign: I fly to the Queens mercy, as a sacred Anchor, permitting
her to dispose of my life and Fortunes at her pleasure. Upon this his
submission, the Deputy commanded him to go aside, and the next day took him
along to Dublin with him, meaning to bring him into England, that the Queen
might deal with him according to her Royal pleasure: But before he could come
into England, the Queen died.

Her TAXATIONS.
IN a Parliament holden the first year of her Reign, a Subsidy was granted, of
two Shillings eight pence the pound of Goods, and four Shillings of Lands, to
be paid at two several Payments, of every person Spiritual and Temporal. In
her sixth year, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, one Subsidy was granted
by the Clergy, and another by the Laity, together with two Fifteenths and
Tenths. In her eighth year, in a Parliament then holden, there were offered to
her four Subsidies, upon condition she would declare a Successor; but she
refused their offer, and directly remitted the fourth Subsidy, which they had
granted, saying, It was all one, whether the money were in her Subjects
Coffers, or in her own. In her thirteenth year, in a Parliament then holden,
toward her charges of repressing the Northern Rebellion, there was granted her
by the Clergy, a Subsidy of six Shillings in the pound: and by the Temporalty,
two fifteens, with a Subsidy of two shillings and eight pence in the pound. In
her six and thirtieth year, a Parliament was holden, wherein was granted by the
Clergy, two whole Subsidies, and by the Laity, three, besides six Fifteens and
Tenths; but it was put into the Act, That this great Contribution, the like
whereof had not been known in former Ages, should not be drawn into Example. In
her fortieth year, in a Parliament at Westminster, were granted her by the
Clergy, three entire Subsidies; and by the Laity, as many, with six fifteenths
and Tenths. In her two and fortieth year, to furnish her self with money
toward the Irish War, she delegated certain Commissioners, to confirm the
Crown Lands to the possessors, that held any of controverted Titles, and to
take money for the Confirmation, thereby to take away the troubles by
concealers, who at this time were very busy.

Of her LAWS and ORDINANCES.
IN a Parliament holden in her first year, an Act was made, That every person
should go to Divine Service upon Sundays and Holy Days, or else pay twelve
pence to the poor. Also it was enacted, That Bishops should not let the Lands
of the Church, longer then for one and twenty years, or three Lives, except to
the Queen or her Successors. In her third year, Proclamation was made, That the
Teston, coined for twelve pence, and in the Reign of King Edward embased to six
pence, should not be current but for four pence; the Groat, but for two pence;
and the piece of two pence, but for a penny: And not long after, all the said
base Moneys were called in, and fine Sterling money was allowed for them,
after the Rate. For Ireland also, she coined Sterling money; where nine pence
in England, went for twelve pence there. The Queen was the first that brought
certain Counties to deliver Provision at a certain rate, that so they might be
freed from the Purveyors: Also the first that granted allowance to Judges for
their Circuit. In her sixth year, in a Parliament then holden, it was made
Treason to refuse taking the Oath of Supremacy; yet with this limitation, That
by it the blood should not be dishonored, nor goods confiscate; nor the Oath
to be required of any Baron of the Kingdom. Also this year, by a Common
Council in London, It was enacted, That all such Citizens as from thenceforth
should be constrained to sell their household stuff, Leases of houses, or such
like, should first cause the same to be cried through the City, by a man with a
Bell, and then to be sold by the common Outcryer appointed for that purpose,
and he to receive one farthing upon the shilling for his pains. In her three
and twentieth year, she represseth by Proclamation excess in apparel, Gold
Chayns, and Clokes which men wore down to their heels. The length of Swords was
limited to three Foot, and Daggers to twelve Inches, besides the Hilts.
Buildings likewise in the Suburbs were restrained, In-mates forbidden, and
express charge set forth, That no dwelling house should be new built within
three miles of any of the City Gates, under pain of imprisonment, and loss of
the materials. In her time was set on foot by Sir Thomas Smith, the Law made
for the serving of Colleges with provision, to the great benefit of those
Scholasticall Societies. In her two and fortieth year, she sets forth
Proclamations against the Transportation of Gold or Silver, wrought or
unwrought, according to the former Acts of Parliament in that case provided.
This year also she founded the Company of the East India Merchants, and allowed
them ample Privileges. In her three and fourtieth year, all Monopolies are
called in by Proclamation. In her four and twentieth year, severe Laws are made
against Papists, some inflicting death, some fine and imprisonment. In her
eight and twentieth year, a Proclamation was set forth, prohibiting to sow Wo^d
within eight miles of any of the Queens Houses, and four miles off any Cities
or Towns Corporate.

AFFAIRS of the CHURCH in her time.
ON Sunday the first of January, next after the Queens coming to the Crown, by
virtue of her Proclamation, the English Letany was read accordingly as was used
in her Graces Chapel, in all Churches through the City of London, and likewise
the Epistle and Gospel of the day, begun to be read at Masse-time in the
English Tongue. Also in a Parliament holden in her first year, the first Fruits
and Tenths were restored to the Crown, and the Supreme Government over the
State Ecclesiastical, and the book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments in the English Tongue was restored, and by degrees the Protestant
Religion was established. The Bishops that refused the Oath of Supremacy, were
all removed, and Protestant Bishops placed in their room. It was enacted also,
That all persons should go to Divine Service upon Sundays and Holy Days, and
a Fine of twelve pence imposed upon every one that should be absent, and the
same to be given to the poor. In her fourth year, the Queen was solicited by
Pope Pius, to send her Orators to the Council of Trent, which she refused, as
not acknowledging it a lawful Council. In a Parliament holden in her eighth
year, it was enacted, and by a general consent declared, That the Election of
the Archbishops and Bishops in England, together with their Consecration,
Confirmation, and Investiture (which some persons slanderously called in
question) was lawful and Canonical, and that they were rightly, and according
to the Acts and Statutes of the Kingdom, chosen and consecrated. In her
eleventh year, there arose in England two contrary factions in Religion: on the
one side, Thomas Harding, Nicholas Sanders, and other Divines that had fled out
of England, began to exercise the Episcopal Jurisdiction upon the Queens
Subjects, which they had derived from the Sea of Rome: On the other side,
Colman, Burton, Hallingham, Benson, and other, making profession of the pure
Religion, would allow of nothing but what was directly taken out of the
Scriptures, openly condemning the received Discipline of the Church of England,
together with the Church Liturgy, and the very Calling of Bishops, as savouri^g
too much of the Romish Religion, protesting in the Pulpi^s, That it was an
impious thing to hold any thing common with the Church of Rome; and used all
diligence to have the Church of England reformed in every point, according to
the Rule of the Church of Geneva. These, although the Queen commanded to be
committed to prison, yet it is incredible how upon a sudden their followers
increased, known by the envious name of Puritans. This sect so mightily
increased, that in her sixteenth year, the Queen and Kingdom was extremely
troubled with some of the Clergy, who breathing out nothing but Evangelicall
parity, cried down the Ecclesiastical Form of Government (as a thing polluted
with Roman dr^ggs) and setting forth Books likewise, Entitled, The Admonition
to the Parliament, and the Defense of the Admonition: they refused to resort to
the Divine Service publicly in use, and framed to themselves other Rites.
Whereupon, the Queen, to suppress them, whom by no means she liked, commanded
every where the severity of the Law touching the Uniformity of Common Prayer,
to be put in execution, and those books, upon pain of Imprisonment, to be
delivered into the hands of the Bishops, or some of the Queens Council. And
this year were taken at Mass in their several houses, the Lord Morley's Lady
and her children, the Lady Guildford, and the Lady Brown, who being thereof
indicted and convicted, suffered the penalty of the Law in that case provided.
Until the twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Papists in England
were mercifully connived at, while they solemnized their own Rites within their
private houses (though that also were against the Laws) but when as that
Thunderbolt of excommunicating the Queen came abroad, then was the Law enacted
against those who brought into the Kindome any Agn^s Dei, or hallowed Beads, or
reconciled any of the Queens subjects to the Sea of Rome; yet for six whole
years together after this Law was made, it was not executed upon any Papist,
till Cuthbert Main, a Priest, and an obstinate maintainer of the Popes
Authority against the Queen, was executed at Launston in Cornwall, and the
Gentleman's goods that harbored him confiscate, and himself adjudged to
perpetual Imprisonment. In her three and twentieth year, diverse Priests and
Jesuits came into England; amongst whom, Robert P^^sons, and Edmund Campian,
Englishmen and Jesuits, being now bound for England, to promote the Catholic
Cause; at which time a Proclamation was set forth, That whosoever had any
children beyond the Sea, should by a certain day call them home; and that no
person should receive or harbor any Seminary Priest or Jesuit. At this time
also, there arose up in Holland a certain Sect, naming themselves, The Family
of L^ve, who persuaded their followers, That those only who were adopted into
that Family, were elected, and no other could be saved, but were all
reprobates, and damned, and that it was lawful for them to deny upon oath
whatsoever they pleased, before any Magistrate or whomsoever, that were not of
their Family. Many of their books were printed, under these titles, The Gospel
of the Kingdom, The Lords Sentences, The Prophecy of the spirit of love, The
publication of Peace upon earth, by the Author H. N. but who this Author was,
they would by no means reveal: at last) he was found to be Henry Nicholls of
Leyden, who blasphemously preached, That he was partaker of the Divinity of
God, and God of his humane Nature: all which books were by Proclamation
commanded to be burnt. In a Parliament holden the eight and twentieth year of
her Reign, some, out of a desire of a Reformation, began to pick quarrels at
the Clergy, desiring to pass Laws for the restraint of Bishops in their
granting of Faculties, conferring of holy Orders, Eccles^asticall Censure, and
the Oath Ex officio. They complained likewise of the non-residency of
Ministers, and the like. But the Queen; who always hated Innovation (which for
the most part changes for the worse) would give no ear unto them; conceiving
besides, That these proceedings in Par^iament in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
derogated from her Prerogative. In her six and twentieth year, the Queen gave a
special charge to Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, to settle an Uniformity
in the Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the Laws, which through the
connivence of Bishops, and perverseness of the Puritans, lay now almost
gasping, Wh^reupon, he provided three Articles, to which every Minister should
subscribe: The first, That the Queen had Supreme Authority over all persons
born within her Dominions, of what condition soever they were; and that no
other Prince, or Prelate, or Potentate, has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Civil or Ecclesiastical, within her Realms and Dominions. The
second, That the Book of Common Prayer, and of the Ordination of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, contains nothing contrary to the Word of God, but may
lawfully be used; and that they will use that, and none other. The third, That
the Articles agreed on in the Synod holden at London, in the year 1562, and
published by the Queens Authority, they did allow of, and believe them to be
consonant to the Word of God.


It is incredible, what reproaches the Archbishop incurred by setting forth
these Articles, both from factious Ministers, and from some also of the
Nobility; yet by his patience and constancy, he brought at last Peace to the
Church, making this his Motto, Vincit qui patitur. Neither did these at home
only disturb the Peace of the Church, but others also from abroad, as Robert
Brown, a young Student of Divinity in Cambridge; from whom came the Sectaries
called Brownists; and Richard Harrison, a petty Schoolmaster. These presuming
to judge matters of Religion by their own private spirit, by books set forth in
Zealand, and dispersed at this time over England, condemned the Church of
England for no Church, and ensnared many in the nets of their new Schism.
Neither could they be restrained, though their books were prohibited by the
Queens Authority, and soundly confuted by sundry learned men; and one or two of
the Ringleaders executed at S. Edmunds Berry. In her one and thirtieth year,
these Puritans flames brake forth again, Books are written by the names of
Martin Mar-Prelate, and A Demonstration of the Discipline, by Penry and ^^dall,
against the Government of Bishops; and nothing would please them, but the
Discipline of Geneva: Many Abettors they had, Knightly and Wigstone, Knights,
besides Cartwright (the father of them) Snape, King, Pradlow, Pain, and others;
who though called in question, fined and imprisoned, could never be reclaimed.
In her six and thirtieth year, the Queen caused the severity of the Laws to be
executed upon Henry Barrow and his Sectaries, for disturbing the Church, and
the public Peace, by scattering of their monstrous Opinions, condemning the
Church of England as no Christian Church, and derogating from the Queens
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical.

WORKS of Piety in her time.
THis Queen converted Westminster Abbey into a Collegiate Church, and there
ordained a Dean, twelve Prebendaries, a Master, Usher, and forty Scholars,
Vicars, Singing-men, and twelve Alms-men. In her third year, the
Merchant-Taylors, founded a notable Grammar School, in the Parish of S.
Lawrence Pountney in London. Also this year, William Harper, Mayor of of
London, founded a Free School in the Town of Bedford, where he was born. In her
seventh year, on the seventh of June, Sir Thomas Gresham laid the first stone
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, which in November the year after, at his
own charges was finished, being the year 1567. In her tenth year, the Citizens
of London builded a new Conduit at Walbrook corner, near to Dowgate, the water
whereof is conveyed out of the Thames. Also this year, Sir Thomas Roe Mayor of
London, caused to be enclosed within a wall of Brick, one Acre of ground, near
unto B^dlam, without Bishops-Gat^, to be a place of Buryall for the dead of
such Parishes in London as lacked convenient ground within their Parishes: He
also builded a convenient room in Paul's Churchyard, on the South side of the
Cross, to receive a certain number of Hearers at the Sermon time. Sir William
Peter, having himself been born at Exceter in Devon-Shire, he gave to Exceter
College in Oxford, a hundred pounds Lands a year: He also builded at
Ingerstone in Essex, Almshouses for twenty poor people, and giving them some
competent maintenance. Sir Thomas Gresham had his dwelling house in
Bread-str^et London, which he dedicated to the profession of the Liberal
Sciences, erecting there Lectures of Divinity, Civil Law, Physic, Geomitry,
Astronomy, Music, and Rhetoric, alotting to the Professors very competent
allowance. In her seventeenth year, died Matthew Park^r, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who founded a Grammar School in Rochdale in the County of
Lancaster: He also procured to Corpus Christi College in Cambridge, thirteen
Schollarships, and built two Chambers for Scholars, and the inward Library of
the same College, and procured to it the Patronage of S. Mary Abchurch in
London, with many other works of like kind. Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper
gave for six Scholars to be found in Ben^t College in Cambridge, three
pounds, six shillings and eight pence a piece for ever. Edmund Grindall
Archbishop of Canterbury, founded a Free School in Cumberland, where he was
born, and gave many Pensions to both Universities. Frances, Countess of
Sussex, sister to Sir Henry Sidney, founded Sussex-Sidney College in
Cambridge: As likewise Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of the Exchequer, founded
Emmanuell College in the same University. Sir Thomas Bodley erected and
furnished the famous public Library at Oxford. Alexander Nowell Dean of Paul's,
endowed Brazen nose College in Oxford, where he was brought up, with two
hundred pound per annum, and died in the year 1602. Sir Roger Manhood, chief
Baron of the Exchequer, built seven Almshouses in Canterbury, giving to every
Alms-man four pounds yearly: and our worthy Countryman William Lambard built
an Almshouse at Gr^enwich, which he called, The College for the poor of Queen
Elizabeth.

CASUALTIES in her time.
IN the first year of her Reign, died Sir Thomas Cheyney, Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, of whom it is reported for certain, That his Pulse did beat more
then three quarters of an hour after he was dead, as strongly as if he had been
still alive. In her third year, there was found near Keswrick in Cumberland, a
most rich Veyn of pure and native Brass, which had lain neglected a long time:
Also the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, which is of great use in Brass Works,
was first brought into England at this time, and that in most plentiful
manner. Likewise this Queen was the first that caused Gunpowder to be made in
England, which before was had from foreign parts, and at dear rates. In her
third year, the Spi^e of the Cathedral Church of Paul's, being five hundred and
twenty foot from the ground, and two hundred and sixty from the square Steeple
where it was placed, and was made of wooden materials, but covered with Lead,
was with lightning burnt down, together with the Roofs of that large Church,
and that within the space of five hours; the Roofs were after re-edified, but
the Spire is yet wanting. The Queen gave toward it a thousand Marks in money,
and a thousand load of Timber; and the City granted a Benevo^^^ce, and three
Fifteens; and the Clergy also contributed toward it. Also this year there were
many monstrous Births: A Mare brought forth a Foal with two heads, and a long
tail growing out between the two Heads. A Sow farrowed a Pig with two Bodies,
eight Feet, and but one Head. A man-child was born at Chichester in Sussex,
having arms and legs like to an Anatomy, the Breast and Belly monstrous big,
about the neck a great collar of flesh and skin, growing like the ruff of a
Shir^. In her sixth yeer^ upon the returning of the Army from Newhaven, the
Pesti^ence war brought into England, but especially into London; where in o^e
year there died one and twenty thousand and five hundred. This year also, in
the Month of December, was driven on the shore at Grimseby in Lincolnshire a
monstrous Fish, in length nineteen yards, his tail fifteen foot broad, and six
yards between the eyes. Twelve men stood upright in his mouth to get the Oil.
In her seventh year; on the one and twentieth of De^ember began a Frost, so
extreme, that on New-yeers Even people passed over the Thames on foot; some
played at Football, some shot at pricks, as if it had been firm ground. Yet
this great Frost, the third of January at night began to thaw, and by the fifth
day, there was no Ice at all to be seen; which sudden thaw caused great
Inundations. In her eighth year, within the space of ten Months, there died in
London seven Aldermen, namely, Edward Banks, Richard Chamberlain, Sir Martin
Bows, Sir Richard Mallory, Sir William H^wet, Sir Thomas White, and Richard
Lambert, one of the Sheriffs for that year. The same year also, in the Town of
Ossestry in Wales, two hundred houses, in the space of two hours, were consumed
with fire. In her tenth year, were taken in Suffolk, at Downham Bridge near to
Ipswich, seventeen monstrous Fishes; some of them being seven and twenty foot
in length: And in the same year, many Dutch flying into England, to avoid the
persecution of the Duke D'Alva, were the first that brought into England the
Art of making Bays, Says, Serges, and such woven stuffs, both Woollen and
Linen. In her time a rich Veyn of Copper was found in the Earl of
Nor^humberlands Grounds, which she by her Prerogative seized upon. In her
thirteenth year, a prodigious Earthquake happened in the East parts of
Hereford-shire, at a little Town called Kinnaston. On the seventeenth of
February, at six of the clock in the evening, the earth began to open, and a
hill with a Rock under it (making at first a great bellowing noise, which was
heard a great way off) lifted it self up a great height, and began to travel,
bearing along with it the Trees that grew upon it, the Sheep-folds, and Flocks
of Sheep abiding there at the same time. In the place from whence it was first
moved, it left a gaping distance forty foot broad, and fourscore Else long; the
whole Field was about twenty Acres. Passing along, it overthrew a Chapel
standing in the way, removed an Ewe-Tree planted in the Churchyard, from the
West into the East: with the like force it thrust before it Highwayes,
Sheep-folds, Hedges and Trees, made tilled ground Pasture, and again turned
Pasture into Tillage. Having walked in this sort from Saturday in the evening,
till Monday noon, it then stood still. In her fifteenth year, in the Month of
November, a new Star, or rather a Meteor (but that it was found to be above the
Moon) was seen in Cathedra Cassiopeae, exceeding Jupiter in brightness, and in
that place was carried with the Diurnall motion of the Heavens sixteen Months
together, though after eight Months it was perceived to grow less and less.
In her sixteenth year, was a great Dearth, so as Wheat was sold at five and six
shillings the Bushel, and other things in proportion. In her seventeenth year,
a vast mighty Whale was cast upon the Isle of Thanet in Kent, twenty Else long,
and thirteen foot broad from the belly to the back bone, and eleven ^oot
between the eyes. One of his eyes being taken out of his head, was more then a
Cart with ^ix horses could draw; the Oil being boiled out of the head, was
Parmasittee. This year also, the River Thames ebbed and flowed twice within an
hour: and in the Month of November, the Heaven seemed to be all on fire. Also
on the four and twentieth of February, being a great Frost, after a Flood which
was not great, there came down the River of Severn such a swarm of Flies and
Beetles, that they were judged to be above a hundred Quarters; the Mills
thereabout were dammed up with them for the space of four days, and then were
cleansed by digging them out with Shovells. In her thre^ and twentieth year, in
the beginning of April, about six a clock after noon, happened an Earthquake
not far from York, which in some places, struck the very stones out of
Buildings, and made the Bells in Churches to jangle. The night following, the
earth trembled once or twice in K^nt, and again the first day of May. In her
six and twentieth year, being the year 1583, the like Prodigy happened in
Dorset-shire, as in the year 1571 had happened in Hereford-shire; A field of
three Acrees in Blackmore, with the Trees and Fences, moved from its place, and
passed over another Field, traveling in the Highway that goes to Herne, and
there stayed. In her eight and twentieth year, Tobacco was first brought out of
the West Indies into England, by Ralph Lane. In her five and thirtieth year,
there was so great a Drouth, that not only the Fields, but the Springs
themselves were dried up, and many Cattle every where died for want of water.
The River of Thames likewise did so fail, that a horseman might ride over at
London Bridge. In her six and thirtieth year, was a great Plague in London, so
as there died this year, in London and the Suburbs, seventeen thousand eight
hundred and ninety, besides the Lord Mayor, and three Aldermen; and Michaelmas
Term was holden at S. Albons.

Of her PERSONA^E and CONDITONS.
SHe was of stature indifferent tall, slender and straight, fair of Complexion,
her hair inclining to pale yellow, her forehead large and fair, her eyes
lively and sweet, but short sighted; her nose somewhat rising in the midst; the
whole compass of her countenance somewhat long, yet of admirable beauty, but
the beauty of her mind was far more admirable: She had been a subject, which
taught her to rule; she had been in misery, which taught her to be merciful;
and indeed, never Prince ruled with more Justice, and with her Justice mingled
more mercy. She had more Valor in her then was fit for a woman, but that she
was a Ruler over men; and more Humility in her then was fit for a Prince, but
that she meant to be a President to women. She delighted in nothing so much, as
in the love of her People, which she procured by ordaining good Magistrates,
and forbearing Impositions. Her way not to need them, was frugality; and her
way to have them when she needed them, was liberality. She made Honor in her
time the more honorable, by not making it common; and indeed, knowing it to be
an influence from her self, she kept it, as her self, a Virgin, and would not
prostitute it to unworthy persons. She declined being a mother of children, to
the end she might be a mother of her Country; and indeed, no mother ever loved
her children more, then she did her people; and therefore never children loved
a mother more, then her people did her. She cove^ed not so much to be an owner
of riches, as of rich Subjects; for she thought money did as well in their
Coffers, as in her own: and indeed, ^he never wanted it, when they had it; and
they always had it, when she ^^eded it. Never Prince had a wiser Coun^ell then
she, yet never Prince ^eeded it less; for she was her self a Counselor to her
Counsel. In sum, whatsoever may in flattery be said of a wise, just,
merciful, religious, and learned Prince, may truly be said of her; in all
which, if ever she had an ^^uall, yet she never certainly had a superior. In
playing her game of ^ortune, she loved not an after-game; for she liked
Preventions, better then Remedies. She was admirable in expressing her mind,
both by speech and writing: and if collection could be made of her Apophthegms,
and extemporall Orations, it would certainly excel any thing extant in that
kind: And for her writing, Sir Henry Savile affirms, That he had seen some
Translations of hers, which far exceeded the Originalls. Never Prince kept
greater State with less stateliness: Her Pensioners and Guard were always
the tallest and goodliest Gentlemen and Yeomen of the Kingdom: her maids of
Honor, and other women about her, the fairest and most beautiful Ladies of
the Realm; and yet her self a Diana amongst her Nymphs; insomuch that a great
Lord of France being entertained at Court, and the Queen asking him how he
liked her Ladies, made answer, It was hard to judge of Stars, in presence of
the Sun.

Of her DEATH and BURYALL.
IT was now the year 1602, when she feeling some Infirmities of Old Age and
Sickness, retired her self at the end of January, to Ri^hmond; at which time,
in a sad Omen, she commanded the Ring to be filed off her finger, wherewith she
was solemnly at the first inaugurated into the Kingdom, and since that time had
never taken it off, it being grown into the flesh in such manner, that it could
not be drawn off without filing. At the beginning of her sickness, the Almonds
of her Jaws began to swell, and her appetite by little and little failed her;
withal she gave her self wholly to sadness and heaviness, which some imputed
to her care for the loss of the Earl of Essex; others, because she heard, That
diverse of the Nobility sought the favor of the King of Scots, adoring him as
the Sun rising, and neglecting her: but howsoever, in March a kind of
benummednesse seized upon her, with a deep melancholy, so as she would sit
silently, refrain her meat, and not admit of any conference, but with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with whom she prayed ^ervently, till such time as her
speech failed her, which failed her a day before she died. She being in this
case, it was thought fit the Admiral and Secretary should go to her, to know
her mind concerning a Successor; to whom she gave this answer; My Throne has
been the Throne of Kings, I would not a mean person should succeed me. The
Secretary requesting her to speak more plainly, I will (said she) have a King
succeed me; and what King, but the King of Scots, my nearest Kinsman? After
this, the Archbishop exhorting her to think of God, That do I (said she) nor
do my thoughts ever wander from him. And when her tongue no longer served her,
it was evident by the lifting up of her hands and eyes, that her thoughts were
fixed upon him. And so on the four and twentieth day of March, being the last
day of the year 160^, she yielded up her soul to God, when she had lived
threescore and nine years, six months, and seventeen days; Reigned four and
forty years, four months, and seven days. Her Body was embalmed, wrapped in
Lead, and brought to White Hall, from whence on the eight and twentieth of
April following, in great solemnity, it was carried into the Collegiate Church
of S. Peter's at Westminster, and there interred in the Vault of her
Grandfather, K. Henry the seventh, in his magnificent Chapel, where our
renowned Sovereign K. James has built her a Princely Monument, inscribed with
Epitaphs to her eternal glory. At her Funeral were said to be Mourners in
black, to the number of on^ thousand and six hundred persons.

MEN of NOTE in her time.
THe Ocean is not more boundless, then the number of men of note in her time;
but though all of them cannot be reckoned, yet some of them must not be
omitted. And to begin with Sates-men: An exquisite Statesman for his own ends,
was Robert Earl of Leicester; and for his Countries good, Sir William Cecill,
Lord B^rleigh; as also Sir Francis Walsingham, that great underminer of
Conspirators. Famous Seamen, were the Earl of Cumberland, the Lord Thomas
Howard, afterward Earl of Suffolk: and of meaner Rank, Sir John Hawkins, Sir
Martin Forbys^er, Sir Walter Raleigh, Cavendish, Preston, Ryman; and, to name
the worthiest last, Sir Francis Drake, who though he were but a short square
bodied man, yet his great Acts have made the Spaniards believe that he was some
goodly Personage. Great Commanders by Land, were Robert Earl of Essex, the Lord
Willoughby, the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Francis Vere, Sir Roger Williams,
Baskervile, Savage; and the Honor of his Family, and our English Nation, Sir
John Norris. Learned Gentlemen and Writers, were Sir Thomas Chaloner, employed
by Queen Elizabeth as her Ligier in Spain, who wrote five books of the
restoring of the English Commonwealth, in elegant Verses, while (as he said)
he lived in a Stove in Winter, and in a Barn in Summer: Roger Askam, born in
Yorkshire, notably skillful in the Greek and Latin Tongues, who had sometime
been Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, and her Secretary for the Latin Tongue;
but taking too great delight in Gaming and Cock-fighting, he both lived and
died in mean estate, yet left behind him sundry Monuments of Wit and Industry.
Sir Thomas Smith, born at Saffron Walden in Essex, sometime Secretary to K.
Edward the 6, who wrote an imperfect Work of the English Commonwealth, a
singular Book of the Orthography of the English Tongue, and another of the
Pronunciation of the Greek; the first man that set on foot the Law for serving
the Colleges with Provision. Sir Henry Savill, Provost of Eaton, and Reader to
Queen Elizabeth, who set forth all S. Chrysostomes works in Greek, and by
translating of Cornelius Tacitus,, deserved as much of the English Tongue, as
he of the Latin: But above all, the admirable sir Philip Sidney, who by writing
in a light Argument, showed how excellently, and beyond all comparison he could
have done in a grave. Learned Divines were John Jewel, born in Devon-shire, a
Student in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, in Queen Mary's time an Exile, by
Queen Elizabeth made Bishop of Salisbury, who wrote an Apology for the
Protestant Doctrine, and died at scarce fifty years of age, in the fourteenth
year of Queen Elizabeth. John Whitaker, Master of S. John's College in
Cambridge, who learnedly answered all the books of Bellarmine. Bilson, Bishop
of Winchester, sometimes Fellow of New College in Oxford, who, amongst his
other learned Works, has written notably of Christ's descent into hell. Richard
Hooker, Preacher at the Temple, who with too much meekness smoothered his
great Learning, yet has something discovered it in his five Books of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and died in the year 1599. Alexander Nowel, Dean of
Paul's, who forbearing deeper Works, set forth a Catechism, according to the
Doctrine of the English Church, and died in the year 1602. After such men, it
might be thought ridiculous to speak so Stage Players; but seeing excellency in
the meanest things deserves remembering, and Boscius the Comedian is recorded in
History with such commendation, it may be allowed us to do the like with some
of our Nation. Richard Bourbidge, and Edward Allen, two such Actors, as no age
must ever look to see the like: and, to make their Comedies complete, Richard
Tarleton, who for the Part called the Clowns Part, never had his match, never
will have. For Writers of Plays, and such as had been Players themselves,
William Shakespeare, and Benjamin Johnson, have specially left their Names
recommended to posterity.

THE REIGN OF King James.
JAMES the fourth King of Scotland, married Margaret eldest daughter of Henry
the 7 K. of England, by whom he had James the 5, who had one only child Mary Q.
of Scots, who had one only son James the 6, who from James the fourth had
undoubted right to the Kingdom of Scotland^ and from Margaret, King Henry the
7 eldest daughter (the male line being clean extinct) unquestionable title to
the Crown of England: whereupon Q. Eliz. being dead about 10 a clock in the
morning, K. James the 6, K. of Scotland was the very same day (M. Secretary
Cecill himself reading his Title, and Q. Eliz. Will) proclaimed K. of Eng.
Scot. and Ireland, by sound of Trumpet, first at White Hall, and then in
Cheapside, in presence of all the Lords and the Counsel, and other of the
Nobility, with a general acclamation of all sorts of people, that we may truly
say, sorrow was never more deceived than at this time; for where upon the death
of Q. Eliz. It was expected there would be nothing for a long time but
sorrowing and lamenting. Now that very sorrow was swallowed up of joy, her
death bringing with it no other alteration but only of sex, in all other points
in a manner the same, the like wisdom, the like learning, the like Justice,
the like religiousnesse in them both: only bettered in this, that we changed a
Q. of 70 years old, whom we could not look to keep long, for a K. of 36, whom
we might well hope to enjoy many years.

Q. Eliz. was not sooner dead^ but Sir Robert Carry a younger son of the Late L.
Hunsdon, posted away unsent, to K. Ia^es in Scotland, informing him of the
accident^ for bringing which news, the K. afterward rewarded him with making
him a Ba^on of the Realm, and L. of Leppington. But though it were sufficient
for the K. information that he heard the news by Sir Robert Carye; yet it was
not sufficient for the Lords of the Counsel in discharge of their duty, if he
heard it not from them, and therefore within a very few days, as soon as they
could provide fit men, they sent first Sir Charles Percy and Mr. Thomas
Somerset, and after them Sir Thomas Lake Clerk of the Signet, a man well
acquainted with the State of the Kingdom, both to acquaint him with the
general applause of all the Realm, to receive him for their Sovereign, and
also inform him in what terms the State of the Kingdom stood, that so he
might not come altogether a stranger when he came into it.

Q. Elizabeth indeed had left him not only a Kingdom, but a Kingdom without
incombrance; No wars abroad, no sedition at home, and not only so, but a
kingdom furnished with all the fruits of Peace, plenty of all things necessary,
and of all necessary things; the chiefest a wise Counsel, for the left Sir
Thomas Egerton L. Chanselor, Thomas L. Buckhurst, L. Treasurer: Charles E. of
Nottingham, L. Admiral and Sir Rob. Cecill principal Secretary. Four such men
that the meanest of them were sufficient to sit at the Helm of any Kingdom.
Yet to these and (...) other besides (all wh^^ the K. now by his letters
authorizeth to exerc^^^ ^^eir several places, ^s formerly they had done) he
adds certain new ones of his own choosing, as namely the E. of
Northumberland, and Cumberland^ the L. The. Howard, and then after the L. Henry
Howard; the one the brother, the other the son of the late D. of Nor^olk, who
had suffered so much, that at last, he suffered for the Q. his mother. But
although the calling of these two last to such place, was done (no doubt) out
of ^avour to that house; yet one of them being known, the other doubted to be a
Papist, it was presently apprehended, as a fa^vour to that sid^; and the
Catholics were not a little confident of his good inclination to them all in
general. And it was indeed but necessary they should at this time have such a
conceit, for in the late Q. sickness, a little before her death, Pope Clement
the 8, had written two Brieves to the Catholics in England, to admit of none
to succeed in the Kingdom, when that miserable woman should happen to dye (so
he pl^ased to s^il^ the most glorious Q. that ever lived) but such a one, of
whose good inclination to the Sea of Rome, they should at least be well
persuaded. And now K. James having settled the Government of his Kingdom of
Scotland, and made convenient preparation for his journey: on the 5 of April
1603, he set forward, and rode that day from Edinburgh to Dunglasse, and from
then^^ the next day to ^^rwick; who having stayed two days^ the 8 of April he
r^de to With^rington^ a house of Sir Robert Caries, from thence the 9 to
Newcastle, wh^re he stayed Sunday and heard the Bish. of Durham preach, and so
joyful were the Townsmen of his being there, that all the time of his stay
they bore the charg^ o^ his household. The 13 of April he set forward to
Durham, and from thence the 14 to Walt^orth, the 15 toward York, where his
train increased to such a multitude, that he was feign to publish an
inhibition of the peoples resort, and flocking to him. At York it was a
question to whom it belonged to bear the sword before the K^ in that place,
for both the E. of Cumberland claimed it, as her^ditary to his House, and the
President of the North claimed it as belonging to his place, but it was
adjudged to George E. of Cumberland, who accordingly did it^ from York the 18
day the K. r^de to Grimston, to a house of Sir Edw. Stanhopes, the 19 to P^^f^^
and so to Duncaster, where he lodged at the sign of the Bear and Sun^ The 20^
of April ^e rode toward Worsuppc. a house of the E. of Shrews^^ri^s; from
thence the 21 to Ne^^rk upon Trent, where a Cutpurse being taken in the fact,
was by the K. warrant hanged, a most unseasonable delinqe^nt, who would force
the K. to commit Justice at a time when he intended nothing but mercy, the as
to Beaver Castle, a house of the E. of Rutlands, hunting all the way as he
rode: From Beaver the 23 to Burleigh, who having stayed 2 or 3 days, the 27 he
removed to Hitchinbr^^k, a house of Sir Oliver Cromwels, where the heads of the
University of Cambridge met him^ From thence he rode toward Royston, and as he
passed thorough Godmanchester a Town close by Huntington, the Bayliffes of Town
presented him with 70 Teeme of horse, all traced to fair new Ploughs^ at which
the K. wondering, they said, it was their ancient custom so to do, when any K.
of England passed thorough their Town, and by which as being the K. tenants
they held their Land. At Royston he lodged that night at M. Chesters house, at
his own charge, which he had not done before, since his coming into Eng. The
^0 of April he rode to Stand^^, a house of S. Thomas Sadlers, where he stayed
Sunday, and heard the Bish. of London preach. The 2 of May he removed to
Brosbourne, a house of S^ Henry Cocks, cofferer to the late Q. and now to the
K. where ^^t him the L. Keeper, the L^ Treasurer, the L. Admiral and diverse
other Lords: The 3 of May he came to Theobalds, a house of Sir Robert Cecils;
when all the Lords of the late Queens most honorable Privy Counsel; presented
themselves, and th^r^ the Lord Keeper made a grave Oration. At this house, the
fourth of (...), the King made diverse Noblemen of Scotland, of his Privy
Counsel here in England; namely the Duke of L^n^x, the Earl of Mar, the
Lord (...), Sir ^^^rg^ (...), Treasurer of Scotland, S. James Elphingston his
Secretary and the Lord of Kinlosse made afterward Mr. of the Rolls. Saturday
the se^^^th of May, he rode toward London, where by the way, the Sheriff
Swyn^er^^^ and the Aldermen met him; and by their Orator Mr. Richard Martin;
made him an eloquent Oration; and then he rode on to the Charter House nee^e
Smithfield, a house belonging to the Lord Thomas Howard, where he stayed four
days: and at his departing from thence made the Lord Zouche^ and the Lord
Burgley, of his privy Counsel. But we must here omit, that from the Kings
first setting forth of Scotland^ as he was in all places received with most
Royal entertainment and rich presents; so he again carried himself most
affable, and distributed his favors in most plentious manner: in some places,
discharging all prisoners, but such as lay for Treason or murder: but
specially in conferring the order of Knighthood, of which sort the first he
made, was Mr. John Peyton, son to Sir John Peyton, Leiutenant of the Tower.
After him diverse Scots in sundry places at Theobalds, eight and twenty; (of
which number the compiler of this work, though the unworthiest was one;) at
Charter House above fourscore: and not many days after, no fewer than at
least a hundred, and before the year went about, God knows how many hundreds;
that one would wonder what the King would do with so many Milites, having no
war to^ard. But it wa^ indeed fit to give a vent to the passage of Honor,
which during Queen Elizabeth's Reign had been so stopped, that scarce any
County of England had Knights enough in it to make a Jury.

Before we go further, it will not be amiss, to show what great men attended
King James out of Scotland; as namely the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Mar,
the Lord Hame and many other great Lords: and many other whom he afterward made
great Lords, as bring in his special favor; first Sir George Hame, made
afterward Earl of Dunbarre: then Sir Thomas Erskin, made Earl of Kelly; then
Sir John Ramsey made Earl of Holdernesse; (which two last had the fortune to
come first in to his rescue against the Gowries) then Sir James Hay, made
afterward Earl of Carlisle; and then Sir Richard Preston made Earl of Kildare
in Ireland; but whose great fortune by marrying the Heir of that Earldom,
was afteward the occasion of his great misfortune; for coming out of Ireland
he was unfortunately cast away and drowned.

But though King James was now safely come himself to London; yet he accounted
himself but half come, until his Queen and children were come to him; and
therefore there are now appointed to go to conduct them, of Lords, and Earl
of S^ssex, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Compton, the Lord Norris, and Sir
George Carow Knight, Lord President of Munster: of Ladies the Countess of
Worcester, the Countess of Kildare, the Lady Anne Herberts daughter to Henry
Earl of Pembrooke; the Lords Scroopes Lady, the Lady Rich wife to the Lord
Rich, and the Lady Walsingham, one of the late Queens bedchamber: But although
these only were appointed to go, yet many other Lords and great Ladies went of
themselves to attend her Majesty, as the Countess of Bedford, the Lady
Hastings, the Lady Cecill, the Lady Hatton, the Lady Harington, and diverse
other: and with this Princely attendance, the Queen with two of her children,
namely Prince Henry of the age of nine years, and the Lady Elizabeth on the
eleventh of June came to York: where resting themselves some few days, on the
seven and twentieth of June they came to Easton in Northamptonshire, a house of
Sir George Fermors, where the King met them at dinner: and afterward they rode
together to a house of Sir John Fortescue, and so to London. The Kings younger
son, Charles Duke of Albany came not at this time, as being not three years
old, and therefore not thought able to endure such a journey, but the year
following falling sick of a feavor, Doctor Atkins one of the Kings Physicians
was sent to conduct him, who in six weeks cured him of his feavour; and the
first week of October brought him safe to Windsor, where the King then lay;
for which service he was so well rewarded, that together with the gayn^s of his
usual practice^ he grew to a greater wealth then was usual for Physicians.

King James had distributed the meaner Order of Knightho^d very plentifully;
now he thinks fit to raise his distributions to a higher degree, and thereupon
on the twentieth of May, he made Sir Robert Cecil Baron of Esindon; Sir Robert
Sidney Baron of Penshurst; Sir William Knowles Baron of Greyes; and Sir Edward
Wooten Baron of Morley: and not long after he made the Lord Henry Howard Earl
of North-Hampton; and Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckhurst, he made Earl of Dorset.

The King had by this time found the love and affection of his own people; but
the affection of neighboring Princes toward him stood yet in suspense, when
now to take away that doubt came first in the beginning of June, an Ambassador
from the Palsgrave of Rhyne; presently after another from the States of Holland
and Zeland; another from the Archduke of Austria; another from the King of
Spain; from the Seignory of Venice another; another from the Duke of Florence;
and lastly on the eight of June, Mon^ieur de Rhosny from the King of France:
all congratulating his happy coming to the Crown of England, for
entertainment of which Ambassadors, and all other that should come after; the
King had erected an Office by the name of Master of the Ceremonies, allowing
him two hundred pounds a year Fee, and the first that had the place was Sir
Lewis Lewkenor: a Gentleman, who besides other good parts was very skillful in
the neighboring languages.

Upon the seventeenth of May this year, were made fourteen Sergeants at Law:
whereof eleven had received Writs the last year of Queen Elizabeth: namely,
Thomas Coventry, Robert Haughton, Lawrence Tanfield, John Crook, Thomas
Foster, Edward Philips, Thomas Harris, James Altham; Henry Hubbard; Augustine
Nicholls; and Robert Perker; to whom the King added three new; John Sherley;
George Snygge; and Richard Hutton, who all kept their Feast together in the
Middle Temple Hall

One would think that by this time, all Offenses against Queen Elizabeth had
been forgotten: but King James more tender of wrongs done to her than to
himself, would not suffer Valentine Thomas so to escape; who after he had lain
many years prisoner in the Tower, was on the fourth of ^une arraigned at the
Kings Bench-Barre; and for conspiracy against the late Queen and some of her
Counsel, was on the seventh of June after six a clock at night, drawn to S^^
Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered.

About this time the Honorable Charles Lord Montj^y, returned out of Ireland;
bringing alone with him Hugh O Neale, Earl of Teroen; at whose coming to the
King, the Lord Montjoy was sworn of the Kings Privy Counsel, and the Earl
of Teroen who had been the cause of so much English blood shed, was yet
pardoned; and Proclamation made, that by all men he should be used with respect
and honor.

All this while the King had moved within his own Sphere, and had done nothing
out of the Realm; his first Employment abroad was now in June, to his brother
the King of Denmark, to whom he sent in Embassage the Earl of Rutland upon two
occasions: the one to be Godfather to his son, who was named Christianus, the
other to present him with the Order of the Gar^er, upon the like employment;
soon after, he sent the Lord Spen^er to Frederick Duke of Wirtenberg; which
Lords, saw the said Princes Invested with the Garter, and after honorable
entertainment returned home.

It was now a time that every man might sit under his Vine: and enjoy the
happiness of a peaceable Government: when suddenly like a storm in a fair
Summers day, brake forth a Treason of a strange Composition: for where in all
Treaso^s commonly they are all of some one Faction in this, there were people
of all sorts; Priests and Laymen, Papists and Protestants, Noblement, Knights
and Gen^lement; that one would think it should be a well managed Treason, and
yet was the shallowest that was ever set on foot; so shallow, that it could
scarce be observed, either what the Authors of it ayled, or what it was they
would h^ve done. Indeed the great favor which King James at his first coming
to the Crown, showed to the Earl of South-Hampton, was like to breed no good
blood in those that were his oposites; and it was said (how true I know not)
that as the King had sent to enlarge the Earl of South-Hampton, and appointed
him to meet him upon the way: So when he heard of an Intention that the Lord
Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh had to meet him; he sent them word they should
spare their labor. But why there it were so or no, it seems they found some
^ause of coffeehouse, and coffeehouse will never want Complyces; and by
this means was the composition of this T^eason made up, and thereupon were
apprehended Henry Lord Cobham, and George Brook his brother, Thomas Lord Gray
of Wilton, Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir Griffith Markham, and Sir Edward Parham
Knights, Bartholmew Brookesby and Anthony Copley Gentlemen, William Watson and
William Clerk Priests: But though they were apprehended in July, yet they come
not to their arraignment till November following; for by reason of the
sickness, which was then hot in London, the Term was put off till Crastino
Martini, and then to be kept at Winchester in Hamp-shire, only the Courts of
the Exchecker, Wards, Liveries and the Duchy of Lancaster were kept in the
Kings Manor at Richmond in the County of Surrey; and so in the fourth of
November following, all the foresaid Delinquents were removed from the Tower of
London and other Prisons, by strong Guards to Winchester, and there arraigned;
whose Indictment was for Conspiring, 1 To kill the King. 2 To raise Rebellion.
3 To alter Religion. 4 To subvert the State. 5 To procure Invasion by Strangers.


Concerning the first Point, it was proved, that the Lord Gray intended to
obtain the levying of two thousand men, for defense of the Low-Countreyes, and
with them to seize upon the King and Prince, and take the Lords of the
Counsel in their chambers. For the other Points, It was proved, that the Lord
Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh, met at S, Martins in the Fields; and there
consulted about raising Sedition, mooving Rebellion, altering Religion,
subverting the State, and to set up the Lady Arbella. And particularly for the
Point of subverting the State: It was proved, that Watson was designed to be
Lord Chancellor, George Brook Lord Treasurer, Sir Griffin Markham Secretary,
and the Lord Gray to be Master of the Horse, and Earl Marshall of England, and
for effecting of these Treasons, It was proved that Waston the Priest had
devised Oaths in writing, by which all parties were bound to keep them secret.
And for the last point, It was proved, that Sir Walter Ralegh was appointed to
treat with Count Aramberg for six hundred thousand C^owns, and the Lord Cobham
to go to the Archduke and to the King of Spain, to persuade them to assist
the Lady Arbella. These things being proved against them, on the days in which
they were severally Indicted, the most which was replied in mitigation of their
fault, was first by Waston, who affirmed it could not be Treason, because the
King was not yet Crowned; and then by the Lord Gray, that it was but a verbal
matter and never took effect, and therefore could be no Treason, but these
assertions being both refuted; they were al (except Sir Edw^ Parham, who only
was acquitted) on their several days of indictment, found guilty of Treason;
and had Judgment accordingly. The Priests Watson and Clerk were executde at
Winchester, the nine and twentieth of November: George Brook was beheaded the
fifth of December. but then the hand of Justice stayed^ and this was the course
which the K. held in showing mercy. After the death of the three before named
he signed three other warrants for the execution of the late L. Cobham, the
Lord Gr^y; and Sir Griffin Mark^h^m, on a certain day then following; but
before that day came he privately framed another warrant, written with his own
hand to the Sheriff; (who was then Sir Benjamin Tichburne,) by which he
countermanded the former Warrants: and that there might be no notice taken of
it: he sent it by Mr. John Gybbe: a Scotch-man: and one utterly unknown to all
the company, appointing him to deliver it so, that it might not take effect,
til after their several confessions, and at the very point of their Execution,
which was accordingly performed: At which time it was a wonderful thing to see
how the Delinquents falling on their knees, lamented their misdoings, and most
of all how they extolled the Kings unspeakable mercy. But though thus pardoned:
yet were they carried back to the Tower, where the L: Gray not long after dyed,
and in him was extinct that Barony, which had formerly bro^ght forth many
valourous and worthy men. Sir Griffin Markha^ after some time was set at
liberty and passed beyond sea, where he lived long after in mean account. The
Lord Cobham likewise was afterward discharged of imprisonment, but deprived of
his Estate, lived diverse years after in great pennury; and in him ended that
noble Family, which had flourished in great honor many Ages. Sir Walter Ralegh
was kept in the Tower, where to his great honor he spent his time in writing,
and had bin a happy man if he had never been released. But such is our state,
that no man's fortune is understood, whether it be good or bad, until it be
discovered by the Event.

But in this mean time many things had passed^ for his Majesty having deferred
the Feast of St. George until his being at some of his own houses: held now
the said Feast at Windsor, the second of July where the Prince was installed
Knight of the Garter; as also the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of South-Hampton,
the Earl of M^rre, and the Earl of Pembrooke; and at the same time were
elected the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Wirtenberg: though their investing
have been spoken off before.

And now was preparation made for the Kings Coronation, and for a preparative
unto it, h^ first restored the Earl of South-Hampton, and then raised in honor
these following: Sir Thomas Eger^on Lord Chancellour^ he made Baron of
Elsemere; Sir William Russell, Baron of Thorn^ugh; Sir Henry Gray Baron of
Grobye; Sir John Peter Baron of Writtle; Sir John Harington, Baron of Exton;
Sir Henry Denvers, Baron of Da^sey; Sir Thomas Gerard Baron of Gerads Bromely
in the County of Stafford; and Sir Robert Spenser, Baron of Wormeleyton. After
this he conferred inferior Orders; and made Knights, all the Judges and
Sergeants at Law, all Civilians and Clerks of the Signet: all his Gentlemen
Vshers and diverse other: and lastly made Knights of the Bathe threescore and
two, most of them Noble men's sons, and the rest Gentlemen of special worth.
These things done, on the five and twentieth of July being St. James day; the
King and Queen were together crowned, and anointed at Westminster by the hands
of John Whitegift Archbishop of Canterbury, in presence of the Nobility and
other, namely Sir Robert Lee Lord Major of London, in a gow^e of Crymson
Velvet, his brethren the Aldermen in gowns of Scarlet, and twelve principal
Citizens admitted to attend on them: all other Citizens stayed from passing
thither, either by water or by Land, by reason of the sickness; and the first
of A^gust following, all suitors were by Proclamation forbidden to repay^e to
the Count till the winter following.

At this time the King forgot no^ a deliverance he had formerly had, which
though it were had in Scotland, yet he would have notice of it taken in
England, which was his deliverance from the conspiracy of the Go^ries, on the
fifth day of August three ye^^es before, and thereupon Friday being the fifth of
August was by commandment appo^^^ed to be kept Holy day with Morning Prayer,
Sermons, and Evening Prayer that day, and Bonfires ^t night which was then; and
after during his life solemnly o^^erved.

King Ia^^^ had in hi^ a^ it were two Persons; one as he was King of Scotland;
and in this he was in perfect amity with ^he King of Spain^, another as he was
King o^ England, and in this he had some difference with Spain; but he, as Rex
pacific^^, ^^oke the best from both, and was altogether for the Olive branch,
and thereupon when at his coming into England, he found letters of Mart
granted against Spaniards: he first caused them all to be called in, and then
cons^nted to a Treaty of per^it reconcilment: In which Treaty handled at
London, the 18 o^ August 16^4: The Commissioners for the King of England were
Thomas Earl of Dorset, Charles Earl of Nottingham, Charles Earl of
Devonshire, Henry Earl of North-Hampton and Robert Viscount Cranbourne: For
the King of Spain, John de Velasco Constable of Castile, John de Tassis Earl
of Villa Media^a, and Alexander Robidius Professor of the Law in the College
of Millaine: For the Archdukes, Charles Count of Aramberg, John Richardo^
President of the Privy Counsel, and Lodowick Verreikin principal Secretary:
by whom a Peace being concluded and contained in many Articles. The Somer
following, the King of Spain sent Don John de Velesco Constable of Castile and
Duke of Fryas, also Pedraca de la Syerra, his great Chamberlain: accompagnied
with diverse Marquises, Earls and Barons, who coming into England, were by
the Earl of Devonshire on the nineteenth of August brought to the Court, where
the King in his Chapel in the presence of the ^ommissioners and other English
Lords, (the Duke of Fryas holding the Kings hands between his) took his Oath
upon the holy Bible, religiously to observe and keep all the Articles of the
Peace and League agreed upon, and in March following, being now the third year
of King James, Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of England was
sent into Spain to take in like manner the King of Spaine's Oath: who
accompanied with three Barons, and many Knights, Gentlemen and other, to the
number of six hundred and fifty, the fifteenth of April arrived at Groyne,
from whence he was conducted to Valledolid, three hundred miles off, where the
King of Spain then kept his Court, enterteined in all places as he passed, at
the King of Spaine's charge, with so great provisions and such demonstration of
love and gladness: that it plainly showed the Spaniards were as glad of our
friendship as we of theirs. The Lord Ambassador being come to Court: He caused
Thomas Knoll Esquire, to deliver the presents sent from the King of England,
which were siz goodly Horses, with saddles and saddle clothes very richly
imbrodered, whereof three for the King, and three for the Queen: two crossebows
with sheafes of arrows^ four fowling pieces, inlaid with plates of Gold: and a
couple of Lyme hownds, of singular qualities: which the King and Queen in very
kind manner accepted, and then on the thirtyth of May, the Lord Ambassador
being sent for, the King came forth into a large room: where having a little
Table set before him, and a Bible very reverently laid upon it, together with a
Crucifix: The Archbishop of Toledo read the Oath, at the reading whereof, the
Lord Ambassador held the Kings hands between his and the King kneeling down,
laid his hands upon the Book, and after his Oath, subscribed to the Articles
formerly concluded. Whilst the E. of Nothingham was thus employed in Spain,
the right honorable Edward Earl of Hartford, was likewise sent Emb^ssador to
Albertus and Isabella, Archdukes of Austria, to take their Oaths, for
confirmation of the said Articles of Peace, which were taken at Bruxell the
first of May with great State and solemnity: After which, as the Earl bestowed
on the Archduks servants, to the full sum of three thousand pouns; So the
Archduke at his departy, bestowed upon the Earl, a Jewel worth nine hundred
pounds, and a suite of Arms worth three hundred, and bore his charges all the
time of his stay at Bruxels. And now was King James, truly Rex Pacificus, Piece
and amity with all Princes of Christendom, which few of his Ancestors ever
were

A little before this, in the Month of August, in the year 1604, the strong
Town of Ostend in Flanders, after above three years siege, and the slaughter of
a hundred and twenty thousand men of both sides, and in defense whereof, Sir
Francis Vere General, and his brother Sir Horatio Vere had showed great
Valor, was by the Marquis Spinola taken; for which Service, the King of Spain
made him Duke of Santa Severina, and Lord General of all his Forces in the
Low-Countryes.

It was now the third year of King James his Reign, when he kept Saint
Georges Feast at Grenwich, and there made two new Knights of the Garter;
namely, the High and Mighty Prince Duke Ulrick, heir of Norway, and brother to
our gracious Queen Anne: and the right Noble Lord Henry Howard, Earl of
North-Hampton. And upon the Saturday following, in the Hall at Grenwich, being
richly hanged with Arras, he created three Earls, one Viscount and four
Barons: namely, Sir Robert Cecil Viscount Cranbourne, he created Earl of
Salisbury: Thomas Cecil, Lord Burley his eldest brother, he created Earl of
Exceter, and Sir Philipe Herbert, younger brother to the Earl of Pembrooke, he
created Earl of Montgomery: then Robert Sidney Baron of Penshurst, Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen, he created Viscount Lisle: Sir John Stanhope,
Vicechamberlaine to the King, he made Lord Stanhope of Harington: Sir George
Carew Vicechamberlaine to the Queen, he made Lord Carew of Clopton^ Master
Thomas Arundell of Devonshire, he made Lord Arundell of Wardez: and Master
William Cavendish, he made Lord Cavendish of Hardwick.

About this time a strange fancy possessed the brains of a professed
Physician, one Richard Haidock of new College in Oxford, who pretended to
preach at night in his sleep, in such sort, that though he were called aloud or
stirred and pulled by the hands or feet, yet would make no show of either
hearing or feeling: And this he did often, in the presence of many honorable
persons, that came to hear him; so as within a short time, his fame was spread
thorough the land, by the name of the sleeping Preacher. At length the King
commanded him to be brought to the Court, where his Majesty sat up the most
part of a night to attend the event: when at last, Haidock making a show to be
a sleep, began to Pray; then taking a Text, made his Division; applying it to
his purpose, for in his Preaching his use was to Inveight against the Pope,
against the Cross in Baptism and against the last Canons of the Church of
England; and having ended his Sermon seemed to continue sleeping. His Majesty
having well observed the manner of his carriage; after a few days, called the
said Haidock before him, and in Conference with him (as he had indeed an
admirable sagacity in discovering of Fictions) made him confess, that all he
did was but imposture: and thereupon to fall upon his knees, and ask
forgiveness, which the King granted, upon condition, that in all places he
should openly acknowledge his offense; because many were brought into belief,
that his nightly preaching was either by inspiration or by vision.

We may not here think it unworthy the relating, seeing King James thought it
not unworthy the seeing, thereby to observe the nature of the Lion, and made a
solemn matter of it: for on Monday the 3 of June (taking with him the Duke of
Lenox, and diverse Earls and Lords) he went to the Lions Tower and caused two
Lions a male and a female, to be put forth, and then a live Cock to be cast
before them which they (as being their natural ennemy) presently killed and
sucked his blood. Then a live Lamb to be put down to them, which the
generous Lions (as having respect to its Innocence) never offered to touch,
though the Lamb was so bold to go close unto them. Then the King caused those
Lions to be taken away and another Lion to be put forth, and two Mastifs to be
put into him, who presently flew upon the Lion and turned him upon his back,
and though the Lion were superior to them in strength, yet it seems they were
his matches in courage and so much superior, as that they were the first
assailants, with whom otherwise, perhaps the Lion would not have offered to
meddle.

On Friday the 4 of January in the Kings second year, Charles Duke of Albany
the Kings second son being then but 4 years old, was created Duke of York;
which, because it was done with extraordinary solemnity, is not unworthy to
have the manner of it, here related. First were appointed Knights of the Bathe,
the Duke of Albany himself, then the Lord Willowby, the Lord Chandois, the
Lord C^mpton, the Lord Norris, William Cecill, son and heir to the Viscount
Cranbourne, Allan Percy, brother to the E. of Northumberland, Thomas Somerset
second son to the Earl of Worcester, Francis Manners brother to the Earl of
Rutl^^d; Thomas Howard second son to the Earl of Suffolk, and John Harington
son and heir to the Lord Harington, the Earls of Oxford and Essex were
Esquires to the Duke of Albany; all the Knights took their lodging that night
in the first Gate House going to Kings street; where they supped, and had
Bathes provided for them. The next morning being Saturday, they went out into
the Park in their Hermits weeds, the Minstrels playing and the Heralds going
before them into the Court, and so into the Chapel, where every Knight with
his Squires went to the Altar, and there offered (the Deane of the Chapel, in
a rich Cope, holding the Basin. After this they went up into their lodgings,
and ^here new attired themselves in robes of Crimsin Taffaty, with hats and
white feathers, and so went back to the great Chamber: where by the King they
were girded with the sword, and had gilt spurs put upon them. This done, they
were solemnly served at dinner, and after went again to the Chapel, and there
offered their swords. The next day being Sunday and Twelfe day in robes of
purple Sattin^ with Doctors hoods on their shoulders and hats with white
feathers, they issued out of the Revestry, with the Duke of Albany (being then
to be made Duke of York) into the Hall, where the King sat under the cloth of
Estate, and then the Heralds going before, the Knights of the Bath followed,
and then the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain came alone, then followed Henry
Howard Earl of North-Hampton and Charles Blunt Earl of Devonshire, carrying
the robes of Estate, for the Duke of York, after whom Wriothsley Earl of
South-Hampton carried the Coronet, George Clifford Earl of Cumberland, the
Golden Rod, the Earl of Worcester the Cappe of Estate, and the Earl of
Nottingham bore the Duke of Albany in his Arms, supported by the Earls of
Dorset and Northumberland, who all coming in this order before the King; the
Duke of Albany was after the Patent read Created Duke of York, with the Robes
and Coronet put on him and the Golden Rod, delivered into his hand: all which
performed, they went to dinner, and the solemnity ended.

About this time on the fifteenth of June, Thomas Douglas a Scotch-man, was
committed to the Tower and had Irons put upon him, being sent hither, but three
days before, from the Count Palatine of the Rhyne. His offense was, that he
had counterfetted the Kings Privy Seal to diverse Princes of Germany; One to
the Archbishop of Cullen, another to the Archbishop of Tryer, another to the
Duke of Cleve, another to the Archbishop of Moguntia, and a fifth to the Count
Palatine of the Rhyne^ whereof being examined and convicted; he was drawn on a
hurdle into Smithfield, and there hanged and quartered:

And now was a second Parliament appointed to be held at Westminster, on the
nineteenth of March following, when four days before the day of sitting; The
King, the Queen and Prince rode solemnly in great state thorough the City of
London, where in diverse places were erected Pageants: Presents given, Orations
made and all demonstrations of love and observance; and then the Parliament
beginning, the King made a long and loving Speech to the House, wherein he
signified the ^auses of his calling it; but in the time, when it should have
proceeded, there was suddenly discovered a Plot of Treason (^o damnable and
foul, that posteri^y will hardly think it true, when they shall hear it) the
^^ot was, to blow up with Gunpowder, both Houses of Parliament at a time, when
the King, Prince and all the Nobility should be sitting in the upper House, and
all the Knights and Burgesses in the Lower.

The principal contriver of this Plot was Robert Catesbie, a Gentleman of
great account in Northamptonshire, descended from that Catesby who had been a
special Counselor of King Richard the third, to whose family the Divine
Providence had now ordained to give a disastrous period. This Catesby not able
to perform the work himself alone, draws in many to assist him, as namely,
Thomas Percie, Thomas Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, John Wright,
Francis Tresham, Guido Fawkes, and at last Sir Edward Digby, all earnest
Papists, and all bound by Oath, and by receiving the Sacrament to be secret;
For effecting of this plot, they hired a house close adjoining to the Upper
house of Parliament, where they were to dig through a Wall, for the fit placing
of their Powder. About Candlemasse they had wrought the Wall half through: when
suddenly they heard a noise in the next room which made them fear they had
been discovered: but sending Guy Fawkes (who went now under the name of John
Johnson, as Master Percies man) to see what the matter was, he brought word,
that it was a Cellar where Sea-Coles had been laid, and were now a selling,
and the room offered to be let for a yearly rent. This room therefore as
most fit for their purpose, being right under the Parliament House, Master
Percie presently went and hired, laying into it twenty barrells of powder,
which they covered with Billets and Faggots, for being discovered. Thus the
first part of the plot was put in a good readiness. It now remained to
consider what was to be done, when the blow should be given: for though the
King and Prince might be slain, yet the Duke of York, and the Lady Elizabeth
should still be safe, and so they should be no nearer their end than now they
were. This work therefore for surprising the D. of York, Percie undertook, and
for surprising the Lady Elizabeth, they agreed upon a match of hu^ting near to
Dunchurch, under color whereof they would draw company together, and surprise
her at the Lord Haringtons house in Warwickshire, where she then lay, and then
proclaim her Queen, and so be sure to have all things done, as they would
themselves. Thus far their bloody plot went fairly on, and had perhaps gone
on so still, if they had continued only bloody; but now a tenderness of heart
took some of them, lest their friends should perish together with the rest,
and this tenderness overthrowes them; for to prevent such promiscuous
slaughter, a Letter was framed, and sent to the Lord Mounteagle, son and
heir to the Lord Morley, brought him by one of his Footmen, which he
received from an unknown man in the street. The Letter was this. My Lord, out
of the Love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your
preservation; therefore I would wish you, as you tender your life, to forbear
your attendance at this Parliament; for God and man have concurred to punish
the wickedness of this time: And think not slightly of this Advertisement:
for though there be no appe^r^ce of any stir; yet I say, they shall receive
a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet shall not see who hurts them. This
Council is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you
no harm; for the danger is past, as soon as you have burnt this Letter; and I
hope you will make good use of it.

My Lord having read the Letter, though much perplexed, yet went presently to
the Court at White-hall^ (the King being then a hunting at Royston) and
delivered it to the Earl of Salis^^^ie, principal Secretary of State, and the
Earl having read it, acquainted first the Lord Chamberlain with it, and then
the Lord Admiral, the Earl of W^rcester and Northampton, who as soon ^s the
King was returned from Hunting^ acquainted him with it: the Earl of (...)
telling hi^, th^^ he thought it must be written either by a fool, or by a mad
(...), because of those words, for the d^^ger is past as soon as you ^ave
(...) thi^ Letter) ^or i^ the da^g^r-w^re so son past, what needed (...)
warni^g^ But the (...) considering it more deeply, apprehended presently some
violent (...); and that it must be some sudden danger (...) blowing up with
powder; and thereupon commanded, than diligent search (...) be made in the
Parliament house, and all other rooms and lodgings (...) adjoyning^ which
search was made by the Lord Chamberlain, accom^^ny^^ with the Lord Mount^^gle,
who entering the Cellar under the upper (...)^ found there great store of
Faggots and Billets; which was answered to (...) Mr. P^rcie's own provision;
but then (it being considered why such sto^e (...) be laid in for Mr. Percie,
who used to make but little stay in Towne^ and ^hereu^on more diligent search
being made, there was found under the Billets one of the Barrells of powder;
and after that all the rest, being six and thirty; ^og^ther with other
instruments fit for their purpose, and then spying the (...) F^wkes to stand
suspitiously, they apprehended him, and found in his pocket a piece of
Touch-wood; a Tynder box to light the Touch-wood, and a Watch, which Mr.
Percie had bought the day before, to try the short and long burning of the
Touch-wood, which he had prepared to give fire to the train of powder. The
plot being thus discovered, yet the most of the confederates met at Dunchurch,
as they had agreed; where they divulged many detestable untruths against the
King and State: signifying withal, that they were there met for advancement of
the Catholic cause; hoping thereby to have drawn many to join with them in
their Rebellion: but this availed them no^^ing: for first Sir Richard Verney
high Sheriff of Warwickshire chased them from thence; and then Sir Richard
Welsh, Sheriff of Worcestershire, knowing them to be entered into Master
Littleton's house at Walbach, beset them round, where Cate^^i^ and Percie
issuing forth, were both slain with one shot of a Musket; and after them,
both the Wrights, John and Christopher were likewise slain outright; Thomas
Winter was taken alive; all which time, Francis Tresham remained still about
the Court, offering his service for their suppression: but being suspected, was
examined, and sent to the Tower, where he confessed all, and within a few days
after dyed of the Strangu^ie. On the seven and twentieth of January following,
a Commission was directed to diverse Lords and Judges of both Benches, for
trial of the rest of the Confederates: namely, of Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes,
Robert Keys, Thomas Bates, Robert Wint^r, late of Hoodington in Warwickshire
Esquire, John Grant, late of Yorthbrook, in the County of Warwick Esquire,
Ambrose Rookwood, late of Staningfield in Suffolk Esquire, Sir Edward Digby,
late of Gotthurst, in Buckingham-shire, Knight, who were all condemned, and had
judgment to dye, and on the thursday following Sir Edward Digbie, Robert
Winter, Grant and Bates, were accordingly drawn, hanged and quartered, at the
west end of Paul's Church in London, and on the friday, the other four; namely,
Thomas Winter, Keys, Rookwood, and Fawks were executed in the Parliament yard
at Westminster. Of all whom, none was so much lamented as Sir Edward Digbie,
and indeed worthily; for he was a goodly personage, and of excellent parts, and
had it seems been cunningly drawn in, and bound to secrecy by Oath, when he
little thought of any such treason. The seventh of November the Earl
Northumberland, upon suspicion of being acquainted with the plots, was first
commanded to keep his house, and after a while committed to the Tower. And thus
was this great plot discovered, and the Plotters punished, to the great
rejoicing of all people: insomuch, that even the King of Spain's and Archdukes
Ambassadors made Bonfires, and threw money amougst the people in token of joy.
And at this time, on the fourth of January, the Spanish Ambassador delivered a
Present to the King from the King his Master: namely six Iennets of Andalusia,
with saddles very richly imbroydered, and saddle-cloathes of cloth of Tissue:
One of which Iennets was snoe white, and had a Maine which reached to the
ground. But this was a Present sent before any knowledge had of the Powder
Treason: but as soon as that was known, there was presently another Present
sent from the Queen of Spain to the Queen of England^ of purpose to
congratulate the Kings happy delive^ance from the intended Powder Treason; and
the Present was brought by D^^ Io^n de Mendosa, which was a Roave of Murrie
Satin, imbroydered all over with Amber leather; and upon the leather, in every
s^ame and skirt twice imbroydered about with gold; the forepart whereof was
set with eight and forty tagges three inches long of beaten gold, hollow
within, and filled with Ambergris; also two large Chains of Amber-greece^
Two Carkanets of Ambergris, a velvet Cappe with gold Buttons, curiously
enammeled, and a girdle suitable to the Bu^tons; all which were presented
together in a large vessel of gold, in form of a ^ason, so as it seems there
was none rejoiced more for the overthrow of this plot for the Catholic cause,
than the Catholic King himself. And now King James, not to be unmindfull to
the Lord Monteagle, for being the means of discovering this treason, he gave
unto him in Fee Farm of Crown land 200 l. a year to him and his heirs, and
500. l. a year besides, during his life: and not to be unthankful to God for
the deliverance, he caused the fifth of November, being the day of the
discovery, to be kept holy, whith Prayers and Thanksgiving to God, which was
then solemnly performed, and has been since, and is likely for ever to be
continued.

But in the midst of this great joy, there was suddenly spread a rumor of
greater sorrow, for on Saturday the two and twentieth of March, news was
brought to the Court for certain, that the King was slain at Oking, twenty
miles from London, stabbed with an invenomed knife; whereupon the Court gates
were presently shut, and double guard set in all places about London, and all
men's minds were infinitely distracted; but within two hours all these clouds
were clean dispersed, and the Sun began to shine out again; and it was
certainly known, that the King was safe, and in perfect health: for which a
Proclamation was presently set forth to signify it to the people; and that
afternoon the King came himself to White Hall, where thousands of people,
ravished with joy, came flocking to see him; and so general was the rejoicing,
that the Spanish Ambassador, gave Sir Lewis Lewk^^r, Mr. of the Ceremonies, a
chain of gold of good value for bringing him the news: Though afterward it
was thought by some, that this rumor was but politickly devised to make the
Parliament and people more tender of the Kings safety, and by making them more
sensible what a treasure they had of his life, to make them more willing to
part with their treasure for his living, as indeed this Parliament they did,
giving more Subsidies then are usual.

The eight and twentieth of March following, Henry Garvet Provincial of the
English Jesuits, was arraigned in Guild Hall, for concealing the foresaid
treason, where he had Judgment to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, and
accordingly on the third of May, was drawn from the Tower to the west end of
Paul's Church, and there executed. At his death, he confessed his fault, asked
forgiveness, and exhorted all Catholics never to attempt any treason against
the King or State; as a course which God would never prosper.

On Tuesday the twentieth of May, were enstalled at Windsor Knights of the
Garter, Robert Cecill, Earl of Salisburie, and Thomas Howard Viscount Byndon;
both of them honorably attended, but the Earl of Salisburie beyond ordinary
proportion.

There was yet a Fag end of the late powder treason behind to be examined:
whereupon two Barons of the Realms; namely, Henry Lord Mordant, and Edw. Lord
Sturton, were brought from the Tower, to the Star Chamber: and there, not
charged indeed with any point of the treason, but only reflectingly, because
they neglected to appear at the Parliament, according to their summons, for
which neglect only, without any further charge, they were fined to pay to the
King, the Lord Mordant ten thousand Marks, and the Lord Sturton six thousand,
and to be prisoners during the Kings pleasure. But on the 27. of June H^^rie
Earl of North^mberla^d was likewise brought from the Tower to the (...)
Chamber, and more directly charged with circumstances concerning the (...),
specially in regard of Thomas Percie, whom he had admitted to be (...) of the
Kings Gentlemen Pentioners, without ministering unto him the Oath o^ Supremacy^
knowing him to be a Recusant; for which, and some misprisions, he was fined to
pay to the King thirty thousand pounds, to forfit all his Offi^^^, and to be
kept prisoner during the Kings pleasure, as indeed he continued many years,
and at last released, was yet confined.

It was now the 4. year of King James his Reign, and was a time of Princely
^i^itation; for this Summer, the 17. of July, Christianus King of Denmark,
brother to the Queen, having been long expected, with eight ships came into
the River of Thames, and Anchored before Graves-end; to whom the next day, King
James, with Prince Henry, and diverse of his Lords went by Barge, and conducted
him to London, where he stayed till the twelfth of August following: in which
time, he was entertained with all the magnificence that could be de^vised; the
King and he riding in great state through the City; where Pageants in many
places were erected; and after he had been showed the chief places about
London^ as namely, the old Exchange, the Tower, the Monuments at Westminster,
and had gone up to the top of Paul's, had been feasted by the King, by the
Earl of Salisburie four days together at Theobalds, had seen Tilting,
Fencing, wrestling, and many other pastimes, on the twelfth of August,
conducted by the King, the Queen, and Prince, with many other great Lords, he
departed to his ships, and in eight days arrived at home: A hapy thing when
Princes can converse together like private persons, and are not kept asunder
with jealousies of State.

After the King of Denmarks departure, on the 23. of September, arrived at
London Francis Prince of Vaudemount, third son to the Duke of Lorraine,
accompanied with seven Earls, ten Barons, forty Gentlemen of quality, and
six-score common persons; who all the five and twentieth of September went by
Coach to the King at Hampton Court, where foureteen days together they were
feasted and royally entertained, and then returned.

But these Festivalls were follwed with a little disturbance; for in May, the
year after, great Assemblies were gathered together in Northamptonshire,
Warwickshire, and Leichestershire, throwing down Enclosures, at first, without
any particular head: but at last rose up a base fellow, called John Reynolds,
whom they named Captain Pouch, because he had a great leather Pouch hanging by
his side, who affirmed to the Company, that in that Pouch he had sufficient to
defend them against all cummers: but when he was afterward apprehended, and
his Pouch searched, there was nothing found in it but a piece of green Cheese.
Proclamation was made, commanding them to surcease their disorder: But this
prevailed nothing, till the King sent Henry Earl of Huntington, Thomas Earl
of Exceter, Edward Lord Zouch, and Sir Edward Co^ke Lord Chief Justice of
England to suppress them by force of Arms, and to punish the Levellers
according to the nature of their offenses; some by Death, as for Treason; some
by Fines, as for Routs: but Captain Pouch was made exampler.

On Friday, the twelfth of June, his Majesty attended with diverse Lords, dyned
with the Lord Major, Sir John Wats, who after dinner presented him with a purse
full of Gold, and humbly besought his Majesty, that he would be pleased to be
free of his Company, the Cloath-workers: To which, the KING graciously
condiscended; and thereupon called to Sir William Stone, Master of the Company,
and said, Stone give me thy hand; and now I am a Cloath-worker: And in token of
my special favor to this fraternity, I do here give to this Company a brace
of Bucks yearly for ever, against the time of the Election of the Master and
Wardens: at which time also many Lords and Gentlemen were made Free of the
Cloath-workers.

On Thursday the 16. of July, the King and Prince with many Lords, dined at
Merchant T^l^rs-Hall, where the Master and Warden of that Society, presented
the King with a Purse of Gold, giving him humble thanks for gracing their
Fraternity with his ^oyall presence^ and therewithal showed him a Roll,
wherein were Registered the names of seven Kings, one Queen, 17, Princes, and
Dukes, two Dutchesses, one Archbishop; one and thirty Eearles, threescore and
six Barons, seven Abbots, seven Pryors, with a great number of Knights and
Esquires, who had been free of that Company; which His Majesty graciously
accepted, but told them, that he himself was already free of another Company:
but the Prince his son should be free of theirs, and that he would see the
Garland put on his head: whereupon the Master presented the Prince also with a
purse of Gold, which he graciously accepted, and said, that not only Himself
would be free of the Merchant Tailors^ but the Lords also that were with him
should do the like, all which was performed with great solemnity.

The fourth of July this year, Sir Thomas ^nevet was called by Writ to the
Parliament by the name of Baron of Estrick, the next day Sir Julius Caesar,
Chancellor of the Exchecker was sworn a Privy Counselor; and the sixteenth of
November fallowing Sir ^ervis Clyfton Knight, was called to the Parliament by
Writ, by the name and title of Baron of Layton Brameswold, whose only daughter
and heir, was soon after married, to Eysme Steward, Baron of Aubigny in
France, sole brother of the Duke of L^nox; whom he afterward succeeded in that
Dignity.

About this time, Hugh Earl of Tervon, most ungratefully and utterly
forgetful of the Kings great clemency to him, together with Te^rconell: Hugh
Baron of Dungaunon, and diverse other Irish Lords, fled into the parts beyond
Sea, with a purpose to solicit foreign Princes against the King, and to offer
the Kingdom of Ireland to the Pope, which was presently signified to the Realm
by Proclamation.

On the Eleventh of April this year, George Iervis a Seminary Priest, and the
three and twentieth of Iune^ following: Thomas G^rnet a Jesuit, were both
executed at Tybourn; Thom^^ Garnet having the favor offered him to be
pardoned, if he would but take the Oath of Allegiance, which he refused.

The nineteenth of April at Whitehall, died Thomas Earl of Dorset Lord
Treasurer, whose death (because he dyed suddenly as he sat at the
Counsell-Table) was by some untowardly interpreted; but being dead and his head
opened, there were found in it certain little bags of water, which whither by
the strayning of his study the night before, in which he sat up till eleven a
clock, or otherwise by their own maturity, suddenly breaking and falling upon
his brain, caused his sudden death. So certain it is that death comes not
always by determinate steps; but sometimes per saltum, and we all carry about us
the causes of sudden death, though unsensible of them till we be unsensible.
This Lord was of excellent parts, and in his place exceeding Industrious, and I
have heard many Checker men say, there never was a better Treasurer, both for
the Kings profit and the good of the subject.

The twentieth of May at Windsor, were made two Knights of the Ga^ter, George
Earl of Dun^arre, and Philip Earl of Mo^^g^mery; but the Earl of Dunbarra,
within a year or two after left both his honor and his life; but not his life
without honor, having been a faithful servant, and a wise Counselor to the
King, and was honorably Interred in the Church at Westminster.

About this time were many famous English Pirates that stuck not some of them
to turn Turks and lived in great state at Tunis, of whom the chief were W^rd,
Bishop, Sir Francis Verney and Gl^^^^le, whom after many depredations and
outrageous acts at Sea, partly the King of Spain suppressed, and partly the
King of Eng. and 19 of their associ^tes being taken, were hanged a^ Wapping.

Also at this time, in the Strand on the North side of Durham house, where
^^ood an old long stable: Robert Earl of Salisbury now Lord Treasurer of
Eng^^^d, caused to be erected a stately Building; which upon Tuesday the tenth
of April, in the year 1609, was begun to be richly furnished with wares; and
the next day after, the King, the Queen, and Prince, with many great Lords and
Ladies came to see it: and then the King gave it the name of Britteines ^urse.

On the eight of May this year, the King by Proclamation prohibited all
foreign Nations, that after August they should not fish upon any of the Coasts
of England, Scotland or Ireland, nor the Isles adjacent, without the special
License from the Commissioners in that behalf Ordained.

At this time the making of Alum, which heretofore with great charges, had
been fetched from foreign parts, was by diverse that labored in it, and now
lastly by Sir John Burchier, brought to perfection in England, and thereupon the
King prohibited upon pain of confiscation, any Alum to be brought from beyond
the Seas, and took the whole traffic thereof to himself.

And now the King according to an ancient custom, had aid of His Subjects
thorough England: for making his eldest son Prince Henry Knight, which yet
was Levied with great moderation, and the Prince to show himself worthy of it:
performed His first Feats of Arms at Barriers, with wonderful skill and
courage: being not yet full sixteen years of Age.

It was now the eight year of King James His Reign; being the year 1610,
when Prince Henry being come to the age of seventeen years; It was thought
fit, He should be Initiated into Royalty: and thereupon the thirtieth of May
this year, He was Created Prince of Wales in most solemn manner; which was
this; Garter King at Arms, bore the Letters Patents, the Earl of Sussex the
Robes of Purple Velvet, the Earl of Huntington the Train, the Earl of
Cumberland the Sword, the Earl of Rutland the Ring, the Earl of Darby the
Rod, the Earl of Shrewsbury the Cape and Coronet, the Earl of Nottingham and
North-Hampton supported the Prince: being in His Surcoate only and bare-headed:
and in this manner being conducted to the King, attended on by the Knights of
the Bathe, five and twenty in number, all great men, and great men's sons: The
Earl of Salisbury principal Secretary, read the Letters Pattents: the Prince
kneeling all the while before the King: and at the words accustomed, the King
put on him, the Robe, the Sword, the Cape and the Coronet, the Rod and the
Ring, and then kissed him on the cheek, and so the solemnity ended.

After this, it was thought fit, he should keep his Court by himself: and
thereupon Sir Thomas Chaloner, a learned Gentleman, who had before been his
Governor, was now made his Lord Chamberlain, Sir Edw. Philips his Chancellor,
and all other officers assigned him, belonging to a Princes Court: wherein he
showed himself so early ripe for Majesty, that he seemed to be a King, while
he was yet but Prince: And all men's eyes began to fix upon him.

King James had long since shut up the Gates of Ianus, and was in Peace with
all Princes abroad; his only care now was how to keep Peace at home; and to
this end, the three first days of June, in his own person he heard the
differences between the Ecclesiastical and the Temporal Judges, argued
touching Protections out of the Kings^Bench and Common Pleas, to this end, the
eight, ninth, and tenth of June, he heard the manifold complaints of the abuses
of the Victualers, and other Officers of his Navy Royal; to this end, the 4 of
June, 1610, he once again by Proclamation, commanded all Roman Priests,
Seminaries and Jesuits, as being the chief Incendiaries of troubles, to depart
this Kingdom by the 5 of July next, and not to return upon pain of severity
of the Law: also all Recusants, to return home to their Dwellings, and ^ot to
ramaine in London, ^o^ to come within ten miles of the Court, without special
License; a^^^r which Proclamation, the O^th of Allegiance was presently
ministered to all sorts of people, and their names certified to the Lords of the
Counsel, that ref^^ed to take it; and this He the rather did out of
consideration of the bloody fact, committed lately by one Revill^ck, upon the
person of the renowned K. of France, Henry the fourth, and whereas Queen
Elizabeth in her 43 years had granted her Letters Pattents to continue for 15
years, to the East India Merchants, now upon their humble petition, the King
was pleased to enlarge their Pate^^s, giving them a charter to continue for
ever, enabling them thereby to be a body Corporate and Politic, which so
encouraged the Merchants, that they built a ship of twelve hundred ^un, the
greatest that was ever made in this Kingdom by Merchants; which the King and
Prince honored with going to Deptford to see it; and then named it, The Trades
increase: and at this time gave to Sir Thomas Smith, (Governor of that
Company) a fair chain of Gold, with a Jewel, wherein was his Picture. But
this great Ship having been in the Read Sea, and returning to Banthem, was
there lost and most of her men cast away. But then the King himself builded
the goodliest Ship of War, that was ever built in England, being of the burden
of 1400 tun, and carrying threescore and four pieces of great Ordnance, which
he gave to his son Prince Henry, who named it after his own dignity, The Prince.

And now whereas a Parliament had been holden this year, and was Prorogued to a
certain day; the King perhaps, not finding it to comply with his designs, or
for some other cause known to himself, on the last day of December, under the
gr^^t S^ale of England, dissolved it.

Before this time, one Sir Robert C^rre, a Gentleman of Scotland or of the
bord^^^, being a hunting with the King, chanced with a fall off his horse to
break his leg; upon which mischance, he was forced for some days to keep his
bed, in which time the King was sometimes pleased to come and visit him: and
then it was first perceived that the King had begun to cast an eye of favor
upon him: and indeed ^ro^ that time forward (as he was a very fine Gentleman
and very wise) many great favors were heaped upon him: So as on Easter Monday,
in the year 1611, he was Created Viscount Rochester. On the two and twentieth
of April, 1612, was swo^ne a privy Counselor. On the fourth of November 1613,
was Created Earl of So^erset, and the tenth of July following, made Lord
Chamberlain.

B^^ this Sunshine of Fortune lasted not long; yet not by any inconstancy in
the King, but by the Earls own undeserving, which thus fell out: The Right
Honorable Robert Earl of Essex, had before this time married the beautiful
Lady Francis Howard, daughter of Thomas Earl of Suffolk, who upon ca^ses
^udicially heard, were afterward Divorced and left free to marry any other.
Afte^ which Divo^ce, this great favorite (the Earl of Somerset) takes her for
wife; the King g^acing their marriage with all demonstrations of love and
favor; and the Lords gracing it with a stately Masque that night, and a few
days after, the Bride and Bridegroom, accompanied with most of the Nobility of
the Kingdom were ^easted at Merchant Tailors Hall, by the Lord Major and
Aldermen. But see how soon this fair we^^her was overcast: For it happened, that
one Sir Th^mas ^^erb^ry, a very ingenious Gentleman, and the Earls special
f^^^^d, who had written a witty Tre^tise of a Wife: and it seems, not thinking
the Lady in all points answerable to his description, had been an earnest
disswa^^^ of the M^^^^, and to ^^rengthen his di^^wasion, laid perhaps some
unjust (...) upon the Ladies (...), which so incensed them both against him;
that (...) could not give them sati^^^ction, than to take away his life: So
(...) saying: Improbe (...)r, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?
(...) this, they find pretenses to have the said Sir Thomas committed to the
^^wer, and there by their Instruments effect their revenge: some say by a
^^^^oned Tansey sent him to eat, some by a poisoned Glyster ministered unto
(...), but howsoever effected it was^ for which Fact Sir Iervis Elvis then
Lieu^^^^^^ of the Tower, and three or fou^e other of inferior condition were
put to death, the Lady and Earl themselves were arraigned and condemned: but
^horough the Kings great clemency had their lives spared, but in such a sort
spa^ed^ as was to them no less grievous than death it self, being never after
suffered to see the Kings face, nor to come near his Court.

This Favorite being thus out of favor, there was place made for entertaining
another; for indeed King James was of so sociable and loving a nature, that he
could not be long well without an Alter idem; a bosom friend with whom to
communicate his Internos sensus, and upon whose shoulders he might sometimes
lay a burden, which he was not willing to beat himself; and this new friend
was Mr. George Villers, a Gentleman of a good House, but a younger brother, but
of so delicate a composure of body, and withal of so excellent pa^ts of mind,
as if nature had framed him of purpose to be a Kings Favorite. And indeed never
any man was partaker of the Royal Influence like to him, made first a Knight,
and Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, soon after made a Viscount and Master
of the Horse; a while after erected Earl of Buckingham, then Marquis of
Buckingham, and made Lord Admiral: Lastly, made Duke of Buckingham, the
greatest Title of Honor that a Subject is capable of^ and yet his Title not
greater than his Power: for all matters of Grace passed from the King by him,
and to grace him the more, his Mother (who after his Fathers death) had married
a younger son of the Lord Comptons, was created Countess of Buckingham, his
sister who had married a Gentleman of no ex^raordinary Family: had her husband
made Earl of Denbigh, his two brothers were made, one of them Viscount
Berbach; the other Earl of Anglesey; besides many other of his friends and
kindred highly advanced; For this Lord affected not an advancement that should
be only personal, but rather be in common to all his Family, and was not of
the disposition of some, who like to great Oaks, love to keep all that are
near them underwood; though it be in truth both against Nature and Policy to
stand alone, when they would be less subject to the violence of winds, if
more stood together. And though never any man had juster cause to be envyed
than he, yet never any man was less envyed; because though his Honors made
him great, yet they made him not swell, but he retained the like temper of
affable carriage after his advancement, as he had done before.

But before all these favors were heaped upon him, many other great pas^ages
had intervened; for first, after the death of Thomas Earl of Dorset, Robert
Earl of Salisbury had been Lord Treasurer, and after him Thomas Earl of
Suffolk. But this Lord, though of a most noble disposition: yet as having had
his trayning up another way, seemed less ready in discharging the place, and
whether for this, or for his Ladies taking too much upon her by his indulgence;
the staff was soon after taken from him; after whom there came in, such a
sequence of Treasures as no Age before had ever seene^ all wise and able men
indeed; but yet in whom the Office seemed an employment, rather to ennoble the
Officer than to enrich the King. For first Sir Henry Montague was taken from
the Kings Bench: and on the fourth of December 1620. made Lord Treasurer, and
presently upon it Earl of Manchester, and before the year went about put off.
After whom Sir Lyonell Cranfield, from Master of the Wards was made Lord
Treasurer, and shortly after, Earl of Middlesex: and then not only put off,
but fined to pay the King fifty thousand pounds: After him Sir James Lee from
chief Justice of the Kings Bench was made Lord Treasurer, and soon after
Earl of Marleborough; and then having made a good return of his Place, p^^ i^
off himself. After him Sir Richard W^ston, from Chancelour of the Ex^he^^^r
was made Lord Treasurer, and soon after Earl of Portland: so as within the
compass of little more than four years, four Treasurer^ in a row were made
four^ Earls; enough to make a praescription for all Treasurers hereafter, to
claim a Right of being made Earls, which yet I speak not as derogating from
those worthy men whose memories I reverence, but as observing, Fataq^e
F^rtunasque Virum; so rare as that there was never any President of the like.

Also the five and twenteth of June, 1612. the Lord S^nquer a Nobleman of
Scotland, having in a private revenge suborned Robert Carlisle, to murder John
Tu^ner a Master of Fence, thought by his greatness to have borne it out; but
the King respecting nothing so much as Justice, would not suffer Nobility to be
a shelter for villainy, but according to the Law; on the nine and twenteth of
June; the said Lord Sanquer having been arraigned and condemned by the name of
Robert Cr^ight^^ Esquire; was before Westminster Hall gate executed, where he
dyed very penitent.

About this time, the King in special favor for the present Plantation of
English Colonies in Virginia, granted a Lottery to be held at the West end of
Paul's; whereof one Thomas Sharplys a Taylour of London had the chief Prize,
which was four thousand Crowns in fair Plate.

At this time also the Corpse of Mary late Queen of Scotland, the Kings Mother
was translated from Peterborough, to St. Peter's Church in Westminster, and from
thence was carried to the Chapel Royal there; where it was interred in a
Royal Tomb, which the King had erected for her.

About this time also Sir Robert Sherley, third son of Sir Thomas Sherley of
Sussex Knight, who sixteen years past had betaken himself to travail: and
had served diverse Christian Princes for the space of five years; but chiefly
Rodolphus the Roman Emperor; who for his service, made him an Earl of the
Empire, he afterward went into Persia, and served the Persian ten years, who
made him General of the Artillery: and held him in so great account, that he
gave him the Lady Teresia in marriage, whose sister was one of the Queens of
Persia, after which the Persian employed him to sundry Princes of Europe; and
sent him in special Embassage into England to King James, to whom he delivered
his Letters, and showed his Commission, all which signified the Persians great
love and affection to his Majesty: with frank offer of free Commerce to all
his Highness Subjects, thorough all the Persians Dominions: After a years
stay here, in which time his Lady lay in of a son, to whom the Queen was
God-Mother, and Prince Henry Godfather; he left the child here in England,
and then with his Lady departed into Persia.

It was now the year 1612. and the tenth of King James his Reign, when the
Illustrious Prince Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne; with whom a Treaty of
marriage had been before, with the Lady Elizabeth: on the sixteenth of October
arrived at Gravesend; to whom the Duke of Lenox and diverse other Lords were
sent by the King, who conducted him to White Hall, and from thence into the
great B^^quetting-House, where the King, the Queen, Prince Henry, and the Lady
Elizabeth entertained him in all kind manner, and after by Barge conducted him
to Essex House, appointed for his lodging. It was many ye^res since any Kings
Daughter had been married in England; which now happening, and to so
Illustrious a Prince; was just cause of Triumph and rejoyceing^ but see the
misery of Humane Affairs; joy can no sooner be setting forth, but sorrow will
be sure to follow her at the heels, as now indeed it happened: for on the nine
and twentieth of October, the Prince Palatine, with all the great Lords of the
Kingdom in most joviall manner, dining at Guild Hall: Prince H^^^^ who wa^
also invited and expected, could not come, being newly fallen exce^ding sick of
a popular malignant feavour, which reigned that year in most parts of this
Land: whereof on the sixth of November, between seven and eight a Clock at
night, at his Court of St. James he dyed. But he being infinitely beloved of
the people, and one that had given great hope of pro^ing an Heroic Prince. It
caused suspicion in many men's heads, that his death was not without violence
offered to Nature; some said, by bunches of Grapes given him to eat: some by
gloves of a poisoned perfume, given him ^or a present: but these were but idle
rumors and conceits: It seems the Divine Providence had ordained it should be
said of him; Hanc tantum terris ^^^endent Fata nec ultra^ esse sine^t: whose
death would have given a great blow to the happiness of this Kingdom, if
there had not been another Prince left of a milder spirit perha^s, but so
accomplished with all excellent endowments, that there could be no great want
of Prince Henry, as long as there was left Prince Charles. The Corpse of Prince
Henry, who dyed at the age of eighteen years, eight months, and seventeene
days, was drawn in a Chariot to the Abbey Church at Westmin^ter, and there
interred in the Chapel Royall^ on the seventh of December following.

This Accident something appealed the general joy, but yet triumphs went on.
Upon Saint Thomas day, the Palsgrave and Grave Maurice were Elected Knight of
the Garter; and the seven and twentieth of December, the Palsgrave was
betroathed to the Lady Elizabeth. On Sunday, the seventh of February, the
Palsgrave in person was enstalled Knight of the Garter at Wind^or, and at the
same time was Grave Maurice enstalled by his Deputy, Count Lod^wick of Nassaw.
On the fourteenth of February, being Shrove-Sunday, and Saint Valentines day,
this happy marriage of the Palsgrave with the Lady Elizabeth was solemnized in
the Chapel at White Hall: The Bride was led to Church by two Batchellors, her
brother Prince Charles, and the Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal: she
was attired all in white, having a rich Crown of Gold upon her head, her hair
hanging down at length, curiously be^e^ with Pearls and precious stones, her
Train supported by twelve young Ladies in white Garments: The King gave her in
marriage, the Archbishop of Canterbury married them, the Bishop of Bath and
Wells preached the Bridal Sermon: which ended, the Bride was led home by two
married men, the Duke of Lenox, and the Earl of N^ttingham, Lord Admiral.
This marriage was solemnized the first night with a stately Masque of Lords and
Ladies: the second night with a magnificent Masque of the Gentlemen of the
middle Temple, and Lincolnes Inn: The third night with a sumptuous Masque of
the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, and Graees Inn, provided indeed then, but
was not performed till the satturday night following, by reason the concourse
of people was so great, it would have hindered the Show. After this, the Lord
Major and Aldermen gave the Bride a Chain of Oriental Pearl, valued at two
thousand pounds: and now when all things had been done for honoring their
marriage, which either love and observance could device, or Art and
Magnificence could perform: On the tenth of April, the Bridegroom with his
Bride took leave of the King and Queen at Rochester, (who had by Barge
conducted them thither) and there taking Ship: On the nine and twentieth of
April they arrived at Fl^shing; from whence the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of
Arundell, the Viscount Lisle, and the Lord Harington, waited upon them to their
chief City of Heydelburgh; in all places as they passed, being received with
all State and magnificence: but then on the foureteenth of June, the English
Lords returning home, the Lord Harington dyed by the way at Worms, whose Corpse
was brought over, and bu^ied in England And here it will not be amiss, to show
of what extent and largeness the Palsgrave's Country is^ because of the
iniquity of some that seek to disgrace it. It is in length about two hundred
English miles, taking the lower and upper Country. In the lower he has six
and twenty walled Towns, besides an infinite number of fair Villages, and two
and twenty houses of residence. In the uper, not so many walled Towns, and
houses, but those that are generally fairer than in the lower, especially
Amberg, and New Market.

But it is now time to look home; in the year 1609. the King having care for
the quietness of Ireland, had granted to the City of London the present
possession and Plantation in the Province of Ulster: whereupon afterward in the
year 1612. they sent thither about three hundred persons, of all sorts of
handy-crafts men, chiefly to inhabit the two Cities of London-Derrie and
Coleraigne: where they ordained Alderman Cockaine for their first Governor.
And for the advancing of this, or the like Plantation in Ireland, King James
about this time began a new Order of Knights, which are called Barone^s,
because they take place next to Barons younger sonnes^ and he appointed
certain Laws, to make them capable that should be admitted. First that they
should maintain the number of thirty foot soldiers in Ireland, for three
years, after the rate of eight pence a day, and to pay the wages of one whole
year, upon the passing of their Patent: Then that they should be Gentlemen of
Blood of three Descents; and lastly, should have land of Inheritance, in
possession or immediate Reversion, to the value of a thousand pounds per annum:
And to keep the Order from swarming, he stinted it within the number of only
200. and as the issue should fail, the Order to cease. But he that will look,
how well the end of the Institution, and the Laws of it have bin observed shall
perhaps find it to be here, as it was in the Order of St. Michael in France,
into which at first^ there were none admitted, but Princes and Emminent
persons: but afterward, all sorts of men, without any difference, were
admitted, that it came almost to be doubted, whether the Dignity of the Order
did more grace the persons, or the meanness of the persons disgrace the Order:
and indeed, when the Laws of an Institution are not in some measure observed,
it seems to make a kind of nullity in the collation.

About this time, on Sunday the ^4. of October, an exemplar penance was
imposed upon Sir Peck^all Br^^kas Knight, which was to stand at Paul's Cross in
a white sheet, holding a stick in his hand, having been formerly convicted
before the high Commissioners, for many notorious Adulteries with diverse women.

This year 1614. in the month of July, Christianus King of Denmark, (out of
his love to his sister, and King James) came the second time into England; but
as being now secure of himself, privately, and with a small company, so as he
came to the Queen at Somerset house unexpected, and before any knowledge was
had of his coming; but K. James being then in progress in Bedford-shire, and
hearing of it, came presently back, and after he had entertained him here, with
Hunting, Hawking, running at Ring, Bear-baiting, Plays, Fire-works^ and
Fencing, on the first of August Prince Charles brought him aboard his Ship, who
then took his leave, and returned home.

In October. this year was a call of Sarjeants at Law, being 11. in number,
namely, George Wild, Will Towes, Rich^ Bawtrie, Henry Finch, Th^^ Chamberlain,
Francis Mo^r^, Thomas Attow, John Mo^re, Francis Harvie, Charles Chibbourn, and
Tho. Richardson; and in Trenity Term before there had two other been called,
namely, Sir Randal Cre^ of Lincol^s Inn, and Sir Robert Hitcham of Grayes
Inn, Knights.

About this time an Ambassador came from the young Emperor of Russia to King
James, desiring his continual love and amity, and to be a means of making
attoneme^^, between him and the K. of Swethland, and withal presented him with
a rich present of Furs: which was no small honor to the K. of great Britain to
have so great a Potentate as the Emperor of Russia a solicit him to be his
mediator.

Though King James out of all natural goodness was addicted to peace, yet out
of providence he neglected not to be prepared for war, and thereupon in the
year 1610. had granted privileges to a society called of the Millitarie
Garden; and this year 1614, caused a Muster of men to be presented before him,
which was performed to his great liking, and to the great commendation of the
City.

About this time a memorable Act was performed by M. Hug. Middleton, Citizen
and Goldsmiths of London, and borne in Den^igh-shire, who having an Act of
Parliament for his Warrant, with infinite cost and indefatigable labor,
brought water to the City of London, from the two great springs of Chadwell and
Amwell in Hartfort-shire, having cut a Channel from thence to a place near
Islington, whither he conveyed it, to a large Pan, and from thence in pipes of
young Elmes to all places of the City: for as the Poeth says: (...).

Nothing is so commodious for the life of man, as water.
Another memorable Act was about this time done on the North side on Lon.
called Moore-fields, which being before environed with deep stinking ditches
and noisome common showers, was now, not only made fair and sweet, but so
levelled into walks and let with trees, that it is the pleasantest place of
all the City.

The next year being 1615, another memorable Act, for the benefit and beauty
of the City of London, was performed; for Smith-field, which was before a rude
dirty place, was now paved all over, and strong railes sequestring the middle
part of it, were set up, to make it a fair walking place, and fit for Market
or any other use.

The Lady Arbella a near kinsewoman of the Kings, had sometime before, without
the Kings privity, secretly married Master William Seymour, younger son of the
Earl of Hartford, now Earl of Hartford himself; for which they were both
committed to the Tower: and now this year, on the seven and twentieth day of
Sep. she ended her lif there, and was buried in the Chapel Royal at
Westminster.

This year also in July, were Enstalled Knights of the Garter, Francis Earl
of Rutland, Sir George Villers Master of the Horse, and Sir Robert Sidney
Viscount Lis^^: and in another kind of Honor, the Earl of Arundell, the Lord
Carews, and Doctor Andrews Bishop of Ely, were sworn Privy Counselors.

Wales by the death of Prince Henry, had been a good while without a Prince,
and now to supply that place, Prince Charles is Created Prince of Wales: In Joy
whereof, the Town of Ludlow in Shropshire, and the City of London, performed
great Triumphs: and the more to honor his Creation: There were made five and
twenty Knights of the Bathe; all them Lords or Barons sons, and yet more to
honor it, there were forty selected Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, that
performed a solemn Iusts at Barries, with great magnificence.

This year was a Censure of diverse great Delinquents, for first Sir Edward
Cook^, was upon displeasure discharged from being Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench; and two days after his discharge, Sir Henry Montag^e the Kings
Sergeant at Law, was placed in his room: Next to him the Lord Egerton, whyther
disabled by sickness or age, to exercise the place, or upon displeasure also,
had the Sele taken from him, which was delivered to Sir Francis Bacon the
King's Attorney, he made first Lord Keeper; and the Lord Egerton dying soon
after, Lord Chancellor. Not long after him Sir Henry Yelverton the Kings
Attorney, for adding new privileges to the Londo^ers Charter, without the
Kings privity, was in displeasure put from his place; and in his room was
placed Sir Thomas Coventry, the Kings Solicitor. But awhile after, Sir Henry
^elverton, was made a puny Judge of the Common Pleas; having indeed the
reputation of an excellent Lawyer.

And yet this work of Censuring stayed not here, for much about this time;
Thomas Earl of Suffolk Lord Treasurer of England, had the staff of his Office
taken from him; which was soon after delivered to Sir Henry Montag^^ Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings Be^ch. If Sir John Benet, Judge of the Prerogative
Court, had made a little more haste, he mihght have made one in this number of
Delinquents: but he came short three or four years; and then being charged by
his own servant with brybery, he was put from his place and censured in the
Star Chamber to pay twenty thousand pounds: and in his room was placed Sir
William Bird a man of more integrity.

Though King James upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, came to reside in
England, yet ^e forgot not that Scotland was his native Country; and therefore
after he had spent some years in England, to acquaint himself with the State
of the Kingdom. In March this year one thousand six hundred and sixteent^, he
made a Journey into Scotland: for though he had left very able men to sit at
the Helm there in his absence: yet he knew, that as it is the Masters Eye,
that makes the Horse fat: So it is the Prince's presence sometimes that keeps
out many distempers in a State, that would otherwise creep in^ and now, when in
his staying six Months there, he had seen all things well settled, both in the
Ecclesiastical State and in the Temporal, and made it appear, that he
resided not in England out of any neglect of Scotland; but to the end, he migt
be in the place of most convenience to both Kingdoms: on the fifteenth of
September, he returned to London, not more to the grief of the Scots to leave
him, than to the joy of the English to receive him, so much was King James as a
just and wise Prince, beloved of both the Nations.

Now comes to be related a matter of special observation; Sir Walter R^wlegh
had lived a condemned man many years in the Tower, and now his Destiny brought
him to his end (by liberty) which it could not do by imprisonment, for out of a
longing for liberty; he propounded a project to the King, upon which (as he was
a well spoken man and of a great capacity) he set such colors of probability;
especially guilding it over, with the Gold he would fetch from a Mine in
Guyana; and that without any wrong at all to the King of Spa^ne (if he might be
allowed to go the Journey) that the King, if he gave not credit that he could
perform it, at least gave way that he should undertake it: and thereupon with
diverse ships, accompanied with many Knights and Gentlemen of quality, he set
forward on the Voyage; but when after long search, or show of search, no such
place of Treasure or no such treasure could be found, whether it were, that he
thought it a shame, to return home, with doing nothing: or that his Malus
Genius thrust him upon the Design: He fell upon Saint Th^m^, a Town belonging
to the King of Spain: sacked it, pillaged it, and burnt it: and here was the
first part of his Tragical Voyage acted, in the death of his eldest son: the
last part was Acted in his own death at his return. For Gundomore the Spanish
Lieger, did so aggravate this fact of his to the King, against him; that it
seemed nothing would give satisfaction but Rawlegh's head, without which he
doubted there would follow a breach of the League between the two Nations.
Rawlegh excused it, by saying that he was urged to it by the Spaniards first
assaulting of him; and besides, that he could not come at the Mine, without
winning this Town: but Gundomor was too strong an Adversary for him; and the
King preferring the public Peace, before the life of one man, already
condamned, gave way to have the Sentence of his former Condemnation executed
upon him; and thereupon, brought to the Kings Bench Ba^^e: he was not newly
Arraigned or Indicted, as being already M^rtuus in Lege, but only has the
former Sentence averred against him, and so carried to the Gate House, and from
thence the next morning to the Parliament Yard: a Scaffold was there erected,
upon which after fourteen years reprivall, his head was cut off: at which
time, such abundance of blood issued from his v^i^es, that showed he had stock
of Nature enough left to have conti^ued him many years in life: though now
above threescore years old, if it had not been taken away by the hand of
Violence.

And this was the end of the great Sir Walter Rawlegh: great sometimes, in the
^^vour of Queen Elizabeth, and next to Drake the great scourge and hate of the
Spaniard, who had many things to be commended in his life; but none more, than
his constancy at his death, which he took with so undaunted a resolution that
he might perceive, he had a certain expectation of a better life afte^ it: so
far he was from holding those Atheistical opinions; an aspersion whereof
some traducing persons had cast upon him.

About this time King James made a progress to the University of Cambridge,
who delighted with the Disputations and other scholasticall exercises: he
stayed three whole days, and could have been content to have stayed as many
years: for next being a King, he was made to be a Scholar.

In the year 1619. being the seventeenth year of King James his Reign, that
knot of love which above twenty years had been tied, between him and his
Queen was by death dissolved; for on Tuesday this year the second of March,
Queen Anne dyed at Hampton Court, whose Corpse was brought to Denmark house, and
from thence conveyed to Westminster: wherein the Royal Chapel, with great
solemnity it was interred: a Princess very memorable for her virtue, and not a
little for her Fortune, who besides being a Queen, was so happy as to be
Mother, of such admired children, as she brought into the World. But the
dissolving of this knot cast the King into an extreme sickness; and after
some recovery, into a Relaps: from which notwithstanding, it pleased God to
deliver him, as having yet some great work to do.

This year on Monday the third of May, one Mr. Williams a Barrister of the
Middle Temple, was arraigned at the Kings Bench, for civilling, and for writing
Books against the King: and upon Wednesday following was hanged and quartered
at Charing Cross.

But an action of another nature was performed this year, the seventeenth of
July; not unworthy the relating, which was this; that one Bernard Calvert of
Andover, rode from St. Georges Church in Southwarke to Dover, from thence
passed by Barge to Calice in France, and from thence returned back to Saint
Georges Church the same day, setting out about three a clock in the morning,
and returned about eight a clock in the Evening, fresh and lusti^.

In the year 1621. a Parliament was holden at Westminster; wherein two great
examples of Justice were showed; which for future terror are not unfit to be
here related: One upon Sir Gyles Montpesson, a Gentleman otherwise of good
parts; but for practicing sundry abuses in erecting and setting up new Innes
and Alehouses, and e^acting great sums of money of people, by pretense of
Letters Patents granted to him for that purpose, was sentenced to be degraded;
and disabled to bear any office in the Commonwealth, though he avoided the
execution by flying the Land; but upon Sir Erancis Michell, a Justice of Peace
of Middlesex, and one of his chief Agents, the sentence of Degradation was
executed: and he made to ride with his face to the horse tail, thorough the
City of London. The other example was of Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount, St.
Albans Lord Chancelour of England, who for bribery was put from his place, and
committed to the Tower: but after some few days enlarged: in whose place
Doctor Williams Deane of Westminster was made Lord Keeper.

The Count Palatine, being now strengthened with the alliance of the King of
Great Britain, was thought a fit man to be King of Bohemia, and accordingly
was elected, by the States of that Kingdom, but he was no sooner invested in
the Crown; but the Emperor with great Forces assaulted him in Prague, and not
only drove him with his wife and children from thence; but took from him also
his own Patrimony the Palatinate: so as though now a King he was feign to fly
to the States of the Low Countries for a place of residence, King James though
he had never given his consent to the Palsegra^es taking upon him that
Kingdom, as foreseeing in his great judgment what the event will be: yet in
this distress, he could no^ forbear to take care of his daughter, and
thereupon sent Sir Richard Wes^on the same that was after Lord Treasurer in
Embassage to the Emperor to solicit the restoring of the Palatinate to the
Palsegrave; but he returning without success; the King had then conference
with Count Gund^mar the King of Spaines Ligier in England, what course might
be taken to procure the restoring it: who made him answer, there could be no
better course than to make a marriage, between his son the Prince of Wales,
and the Infant of Spain which he said would easily be effected, if the Prince
might have leave to make a Iourny into Spain. King James though he considered
the inveterate grudges between Spain and England, and as dangerous it might
be^ to put the heir of the Kingdom into the Spaniards hands, yet grounding
himself upon the saying: Fide lem si putaveris, facies: and drawn on by the
insinuating speeches of Count Gundomar, not perhaps without some Indinction in
the Marquis of Buckingham, was contented at last the Prince should go. And so
Prince Charles sending his ships about, and taking along with him only the
Marquis of Buckingham (who in the time of his being in Spain was created Duke
of Buckingham) Endymion Porter, and Mr. Francis Cottington: (two that were well
acquainted with the Language and affairs of Spain) he took his Journey by
the way of France, went to Paris, and secretly in disguise to the Court there,
where he had the sight of that Lady, that might well have stayed him from going
further, but yet on he went.

In the mean time Gundomar a cunning man, and one that besides his Masters had
ends of his own, and could play his Game no less for his own profit than his
Masters Honor; as he had persuaded the King of the facility of the Match with
Spain, so he persuaded a certainty of it, especially amongst Catholic Ladies,
by which means he brought no small store of Grists to his own Mill, receiving
from one Lady three hundred pounds to be made Groom of the Stool, when the
Spanish Princess should come; of another a good round sum to be made Mother
of the Maids, and of diverse other the like for other places.

But the Prince being arrived in Spain, was received indeed with all the
demonstrations of love and kindness that could be devised, so as the charge of
his entertainment was said to stand the King of Spain in nine and forty
thousand Ducats; but yet his acquaintance with the Lady was much restrained,
for in all the time of his staying in Spain, which was no less than eight
months, being from February to October) he saw her but very seldom, and that
at good distances, never spoke with her but twice, and that before company,
besides that his speeches were limited, how much and what he should say, far
from any means of tying the knot between them which was pretended, what the
cause should be was much in obscurity; some thought that a difference between
the Duke of Buckingham, and the Count Olivares, the King of Spayne's great
Favorite was a great hinderance of the proceeding: but other, and more likely
that the Spanyard indeed never really intended the Match at all, but had drawn
the Prince into Spain for other Ends: but what those ends were, was no less
uncertain; (one thought it was done to hold the Prince in a treaty of marriage
with a Daughter of Spain, till the Daughters of France should be bestowed,
thereby to keep him from that alliance, but others and more likely, that the
King of Spain entertained this Treaty with the King of great Brittayne,
meaning to spinne it out till he had compassed some designs in the
Low Countries, and the Palatinate, at least to make King James, most vigilant
for those pa^ts.

But when much time had been spent in protracting, upon pretense of
difficultities in obtaining the Popes dispensation, King James partly wearied
with delay, but chiefly angered with delusion, sent to the Prince, with all
speed to return into England; which the Prince presently signified to the King
of Spain, and had his leave to depart; but upon promise to continue the treaty
of the marriage still. Though it was said, the Prince was gone but a few days
on his journey, when a Post was sent to have stayed him, if he had been
overtaken. But whether it was so or no, it was Gods providence that he came
safely to his ships, and in them safely into England; arriving at Portsmouth,
where he was beheld of the people, with no less gladness, than the Sun
after a long Eclipse: and now his safe returning did both justify King James
his judgment in suffering him to go, and the King of Spaines justice, in
suffering him to come back: and was cause, that the people began to have a
better opinion of the Spanish faith, than they had before. But now it presently
brake out, that this match with Spain could never take effect: for King James
having received Declarations of the Articles touching the marriage, found many
very strict and large for exercise of the Catholic Religion: but none at all
for restitution of the Palatinate; which made him so much discontented, that he
presently brake off all treaty of the marriage; and signified as much, not
only to the King of Spain, but to diverse other Princes of Christendom: Upon
which breach, two great Points were presently had in consultation: One for
preparing forces, for recovering the Palatinate by way of Arms, which could
not be done by a way of friendship: and for this purpose, a Council of war
was called, and a proposition resolved on both of men and money, for
undertaking the enterprise: as also a great contribution by way of benevolence
was collected; toward which, the compiler of this work, gave himself fifty
pounds: as many other far greater sums, though the collection went not
through the whole Land^ by reason there was hope given of a peaceable
reconcilement: so as many that were not overhasty in their payments escaped
without contributing at all. The other point was for providing a fit wife for
the Prince, in some other place. It was said, the States of Holland offered a
very great portion in marriage to the Prince, if he would match with some Lady
of that Country: but matches are made in heaven, and there was a young Lady of
France destined to his bed: and for this purpose, the Earl of Carlisle, and the
Earl of Holland were sent into France, to treat of a marriage with a younger
daughter, of the Great Henry the fourth, King of France deceased, and sister
to the present King Lewis; which marriage afterward took effect, but was not
accomplished in King James his days; who dyed soon after the agreement.

It was now the year 1623. in which in Michaelmas Term, there was a Call of
fifteen Sarjeants at Law, who kept their Feast in the Middle Temple Hall.

Some Passages of small moment I confess are omitted by me, in this Reign of
King James, as whereof, for want of knowing the particulars, I dare not venture
upon making the Relation: which if some men would have done, the truth of our
Chronicles should not have been mingled with so many falsities. Of his
TAXATIONS.
IN his second year, in the month of September, he sent Privy Seals, to the
wealthiest Citizens of London, for moneys to be borrowed of them: and in
October following, the customs of Merchandises, both outward and inward were
raised, and then were letten out to Farm. In a Parliament holden at
Westminster, the third year of his Reign, there were given him three entire
Subsidies, and six fifteens by the Temporalty, and by the Clergy four entire
Subsidies. This year also Henry Lord Mordant, convicted in the Star Chamber,
for diverse misprisions, was fined to pay ten thousand Marks, and Edward Lord
Sturt^n for the like offense to pay six thousand Marks, and Henry Earl of
Northumberland for offenses laid to his charge, to pay thirty thousand pounds,
and some years after Sir John Bennet, Judge of the Prerogative Court was fined
to pay twenty thousand pounds. In his fourth year he repayed threescore
thousand pounds to the Citizens of London, which the Londoners had lent to
Queen Elizabeth, three years before her death; an act by which he got more
love, than he paid money. In his seventh year he had aid througho^t
England, for making his eldest Son Prince Henry Knight: which though levied
with great moderation, brought him in great sums of money. In his eighteenth
yea^e, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, the Temporalty gave him two
Subsidies, and the Clergy three: and in another Parliament, in the year 1623.
the Temporalty gave him three subsidies; and three fifteens; the Clergy four
Subsidies. Besides these Subsidies he sent abro^d many great Privy Seals,
and had also a benevolence throughout the Realm: not without some grudging,
but without any just cause; for it should have been remembered, that he took it
not out of covetousness to gather wealth, but out of very necessity to supply
wants: For by his employing many Ambassadors in Ordinary, many Extraordinary,
by his necessary bounty to his followers, and by his charge of keeping
several Courts; none of all which he could avoid: His expenses were far
greater than any of his Predecessors had ever been,

Of his Laws and Ordinances.
THE day of his removing from Charter House, at his first coming into England,
he caused Proclamation to be made, that all Monopolies and Protections should
cease; as likewise all oppressions done by Salt-Peeter men, by Purveiers, and
Carters. On the 26. of May following he set forth a Proclamation, restraining
all persons under great penalties from killing of Dear, or any kind of Foul
used for Hawking. The seventeenth of May, Proclamation was made against
Robberies on the borders: and on the nineteenth of May, another for ^niting the
people inhabiting about the borders of England and ^c^^land, to live in love
and qui^tnesse. In this first year, in a Parliament ^hen holden^ it was
Enacted, that neither Archbishop, nor Bishop, should Alienate, Grant, or
Demise, or in any sort convey, no not to the King himself ^^y of the Honors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, being parcel of the possessions of his
Arch-bi^^op, or Bishopric: and if any were, it should be utterly void, and of
no effect, notwithstanding any former Law, Act, or Ordinance to the contrary.
He then also, caused himself by Proclamation to be Enstyled King of Great
Britain, that the division of England and Scotland might be no more remembered.
In his second year, by his Letters Patents he incorporated the Fel^-makers of
London, by the name of Master, Wardens, and Communalty of the Art or Mystery
of the Felt-makers, granting them diverse privileges and liberties, for their
good government of their Corporation. In Novem. of his second year, were
Proclaimed in London certain new pieces of coin, both of gold and silver,
with the true valuation and weights of them, according to the Mint of both
Nations, English and Scottish. In a Parliamen^ holden the 3. year of his
Reign, the Oath of Allegiance was devised and ordained, and soon after
min^^tred to all sorts of people.

This year also he m^de Proclamation to redress the misimployment of L^^ds,
or goods given to (...) uses. Also this year, he set forth a Proclamation for
beari^g of (...) in S^ips to be in this manner, that from thenceforth all the
Subjects of gre^^ ^ritt^^^^ should bea^e in their main top, the Red-Crosse,
commonly called the (...) Ge^^ges Cr^sse, and the (...) Cross, commonly called
St. Andre^^^ Cr^sse joyn^d together, and the Subjects of South-Brit^^^^^ should
ca^^y in their Foretop only the Red-^ro^se as they were wont; and (...)
^ubjects of North-Bri^^^ine only the White-Cro^se. In this ^ourth year on the
(...) he set ^orth a Proclamation, commanding all Iesui^s, Semin^ry (...) to
depa^^ the Realm before the first of August following and (...) return upon
pa^ne of death, according to diverse Statutes in that (...) ^rovided. In his
second year he had set forth a Proclamation against (...) increase of new
buildings, which being little regarded; Now in his four^^ y^^re he renewed the
said Proclamation^ adding withal that the (...) and windows of all new
buildings should be either of Brick o^ stone^ (...) ^^sobeying whereof, many
were called in the Star Chamber, and there fined^ (...) year, he gave order
for planting of Mulberry Trees; and breeding of (...) worms, that England
might be a Country as well of silk as Cloth: In his ^^venth year, he
instituted the Order of the Baronets, which has much dege^^^ated ^ince his
institution, and thereby having been devised for the benefit of (...), has
caused but little contentment unto England. This year also the ^ing himself
in person came to the Star Chamber, where he had appointed the (...)-men to
meet^ and there, for the better keeping of Coins of Gold within (...) Realme^
he raised the prizes of them; ordayning the price called the Unity, which went
before but for twenty shillings, to be cur^ant now for tw^ and twen^y, the
double Crown and all other pieces to increase in the l^ke proportion. in his
fifteenth year, he granted to the Apothecaries of London to be a Corporation
for themselves, and their successors for ever; and by Letters Pa^en^s made
them a Body Politic and corporate. In his time by his appointment ^ strict
decree passed in the Star Chamber against Duells and single Comb^ts, and a
strict Law was made in Parliament against stabbing with a dagger o^ knife,
making it to be wilful Murder.

Affairs of the Church in his time.
THe King as a Religious Prince, desiring nothing so much as to settle Peace in
the Church, and hearing of some dissensions of his Divines in points of
Religion, in the very first year of his Reign, appointed a Conference to be
holden before himself at Hamp^on Court, to which were called diverse Bishops,
Deanes, and Doctors of one side, and of the other, four eminent Divines;
namely, Doctor Reynolds, Doctor Sparks, Mr. Knewstabbs, and Mr. Chadderton:
who all meeting before the King the 14 day of January: the King first
signified, the cause of his calling them together, and then told them he was
there ready to hear, what they could object or say against the present
Government of the Church, whereupon Doctor Reynolds being their Foreman,
redu^ed all matters disliked, or questioned to these four Heads.

1. First that the doctrine of the Church might be preserved in purity,
acco^ding to Gods Word. 2. That good Pastors might be plan^ed in all Church^s
to preach the same. 3. That the Church Government might be sincerely
administered, according to the Word of God. 4. That the Book of Common Prayer
might be fitted to more encrea^e of Piety.
Out of these Heads, he drew and moved diverse points: One that Confirmation
might not be by Bishops only, but that every Pastor in his Parish might
Confirm, but this was thought to trench too much upon the Jurisdiction of
Bi^hop^, and to be a step to bring in a Presbiterian government, which the King
much misliked, and the Bishop of Winchester challenged Dr. Reynolds with a^^
his learning to show, where ever he had read, that Confirmation was at a^^ used
in ancient times, by any other than by Bishops. Another motion of Doc^o^
Reynolds was; That there might be a new Translation of the Bible beca^se the
present (...) (...) (...) from sevenscore to two hundred, so he increased their
Pensions, from two shillings a day, for three months in the summer, to seven
groats a day for six months in the summer. Then, where at his coming, he
found but only four Judges in the Courts of Law at Westminster, he added a
fifth, with the like allowance as the former had; besides many other Pensions
of like nature. But the works of Piety done by others in his time, were very
many: whereof we may justly set in the first place, the repairing of Paul's
Church, begun in his time, though not finished till many years after; a work
of as great cost and labor, as the first founding it: toward the furtherance
whereof, though many well devoted persons contributed liberally: yet none was
more industrious, than the learned Doctor Laud, first Bishop of London, and
after Archbishop of Canterbury; who also was a bountiful Benefactor to the
College of Saint John's in Oxford, where he had his Education. Next to him his
Predecessor next before him, the worthy George Abbot, Archbishop of
Canterbury, founded a fair Almes-house at Croydon in Surrie: as likewise
Robert the second Earl of Dorset, founded another in Sussex; to the
maintenance whereof, he gave Lands to the value of three hundred pounds a
year. But of all the Almes-houses that were ever founded in Christendom,
there is none I think can parallel that of Thomas Sutton Esquire. This man
borne at Snayth in Lincolnshire, having always lived a Batchelour, and by
sundry employments, and parcimony, being grown to great wealth, bought of the
right Honorable, Thomas Earl of Suffolk, his Mansion house, called the
Charter House, near to Smithfield in London, and out of a pious mind converted
it into an Almes-house, by the name of Suttons Hospital, endousing the same
with above three thousand pounds of yearly rent: wherein are maintained
fourscore poor men, with convenient lodging, diet, and allowance of money for
apparel: also forty poor children with the like provision, and a Grammar
School, with a Master and Usher to teach them: overall whom, he ordained a
learned man to be Master of the household, and to be chosen by the Governors,
whom he appointed for the present, by the Authority of the Kings Letters
Patents, to be George, Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord Elsmore, Lord
Chancellor, Robert Earl of Salisburie Lord Treasurer, John Bishop of London,
La^ncel^t Bishop of Ely, Sir Edward Cook, chief Justice of the Common Pl^as,
Sir Thomas Foster, a Judge of the Common Pleas, Sir Henry Hubbard the Kings
Attorney general, Doctor Overall Deane of Paul's, Doctor Mountain Deane of
W^stminster, Henry Thursby Esquire, Master of the Chancerie, Richard Sutton
Esquire, Auditor of the Imprests, Ieff^rie Nightingall Esquire, John Low
Gentleman, Thomas Brown Gentleman, and Master of the Household for the time
being, to be always one: and as any of these six^eene Governors should dye,
the Survivers to make present addition of others. Next to this, was a fair
College in Oxford founded by Nicholas Will Be Esquire, and called after his
name. About this time also Edward Allin of Dulwich in Surrie, founded a fair
Hospital at Dulwich for six poor men, and six poor women, and for twelve
poor children, from the age of four or six years, to be there maintained and
taught till the age of foureteen or sixteen, and to have a Schoolmaster with
diet, and a convenient stipend. This man may be an example, who having gotten
his wealth by Stage-playing, converted it to this pious use^ not without a kind
of repu^ation to the Society of Players. In this Kings time also, William
Cambden, King at Arms, founded an History Professor in Oxford, to which he
gave the Manor of Bexley in Kent, which some years expired, will be worth
four hundred pounds a year. In his tenth year, Sir Baptist Hicks, one of the
Justices of Peace in Middlesex, who was after made Viscount C^^bden, built a
fair Sessions house of Brick and Stone in St. John's street, which by the
Justices was called after his name, Hicks Hall, a great convenience for the
Justices; who sat before in a common Inn, called the Castle. He also founded
a fair Hospital of Free stone at Cambden in Gloucester-shire, for six men and
six wowomen, allowing each of them a yearly Gown, and two shillings six pence
a week, with two rooms and a garden. In this Kings time, George Patyn Citizen
and Grocer of London, gave to good uses, three thousand an six hundred pounds,
whereof twelve hundred pounds to the two Universities, nine hundred pounds for
an Almes-house, and a certain sum of money to buy two Bells, and make a
Chime in Bow-Church. Also Thomas Teasdale of Glympton in the County of Oxford
Gentleman, gave five thousand pounds to purchase lands, for perpetual
maintenance of seven fellows, and Six Scholars, to be placed in Baylyoll
College in Oxford, and to be chosen thither from time to time, out of the
Free-Schoole of Abbington in Berk-shire: to which School he also gave lands
for maintenance of an Usher. In this Kings time also, Sir Mermaduke Darrell,
being Lord of Fulmer, a Town in Buckingham shire, where was an old ruinous
Church, standing a mile distant from the Town, pulled down that old Church,
and at his own charge builded a fair new one in the Town, and furnished it
with a Font, a Pulpit, and all Ornaments necessary. Also Thomas Watson of
Halstead, in the County of Kent, Esquire, new builded a fair Chapel, on the
North side of the parish Church of Halstead, of Freestone from the ground, and
gave to the Church four new Bells, and two Pulpits. In his time also Doctor
Aylmer Bishop of London, and Elizabeth Countess Doweger of Shrewesburie, gave
certain sums of money toward the better maintenance of Sermons hereafter at
Paul's Cross: As likewise Thomas Russell Draper gave ten pounds a year for
ever, to be given to unbeneficed Ministers, that should preach there: and to
the same use, George Bishop Stationer of London, gave ten pounds a year more.
In this Kings time also, the Citizens of London new builded Algate, where
pulling down the old Gate, they found many ancient R^ma^ Coins.

On the fi^^een^h of June, 1614. dyed Henry Earl of Northampton, who built
from the ground a house near Charing-Crosse; and dying, was buried in the
an^ient Chapp^ll of Dov^r Castle, who in his life time founded three fair
Hospit^lls, and endowed them with large maintenance for ever, one at Rising in
Norfolk for twelve poor women, and a Governesse, a second at Clun in
Shr^p-shire, for twelve poor men and a Governour^ The third at Greenwich in
^ent, for a Governor, and twenty poor Almes-men. In this Kings time also,
Master Robert Dowes of London Merchant Tailor, give a competant maintenance for
ever, unto Sepulchers parish, for the tolling of the great Bell, and for
finding some Devine to come to the prison of New-ga^e, the midnight before
Execution, and there to ring a hand Bell, and put the prisoners in mind of
their approaching death, with a Christian remembrance and exhortation; and the
next morning to toll the great Bell, from six a Clock till ten, and then to
ring it out when the Execution should be past. He also established a free
singing School, in Christ's Hospital: for the better education of the poor
children there^ besides many other good deeds of Alms. About the same time,
Robert Peake of London Goldsmiths, gave to Sepulchers Church a Communion Table
of two yards long, and three quarters and a half broad, richly gilded over,
and at every corner imbost with pla^es of silver. In this Kings foureteenth
year, William Jones of London Merchant, gave about eight thousand pounds to
found a Free-Schoole in Wal^s, where he was born, with Almes-houses and
Pensioner^ in London: and a hundred pounds a year for ever to a learned
Preacher in London: ord^yning all things to be ordered by the Company of
Haberdashers, whereof himself was free. This year also the old ruinous gate,
called Aldersgat^ was q^ite taken down, and new builded from the foundation,
to^wa^ds the b^^^^ing whereof, William Par^et, Merchant Tailor of London, gave
a thousand pounds. In this Kings time also, was erected a building near to
Chels^y^ with a purpose to be a College for Devines to study the Controversies
of Religion: but upon the second thoughts, the Cage indeed stands finished, but
(...) Birds have ever yet been brought to sing in it; and perhaps never will.
If any other deeds of Alms, or public benefit were done in this Kings time,
as perhaps there were many, the Reader may be pleased both here and in other
Kings Reignes^ to add them, as he meets with them: for partly to this end, I
have digested this Chronicle into such several Heads and Chapters.

Of Casualties happening in his time.
IN his first year, on the seven and twentieth of April, thirteen persons were
slain, by misfortune with Gunpowder, at the Gunpowder Mill in ^^driffe, and
much other hurt done in diverse places. This year also, the plague in London
was so great, that from the three and twentieth of December, 1602. to the two
and twen^ieth of December following, there dyed in London, and the Liberties,
eight and th^rty thousand, two hundred and four and forty, whereof the Plague
thirty thousand, five hundred threescore and eighteen of them in one week,
three thousand fourscore and ten, where the next year after, though the
City were increased with great number of strangers, yet there dyed that year
of all diseases, within London and the Liberties, but only four thousand, two
hundred threescore and three persons. In the second year of his reign, a
strange accident happened, to the terror of all bloody murderers, which was
this; one Anne Waters enticed by a lover of hers, consented to have her husband
strangled, and then buried him secretly under the dunghill in a Cow-house;
whereupon the man being missing by his neighbors, and the wife making show of
wondering what was become of him: It pleased God, that one of the inhabitants of
the Town, dreamed one night, that his neighbor Waters was strangled, and
buried under the dunghill in a Cow-house; and upon declaring his dream,
search being made by the Constable, the dead body was found, as he had dreamed:
and thereupon the wife was apprehended, and upon examination, confessing the
fact, was burned. And now what hope can murderers have of being concealed,
when they are subject to be discovered by any man's dream. The nineteenth of
January in his third year, a great Porpus was taken at Westham; in a small
Creek, a mile and a half within the Land: and within few days after, a Whale
came up within eight miles of London, whose body was seen diverse times above
water, and judged to exceed the length of the largest ship in the River: but
when she tasted the fresh water, and scented the Land, she returned into the
Sea. In his fourth year, being the year 1607. a mighty west wind brought in
the sea into the River of Severne, with such violence, that in some places of
Somersetshire and Gloucestershire, the waters in diverse Towns and Villages,
grew higher than the tops of their houses; so as (notwithstanding all courses
that could be taken, there were drowned in Somersetshire 80. Persons, and
damages done to the value of twenty thousand pounds. At Coventrie also, the
seventh of April so sudden a flood came into the Suburbs and City, that in
one hour it rose in some places above 3 yards in height, to the great damage
and hurt of many, and that which is much strange, as it suddenly came, so it
suddenly abated: so as in four hours and a half, it both came and went away.
In his 6. year, being 1608. a frost began in December. which continued till April
following, with such violence that not only the Thames was so frozen, that
Carts laden were driven over as on dry land, but many fowls and Birds
perished, as also much herbage in gardens, especially Artichoaks and Rosemarie
were destroyed. This year also the 11. of April a Malt-house in the Town of St.
Edmonds berry being by chance set on fire, continued burning till it had
consumed 160. houses: but by the Kings bountifulness, (giving 500. loads of
timber) and the City of Londons relief, the Town was forthwith new builded,
in a fairer manner than it was before. In the year 1613^ on the seventeenth of
April, in the parish of St^ndish in Lancashire, a maiden child was borne,
having four legs, four arms, two bellies joined to one back: one head with
two faces, the one before, the other behind, like the picture of Ianus

This year also on the 26. of June, in the parish of Christs-Church in
Hampshire, on John Hitchel a Carpenter, lying in bed with his wife and a young
child by them, was himself and the child both burned to death with a sudden
lightning, no fire appearing outwardly upon him, and yet lay burning for the
space of almost three days, till he was quite consumed to ashes. This year
also on the seventh of August, the Town of Dorchister was quite consumed with
fire, begun on the house of a Tallow Chandler, destroying all the houses,
except a few near the Church, and all their wares and goods, to the value of
two hundred thousand pounds, yet not any man or woman perished. About the same
time also, the Playhouse called the Globe upon the Banks side near London,
was quite consumed with fire, by discharging a Piece of Ordnance, and yet no
man hurt: and about four years after, a new built Playhouse, near
Golding-lane, called the Fortune, was by negligence of a Candle, clean burnt
to the ground. In the year 1614. the Town of St^atford upon Avon, was burned:
and left the water should be behind in doing of mischief, so great Iundations
were at this time in Norfolk and Lincolnshire, that the sea entered twelve
miles into the land. In the year 1612, on the 18. of November. a Blazing star
bgan to be seen in the South-east, about five a clock in the morning, the
flame or stream whereof, inclined toward the west. This comet, in the opinion
of D. B^mbridge, the great Mathematician of Oxford, was as far above the Moon,
as the Moon is above the earth: what i^ portended is only known to God: but
the sequel of it was, that infinite slaughters and devastations followed upon
it, both in Germany and other Countries. In the year 1622, on Friday the 24. of
October, a Roman Catholic Priest preached in the afternoon, at Hunsdon house
in the Black Friars in London, in an upper chamber where there were assembled
above 300 men and women, when about the middle of the Sermon, a great part of
the Floor brake, and fell down with such violence, that it brake down the next
floor^ under it: in the fall whereof, were slain the Preacher, and almost 100^
of his Auditors, besides as many more hurt. In this Kings time course paper,
commonly called white brown paper was first made in Engl. specially in Surry,
and about Winsor.

Of his Wife and Children.
HE married Anne, the daughter of Frederick, the second King of Denmark, whose
marriage was there solemnized in the year 1589. By whom he had borne in
Scotland, two Sons, Henry who dyed before him, and Charles who succeeded him
in the Crown; and one daughter named Elizabeth, married to Frederick the fi^th
of that name, Count Palatine of the Rheine, by whom she had many children, both
Sons and Daughters. King James had also by his wife Queen Anne, two other
daughters borne in England, the Lady Marie, and the Lady Sophia, who both dyed
young^ the Lady Marie at about three years old, the Lady Sophia the next day
after she was borne, and were both of them buried with great solemnity, in the
Chapel Royal at Westminster.

Of his Personage and Conditions.
HE was of stature somewhat higher than ordinary, of a well compacted body, of
an Ambourne hair, of a full and pleasing vi^age^ in his latter days enclining
to be fat and bu^ley^ of bodily exercises, he took most delight in hunting^
which yet (some thought) he used rather as a retiring himself from the
importunity of Sta^e affairs, than for any great pleasure he took in it. It
is said, he had such a fashion in riding, that it could not so properly be
said he rid, as that his horse carried him; for he made but little use of his
Bridle, and would say, a horse never stumbled, but when he was reined. He was
of an admirable pregnancie of wit, and that pregnancy much improved by
continual study from his childhood: by which, he had gotten such a
promptness in expressing his mind, that his extemporall speeches were little
inferior to his premeditated writings. Many no doubt had read as much, and
perhaps more than he; but scarce ever any concocted his reading into judgment
as he did: by which he became so judicious, that though he could not
Prophecy, yet he could presage; and his Conjectures were little less than
Oracles. In all the Liberal Sciences, he was (we may say) a Master of Arts:
but in Divinity, a Doctor, as he made appear in the Conference at Hampton
Court, and is seen still by the learned Writings he has le^t behind him. And
as for that part of the Politics, which concerns Monarchy, Regere Imperio
populos, which himself used to call King Craft: in this he excelled. He knew
how to take the inclinations of the people at their first bound, and never
suffer them to rise higher, than he could well reach them: nor to grow
stronger, than he could either alter or divert them. He would be sure to keep
his Subjects in a temper of contentment; which if he could not do by
preventives, he would by lenitives. He was so wise, that he could dissemble,
without seeming a Dissembler: be free in opening his mind, and yet keep
counsel. He was as a provident Pilot, that in a calm would provide for a
storm: and you should never find him committing the fault of Non p^taram. He
was both Marti and Mercurio; but not tam morti quam Mercurio, as being of his
temper who said, Cedant Arma Toga: and indeed, seeing peace is the end of both.
It were not wisdom to seek it by Arms, if it may be had by the Gown, as it
is in the Aphorism, Consili^ omnia experiri prius, quam Armis sapientem Decet.
That which was bounty in him being a King, would have been frugality, if he
had been a private person, there being of both, one radical reason. Of all
the Morrall virtues, he was eminent for chastity; in which the Poet seems to
include all virtue: where he says; Nulli fas casto sceleratum in sistere limen.


By nulli casto, meaning no virtuous person; it was a manifest argument of his,
being an excellent Prince, that coming next to the admirable Queen Elizabeth,
which was, in a manner to compare them together: yet there appeared no
inequallity, that it might not untruely be said, King James was but the
continuation of Queen Elizabeth, the same virtue, though different sexes: and
now to express his Character in a word, which worthily might be matter for
many volumes: He was to his wife a most loyal husband, to his children a most
loving father, to his servants a most bountiful Master, to his Subjects a most
just prince, to all Princes near him a most peaceable neighbor; that more
justly it may be said of him, than of whom it was said; Quaete tam laeta
telerunt saecula? a Prince af^e^ Plato's own heart, for his learning, and
which is infinitely more worth, after Gods own heart, for his Religiousnesse
and Piety.

O^ his Death and burial.
OF his death, there were many scandalous rumors spread, and some were so
impudent^ as to write that he was poisoned, as the Duke of Richmond, and the
Marquis Hambleton had been before: but King James being dead, and his body
opened, there was found no sign at all of poison, his inward parts being all
sound, but that his Spleen was a little faulty, which might be cause enough to
cast him into an Ague: The Ordinary high way, especially in old bodies to a
natural death: Of this ague after a months anguishing, notwithstanding all the
remedies that could be applied, he departed this life a^ Th^^balds, on the 27
of March, in the year 1625, in the 59 year of his age^ when he had Reigned
two and twenty years complete. His body for the greater Sta^e, was convayed by
Torche light, from Theobalds to Denmark house; who having tested from the 23 of
April, to the 7 of May: it was carried to Westminster, and there interred in
the Chapel Royal with great solemnity, but with greater lamentation: there
being scarce any of the infinite multitude that was present, of whom it might
not be said, Multa gemens, largoque humectat flumine Vultum.


Of Men of note in his time.
MIlitary Men of Note, in a time of Peace, as the whole Reign of King James
was, we have no reason to expect; yet if we look amongst the Voluntaries that
went to the School of War in the Low-Countryes; we shall find a pair of
brothers, that may stand in comparison, with the greatest Soldiers in the most
Martial times, S. Francis Vere, who as another Hanniball, who with his own
eye, could see more in the Martial Discipline, than common men can do with
two; and Sir Horatio Vere; who as another Philopaemen, contained in a very
little body, a very great, both skill and courage. But for Men of Note in
Learning: as being in the time of a most learned Prince, there was never
greater store; of whom these for example. In curiousness of Preaching, there
was Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester; who has left to posterity, a Century
of such golden Sermons, that shows, he as well deserved the name of
Chrysostom, as he that had it. In multiplicity of Reading, there was Doctor
Reynolds of Corpus Christi College in Oxford; who seemed as it were, a living
Library; and one would have thaught his Memory to be a perfect Index of all the
Books had ever been written. In knowledge of Law there was Sir Edward Cook,
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; who has written such excellent Commentaries
of the Law, that he seems as another Bartholus or Baldus amongst us. In
Elegancy of writing, there was Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount Saint Albans; who
besides his profounder Books of Novum Organum, has written the Reign of K.
Henry the 7, in so sweet a style, that like Manna, it pleases the taste of all
palats. In the skill of Antiquities, there was William Camden, King at Arms;
who has set forth the Description of Britain, and the life of Q. Eliz. in so
lively colors, that he seems to have brought Britain out of darkness into
light, and to keep Q. Eliz. alive after her death. And to speak it in a word,
the Trojan Horse was not fuller of Heroic Grecians, than K. James His Reign
was full of men excellent in all kinds of Learning. And here I desire the
Reader leave to remember two of my own old acquaintance, the one was Mr. John
Dunne, who leaving Oxford, lived at the I^n^^ of Court, not dissolute, but very
neat; a great visiter of Ladies, a great frequen^er of Plays, a great writer
of conceited Verses; until such time as King James taking notice of the
pregnancy of his Wit, was a means that he betook him to the study of
Divinity^ and thereupon proceeding Doctor, was made Deane of Paul's; and
became so rare a Preacher, that he was not only commended, but even admired by
all that heard him. The other was Sir Henry Wootton^ (mine old acquaintance
also, as having been fellow pupils, and chamber fellows in Oxford diverse years
together.) This Gentlemen was employed by K. James in Embassage ^o Venice; and
indeed the Kingdom afforded not a fitter man, for ma^ching the Capriciousnes of
the Italian W^^s: a man of so able dexterity with his Pen, that he has done
himself much wrong^ and the Kingdom more, in leaving no more of his Writings
behind him.

Of the English Plantation in the Indies, that were i^ King JAMES his time.
AN^ now we are come to a time, wherein we may very near say as much of King
James, as was said of Agustus Caesar: Super and Garamantus and Indos profert
Imperium. In this better, that where Augustus did it by the violent way of
Arms, King James did it by the civil way of Plantations: for in his days
began the great plantation of the English in the Indies; and must be
acknowledged the proper effect of his peaceable Government. The first
Plantation of the English in the Indies, was that which is now called Virginia,
in memory of the Virgin Queen Elizabeth: but called before Wingandacoa. It was
first discovered by Sir Walter Rawlegh, in the year 1584; to whom the first
Letters Patents were granted for making a Plantation there: but yet no Colony
was sent thither, till the year 1606. It is a Country in America, between the
degrees of 34, and 45, of the North Latitude: but that part of it which is
planted by the English, is under the Degrees of 37, 38, and 39. It is no
Island, as many have imagined, but a part of the Continent adjoining to
Florida. The first and chief Town made here by the English, is called James
Town, in honor of the Kings most Eexcellent Majesty. It is a Country
abounding with all sorts of Fish and Foul; so fruitful, that it yields
thirty and sometimes forty Bushells of Corn upon an Acre: and that, (which
to us is more strange) has three harvests in a year, the Corn being sowed,
ripe, and reaped, in little more than two months. Many^ Plantations had been
attempted here before, but came to nothing: the first to any purpose was in the
year 1607. under the conduct of Captain Gosnoll, John Smith, and Mr. Edw.
Maria Winkfield, who carried a Colonie thither of a hundred persons; but of
these, many dying of sickness, or slain by the Savages, a new supply came in
the year 1608. of a hundred and twenty persons, under the Conduct of Captain
Nels^n. After which, was sent another supply of threescore and ten persons: and
in the year 1609. a third supply came of five hundred persons, under a Patent
granted to Sir Thomas West, Lord de la Ware, but conducted thither by Sir
Thomas Gates, Gates, Sir George Summers, and others. In the year 1611. was a
fourth supply of three hundred men under the conduct of Sir Thomas Gates. In
the year 2612. two other supplies were sent of forty men in each; and now was
the Lotterie spoken of before granted by the King, for further supplies of this
Plantation. After this Master Samuel Argall being appointed Governor in in the
year 16^8. the Lord De la Ware came thither with a supply of two hundred
people; but in his stay there, dyed. After this, in the year 1620. were sent
thither eleven Ships, with twelve hundred and sixteen persons, and now they
founded themselves into Corporations. In the year 1621. Sir Francis Wiat was
sent thither Governor, with thirteen hundred men, women, and children, and
now they founded Schools, and Courts of Justice; and the Plantation was
extended a hundred and forty miles up, on the River of both sides. But now when
the English were secure, and thought of nothing but peace, the Savages came
suddenly upon them, and slew them, three hundr^d and seven and forty men, women
and children. For r^pairing of which loss, the City of London sent presently
over a supply of a hundred men. This massacre happened, by reason they had
built their Plantations remote from one another, in above thirty several
places, which made them now, upon consultation, to reduce them all to five or
six places, whereby they may better assist each other: since which time, they
have always lived in good security. And thu^ much for Virginia.

Next was the Plantation of the Island called Barmudas, so called of a Spanish
ship, called Bermudas, which was there cast away, carrying Hogs to the West
Indies, that swam a shore, and there increased. The first Englishman that
entered this Isle, was one Henry May in the year 1591: but in the year 1610,
Sir George S^mers was sent thither, who dying there, in memory of his Name, the
Isles have ever since been called Summers Isles. In the year 1612. One Mr.
Moore landed there with 60 persons, and then builded the chief Town there
called S. Georges, together with 8 to 9 Forts. The same year a supply of 30
more persons was sent thither, and the year after 60 more, under one Mr.
Bartlet; with a show to survey the land; but with a purpose indeed to get from
thence a great lump of Ambergris, and no less than 80 po^^d weight, that
had been found and taken up in the Island some years before, and was there
still retained. A while after this, came a Ship called the Blessing, with a
hundred passengers; and two days after came the Star, with a 180 more; and
within 14 days after that again came thither the Margaret and two Frigates,
with 130 passengers: So as now they began to divide the Coun^^y into Tribes,
and the Tribes into shares. In the year 1616, Captain Da^^el Tuckard was sent
from Virginia to be Governor there, and now it began indeed to be a
Plantation; for now they began to build them houses: and now was sent from
thence into England, a Ship fraighted with 30000 weight of Tobacco, valued
there but at 2 s. 6 d. the pound, though sold here oftentimes for V^rinos at
great rates. In the year 1619^ Captain Nathaniel Butler was sent Governor,
with new supplies; in whose time they build them a Church; held Assizes for
Criminal Causes, twice a year; and began to have Parliaments as in England:
and now in the Ship called the Magazin, came diverse Gentlemen of good fashion,
with their wives and families: so as now their number, was no fewer then
fifteen hundred people: Dispersed twenty miles in length. In the year 1622,
came Governou^ M. John Bernard, bringing with him a supply of a 140 persons;
but he and his wife dying presently upon their coming: M. John Harrison in the
year 1623 was chosen Governor. These Isles of Bermudas are in 32 degrees of
Northern latitude: So as they are distant from Virginia, at least 500 leagues,
and from Egland above three thousand three hundred. This Country is of a most
healthful Air, abounding with all sorts of Fowls, Birds and Fish; and where
great pieces of Amber-gr^ce are oftentimes found, which is valued there at no
less than three pounds an ounce. And thus much concerning the state of
Bermudas, till the year 1624.

Next comes the Plantation of New England, concerning which, we must first
know, that King James in the year 1606, granted two Letters Patents for
Plantations in Virginia, one to the City of London; another to the City of
Bristow, Exceter and Plimmouth; with power to plant Colonies any where between
the Degrees of 38 and 44, provided there should be at least a 100 miles
distance between the two Colonies. So as the first Colony was from the City of
London, and is that which is called Virginia. The Second Colony was from
Bristow and the other Towns, and is that which is now called New England, and
is situate between the Degrees of 41 and 45: the very mean betwixt the North
Pole and the Line. And now to speak a little of the Country, there are on the
Sea Coast, 25 excellent good Harbors, in some whereof there is Anchorage for
500 sail of Ships of any burden. The Earth as fruitful and the Air as
healthful, as any part of the World: abounding with all sorts of Grain, Fowls
and Fish: Many of such kinds as a^e to us unknown, yet excellent meat: Many
Voyages had been made for the perfect discovery of the Country: Many Attempts
for settling a Plantation there: Many Miscariages and Disasters in making the
attempts: but all at last came to this, that in the year 1624 (which is the
limit of ou^ Narration) there was a Plantation settled; though but a small one:
but a few years after (by the sending forth of new supplies) increased to so
many thousands, that if God continue to prosper it, as he has begun: the New
England in a few ages may prove as populous as the Old; and the King of England
likely to have as many and greater Crowns in the Indies, than he had in His
Realms of Great Britain and Ireland. But seeing of these and all other
English Plantations in the Indies, whereof there are many large discourses
written by diverse Authors; It should be more than supperfluous to speak more
of them in this place: It is sufficient to have showed, that King James had the
honor, to have them settled in His time, and under the Influence of His
peaceable Government.

Of the Earls and Barons made by King JAMES.
IN former Kings Reigns, the making of Earls and Barons was but rare, and
therefore they are fitly set down, at the several times of their making; but
in King James His Reign, there were so many made, that it may not be unfit, to
set them down in a Cathalogue together.

In His first year were made four Earls and nine Barons: namely, Henry
Howard, younger brother of the last Duke of Norfolk, was made Earl of
Northampton: Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckhurst, was made Earl of Dorset; and
shortly after Charles Blount Lord Montjoy, was made Earl of Devonshire, and
Thomas Howard Baron of Walden, was made Earl of Suffolk: Henry Gray was made
Lord Gray of Groby, (afterward by King Charles made E. of Stamford) Henry
Danvers was made Baron of Dansley, (afterward by K. Charles made Earl of
Danby) Sir John Peter of Essex, was made B. of Writtle: Sir W. Russell was made
Baron of Thornaugh: Sir Thomas Gerard was made Baron of Gerards Bromly in
Staffordshire: Sir Robert Spencer was made B. of Wormelayton in the County of
Warwick: Sir Thomas Egerton was made B. of Elesmore: and Sir Robert Cecill was
created B. of Henden in Rutlandshire: and Sir John Harington was made Baron of
Ex^on. In His second year on the 20 of May were made four Barons and one
Viscount: Sir Robert Sidney was made Baron of Penshurst: Sir William Knowles,
Baron of Grayes: Sir Edw. Wotton, Baron of Marley: and Mildmay Fanc, Lord de
Spencer; and in August the same year, Sir Robert Cecill Baron of Essenden, was
created Viscount Cranbourne. In His third year of the 4 of May, were created
three Earls, and one Viscount, and four Barons; namely, Sir Robert Cecill
Viscount Cranbourne, was created E. of Salisbury^ Sir Thomas Cecill his elder
brother L. Burghley, was created E. of Exeter; and Sir Philip Herbert, younger
brother to the E. of Pembrok, was created E. of Montgomery: Robert Sidney Baron
of Penshurst, was created Viscount of Lisle: Sir John Stanhope, was made Baron
of Harington: Sir George Carew, Baron of Clopton: Mr, Thomas Arundell of
Devonshire^ Baron of Warder and Master William Cavendysh, Baron of Hardrick^ In
his fourth year, on the fourth of July, Sir Thomas Kneve^t, was called by writ
to the Parliament, by the name of B^ron of Estrick^ and was thereby Baron of
that Title: and on the seventh of September, Sir Iervys Clifton was likewise
called by writ to the Parliament, by the name of Baron of Layton Bromsensold,
and was thereby Baron of that Title. In his ninth year, upon Easter-munday,
Sir Robert Carre was created Viscount Rochester: and In his tenth year, an the
fourth of November, was created Earl of Somersett. In his eleventh year,
Lewis Steward Duke of Lenox, was made Earl of Richmond, and after, Duke of
Richmond. In his thirteenth year, on the 29. of Iu^e, Sir James H^y of
Scotland was created Baron of Sawley, and about three years after, was made
Viscount Doncaster, and Sir ^obert Dor^er was created Ba^on of Wyng, (afterward
by K. Charles, made Earl of Car^arvan.) In his fourteenth year, on the 9. of
July, Sir John Hollis was created Baron of Haughton, and Sir John Roper of
Ken^^ was made Baron of Tenham: and on the 17. of August, Sir George Villiers
was created Baron of Whadden and Viscount Villiers, and on the 7. of November,
Thomas Egerton L. Elsemore, was created Viscount Brackley (and he dying soon
after, his son John was created Earl of Bridgewater, William L. Knowles was
created Viscount Wallingford; and Sir Philip Stanhope was created Baron of
Shelford: On the 5 of January, the Viscount Villiers was created Earl of
Buckingham, and on the third of March, Sir Edward Noell of Rutland-shire; was
made Baron of Rydlington. In his fifteenth year, on New-yeares day, Sir George
Villiers Earl of Buckingham was created Marquis of Buckingham, and on the 12
of July, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor, of England, was created Baron of
Verulam, and not long after, Viscount Saint Albans. Also in the Summer of this
year, the King created four Earls and one Countess: namely, the Viscount
Lisle was made Earl of Leycester, the Lord Compton was made Earl of
Northampton, the Lord Rich was made Earl of Warwick, the Lord Cavendish was
made Earl of Devonshire, and the lady Compton wife to Sir Thomas Compton, and
mother of the Marquis of Buckingham was created Countess of Buckingham. In his
sixteenth year, on the 25 of November, Sir John Digby Vice chamberlain to the
King was created Baron of Shirbourne, by Patent to him and his heirs Males. In
his seventeenth year, in the month of June Esme steward Lord d' Aubigny;
younger brother Duke of Lenox, was created Earl of March; James Marquis
Hammilton was created Earl of Cambridge, and Sir John Villiers brother to the
Marquis of Buckingham was Baron of St^k and Viscount Purbeck. In his eighteenth
year, William C^vendish was created Viscount Mansfield; (afterward by King
Ch^rl^s m^de Earl of Ne^castle) and on Monday the fourth of Dec^mber; Sir
Henry M^^tague, being first made Lord Treasurer, was created Baron of
Kimbolton, and Viscount M^^devile, and not long after, Earl of Manchester, and
Sir John Ramsey Viscount Haddington of Scotland, was created Earl of
Holdernesse, and William Fielding was created Baron of Newhen^^^ and Viscount
Fielding. In his ninteenth year, Henry Carry was made Lord Carry of L^ppington,
(afterward by King Charles made Earl of Manmouth, Sir Edward Mountague elder
Brother to the Viscount M^^devile was made Baron of Boulton, the Lord Darci^ of
Essex, was created Viscount Colchester, (afterward by King Charles made Earl
R^vers) the Lord Hu^sdo^ was created Viscount Rochford, (afterward by King
Charles, made Earl of D^ver) Sir Lyonell Cranfield, Master of the Wards, was
created Baron of Cranfield in Bedford-shire, and Sir Thomas Howard^ second
son to Thomas Earl of Suffolke^ was created Baron Chorleton, and Viscount
Andover, (afterward by King Charles made Earl of Barke-shire. In his twentyth
year, in the month of September, the Viscount Doncaster, was created Earl of
Carlisle, the Viscount Fielding was created Earl of Denhigh, the Lord Digby was
made Earl of Bristow, the Lord Cranfield, was created Earl of Middlesex, and
Sir Henry Rich was made Baron of Kensington. In his one and twentyth year, the
Marquis of Buckingham, being then in Spain with Prince Charles, had his Patent
sent him to be Duke of Buckingham, William Gray was created Baron of Warke,
Elizabeth the widow of Sir Moyle Fynch of Kent, was created Viscountesse
Maidestone, (afterward by K. Charles made Countess of Winchelsly. ^his two and
twentieth year, the Earl of Clanricard of Ireland, was created Viscount
Tunbridge in Kent (afterward by King Charles made Earl of Saint Albans) Sir
John Hollis Baron of Haughton was created Earl of Clare, Sir (...) Ri^h Baron
of Kensington was created Earl of Holland, the Lord (...) Baron of Say and
Seal, was made Viscount Say and Seal: Sir (...) ^ane was created Earl of
Westmerland, Oliver Lord St. John of Blet^^^ (...) made Earl of Bullinbrook,
Sir Christopher Villers brother to the Duke of B^ckingham, was made Earl of
Anglesey, and Sir James Ley was made (...) (afterward by King Charles made
Earl of Marlborough.) Also this year^^ Sir Francis Leak was made Baron of
Deincourt, and Sir Richard Roberts was made Lord Roberts of Truro in Cornwall.
And this was the number of all the Earls and Barons made by King Iames^ but
in his time also began another sort of Nobility to be made in England, which
had none of the Privileges of English Barons, but had only Title to be
called Lords, of some place either in Scotland or Ireland, although they
possessed not a foot of Land in either: Of which ^o^t, the number being great,
I forbear to rehearse them, lest I should be tedious, or otherwise be thought
to encroach too much upon the Heralds office. It is sufficient to have showed,
that King James advanced so many in honor, that in a kind it might be said of
him, as was said of Augustus Caesar, That he left Rome of Marble, which he
found built of Brick.

The beginning of THE REIGN OF KING Charles.
KING James being deceased on the 27 day of March in the forenoon, the same day
in the afternoon, Charles Prince of Wales His only son, then living, was
Proclaimed King of Great-Brittain, France and Ireland, with the General
acclamation of all sorts of People, as being a Prince of admirable endowments
both of mind and body. He was now about the age of 25 years, whereof, the most
part of one he had spent in Spain; where, although he was frustrated of the
end for which he went, yet it gave him a tincture of Travail and Expe^ience,
more worth perhaps, then the end he went for: For by this means he attain^^ to
a greater degree of that, which made Ulysses so famous: Quod mores hominum
multorum vidit and urbes.
The first thing he did after his Coronation, was to proceed in the marriage
agreed upon in His Fathers time, with the beautiful and virtuous Lady Henrieta
Maria, younger daughter of the Great Henry the 4^ K. of France; after which
marriage, we have only to say, that he was happy in the Wife of His bosom:
Happy in His hopeful Issue: Happy in the love of His people: Happy in the
Peace and tranquillity of his Kingdomes^ and Happy in the continu^nce of all
these Happinesses, for 15 years together, and might have so continued still, if
it had not been for, Discordia Demens Viperiu^s crinem vitti^ innexa cruentis.


But of that which happened afterward, I dare not take upon me to be a
Register: Neither is it indeed safe to begin a Narration, which I must be feign
to break off in amaz^ment, as having nothing left me to say, but Omnia in
malu^ ^^ere; and so far from any appearance of humane remedy; that our only
Anchor must be this: In te D^^in^ sper^m^^, non confundamur in aeternum: Quid
enim nisi v^a supersunt^ Yet our hope is, It will be but a fit, and the storm
once past, fair weather again, and fairer perhaps than it was before, and then
with Joy we shall resume our style.

Laetumque choro Poeana canemus:
In the mean time comforting our selves with the words of the Prophet David;
Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them
all.

Carolus en Rex magnus in armis, major in ermis.
Quid mirum? Imperio magnus, amore magis.
FINIS.

