AN APOLOGY For LAYMENS WRITING in Divinity. With a short Meditation upon the
Fall of Lucifer.

Written by Sr. Richard Baker Knight.

LONDON Printed by E. Griffin for F. Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Marigold in Paul's 1641.

To My Worthily much Honored Cosen Sr. JOHN BAKER of Sissingherst in the County
of Kent Baronet.
SIR,
I Cannot but very much honor you, as being a flourishing branch of that tree,
of which I am but a withered bough; and yet more, for the many excellent parts
of piety and morality that are in you; which as they are an ornament to your
own person, so they make your person an ornament to all your Family; whereof as
a member I have resentment in a very great degree; and therefore have dedicated
this small tract to the Memory of your Name; not so much to be a monument of
your Virtues, which will always be a monument to themselves, as of the great
Respect and Love I bear you, no less then owe you. I may justly call it a
tract, seeing I have been drawn to write it, as it were by violence; least I
should yield my self guilty of profane presumption, for writing in arguments
of Divinity, being but a Lay man; For there are some have censured it no less,
and me no better; but the best is, I need not their voices; It is sufficient
for me, that there is warrant enough in the Scriptures, for it; allowance
enough in the best writers, for it; and testimony enough in the practice of all
ages for it; but most honored Cosen, if notwithstanding all this, the cause
shall happen to be a looser by my defending it; I shall then entreat you, to
accept it, withreflecting upon your own worth; and if you find in it, nothing
that is worth your reading; at least you shall find by it, his love and
affection, who will ever be

Your truly loving Cosen to ser^e and Honor you Richard Baker.

AN APOLOGY for Laymens writing in Divinity.
I Am very tender to speak in an Argument, that may any way be drawn to trench
upon the clergy; whose calling I Reverence; and whose Person I respect^
Tanquam Angelos Dei; but who can be patient to hear the Ignorant murmuring of
some men^ who as though they would cloister up God^ spirit, and not suffer it^
spirare vbi vult; to breath where It lists; Exclude, lay men wholly, from
handling matters of Divinity; and as if they reckoned them, in the number of
those, of whom God said; What have thou to do, to take mine ordinances in thy
mouth; seal up their lips, and take their Pens from them, for setting forth
Gods Glory, either by Observations upon places of Holy Scripture; or by
Meditations in the Law of God. Not unlike to David's brethren, who murmured at
David, and upbraided him with Insolency; for that being no Professed soldier,
no^ One of the Army; he^ durst presume to talk of matters of war and
especially of Encountering with Goliath: whenyet we see, the King allowed him to
undertake it; and God miraculously prospered his undertaking it. For, are there
not some, that in ^ike manner, charge lay men with Insolency; for that, being
no Professed Divines, nor at all of the Clergy; they presume to enter upon
Clergy men's work; and to entermed^ile with matters in Divinity? when yet we
see, the Governors of the Church allow them to do it; and God o^ ten-times
most eminently prospers them, in the doing it. And thus, whilst these men seek
to Vindicate a Privilege, to the Body of the Clergy: they lay an aspersion,
upon the Heads of the Clergy; and whilst they make lay men guilty of
Intrusion, by offering to enter upon Church men's offices; they make themselves
guilty of a far worse Intrusion, by offering to censure their superiors
actions. It may therefore be a labor, not altogether vain, (least such
opinion should gather strength from men's weakenesse^ and grow at last, to be
fed with Reasoning, which is yet nourished, but with murmuring) to make it
appear, that lay men are not of such uncircumcised lips, but that they may
lawfully speak the language of Canaan^ and therefore, that neither they are any
intruders upon the borders of the Clergy, when they write in Arguments of
Divinity; Nor the Overseers of the Church commit any oversight, in allowing
them to do it. It seems, It is conceived, They have the like advantage over
Lay men, as Chremes in Terence had over Menedemus; and that they may say to
them, as he said to him; Tantumne est ab re tua otij tibi, aliena ut ^ures, ea
ue nihil quae ad te attinent? but as Menedemus justly Replied; Homosum; Humani
a me nihil alienum puto; so a lay man may as justly answer, Christianus sum;
Christiani a me nihil alienum puto. It is true; there are many Functions so
peculiar and proper to the Clergy; that they are not a^ all faisible by a Lay
man: but is Knowledge in Divinity, and Expressing such knowledge by writing,
any of these Functions? None but a Clergy man, can consecrate the Bread and
Wine in the Sacrament: but to Discourse of the Nature and properties of a
Sacrament, what hinders but a Lay man may be capable to do it? To Pronounce
absolution of sins to them that are penitent, is a work that none can truly
do but a Clergy man; but to write of the Nature of Repentance, and of the
Conditions of such Absolution; what hinders but a Lay man may be able to do
it? Concionari E^suggestu; To ^preach publicly in the Church; is as unlawful
for a Lay man, as It is for a Private man to take upon him, to be the Kings
Herald: but to make Observations upon places of Scripture; is no more unlawful
for a lay man; then It is for a private man, to make explanation of the Kings
Proclamation. May we not justly then, revive here the old Exclamation; O
Tempora; O Mores; was there a time, when Saint Ambrose, scarce yet a Christian,
was Elected and allowed to be a Christian Bishop; and consequently to Preach
publicly the Doctrine of the Gospel: and are the times so altered now; that a
Christian borne; bred and brought up at the Feet of Christian Camaliels; shall
be thought unworthy to publish writings in Divinity^ and why thought unworthy?
Is not this the Prime reason; least the Doctrine of the Gospel should be
tainted with Errors; and receave impurity from Lay men's writings; and
therefore None but Clergymen, fit to do it. But who sees not that this Reason
is thrust upon Lay men thorough Clergymens sides? For, are all Clergy men's
writings, free from such taynting? Was not Origin a Clergy man? yet how many;
how gross Errors had their original and beginning from him? Was not
Tertullian a Clergy man? yet if his writings be arraigned of Haeresie; he will
scarce be found worthy to have his Clergy. And not to insist upon the
Ancients; (of whom scarce One, is sine Naevo) Is it not so also with the
Modernes; and not with the Ordinary Flock only, but even with the Arie^es
Gregis? Was not Arminius of late, an Aries gregis^ a Clergy man? yet how do
his writings swarm with errors? By this Reason then, both Clergy and Lay, are
like to fall into an equal degree of praemunire; and so either Both of them to
be Excluded; or Both of them to be Admitted. But why should It be feared,
least the Doctrine of the Gospel should be tainted with Errors, by Lay men's
writing? Is it, because they cannot attain to a sufficient portion of Divine
Knowledge? but what should ^^inder, that a lay man may not attain to as much
knowledge, that It may as justly be said of him, as was said of an Ancient,
Doctissimus Vneliquaque Varro? For what would they make Lay men to be? would
they have them be thought only grosse-headed fellows; so incapable of
Learning, that they never go further, then Ruerilis and their Accidens? As
though to attain to Legit ut Clericus; were the uttermost height of a Lay man's
learning? Does not the whole staire case, by which all Learning Humane and
Divine, is ascended up by, lie open before them? Have they not alike Gifts of
Nature; alike helps of Art? have they not as much conference with Learned men;
as much plenty and supply of Books? have they not equal leisure to study;
equal will and Desire to learn? and indeed, what One step, in the whole
Ascent of Learning is wanting to them? To say; they want yet the step of
taking Holy Orders; this will prove nothing to this purpose. It is indeed a
high step, in the Ascent of Sacred Character; but in this of Knowledge, It
seems to be no step at all. For does conferring of Holy Orders, confer any
thing to Knowledge? If this were so: then most likely, It should have done it,
when Christ, a most powerful Agent in all he did, conferred Holy Orders upon
the Apostles, but It appears, this gave them no knowledge. They who think,
the Apostles were made Priests and received Holy Orders by virtue of those
words of Christ at the Institution of the Eucharist, Hoc Facite, (as some there
are that think so) let them shew^ that after these words, they continued not as
very Ignorants in the Mysteries of salvation as they were before. It will
appear, their Illumination came not with Hoc Fa^ite; but with Insufflavit in
eos: when Christ breathing upon them said; Accipite Spiritum Sanctum: and not
then, Complete neither, till Ten days after his Ascension, when the Holy
Ghost Descended, and sat upon them in Cloven Tongues. So as, the wonder which
the Jews made at Christ; how he came to be so learned, who had never
learned; was continued in the ^^postles, how they came to sp^^ke so many
Tongues, who were never taught any. But Miracles ceased with the Apostles
times: and we have no Miraculous learned men, no Egyptian Anthonies, now a
days: None that attain to Learning by miracle: All Divine Knowledge now,
comes in by these words of Christ, s^rutamini Scripturas, by searching and
studying the Scriptures. It cannot be Denied, but that our Church is now stored
with Learned Divines; with admirable Preachers: with profound and sound
Interpretors, as much as this, or any other particular Church, ever wa^ or is;
but can we attribute this, to their takin^ orders; or to their takin^ paines^
Is there any ^ them, of whom it man (...) (...) Warrant from Christ for this
Scrutami^ (...); and that where Christ giv^s a warrant, God gives a Blessing;
what should hinder^ that a Lay man, (...) them no knowledge. They who think,
the Apostles were made Priests and received Holy Orders by virtue of those
words of Christ at the Institution of the Eucharist, Hoc Facite, (as some there
are that think so) let them show, that after these words, they continued not as
very Ignorants in the Mysteries of salvation as they were before. It will
appear, their Illumination came not with Hoc Facite; but with Insufflavit in
eos: when Christ breathing upon them said; Accipite Spiritum Sanctum: and not
then, Complete neither, till Ten days after his Ascension, when the Holy
Ghost Descended, and sat upon them in Cloven Tongues. So as, the wonder which
the Jews made at Christ; how he came to be so learned, who had never
learned; was continued in the Apostles, how they came to speak so many
Tongues, who were never taught any. But Miracles ceased with the Apostles
times: and we have no Miraculous learned men, no Egyptian Anthonies, now a
days: None that attain to Learning by miracle: All Divine Knowledge now,
comes in by these words of Christ, serutamini Scripturas, by searching and
studying the Scriptures. It cannot be Denied, but that our Church is now stored
with Learned Divines; with admirable Preachers: with profound and sound
Interpretors, as much as this, or any other particular Church, ever was or is;
but can we attribute this, to their taking orders; or to their taking pains?
Is there any of them, of whom it may not be said: Multa tulit fecitque puer,
sudavit and alsit? If then Scrutamini Scripturas be the only way now left,
for attaining of Divine Knowledge; and if Lay men have their Warrant from
Christ for this Scrutamini Scripturas; and that where Christ gives a warrant,
God gives a Blessing; what should hinder, that a Lay man, may not attain a
sufficient portion of Knowledge, after edifying himself, to Edify others; and
having such Knowledge; why not fit, or rather indeed bound to communicate it
to others? Unless we think such Knowledge to be none of the Talents of which
Christ in the Parable says; that an account shall be required. Are they
commanded to search, and shall they not be allowed to tell what they find?
May not men have Sacras Dotes, though they be not Sacerdotes; and may they
have them and shall they be Denied to use them? shall a Godly man meditate in the
Law of God, Day and Night; and shall Gods Blessing such meditation, bring forth
nothing, that may be worth the writing? Or if any thing of worth, by such
Meditation be brought forth; shall it therefore be cast forth, because written
by a l^y man? What were this, but to appoint God, by what Messengers he shall
send his Presents, Or rather, to refuse his Presents, if he send them not by
messengers, of our appointment? Not much less, then as if the Apostles should
have refused to be instructed of Christ's Resurrection, because they were women,
and none of the seaventy Disciples that told the^ of it. As therefore there is
no reason to exact writing in divinity of every Clergy man; seeing such
abi^ity, is not Dos Ordinis, but Hominis, Not a Dowry of the Order, but of the
Person; so there is no reason to Deny writing in Divinity to every Layman;
seeing such ability is Dos Hominis, non Ordinis, a Dowry of the Person, and not
of the Order. It makes indeed the sweetest Harmony; when Learning and Holy
Orders, meet in one Person together, but yet asunder, they are not to be
despised: (...): It is a wrong to God himself; to refuse to make use of either
his gifts or his blessings, in whomsoever they are found to be.

If I should here challenge Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, and the Prophets;
all the Pen men of the old Testament, to be of the number of Lay men; No man I
think could justly deny them to be so: for though there be diverse kinds of
Unction; as Regalis, Prophetica and Sacerdotalis: yet they are all distinct,
and enter not common with One another, and therefore when David entered into the
house of God, and did eat of the shewbread, he did that, which was not
lawful for him to do; but only for the Priests: It was not his Vnctio
Regalis or Prophetica, that could Privilege him to do it; and if there had
been in him, any degree of Sacerdotall Unction; It should not have been as
absolutely unlawful for him to do it, as for them that were with him. But to
let the other stand by; may we not be peremptory, to take Joshua and Solomon;
who were neither Priests nor Prophets; but puri puti Laici; yet Both of them,
writers and Pen men of holy Scriptures? You will say; These were men Divinely
Inspired; and these Gifts in them, were extraordinary, which in Lay men now a
days are not to be expected; It is true, neither for our purpose is it
requisite, they should: It is enough for us, that God at all times has
vouchsafed to Lay men, his Grace of Divine Knowledge; and if of extraordinary
Knowledge; we may well think, of ordinary, much more.

Next to the work it self, of Penning the Scriptures: that work of the
seaventy Interpreters; is in matter of Scripture the greatest that ever was
done, and what were those seventy Interpretours? were they not most of them, if
not all of them, Lay men? For how ^lse could they be six out of every Tribe;
as all Historical Authors make relation! If then Lay men were the first
Penners of Scripture; and Lay men the first Interpretours of Scripture; shall
they have this for their labor, that Lay men shall be excluded; from meddling
with Scripture any more? but seeing they have been thought worthy to be Gods
Instruments in the greater, how can it be thought or who can think it
unworthy to be his Instrument in the lesser?

There are some indeed that allow not Lay men, to read the Scriptures, and
think that this S^rutamini scripturas, is no General precept: but that lay men
must take them at second hand: and they, no doubt have reason to tie up Lay
men's hands from writing; who close up their Eyes from Reading: but for men
that allow Lay men to Read, and yet Deny them to write; what can be conceaved
more Incongruous? much like, as if they would allow men to marry, and not allow
them to have children; or if to have Children, yet not to be Legitimate; for,
what is their writing, but as it were the Issue and Offspring of their
Reading! Not, that every one that Reads, must presently be a writer; no more
then every One that marries, of necessity has Children; but that where the One
is lawfully permitted, the other cannot reasonably be Denied.

You will perhaps Infer, that if laymen be allowed to be writers in Divinity;
they may as well be allowed, to be Assistants in Councels, where Points of
Divinity are Determined, and who ever heard of such Assistants? but may we not
more truly say, who ever heard of such an Inference? as though because a man
can discourse well, of the qualities and conditions required in the Counselor
of a King; we should there upon conclude him presently to be of the Kings
Counsel? For though we allow of lay Divines: yet we are no Patrons of Lay
Elders: though we give them place in Theological mootings; yet we give them
no Seats in Ecclesiastical Tribunals; They may be reckoned Inter Scriptores
Ecclesiasticos: though not in the reckoning of Patres Ecclesiae. And yet even
this Assistance of Lay men in Councels, not perhaps so strange a matter, as
they would make it. Does not Nicephorus in his History, make mention of a Lay
man, who in the Praeludium, I may say, of the Great Oecumenicall Nicene
Council, spoke some words that were harkned to with great attention; and gave
no small furtherance to the business in hand? And not to stand gathering up
such crummes; Did not the Councels assembled by the Apostles themselves: Did
not this first Council of Nice, and indeed all antiquity, admit always Lay
men to be amongst them? did not Pope Adrian himself admit lay men in the
Council of Lateran? and did not Pope Nicholas in another Council give a reason
for it, that seeing Faith is Catholic and common to all men; It therefore
belongs as well to Lay men as to Priests; to be admitted i^ place, where
Controversies of Faith are handled? And why may not the Opinion even of
Arminius, in this point have its weight: seeing it is not reckoned amongst his
Errors, who in Councels holden for Composing Controversies in Religion, would
have laymen to be admitted, and to have their voices? which is indeed no more
than for which, Gregorius Neocaes^riensis, an Ecclesiastical writer, alleges
a Canon that makes it lawful.

But why then is it said, the Priests lips shall preserve Knowledge? For if
Priests be appointed the Keepers of Knowledge; what have Lay men to do, with
any thing in their Keeping? But of whom was this spoken? was it not of Priests
under the law; who were Priests, Borne all; not made Priests, as Ours are? and
Knowledge might well be then tied to the Priesthood; when the Priesthood it
self, was tied to one Tribe; but now that the Priesthood is set at liberty;
and no longer tied to One Tribe; now, Knowledge also is set at Liberty; and no
longer tied to the Priesthood. And though we be not all Priests in office, yet
we are all Priests in capacity; as being capable of that knowledge which is
required in Priests: and that which Saint Peter calls Regale Sacerdotium, the
Royal Priesthood, extends no less to lay men, then to them of the clergy.
But chiefly perhaps, It is justly said; The lips of the Priest shall preserve
Knowledge, because to their custody were committed the Books of the Law; and
they appointed to Read and expound them in their Synagogues. But what makes
this against Lay men now; to whom the Books of the Law and of the Gospel, lie
as open as to Clergy men themselves? (...) of whom It is said; They shall be
all Docti a Deo; and shall know God, a Maximo usque ad Minimum; Not that the
Teaching of Clergy men should be neglected, but that the Learning of Laymen
should not be contemned. Or may we not conceave; It is justly said; The
lips of the Priest shall preserve knowledge; because in them, It is a
necessary Duty; where in Lay men, It is but a voluntary service: In them It is
done Ex Officie; and as Incident to their calling, where In these, It is done
of Devotion; and out of their Christian Liberty: yet as from Those, It may
justly be It cannot justly be (...). Or lastly perhap^^ it not ^ignanter said:
The lips of the Priest shall preserve Knowledge, because the Viva Var of
public Instructing, which i^ the work of the lips, is properly belonging to
the Office of the Priest; but It is not said; The Pen of the Priest shall
preserve Knowledge; because to Illustrate or Demonstrate by writing, which is
the work of the Pen, has always been allowed, as Common with the Layity.
If Origin had gone no further then the pen: had only written Treatises in
Divinity, whereof he writ many; as also Tertullian did; before he entered into
Holy Orders; he had never for that, been reproved by the Church: but when he
would go as far as the lips; go up into the Pulpit; and Preach publicly to
the People, being yet but a Lay man: This was to intrude upon the Priestly
office, and for this he was justly censured a Transgressor: and yet even in
this too, there were Bishops of that time, and those no mean Ones neither,
that approved his doing, and brought Examples to excuse him.

But is it not said, that No Scripture is of private Interpretation; and how is
it not of private Interpretation, if private men Interpret it? Indeed no more,
then if Clergy men Interpret it: For it is not the person of the Interpretour;
but the manner of Interpreting, that makes it to be private; and therefore a
Clergy man, may make it of private Interpretation, if he follow his private
sense; and have no Guide but his own Spirit; and a Lay man may make it, of no
private Interpretation, if he be guided by the conduct of the spirit that writ
it. In many cases, no doubt, the Rule upon which to ground our consideration,
is Quis, and not Quid: but are there not many Cases also, in which the Rule is
Quid, and not Quis? when Saint Paul says; Omnia Probate; quod bonumest,
tenete: does he not refer us rather Ad Res^ then ad Personas? if Moses had
considered Quis and not Quid: he had never entertained the Instructions of his
Father in Law Iethro, as being a Gentile. How many Books, are aamongst learned
men, held in high account, whose Authors yet are altogether unknown; and would
you have them be rejected; because perhaps the Authors of them, were but Lay
men? shall you not in so doing, reject many excellent Writings of the Ancient
Fathers, who writ many of their Books, before ever they entered into Holy
Orders? How much better may that be applied to Lay men here, which Christ
spoke in his own case; if I have spoken ill, reprove me in it: but if I have
spoken well, why do ye strike me? and if no man can call God, Lord; but by
the Holy Ghost; may we not be sure, that a Treatise, orthodoxly and piously
written in Divinity: is a Spiritu sancto; a work even of God; whosoever be the
Ministerial Author? If Christ were Flos Horti, a Flower of the Garden; then
indeed None but Gardiners should have Right to gather him: but seeing he is
Flos campi; a Flower of the Field: Now he lies open for all to gather; and
Gardiners have no more Right, nor means to gather him then any other. If the
Scriptures were as the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple; into which none might
enter, but the High Priest; then indeed we might well think them to be Adyta
non adeunda; No matters for Lay men to be suffered to meddle with: but seeing
they are as the Atrium, the common receptacle of all; and that Not only all
may come; but to which all are Invited to come; and blamed if they come not,
what should hinder, why a Lay man being conversant with them, may not be
Intelligent of them; and why Meditating in them, Day and Night, he may not
bring forth something worthy of the light? It is said to be a Tenet among the
Turks, that their Alcoran which is their Scripture; is not to be Understood
by study, but by Illumination; and that Illumination is proper to their
Priests; and never influenced upon the Laity; but I hope, this Tenet for
understanding our Scriptures, shall take no hold, amongst us Christians. To
conceave that Lay men's writing in Divinity; is an Affront to the Clergy; is
the conceit of Joshua in his Non age; a simple conceit; It is rather a Glory,
and ought to be a Joy unto them: For what greater Joy to a shepherd, then to
have his Flock thrive? what greater Glory, to a Master, then to have his
scholars prosper? and what are Lay men to the Clergy, but as sheep to
Pastors; and as Scholars to Masters? who knows not that Clergy men be as
Pilots in the ship of the Church; and worthily sit at the Helm; and Is it any
prejudice to them, that Lay men be suffered to row at the Oar? who doubts but
Clergy men, are as Captains and Leaders of Gods Armies: and may not Lay men
therefore be allowed the place of soldiers, in fighting Gods Battles? Clergy
men no doubt, are the Prime Laborers, in Gods Harvest; but may not lay men
therefore be allowed to be Gleaners? Though Clergy men be distributors of
Christ's whole loaves; yet without any Prejudice to them; Lay men may be
permitted to gather up the Fragments. Is it not enough, that Lay men strike
sail to the Clergy, as they pass by, but they must be wholly excluded from
following the Fleet? Would not Moses have said in this Case; Envy ye for my
sake? would God that all the Lords People were Prophets: that so, whilst many
bring in, to the Gazophilacium of the Church, though but every One a little, a
greater treasure may sooner be gathered, then when but a few bring in, though
Every One a great deal. And (not to bear too hard a hand upon Lay men) Is it
not congruous that as Clergy men are permitted to do many things, which yet
more properly belong to the Layity; so Lay men, may be allowed to do some
things, which yet we may grant, more properly to belong to the Clergy. And
have I not now, spoken a word, which with men that are not contentious, may
justly give a period to the Question; or rather make it, without question? For,
though Lay men be not allowed to write in Divinity, and to Publish their
writings, of their own heads; yet at least, It cannot be Denied, as a thing
fit to be permitted by superiors. For so, all Inconveniences Pretended will be
avoided; Neither Schism will be occasioned; Nor Errors Creep in; Neither
Laymen will be Denied the Use of their Talents; Nor Clergy men abridged, in
the honor of their Calling; but all will be done in that decent order, which
is fit to be Observed, in the Israel of God; and in the Flock of Christ. For
indeed, though S^^ntamini Scriptur^s be said to all; and all in General are
Commanded to search; Yet all do not Search; but the greatest number, are
willing to take their ^ase; and leave Searching to them that will. Again, of
those that do Search, all do not find; but whether by Carelessness, or by
being Dymme Sighted, in stead of Finding, they oftentimes Loose themselves;
Again of those that do Find; All, find not matter of worth; but matter
perhaps of Difficulty, or Curiosity; perhaps Straw or Stubble, fitter to be
burnt, then brought into the Barn; Again of those that find matter of worth;
All, is not presently such, that seems such in their own Eyes; It must not
therefore be done here as was done in Israel, when there was no King; every
one to do and write what he list, but we have Reges and Regentes; Men
Positos quasi in Specula, set as it were in Sentinel: to whose Care it is
Committed; Vt Ne Quid Ecclesia Detrimenti capiat, that the Church be not any
way endammaged: who amongst their other Honorary functions, are to overlooke
such Searchers; and to Examine, what It is they find; and if they find their
Findings to be for substance, such as Recedes not from Analogy of Scripture;
and for Use, such as may Conduce to the edification of the Faithful; Then It
is their Parts, of Private to make it Public; and to receive it, though but as
the poor widows mite, into the Gazophylacium of the Church, that so, not so
much as the Fragments of Christ's Lo^ves may be lost; but all gathered up, and
put into Baskets. This Restraint, of Publishing Books without License; is, no
doubt, a laudable Custom in the Discipline of the Church; but yet a Custom,
of which it may be said, Non suit Sic ab Initio; For in the first times, and
even to these last times, both Clergy men; and Laymen; might write what they
list; and Publish what they writ; which perhaps made Solomon say, Faciendi
Libros nullus est Finis; but now at last, the Doctrine of the Gospel being
thoroughly sifted, and settled; It has seemed good to the Governors of the
Church, to make a Restraint; yet so, that even those, who allow not Lay men to
Read the Scriptures without License; yet with License, allow them to write of
Scripture; and would it not be strange, if our Church which allows Lay men to
Read the Scriptures without License; should not with License, allow them to
write?

But because my self a Layman, speaking for lay men; may be thought partial
in the Cause; or rather, because Reasons have not their strength, so much in
themselves, as from the person that delivers them; hear, what Cleargymen, them
selves say; and what allowance they give to Laymens writing. Take Saint Austin,
One of the soundest Fathers, and of the soundest times; who though he have
written no Treatise hereof, of purpose; yet he has a passage in him, that
sufficiently expresses, what his Opinion is: For in his Second Epistle, Ad
Petrum presbyterum De Anima; mentioning a Laymans work in Divinity; which this
Peter had Commended to him; he writes thus: Absit ut erubescam Presbyter a
Presbytero Discere; si tu Presbyter non erubuisti a Laico, praedicanda and
Imitanda humilitate, vera Didicisse. An humbleness he accounts it in a Clergy
man, to learn of a Lay man; but yet an Humbleness, worthy to be praised, and
fit to be practiced. About his time and soundness, is also Saint Hierome who
upon the Epistle to the Colossians; writes thus; Hie Ostenditur, verbum
Christi, non sufficienter, sed abundanter etiam Laicos debere habere; and
Docere se invicem, vel Monere. But come to our own times; which, as by men's
curiosity they are fuller of Scruples; so by growth in Divine Knowledge they
are fuller of Resolutions; and Hear, what Doctors of the Church at this day
say. Andrew Ryvet, Professor of Divinity, in the University of Leyden; Delivers
his Opinion in these words: Agnoscimus in Ecclesia sub Deo Vnico Iudice and
Independenti, Duo Iudicia Dependentia and subalterna; quorum, Vnum est
Publicum; Al ^d, Privatum: Hoc quidem, Omnibus Fidelibus Concessum; Illud Vero
solis in Ecclesia Ordinatis. We acknowledge there are in the Church, under God,
the only Independent Iudge^ Two Dependant and subalternate Judgments; whereof,
the one is Public, the other, Private: This, granted to all the Faithful,
That only, to Pastors ordained in the Church. With him, concurres in Opinion;
Daniel Chamyere; a learned Divine, and a famous writer of late time; who
Declares himself in these words: Pronuntiamus cuilibet Christiano, vt legere,
sic Interpretari scripturas: servatis tamen diversarum Vocationum gradibus; ut
Pastores tanquam Pastores, in hac re, suo publico officio fungantur; Privati
autem, privatas suas parts expleant; and then adds: Et quia Deus sui Spiritus
Dena vary distribuit; Docuit Experientia, Nullius hominis Fidelis in hoc
negotio aut voluntatem Damnandam; aut Conatum, Detestandum. We pronounce it
lawful for every Christian, as to Read, so to Interpret Scripture: yet
observing the degrees of several callings; namely that Pastors exercise their
public Function as Pastors; and Private men, their Private parts: and then
adds, and seeing God does diversely distribute the Gifts of his Spirit;
Experience has taught us that in this kind, neither the will of any Faithful
man, is to be Condemned, nor his Endeavor to be Despised. To these may be
added Infinite other; all Pedibus euntes in eandem sententiam: all agreeing as
an Unisone in Music, in this Tenet.

And now that you have heard, how it is De Iure: Look into the Registers of
Time: and see, how it is De Facto; and what the Practice in the Church has
always been. Under the Law, the Scribes and Pharisees were no Priests; yet who
greater Glossists: who more frequent Interpretours of Scripture then They,
Under the Gospel, after the Apostles: and in the Primitive time of the Church:
how many Lay men does Saint Hierome, in his Catalogue of famous Ecclesiastical
writers Record: amongst others, Ar^stides, Hegesippus, Justinius, Modestus:
Musonus, Heraclius, Apollonius, Maximus: of whom, some writ Apologies for the
Christian Religion: some Disputations for convincing of Haereticks: All,
Arguments of Scripture, and Points of Divinity. After these men to our time;
have run out many Hundred years, yet not so many days in these hundreds of
years, as lay men writers in matter of scripture: that if I should stand to
reckon them up, Ante Diem Clauso Componet Vesper Olympo. But come to our last
Age, and lest you should think it a Local Error, and but of some One
Country; Look into all Countries; and see how the Practice has gone: Look
into Italy; there you shall see Picus Mirandula; an Earl and a mere Layman:
look into France; there you shall see Philip Mornay, a Baron of that Country;
and a mere Laymen; look into our own Country of England; here you shall see
Sir Thomas More; a Chancellor of the Kingdom and a mere Layman; Alk of
them, writing Treatises, in Divinity^ and handling Arguments of Scripture. I
name but One in a Country, where but for tediousness, I might name a Hundred.
And now looking back upon the Arguments that have been brought: upon the
Reasons; the Authorities; the Examples, for the lawfullnesse of Lay men's
writing in Divinity; I seem, me thinks, to have offended rather in Excess,
then in Defect of showing it; at least to have said so much, that whom it
cannot satisfy, yet it may persuade; and whom it cannot persuade, yet it may
satisfy: and serve sufficiently; both Impellere volentem, and Nolentem trahere.

AN ADDITION TO THE APOLOGY.
ANd now having spoken sufficiently in Justification of Lay men's wtiting in
Divinitye It will not be unsit, to say something in celebration of their study
for enabling them to write: that it may appear they come unto it, if not in
Saul's Armor, yet at least with David's weapons; with a Sling and with stones,
sufficient for overthrowing of any Goliath: and then if it can be proved that
Lay men may attain to as much perfection in Knowledge, as Clergy men may; It
cannot be doubted, but they may as well be allowed to communicate their
knowledge to others by writing, as clergy men are. And if in this I shall seek
to Parallel them, and make them go Passabus ^quis; as fast a pace as they,
there is none can justly take exception seeing there is none can challenge any
Prerogative; and Comparisons are never odious where the Endeavors only and not
the Merits; or the Merits only and not the Persons; or the Persons only, and
not the callings are compared. And we may be allowed to say; that if a Clergy
man be Pedibus celer, and Pernicibus alis; a Lay man is not behind him in the
like Instruments of speed; and therefore may make equal progress in Learning,
in equal time; and thus far there will appear no Inequality between them.

It is the saying of a Heathen man; and though of a Heathen man, yet a true
saying. Di^ omnia Laboribus vendunt, which we may Christianly translate: God
s^lls all things to men for labor: meaning that he loo^es for no other money
from us for his wares, but only our labor. If then it can be proved, that
Lay men lay out as much of this money with God, as Clergy men do; how can it
be doubted, but that lay men may have as much of Gods wares as Clergy men
have? For when David says, Blessed is the man that meditates in the Law of
God, day and night; do we think, he means it not as well of Lay men, as of
Clergy men? and as well that they are Blessed in it, as Blessed for it?

And what are then the Incitamenta Laborum? the Initements to labor? for with
whom the greatest Incitements are, form them we may expect the greatest Labor.
One great Incitement to Labor, is Spes Lucri; Hope of Gain; as it is said:
^^cri causa Currit Mercator ad Indos; the Merchant for his profit will run
from one End of the world to another, Another great Incitement to Labor, is
Reputation: as It is said; Honos alit Arts: Omnesque Incenduntur ad studia,
Gloria; Honor is the Fomenter of Arts: and glory an Incentive to Study: and
these indeed, are eminent in Clergy men; in Lay men Little or None at all; but
then, the Lay man has another In citement more forcible then Both these: and
that is; The Love of Learning and the Delight he takes in study; for where
this love is; all lab^^rs seem easy; all time seems short; as was seen in
David; who, though nothing be more dear then Life; and nothing maintains Life
but Food; yet his Love to meditating in the Law of God; made him forget
oftentimes to eat his bread. This Love is that which only makes the good
stomach; where the digestion is as good, as the Appetite is great; and each of
them makes way to the continuance of the other: which in the Clergy man
commonly is not so: For the End of his study, being set upon profit and
preferment; that profit and Preferment once gotten, the study abates: where the
Lay man that studies for love never slacks his Inte^^ion: but the more it is
enjoyed, the more it increases. Yet I speak not this, as though Clergy men may
not study out of love too; but because Lay men have no other Incentive of their
study, but their love: and then is love most forcible, when and is sincere; it
is not mingled with any By respects^

The end of a thing is always more Intentively aimed at, then the Medium to
that End; and seeing Clergy men for the most part, make profit and preferment
the End of their studies; Learning but the Medium: what marveile if they
seldom attain to more then a mediocrity of Knowledge: so much as may serve to
make then capable of Pre^erment: and then give over studying; as thinking that
further Learning would be but superfluous: that all this while they may be
rather said to have studied the Politics then Divinity; but the Lay man,
having no end in his study, but his study; and seeking not Learning for
Preferment; but accounting the Learning it self to be his Preferment; he
never thinks he has enough, though he have never so much: and It may be said
of him in a good sense, which is said of a Coveious man in a bad: Quo plus
btbuntur, plus sitiuntur aquae: the more he drinks, the more he thirsts and
desires to drink; the more learning he attaines, the more he labors to
attain more; and Now, which of these Two, is the likelier man to attain to
that height of Learning: of whom It may be said: Iamque arce Potitus, Ridet
anhelam, tes duri ad saftigia montis? Besides the Clergy man has many
actions, Incident to his calling, which call him away from actions of Study:
many Imployme^ts which are as rubs in his course of Learning; where the Lay man
is free to be Totus in Libris: wholly at his Book; and has nothing to do
but Hoc agere: having both his mind and time at liberty: and Now, which of
these Two, is the likelier man, to make the greater progress in the course of
Learning? Again the Clergy man oftentimes enters upon the study of Divinity,
ut Fors o^^^cerit illi: rather by Ca^^al^y and chance, then by his own choice,
as perhaps more Inclined to some other study; where the Lay man being free and
at liberty, enters into it, by the only propension of his liking, and as his
natural Inclination Leads him: and Now, which of these Two, is the likelier
man to attain the greater Perfection in Divinity; He that enters into the
study, if not against his will; at least Inuita Minerva: or He that enters
into it, by the only Inclination of his Genius? And of this, if we desire
Examples, we need not go far to seek them, having had Two men in our time
(to speak of no more) the One of our own Country; the other of a
neighbour-Nation. I mean Sir Francis Bacon Lord of Verulam; and Isaac
Casaubone: Both, Lay men; and Both so excellent in all kinds of learning; that
if they would have showed themselves in the Orb of divinity, as they did in
lower Spheres; they might have shined as stars of the First Magnitude,
among^ ^ the Greatest of the Clergy. And though we may read of many Clergy
men, that have been excellent scholars, and admirable Divines; yet if we
could look into the course of their lives; we should find, that the greatest
part of their Learning, they got being Lay men, as indeed the Lay man's life is
sit for study: the Clergy man's for Practice.

And because the mind is more Intentive, where the object is more Attractive;
It will not be amiss to say something here, of the Excellency and pre-eminence
of Divinity, that it may appear, how much more of the Adamant there is in it
then in any other kind of Learning; and therefore no marvel if men's minds be
drawn unto it, with a kind of violence; at least with more then an ordinary
Inclination: It is true all other kinds of Learning have their several
pleasures; and their proper ways of delighting the mind: natural Philosophy
Delights with the curiosity and search of causes: Mathematics Delight, with
the subtilty and certainty of conclusions: Poetry Delights with the Rapture
and Liberty of Invention; Rhetoric Delights with the sweetness of style,
and flowers of expressing; and so of the rest: but all these Arts, though they
be pleasing for a time; yet they leave in the mind a kind of guiltinesse^
that the time spent in them, might better have been spent; as the famous Poet
Virgil, after his excellent Elaborate works in Poetry, yet at last, as in a
kind of Remorse, be queathed them to the Fire, and would have had them burnt.
And it is written of Saint Hierome, that he was haled in his sleep to a
tribunal; and there cruelly beaten for affecting Rhetoric so much: and
spending so much time in Cicero: And as for Philosophy; St. Paul affords it no
better a title, then to call it vain Philosophy: and thus; all human
learnings have their Remorses: only divinity though it persuade to Repentance
yet it never Repents: but is the only study, that Redeemes the time, and
Iustifies her Children: And though she scorn not those other Arts; Yet she
holds but little fellowship with then: as being her self Queen: and They but
Handmaids. Again where all other studies have both their use, and delight
ended in this life and all their Characters blotted out by Death, yet the
study of Divinity leaves in the mind a kind of Impression, that (as some
think) will never be obliterate, as being a beginning of that Knowledge of God
in his word, which shall hereafter be perfected in in his vision: at least, It
makes us in this life to Foresee the Next; and in some measure to Partake of
the Next: but in a full measure, Prepares us for the Next. In all other
studies, It is enough, if we observe, Philosophandum, sed Paucis; a certain
proportion is sufficient: but in the study of Divinity, there is no staying at
Paucis; No stinting of proceeding: For to make a stop, is to take a Fall; where
the further we go, the fayrer way we shall find; and the greater mysteries
will be revealed. Indeed Divinity, is in great part, if not a Reparation, yet
an Exaltation of the knowledge which our first Parents lost, by eating the
Forbidden Fruit: and where by eating that Fruit, they were then excluded from
Conversing with God in Person; we by the fruit of Divinity are admitted now to
Converse with him in Spirit; and though by it' we come not to know so much of
the Creatures as Adam did; yet certainly we come to know more of the Creator
then Adam did; For by it, we come to know the Incarnation of the Son of God; a
Mystery which the Angels desired to know, and knowing admire: we come to know
the Nature of God, which transcends all Metaphysics: we come to know the
Power, of God which transcends all Fictions of poetry: we come to know the
wisdom of God, which transcends all Politics; we come to know the creation of
the World: which transcends all Philosophy: that we may truly say; all the
Tomes of all other Arts, are but Atoms compared to this of Divinity. Divinity
teaches us Humility and Charity: Two virtues, which Moral Philosophy never
knew; It teaches us Obedience to the Law of God: and submission to his Will:
Two sacrifices, which Heathen Religion never understood. Divinity teaches us,
that the way to be Rich, is to be Godly; that the way to be Honorable, is
to be Humble; that the way to Happiness, is Adversity; that the way to
salvation is Repentance; that the way to life, is Mortification. Divinity makes
us certain of the Immortality of the Soul; a Secret to which Humane Learning
never approached but with doubting; makes us certain of the Resurrection of
the Body a Secret to which human Learning never approached so near as doubting
Divinity makes us foresee; that, which we cannot see; makes us know that which
we cannot Comprehend: makes us Believe that which we cannot imagine. Many are
the troubles of the righteous in which Estate there is no kind of learning that
gives any comfort to the mind but only Divinity: for this teaches us the true
Interpretation of Afflictions; that they are oftentimes as well Favors of God,
as Punishments; which no other learning teaches; because none acknowledges.
This world is a Maze of Perplexities and Doubts: in which, there is no other
learning that can afford an Ariadnes Thread to guide us, but only Divinity;
for this discovers to us all the snares that are laid by the world to entrap
us; all the subtilties that are used by Satan to deceave us; which no other
learning discovers; because none acknowledges. By reason of sin, there is
grown an Enmity between God and us: in which miserable Estate, there is no
kind of Learning can set the mind at Peace; but only Divinity: for this
assures us, the promised seed of the woman to bruise the Serpents head, the
only means for Reconciling us to God; which no other learning can assure;
because none acknowledges: that we may truly say, all other learnings are but
Crepundia, Toys to please Children; and indeed they please us no longer, then
while we are Children in Knowledge: as Saint Paul says; when I was a Child, I
spoke as a Child: I thought as a Child, I did as a Child; but when I came to
be a man, I put away all Childishness: but how to come to be a man in
knowledge; and how to put away the Childishnes of ignorance; there is no other
learning but Divinity that informs it, because there is no other kind of
learning, that acknowledges it.

The Jews among many their Fables of God, have this for one; that every day he
spends certain hours in studying the Talmud; which is their body of Divinity;
a blasphemous Fiction, but yet a Fiction, that adds as much to the honor of
Divinity; as it Derogates from the honor of Gods Deity. He that studies
Divinity, is continually meditating in the Law of God; and he that does so, is
Pronounced blessed, by the Prophet David, but he never pronounces them
Blessed that study the Mathematics, or the Politics, or Philosophy: no Alas:
for these are the Learnings, of which Solomon says: He that increases
Knowledge increases sorrow; but then he means not the Knowledge in Divinity;
for the more this Knowledge increases, the more it fills the mind with the
true objects of Joy; with which, all sorrow is Incompatible; but only that
sorrow for which we have not, never shall have cause to be sorry. If
Knowledge were not a thing to be Desired; the Cherubins that are Angels of
Illumination should not have so high an Order, in the Hierarchy of Angels as
they have. But then it must be a knowledge that tends to his Glory, who is the
Fountain of Knowledge; which no learning teaches but only Divinity. What
availes it to know a world of secrets, if we know not the secret of the world,
to what end it was made; thereby to Glorify him that made it? which no
learning teaches but only Divinity. What would it avail us to know the
Nature of all creatures, that we could give them Names expressing their
Natures as Adam did; if we should not know the Creator and his name ^ehova;
revealed first to Abraham; which no learning teaches but only Divinity. There
is but Vnum Necessarium, as Christ says: but one thing Necessary; and this one
Necessary thing no learning teaches, but only Divinity: and if Divinity only
teach the one thing that is necessary, then all other learnings teach that
which is superfluous; what marvel then, if as Saint Peter said to Christ of
himself and others: Behold, we have Left all to follow thee; so many Excellent
men in ancient times, have left all other Learnings to study Divinity; as
Origin and Saint Austin did; who left their Schools of Rhetoric, to be
Scholars in Divinity, as Saint Cyprian did, who left his study in Astrology
and Curious Arts, to be a student in Divinity; as many Emperors and great
Princes have done; who after many glorious achievements in the World, have
left at last, I may say, their studying the Politics; and betaken themselves
to a private Life, to study Divinity; for this only teaches us both to know
God and our selves; this only instructs us both to Live well, and Die well;
this only informs us, how to make use of the Present time, in providing for
the time to come ^ without which, all study is but idleness; all Learning is
but Ignorance: and therefore O my Soul; Let other Arts have their portions
with Ismael; but Let the study of Divinity be thine Isaak and Inherit thee:
Let other Learnings have some place in thy Memory; but Divinity only in thy
Assection; Let other studies be thy (...) thy Vacation; but only Divinity thy
(...) thy Negotiation; for (to use no worse comparison) He that leaves
Divinity to follow any other study: leaves the clear Water of the Fountain,
to drink of muddy streams.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONS UPON THE Fall of LVCIFER
THE Fall of Babel was a great Fall: for when they had reared the Walls above
the Clouds; and raised them up to the confines of Heaven; even then confusion
took it, and laid it flat with the ground; and has left it an example of
desolation to this day. But the Fall of man, was a greater Fall; for he being
seated in Paradise; a seat level with the Angels; and nothing but God above
him; was brought down into this vale of misery: where he has no better a place
to dwell in, then the beasts of the field. But the Fall of Lucifer, as it was
before, so it was beyond both these and exceeded them as much in greatness as
in time. For where the Fall of Babell, was but a Fall from a higher to a lower:
and the Fall of man, but from a better to a worse; the Fall of Lucifer was a
fall, from the highest to the lowest: from the best to the worst; or rather to
a lower then the lowest^ to a worse then the worst; seeing they fell into Hell,
which had been no Hell, if; they had not fallen into it for though God made
the place, yet their fall made the misery of the place: which had been none
without it. The fall of Babel was but of a pyle of stones, reared up by the
hand of man, as it were against their will; and their Fall was but a returning
to the place from whence they came; and the Fall of man, was but of an earthly
creature; and but from one part of the earth to another; a remoove rather then
a fall; to a courser part indeed, but yet to a larger and of more elbow room,
then where he was before; and but the same out of which, he was taken; and
therefore natural to him: but the fall of Lucifer, was a fall, though not of
Heaven it self, yet of a prime Creature of Heaven: and of a great part of the
Host of Heaven; and thatto a place, no less made by his fall, then for it: and
which is now the center, or rather the sink of all falls, and of all that
fall: a final, yet endless fall: though fallen, yet still falling, because
into a bottomless pit.

But how could Lucifer fall; that had such stays to hold him up; the props of
such Heavenly gifts, as never Creature, that was but only a Creature, everhad,
before or since? Gifts of knowledge and understanding; Gifts of strength and
power: Gifts of brightness and splendor; and were not all these Gifts, of
force sufficient to keep him from falling? could not understanding make him
know the danger; could not strength make him shun the danger; could not
brightness make him see the danger: but that he must fall headlong into it: as
one that had neither sight nor strength, nor understanding? O my soul, These
gifts are all excellent; but their excellency is nothing, where grace is
wanting; and though Lucifer had grace too in excellency, yet he had not, It
seems, the excellency of grace; his grace was inferior to his gifts: and
therefore as inferior, was overthrown by his gifts: his understanding made him
Altum sapere; his strength made him Altum petere; his brightness, made him
Altum spirare; so that, all these gifts, though in themselves excellent; yet
having not equal grace to wield them: were but as so many instruments to
procure his Fall.

But yet how could Lucifer fall, that was an Angel? seeing Angels are
spirits; and spirits are aerie and light: and have no weight to press them down
as bodies have: but are borne up with their own lightness as with wings:
though there be nothing under them to bear them up. Indeed Angels being
spirits, are not properly In loco, in a place, in the manner as bodies are: and
therefore are not properly subject to local falling, as bodies be: which is
indeed a translation rather then a falling; as Henoch was translated when he
was taken up to Heaven: there never properly was a falling, but this of Lucifer
and his Angels; For this had in it, all the parts and circumstances, of a true
fall: It was a fall in place: for they fell from Heaven into Hell: a fall in
estate; for they fell from being Angels to be Devils: a fall in condition; for
they fell from happiness into misery: a fall in glory, for they fell from light
into darkness: and that which is most of all, and the cause of all, a fall
from Gods favor to his anger; and therefore finally, a final fall; and which
can never be but a fall: for it is not Origin can persuade us, that a time will
come; when all the apostate Angels, shall be restored again, to the same
estate in Heaven they were in, at first. Indeed man, who fell not of himself,
but was thrust down by another: has had the favor to be raised up by another:
but Lucifer who was not thrust down by any other; but fell of himself; has
justly been left to rise of himself; and seeing it is impossible, that he
should rise being fallen, who could not stand being up; therefore Sedet
aeternumque sedebit, Infoelix Lucifer: his fall is irreparable; and no hope
left of any possibility, ever to rise again: and least having the liberty of
their prison, should give them any hope to be in time delivered; they are
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day: the day of which they said to Christ; Art thou come to torment us
before our time? Not that they were without torment then; but that they had it
not, in the full measure.

O Lucifer, why would thou fall, when thou might have stood! though I
cannot say, thy will was to fall, but to rise: but that will of thine to rise,
was a just cause of thy fall; for why should thou desire to rise higher, who
were as high already as the Highest, but only the Highest! could nothing serve
thy turn, but to be equal with God, who should not be God, if he could have
an equal? what was this but extreme pride? and if it be true that pride will
have a fall; and a fall proportionable to the pride: there never was such a
pride: and therefore never such a fall. The pride extreme: and therefore
extreme the fall.

But how could such pride enter into the mind of Lucifer, to have emulation
with God? To be proud in emulation with men, may have some color: because we
can see defects in them; and will see none in our selves: but to be proud with
God; seems a thing impossible: because there is nothing to be seen in God,
that is not perfecter then perfection it self. But the truth is, It is the
nature of pride to infatuate: and to make one see less in others; more in ones
self, then there is: and this was Lucifers case. He could not but know, that
whatsoever he had: he had it from God; but he might think perhaps, that God
had over spent himself in giving, before he was a ware, and had given him
greater gifts then he left for himself: and upon this, might take upon him to
be as great as he: when he thought himself to be as good as he. But O Lucifer,
if this were thy thought, we may justly think, thy wit as little as thy grace:
For though it be s^yd of the Son of God, that Exinanivit seipsum; he emptied
himself; yet but as son, not as God: but that remains entire still; and can
suffer no abatement, notwithstanding any greatness of gifts, he imparts to any
other. Indeed there is not in the World a more foolish thing then pride; which
will always be climing, when nothing is so unsit to climb as it: ^or he that
will prosper in climing, must begin at the foot of the Ladder; which is
humility; and this, pride thinks skorne to do: or rather it thinks skorn, to
use any Ladder at all; and indeed there is no Ladder, to reach so high as
Lucifer aspired; For the longest Ladder of Creatures reaches but to Heaven;
and he aspired to be as high as God, who is above the Heavens. But as bodies
are held up, by something that is under them: so spirits are held up by
something that is above them; and that something above them, is the hand of God:
who if once he give over his hold; (and he gives over his hold, where he sinds
there is pride:) how can proud spirits choose but fall, when they have nothing
either under them, or above them to hold them up? not under them; because they
are not bodies; Not above them; because they are not humble.

It may be thought, that Lucifer was not much discontented with his fall,
seeingby his fall, he got to be Prince, the Prince that rules in the Air. He
might have stayed long enough in heaven before he should have gotten such a
dign^ty; and if this be a fall, what is a preferment? For though the Air be a
meaner Country then Heaven; yet to be a Prince in it, pleases him better, then
to be a subject in the other. For he is all for sovereignty: of his mind that
said; Aut Caesar, aut Nihil: if he see but one above him; he takes no joy, how
many soever he sees below him: But alas what availes it to have the title of a
prince, and not the power? For what power has Lucifer in the air, when all
his walk, is but to compass the Earth; and can do nothing there neither; not
so much as enter into Swine, but as he is feign to ask leave of God. O then
the vanity of pride, that pleases it self with titles, where there is no
Power. But Lucifer is of another mind; For if once he get but the title, It
shall go hard, but he will quickly get the power too: and for all his fall, is
not out of hope to attain his end. For though he cannot rob God of his
worship; yet of his worshippers he can and will: that if the matter should come
to be tried by number; he would not doubt to have more followers to take his
part, then God: and then, this is glory enough for him, to be equal with God
in number of followers, though he cannot be in power; and in deed if it be
true, that in Heaven he drew as many after him, as he left behind him; he is
like to make it good in Earth with advantage; where for one that adheres to
God; I cannot say how many, but many adhere to him, and this was plainly seen
at the time of the great deluge; For there entered then into the Arc but eight
persons; and all entered that were the servants of God: all the rest of the
World: and the World was then as full of people as now; were all, for any thing
appears, the servants of Lucifer. But in what air is it, that Lucifer is a
Prince? Is it any where but in aerie and inconstant minds, carried about with
every wind, and in whom there is no stability of grace? and to be a Prince in
such air what is it but to be an aerie Prince? without any solidnesse or
substance in him; all in phantasmes and shows; as he showed Christ, all the
Kingdoms of the World: but it was but a show; and he showed Samuel to Saul;
but that but a show too; and his enchanters turned their rods into Serpents:
and that but a show neither; for indeed all the power he has: and all he can
do as Prince of the Air, is but to make a show; great promises; and great
threatings, but all vanish into Air; and therefore this but a poor amends for
the misery of his fall; seeing his Principality^, is but a seeming Dominion:
where his Fall is a sensible and real servitude.

If you ask at what time it was that Lucifer fell; there be some will tell
you, before the making of the World: but this could not be: seeing there was
neither Vnde nor Quo: neither place from whence nor place, whither he should
fall, till God had made the Heaven and the Earth. Others there are will say;
Upon the first day of the Creation: because then, God made the light: and the
Angels are said to be Angels of light: and if made then; they also fell
then: for they sinned as soon as they were made: and fell as soon as they
sinned. But most likely it is, they fell upon the second day of Creation; which
therefore made Moses not to say of the work of the second day, that God saw,
It was good: because in that day God saw something, that was not good; and
nothing so likely, as the pride of Lucifer, and his fall. But whenever it was
that he fell; whether sooner or later; It was too soon for us, seeing he was
ready here on Earth to seduce us; as soon as we were made; as he had seduced
others before in Heaven, as soon as he was made himself; to the end belike,
that none should be longer innocent, then he himself had been: For Inveritate
non stetit: He stayed not one jot of time, before he played his prankes in
Heaven. He never stayed for Secundae cogitationes: For if he had stayed but so
long as to bethink himself; could he have been so blind, not to see his
error, or so improvident, not to prevent his fall? Oh the wonderful damage
that is incurred by hastiness and precipitancy. Not Lucifer with all his
gi^ts, but hastiness brought upon him, his miserable fall, and utter ruin.

And as it is uncertain at what time he fell; so it is as uncertain to what
place he fell: though no doubt, into Hell, if there be a Hell; but if there
be none, whither then? and indeed where should any such place be? we are sure,
Not in Heaven; For then it should have been no fall; and besides, Heaven and
Hell are not only asunder, but opposite. And we may be sure, not in the Sea;
For then there could be no Hell fire for water, and besides, Dives would never
have made such moan, for a drop of water to cool his tongue. It might be
thought to be in the Air; because he is said to be the Prince that rules in
the Air: but that when Corah and Dathan went down quick into Hell: they were
swallowed up of the Earth, and not of the Air. And yet neither can Hell be in
the earth, seeing the Earth is a solid body; and not likely to have any cavity
so large to make a Hell; which must be able to hold all the bodies of the
damned, that ever were, or shall be; and indeed if there were any such place
as Hell; would Moses have omitted it in his catalogue of Creation? and seeing
he makes no mention of any such place, we may well think there is no such
place: but that it is only a fi^tion of Poets; of whom it is truly said;
Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae. Thus argue some infidel spirits,
that would be glad there were no such place as Hell, and therefore speak as
they would have it: but the reasons of their infidelity may be easily confuted.
For, why is there no such cavity in the earth to make a Hell; when by evident
demonstration it is prooved, that the thickness of the Earth is no less then
seven thousand miles; and may not so vaste a space afford room sufficient for
a Hell: and for a Hell sufficient to hold all the souls of the damned; that
ever were or shall be; when the body of one man was able to hold a legion which
is at least six thousand devils; and devils take up as much room as souls?
For as for the bodies of the damned, there needs no room in^ Hell for them;
(unless now and then perhaps, for two or three such as Korah and Dathan)
until the day of judgment: For bodies come not there till then: and then
there will be a new Heaven, and a new Earth: and no doubt a new Hell too; at
least, the old Hell so much enlarged, as to be able to hold as well the bodies
of the damned, then, as now the souls; of which enlarging of Hell, the Prophet
Fsay says thus; Hell has enlarged her self, and h^th opened her mouth
exceedingly: as if it were the condition of Hell, to grow always greater with
the occasion; and therefore no need to fear, it will ever be too little. And
what though Moses make no mention of any such place as Hell; does it therefore
follow, there is no such place? He makes no mention of Angels neither, shall
we therefore think, there are no Angels? But as he forbeares to speak of
these persons: so he ^orbeares to speak of this place: and both perhaps for
one reason; because his purpose is to speak only of visible things; of which
neither of these is any. But though Moses make no mention of any Hell; yet
there are others that do; and others as worthy to be credited as Moses. And to
go no further then our Creed: does not an Apostle make it an article: that
Christ descended into Hell? but descend into Hell he could not, if there were
not a Hell, to descend into? does not the Prophet Ezekiel say; The mighty s^all
speak out of the midst of Hell; but what midst of Hell, if there be no Hell?
does not the Prophet Am^s speak in the person of God; Though they dig into
Hell; thence shall my ^and take them; and dig into Hell, they could not, if
there were not a Hell to dig into; and that, in the Earth too? But if we will
neither believe Apostles, nor Prophets: at least we will not refuse to believe
Christ: and Christ says thus; whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hell sire; but what danger of Hell sire, if there be no
Hell? and again; Fear not them that can kill the body: but cannot kill the
soul; but ^eare him, that can cast both body, and soul into Hell ^ire; but
cast them into Hell fire he could not, if there were no Hell ^ire, to be cast
into And indeed if there were not a Hell; Gods Kingdom would be defective in
the coercive part: there would want a fit place for execution of malefactors:
and for imprisonment of offenders. In which point, God has been so provident;
that although the Devil sinned from the beginning; yet before that beginning,
he had made ready a prison to hold him, if he should offend; and all other that
should be his adherents: as appears by the words of Christ, Go ye cursed,
into everlasting fire; prepared for the Devil and his angels. Wherefore O my
soul, be most assured, that there is a Hell sire; the place into which Lucifer
and his angels fell; and in which both he and all that be his adherents, which
are all impenitent sinners; shall everlastingly be detained and everlastingly
be tormented: but where or how it is, who can tell, or how should we know, when
it is not revealed?

But in what was it, that Lucifer showed his pride toward God? was it in
contesting with him about his sovereignty? Or was it, in finding fault with his
Creation of the World; or with his government in the administration of his
Creatures? and then, was it in word, or in deed; or but in thought only? some
indeed have thought but only in thought: but this is not likely; for could he,
by only thinking, have drawn such multitudes of Angels, as he did, into his
faction? some again have thought, he took it in skorn at Gods Hands: that his
Son should take upon him the nature of man; and not of Angels; wherein he
thought himself disparaged; and thereupon grew murmuring and rebellious
against God: but neithe^ is this likely: for that secret of Christ's
incarnation, was not perhaps as yet discovered, when Lucifer offered his
affront to God. Whatsoever it was; It was sufficient that God saw in him an
insolent and rebellious disposition, with which, by communication he had
infected many; and who knows to what it might have grown, if God had suffered
him never so little, to have stayed in Heaven?

But how should Lucifer come to sin, being created in so great Holiness, as no
doubt he was? was it not, that seeing himself in state of immortality, he knew
he could never perish; and the knowing he could not perish, made him stand upon
himself; and admiring his own gifts, neglect the giver? For otherwise, it is
as impossible to conceave, how he should ever come to commit sin, being created
in such holiness; as to conceave how there should be sin, for him to commit,
when there was no such thing as sin created. It seems therefore he created it
him^^^fe: which perhaps Christ meant, when he said; Diabolus est mendax and
Pater ejus; the Devil is a lier; and the Father and creator of lies. For he,
seeing God to be a creator: and knowing himself made Ad similitudinem Dei;
after Gods likeness: thought perhaps, he might lawfully do as he saw God do:
and be a creator as well as he: And why not be Similis Altissimo: like to the
most high; being made, Ad similitudinem Altissimi: after the likeness of the
most High? upon which false ground seeking to be like God in sovereignty;
where he should have sought to be like him in holiness: he became as it were
the creator of sin; For alas, what other creature ^ould he make, if he
would needs be making creatures, being a Creature himself, but only sin?
that now, as God said afterward of Adam as it were in skorn: Man is become like
one of us, knowing good and evil: so of Lucifer, he might say in skorn;
Lucifer is become like one of us being a sovereign, and a maker of Creatures.
But as sin was at first, as it were the Creature of Lucifer; so Lucifer is now
as it were the Creature of sin; for what is there in him, which si^ has not
made? all that God made in him being utterly defaced: and this was a greater
fall, then that which was local; for that, though from the highest to the
lowest, was yet but a finite ^all; where this, from ^race to sin; from being a
Creature of God, to be a Creature of sin; was a fall as Infinite, as sin it
self, which next to the infiniteness of him that is infiniteness it self, is
infinite.

But why would God so severely punish a first offense; and of a first
offendour; and of one that knew not what punishment meant; and had never had
example, to make him take heed? was it not that this first sin, should not
have been the last, if the offendour had been suffered to escape unpunished!
and therefore was not more a punishment, then a prevention. And could any
severity be too great in punishing an offense so insolent; an offendour to
impenitent? For do ^e think he would not do it, if it were to do again? no
doubt he would: he could no more leave off his pride; then the Leopard can
leave off her spots: the greatness of his gifts was all employed to make great
his sin; or rather indeed was great with sin; and he could no more contain
himself, from bringing forth sin; then a woman can contain her self, from
bringing forth the fruit of her body; and a^ no woman ever hated her own
flesh; so Lucife^ could never come to hat^ sin, which was his own issue: and
we may know the continuance of hi^ ambitious aspiring by this; that
notwithstanding his fall; notwithstanding the servitude by his (...);
notwithstanding the ^orments in his servitude; ^otwithstanding the bit^^rnesse
of his torments; ^et amidst all these affli^^ions, his mind ran still upon the
satisfying of his ^mbition; and in so high a ^^gree, that nothing ^ould serve
his turn, but (...) have the Son of God (...) do him homage; and (...) fall
down and worship (...), therein exercising his ambition no less i^ Earth, then
he had done before in Heaven.

But why do we call (...) the fall of Lucifer; an^ not rather the ejectmen^ or
the banishment; or the expulsion, or some suc^ word, as might expres^ some
angry act of God, (...) repressing his insolence and punishing his pride indeed
because it is the fittest word: for if w^ ^^^ld call it by any of (...) other
terms, it ^^ght seem to intimate, (...) if it put God, to some ^^^at
business, to rid his ^^nds of him; and to re^oove him out of Heaven; when
alas, God ^ouchafed him not the honor; so much as to ^^ave any hand at all in
his fall; but only left him ^o himself; and there needed no more; for then he
presently fell; not se^ much by Gods power; a^ by his own weakness; No^ by any
weight of body^ which he had not; but by the weight of sin, which was as
plummets of lead, to press him down. And that we may know, how ^ittle God
troubled himself in the matter; he has left it to us, to be Judges in the
case; as it is said; Know ye not that shall Judge the Angels? ^^aning, no
doubt, these ^postate Angels: yet not perhaps, that we shall sit in judgment,
to censure their fault; and to pronounce their doom; but that by the
comparison of their gifts with ours; and perhaps of their fin with ours: the
greatness of their sin, shall the better be made appear, to their greater
condemnation; in a like senfe to that saying of Christ; The Queen of the south
shall rise^ up in the judgment, against this generation; and condemn it.

It is a great secret revealed to us; that in the deity there are three
persons; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; and it is another great
secret revealed to us; that relation is had to these three ^ersons, in the
punishment of sins; for sins against the father; and sins against the son shall
be forgiven: but a sin against the holy Ghost; shall never be forgiven, either
in this world, or in the world to come. But how may application be made of
this, in this case of Lucifer? May we not say, that in God the Father, is
consi^ered power; as we say in our creed: I believe in God the Father Almighty;
and to sin against power is a sin of infirmity: and this sin shall be forgiven:
In God the Son is considered wisdom; as it is said; In Christ are all the
treasures hidden of wisdom and knowledge; and to sin against wisdom, is a sin
of ignorance: and this shall be forgiven: but in God the holy Ghost, is
considered love; as it is said; The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost: and to sin against love is a sin of malice: and this shall
never be forgiven. O wretched Lucifer; we may then conclude, thy sin as being
of malice, is absolutely irremissible: and therefore thy fall, as an effect of
that sin, is utterly unrecoverable: that it is but labor in vain, for Origin
to plead for thy pardon any longer; For, though there might be hope of pardon
for they sin of pride; as being against the Father, and the Son: yet for thy
sin of malice, there can be no hope at all, as being directly against the holy
Ghost.

And now my soul, wonder not that Lucifer fell: but wonder rather, that thou
fallest not thy self: for how much do thou come short of Lucifers aspiring?
he sought to be Gods equal: and thou think much to be his inferior: For
why else do thou vilify his Laws; set at naught his Commandments: and
make no more reckoning of his precepts, then if they were the words of an
idol? Is it not as much not to obey God; as not to acknowledge him? is it not
as great an indignity, to vilify his word, as his person? O accursed Lucifer,
though we may curse thee for all this evil; yet there is some good for which
we may thank thee, that by this dreadful example of thy fall, we may learn
to humble our selves under the Almighty hand of God; and to serve him with
fear; least we take the like fall, as thou have done: for if God spared not
the Angels that were disobedient: why should we think he will spare us? only
O blessed Savior, It must be thy work to stand between us, and thy fathers
anger: that he leave us not to our selves: as he did Lucifer and his angels;
For alas then, we shall never be able to escape falling with Lucifer and his
Angels.

FINIS.

