TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK; The humble Gratulation and
Acknowledgement of Colonel Robert Broughton, and several others his
Counrrey-men.
May it please your EXCELLENCY,
THe Anguish of our sufferings (like that of the Children of Israel in Egypt)
being of late aggrevated by circumstances neither supportable in themselves,
nor proportionable to our crimes, if it be a crime to have endeavored the
asserting of our native Rights (as men and Christians) and your Excellency (by
happy providence) having taken off our Shackles, and led us to a prospect of
Freedom: Let it be permitted us modestly to hope, that we shall not always
languish under a malignant constellation: but that the Spirit of true
Britains, Lovers of our Country appearing in us, we may at length be
Cordially embraced, as really such our obligations are doubled upon us, by your
Excellency in not only having rescued our possessions, but our liberties, and
therein given us the means of further manifesting our integrity.

Wherefore that this, which we humbly propound (as a Testimony of our
Gratitude) may not pass to you, under ambiguous representations; we assume the
boldness to declare, that no sort of people in these Nations bear either more
fervor to your best interest, or a more entire submission to the freedom of
Parliaments rightly constituted then.

Your Excellencie's most obliged and humble Servants John Owen. Robert
Broughton. Richard Middleton. Richard Broughton. William Broughton. Oliver
Broughton. Andrew Middleton. John Lloyd. Edward Jones. Edward Philips. William
Philips. Roger Jones. John Salsburie. John Edwards. John Dowleben. Hugh
Bennaut. Rich. Jones. Oliver Thomas. Tho. Prichard. David Davis. Richard Lloyd.
Rice Powell. Hugh Butler. Alexander Langhorn. Thomas Vaughan. John Lloyd. Hugh
Meridith. Edmund Meyrich. Cadwal. Winn. Roger Arthur.

This was presented to his Excellency the 23 day of March, 1659. by Col.
Robert Broughton, and some of them whose Names are hereunto subscribed, for the
which he and they had his Excellencies thanks for their good affections, and
willed the said Colonel to give the rest of the Gentlemen who had subscribed
the said Gratulation and Acknowledgement, thanks accordingly.




