THE HISTORY OF THE INDULGENCE Showing its Rise, Conveyance, Progress and
Acceptance: Together with a Demonstration of the Unlawfulness thereof, And an
Answer to contrary Objections: As also a Vindication of such, as scruple to
hear the Indulged. By a PRESBYTERIAN.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXVIII.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS, Particularly, the suffering Ministers and Professors
in the CHURCH of SCOTLAND.
Reverend, much honored, and dearly beloved;
I hope, I need not tell you, (whom I look upon and address my self unto, as
taught of God, not only in the main; but in many things that relate to our
present calamitous case and condition) that the knowledge of the times, and
what the Israel of God ought to do, should be your Ornament and Cognizance,
distinguishing you from others, who are brutish in their knowledge: Neither
need I tell you, how impossible it is to know, what the present day and hour
makes indispensible duty, without a just reflection on what is past; for the
emergents of the present day can never be improved, to the advantage of
preventing the morrow's misery, without this; whereas hereby the present day
may be made the better for yesterdayes error. Now, that you and I may be
helped to a profitable reflection upon what is past, and improve it to its just
advantage, the Lord has been pleased, in this common and unconcerned sopor of
many, to put it upon the heart of a Servant of his, to whom he has given
dexterity, of hand for the undertakeing, to give you and me the following
History, and Account of one particular emergent, in the sad History of our
time, which has been followed with the most dismal and dire effects of any
thing that has befallen our poor Church, and the precious remnant therein,
since the Holy Lord was pleased to give us up into the hand of such, as have
with violence and rage overturned that blessed and beautiful fabric, reared up
and erected amongst us by Him, who dwelt in it, and made our souls glade in
his house, while we walked with Him, and He dwelt among us.

If this History and account be carped at, and cried out against by some; that
must be borne with; for our distempers (Alas) and distractions are arisen to
that heat and height, as he who rebuk^th in the gate is hated, and he who
speaks uprightly is abhorred. And yet a faithful and wise Servant, seeing how
his Lord is wronged, and for what the Land is made to mourn, and the Church in
hazard to be utterly ruined, may not lay his hand upon his mouth, and, to
prevent the opening of the mouths of others against him, give up himself to a
stupid silence. But whatever some may judge or say of what is here said, and
set before us, wisdom will be justified of her Children: and I am sure, the
account given will be refreshful and acceptable to many, who love the truth,
and lament these our recessions and declineings from our first love and ways.
Oh if I might mix myself amongst the mourners, and those whose souls are melted
and poured-out in them, in this heart-rending reflection!

I shall at present forbear to go so far backward, as to set before your eye,
(which may make you and me go mourning to our grave, and ought to be
remembered by us for that very end) what was our carriage, or rather, what were
our miscarriages, in the day, when the Enemy, with displayed banner and
open-faced violence, did raze and overturn all. Oh, if He would raise up some
to represent us now unto ourselves, according to what we really were in that
day; that so we for our part might go mourning to the grave, and the
succeeding generations might thereby take warning, and beware to tread our
path, or trace our steps, lest, as we have done, they should stumble, fall and
be broken.

Leaving therefore this sad subject, I come to make a blunt and abrupt inquiry
how did we behave? What was our Posture and Practice after we had so stupidly
stood by, till we saw the whole work overturned, without offering to interpose
effectually to prevent its ruin, or fall with it? And now, when we ourselves
were thrust from the public Exercise of our Ministry, are we found lamenting
after the Lord? Are we found lying in the dust, loathing ourselves in the
remembrance of the sad and soul-afflicting ruin, which fell under our hand? Is
there now a corresponding how to excite one another unto the first Love, and to
the first works of the Church of Scotland? does the sorrow of every man's soul
look-out at his eye, while he beholds the desolation of the Sanctuary, the
Mountain of Zion laid waste, and the Foxes walking upon it, and considers how
he has not only outlived the departing of the glory, but must, if he see, and
lay to heart what has been in his hand, carry his own tormenter about with
him, as having by his conniveing, or a cowardice, unworthy of the Spirit of
Ambassadors for Christ, contributed to the advancement of the enemies desperate
design? Do we now meet, and set days apart alone and together, on this very
design, to mourn, to pour out our hearts before Him, to weep upon Him,
importuning Him, and praying with all manner of prayer and supplication for
Light, for Life, for Zeal, for Courage; that as being strengthened with all
might, according to his glorious Power, we might be in case to stand and
withstand, in so evil a day, and having done all to stand? Did we, as knowing
from what had past, and as not ignorant of his devices, plead with our Lord,
that we might not be left, nor led into temptation; but that we might be upheld
in our integrity, and helped upon all hazards to witness our soul abhorrence
at the ways of these turners aside, and overturners of the work of God? Did
we, as faithful Ambassadors of Christ, fixedly loyal to our exalted Prince; or
as true Lovers of the soul-interest of those, who by their way had witnessed
there was no fear of God before their eyes, yea that they had forgotten, or
delete the apprehension of that Eternal God, who is above them; and so in the
madness of their apostasy, without all inquiry or care, whether that way did
lead them, or where it would Land them, run as enraged upon the bosses of the
buckler of God Almighty? Did we, I say, deal plainly with the men of these
abominations, these prodigious wickednesses, these hateful and heaven-dareing
practices? Did we beseech, obtest, exhort, yea and with an Ambassadour-becoming
boldness charge them, in the name of the liveing God, to return, as they
would not be turned into hell, for these their treacherous turnings away from
Him, and transcendently wicked turnings against Him? Nay alas! Whatever were
the secret mournings, the sorrowings, the grievings of some, which, I hope,
are on record in Heaven; yet, the first thing that is heard of in others,
after an interval of shameful and sinful silence, is a fearlesse making and
meddling with the stated enemies of the work of God, even while breathing-out a
keenness of cruelty against the more zealous faithful Ministers and
Professors, and this fearlesse meddling (ere mourning over former
unfaithfulnesses and miscarriages had gone before; ere Brethren, equally
concerned in the case, and on whom the care of the Church did equally lie, yea
and of some of them I may say, were no less eaten up with the zeal of His
house, than the Consulters, were consulted) produced this that fatal
Indulgence; and to use the Vindicators phrase [which he in useing, upon the
occasion and account he makes use of it, to detestation abused] hinc illae
lachrymae.

Alas? What else but a further defection could be exspected, as the issue and
result of these medlings, betwixt, (on the one part) not only the Chief
Instruments of all these incumbent Calamities; but men set upon this mischief,
how to destroy by dividing, and ruin by their Methodes, beyond hope of an
escape or recovery, the poor remnant; and root-out the remembrance of that
People, and Party, whom in their thoughts, desires and designs, they had
devoted to destruction. And (on the other part) what ever the men had formerly
been, or still were; yet I must say it (and let none mistake me so far, as if I
intended hereby to reproach or reflect; far be it from my soul; for while I am
constrained to mention it, I desire to let my ink drop out of my Pen here, with
a wrung and wounded heart; and to writ as knowing what I now say must meet me
at the Tribunal; nay, I would forbear to say it, if I did not believe it
should meet me there, if I smothered what I am now about to say, in a
truth-prejudgeing silence) men in as ill case to have made or meddled in the
concerns of Christ and his Church, with the men, with whom they had then to
do, in their circumstances, as ever any Godly men in our Church were. I desire
not to be put to the unpleasant necessity of dilating this further; Nor, if
necessity be laid upon me (since it is the pure interest of truth, I desire to
aim at, without respect of Persons) shall I decline it, though for that I
should be yet more vile.

Now, as foregoing untendernesse and declineing had paved the way, and prepared
us, for this new step of further defection; so this wretched Indulgence has
had the most deplorable and dismal effects; and if the Lord do not graciously
deliver his Servants and Church from what it tends to and threatens, it is like
to be and prove more fatal to the Poor languishing Remnant, than any step of
defection, to which ever any Godly men were left, in the Church of Scotland.
The History of its effects and of the bitter fruits it has produced (which
will make it the just hatred of Posterity; as well as it is the grief, sorrow
and lamentation of many a serious soul in the Generation) is not at present my
business; All I have to hint at this time, in reference to it, shall be
shortly this. That however I do not offer to make an addition of Arguments
(for that were superfluous, Considering what the Author of the following
Discourse has so nervously adduced) yet let me address my self without
offense; not as an acute disputant, but as a poor blunt, plain, open-hearted
well wisher, to the Work and Interest of Christ, to my Indulged Brethren (not a
few of whom are dear to my soul; and, I hope, though they should both despise
me and despitefully use me, shall be so) in a few plain Questions.

Now then the Indulgence is embraced, and thanks to the givers are rendered by
the takers. I Ask therefore First, If they could, after this their acceptance
and giving of thanks to the Council, have withdrawn from that appearance, and
sisted themselves before Christ Jesus, the King of his Church, and with a sweet
serenitie of soul have had confidence to offer their thanks to Him, for being
helped to witness a good Confession against the wickedness of this Invasion,
made by the Overturnes of his work, upon his Royal Prerogative, who built the
house, and must bear the Glory; for it was either then or never, that it was
to have been done. Secondly, Let me ask; are they so very clear and confident
in the case, as they can, not only in dealing with men, hold up their face,
and affirm, without hinck or hesitation, that this is their rejoyceing, even
the testimony of their Conscience; that in simplicity and Godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, they have had their
Conversation before all men, and more abundantly toward these backslideing
Rulers, before whom they appeared, now declared enemies to the Work of God, and
invaders of His Throne and Prerogative: But are they also content to be carried
before the Tribunal of Christ, with this acceptance from those, who have
exautorat their Lord and Master, in their hand; and to have the quality of
their Love to the comeing of His Kingdom, and their Loyalty to Christ Jesus,
now opposed and put from the exercise of his Royal Government by the Party
Indulgeing, in this very Indulgence, tried by such a Test? It were fit, sure,
to think on this, and lay it to heart; for each receiver may lay his count with
it, that soon or syne he shall be put to it. Thirdly, Let me ask (though I put
it out of doubt, they do, and far be it from me to think otherwise) whether
they believe, that Christ, who purchased His Church, and bought His Crown with
His precious blood, lives also to make intercession, and to plead his own
purchase, and Procure, by virtue of the Price He has paid, the execution of
the written vengeance upon all, who will strive with Him for State and
Supremacy in ordering the affairs of his house, the Church of the living God;
or who will, in their desperate daring and rage, revolt and exautorat Him by
their Law (which is a legal and explicit bursting of his bonds, casting away
his cords from them, and, in contempt of, and Contradiction to the Christ of
God, a formal taking of His house in Possession) as our Rulers have done; to
the out-doing, in this affront to Jesus Christ, all that ever went before them;
or as if they were resolved never to be outdone by any, who should come after
them, in a copeing with the Mediator, and a downright denial of Him to be King
(for now they have put Caesar in his Place) sure, the Indulged Brethren neither
can nor will deny this: Then they must give me leave to assert and subsume
(what has been, as often upon my soul, as I thought upon their carriage at that
appearance (yea, if they speak consequently to the supposed concession, they
must agree with me in it; That with the same objective assurance, I believe the
Right that Christ has bought, to be sole and supreme, in regulating all the
affairs of His own house, to have none to share with Him in the Autocratorick,
Architectonick and Magisterial Power of making Laws, to obliege the
Conscience of his Subjects, nor to be in case to give a Ministerial Power
besides himself; And as I believe the firmness of the stipulation betwixt
Jehovah and his Anointed, to secure unto him his throne; and take vengeance on
all his Adversaries, and as I believe he lives to make intercession; so I must
believe also that, at that very instant, when the Indulged stood before the
Council, and by their mouth made such a harangue; The Mediator, who is set
down, at the right hand of God, was interceeding and pleading by his blood, by
his wounds and Passion, for the execution of the purchased and promised
vengeance upon such, who by the complex of this very deed, in a defiance to the
everlasting Decree, whereby his throne is Established, declared, they had taken
unto themselves His house in Possession. Ah; my dear Brethren, can the
thoughts of such a discord and discrepancy betwixt His intercession in heaven,
and your harangueing on earth, enter into your soul (and I give you the
defiance to enter into the serious thoughts of the matter, and hold them out)
or be reflected upon, without Terror, Trembling, Confusion of face, Shame and
Astonishment.

Now my reverend and very dear Brethren, may I not, upon this ^ccasion, make
bold to fall before you as prostrat, and with the tear in mine eye, (for I
have confidence to say it, I scarce see my Paper, while by my Pen I make this
address unto you,) humbly and earnestly beg of you, request, beseech and
obtest you, for your blessed and glorious Master's sake, who is now Crucified
again amongst us, from whose head the crown is taken; for His Churches sake,
whereof he has made you Ministers, and so magnified you amongst men, in
sending you into the world, under the Character of his Ambassadors; for your
poor broken hearted and bleeding Brethrens sake, as ever you would be amongst
the restorers of our breaches; as ever you would again be as some of you were
in times past, as the chariots and horsemen of Israel; as ever you would wish
to be brought again to keep His Courts, and to judge His house; and, when that
work is over, to have a Place amongst them that stand by; as you would not be
the occasion of the rupture and utter ruin of the small remnant (for God and
all good and understanding-men will refound this distracting and
remnant-destroying Division, that is amongst us, upon this Indulgence); as you
tender the good of the Posterity, and would give an unquestionable evidence,
how intensely you desire, that Jesus Christ may reign and rule without a
competitor, when you are gone; As you Love to live at peace with God, and
enjoy, as feeding Pastors and faithful Witnesses to your Lord, a sweet
serenitie of soul? Nay as ever you exspect to go off the stage in good terms
with God, and have your Masters welcome of well done, good and faithful
servants, and be enrolled, when you are gone, amongst the Confessors of his
name, and holders fast of the word of his Testimony, and such as had obtained
mercy to be valiant for the truth: Let me, I say, upon all these, and many
other accounts, make bold to beseech you, without more debate, without more
delay, to deliver yourselves; to deliver the Church; to deliver your wounded,
weeping and overwhelmed Brethren; and to deliver the Posterity from the snare
of that cause-destroying, Church ruining, remnant-divideing Indulgence. Do not
say, I would wheedle and fool you into an irrational implicitnesse or bogle you
into a relinquishing of what you have embraced, with a parcel of words, wherein
is nothing to convince you of the evil of what you have done, Read but the
following History; and if, as in His sight, without prejudice or
mind-occaecating Passion you Peruse it, I am not without hope; but you will
suffer yourselves to be overcome (which will be one of the greatest Victories
you have ever obtained,) into a compliance with the humble and earnest
beseechings not of your Poor Brother only, but of many, who are Presenting you
to God, and dare seek nothing for you, till this be obtained. Do not offend at
this last word; for, if it were my last, I must both confess unto you, I have
never had Confidence to seek any thing for you, since you embraced that
Indulgence, save this; and I know, you have, since that day, been much out of
the Prayers of many serious Prayers, to whom you were, and yet are, dear,
which has been none of your advantage; yea whatever use you may make of it,
yet fidelity to you put me to use this freedom, that I have not only found my
self in fetters, but I have observed more servent Judicious and gracious
Persons, to whom it was a case of Conscience; yea who had no Confidence to
represent you to God, as a Part of that suffering remnant, for whom they
essayed to Pour out their heart before Him, whereat you will cease to wonder,
when you consider that to them, the Indulgence was a Defection. But if the
following History Prevail not with you, yet Let the History that God has
written against that acceptance do; Least He impose the necessity upon some to
transcribe it, and set it before your eye, for your further Conviction, and a
Caution to the Posterity. But to close this, give me leave, Dear Brethren, to
say this one word more; that often, under my sinking soul-anguish and sorrow,
because of this Indulgence, and its woeful effects, I have with an anticipat
complacency essayed to allay the sharpness of my sorrow, and to flatter my
self into a cheerfulness in the pleasant expectation and hope, that amongst
the Indulged themselves, amongst so many Godly men, there was more than a may
be of hope, that the Lord would pitch upon some of these, and make use of them,
to discover, with more conviction and advantage, the evil of this Indulgence,
than any else is in case to do: Blessed shall that man or these men be! And O
that I may not be disappointed in this expectation!

I know, the following History will fall under the severe Censures of many, and
not a few will be ready to cry-out against it, (who shall never be able to
answer its reason, but by clamor) as unseasonable; I grant indeed, that it is
the great Qualification of writing and speaking, that it be seasonable; and it
is also the great commendation of Hearers and Readers, that they have that
wisdom of heart as to discern both time and judgment; for as a word in season
and fitly spoken is like apples of go^d in pictures of silver; so it is a rare
thing, especially in a declining time, to be in case to judge what is truly
such, and, as having escaped the mistakes ariseing from preconceived
Prejudices, to approve that which is more excellent; but whatever Prejudice may
prompt some to say; yet what is said by this wise Reprover will be found and
entertained as an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold unto an
obedient ear. And for my confidence in commending it, as a word in season unto
the Reader, I render these reasons. First, If men consider the heinousness of
guilt, which the Author has clearly demonstrat to be wrapped up in, and
inseparably connected with this Indulgence, they will rather say, Alas, he has
been too long in comeing, to make a discovery of its iniquity; than complain
as if he had come to soon. Secondly, If men take it up in its true nature and
tendency, and consider impartially the quality of its defection, according as
it is here held forth, if they speak their soul, they must say, That a
standing Testimony against this evil is of more value and worth, than all of us
are, when sold out of the ground. Thirdly, It will not fall under the Censure
of unseasonablenesse by any, except such as do either downright plead for the
Indulgence and defend it, or else connive at it, as an aliquid nihil, not to be
regarded; and it is to me, and, I hope, will be so to many, in regard of such,
that the one may be cured of their Confidence and the other of their
Indifferency and detastable Neutralitie, a word in season. Fourthly Let this
silence the clamor about its unseasonablenesse, and satisfy, yea plead the
indispensible necessity of it, at this time. That the Indulged Brethren have
of late been more hot and high, than formerly, even to the threatening of men
into a silence at its defection, by boasting us with a Vindication of the
Lawfulness of their Acceptance; and therefore, as to them it ought to be
justly reckoned seasonable. Fifthly, Because somewhat has been of late done
even by the Non-Indulged, not only to the strengthening of the hands of the
Indulged, and giving them new confidence in their course, in obliquo, by
covering all, and carrying toward them, as if they had done nothing amiss,
But upon the matter (for it is beyond my shallow capacity otherwise to
interpret, or understand the deed) by a direct homologating of that Indulgence;
for now silence, as to all speaking against this evil, is made the very Door
and Porch, through which all the Intrants to the Ministry must pass. I hope,
they will not allege, that this is misinformation, for now we have it under
their own hand; and the breach of this engagement is brought and laid down as a
ground, upon which a Young man is challenged; And therefore, its now simply
necessate yea more then high time to discover and detect the blackness of its
defection, when the Church is thus brought in bondage by it. Sixthly, The severe
insulting over some of the poor remnant, who cannot forbear to witness their
abhorrence at it, and dare not dissemble their hatred of it, constrained the
Author to give the world this account, to convince them, how little reason the
one Party has to insult thus over their poor Brethren, and how little cause
the other have to be ashamed of witnessing their dislike. Seventhly, Because it
has been often and still is objected to us, that we have made a hideous hue
and cry after it, as a thief, but neither would nor could render a reason, or
prove it to be a coming-in not by the right door, but a climbing up by another
way: And therefore, the Interest of truth constrained the Author, to give them
and the world such a Plain and Public Account of the reasons of his just
dissatisfaction, as may abide ad futuram rei memoriam. And Lastly, Because
there is a may be of hope, that as some at least of these Godly men Indulged
may be hereby taken off, and all of them made more sober, and less violent; so
it is much more to be hoped, that the Non-Indulged will henceforth more
seriously consider what way to deliver the Church from this evil, their
Brethren out of the snare, and how to keep themselves free from the
transgression of giving this evil any interpretative countenance; (for if God
put it upon their heart to apply it, the Plaster is in their hand, to wit, a
just discountenanceing of this as a defection.) And withal that they will
henceforth appear more friendly toward the real Lovers of them and the cause;
and holders fast of their integrity, and less severe against such, who ought
to be countenanced, cherished, and encouraged for their uprightness in hateing
the Supremacy, as the spring, and all the streams that flow from that corrupt
and cursed fountain; and hereby shall they have better access, when real
affection and tenderness upon these accounts is witnessed, to curb or cure
these excesses, which are not inseparable from, yea incident to the zeal of the
best of Saints out of heaven; for it is there that our fire will want smoke.
Dear Brethren I shall detain you no longer from Peruseing this History. And
that you may in calmness and without Prejudice consider what is said; and
that the Lord God himself may, as in all things, so in this thing also, give
you Light, is for you the soul-desire of

Your poor afflicted Brother and welwisher.

THE HISTORY OF THE INDULGENCE.
AFter the unexpected Alteration (which proved indeed a Convulsion falling-out
so suddenly) that came upon the Church, after the Kings restoration, when
beside many other sad passages, (and too many here to be commemorated) the
memory of which may make tears trickle down from our eyes, so many of the
able, painful, faithful and succesful laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord
were by one Act of Council at Glasgow Anno 1662. put from their work; and by
violence thrust out of the Vineyard, where the Lord had set them to labor;
even to the number of Three hundred and above. Nor was it enough to the Rulers
to banish all those by an Act from their own Parishes; but to make this
banishment yet more grievous, and the life of those faithful Servants of Christ
yet more bitter and less vital, they thereafter did command them to remove from
their own Paroches twenty miles, six miles from a Cathedral Church, and three
miles from a Brugh. After (I say) this surprising and astonishing blow, tending
so directly to the overthrow of the Lords Ministry, in that Church, and the
Introduction afterward of abjured Prelacie, whereby the Church became suddenly
filled with aswarme of locusts; and the many Acts made to enforce a compliance
among the people with this defection, and actual conformity thereunto, and that
so violently and rigorously, as even simple withdrawing was made seditious and
criminal, and severely punished: the ejected Ministers began to think with
themselves, that this tyrannical ejection did not, nor could not, unminister
them, or make them no more Ministers of Christ; so as they might not preach the
Gospel, wherever they were, as Ambassadors of Christ; but, on the contrary,
they saw, that they lay under the wrath and displeasure of God, if they should
not preach Christ; and that a necessity was laid upon them, yea and woe was unto
them, if they preached not the Gospel; according to that 1 Cor. 9: v. 16. and
they observed likewise, that the necessity was now great, yea greater than
ever, upon many accounts: And on the other hand, the people being more and more
alienated from the Swarm of Curats, as being not only prodigiously profane, and
lascivious, vain and ignorant (enough to demonstrate, that they were never the
authorized Messengers of Christ) but also highly guilty of perjurie and
defection, in their compliance with, receiving their commission immediately
from, acting in subordination to, and by a power derived from the abjured
Prelates, contrare to the Word of God, the Primitive Pattern and our own
Reformation, confirmed by Oaths, solemn Vows and Covenants; and being
sensible of an obligation still lying upon them to own the outed Ministers, as
the faithful Servants of Christ, and therefore under a necessity to hear them,
and to receive the Ordinances of Christ, as dispensed by them: both the one and
the other saw themselves called to some other exercise, both to restifie their
adherence to their former avowed Profession, their abhorrence of the abjured
re-introduced Prelacie, and their willingness to keep Christ, in his pure
Ordinances, in the Land.

Wherefore not a few of the more serious Ministers, bethinking themselves, and
considering the many obligations lying upon them, to preach, and to be instant
in season and out of season, and considering the urgent necessity, and withal
the cheerful readiness and willingness of the people to hear, saw themselves
called of God to preach as Ministers of the Gospel, wherever providence ordered
their abode; and thereupon, as occasion offered, preached unto all such as were
willing to hear; but at first (that they might as little displease the Rulers,
as possible) only in private houses, and that for the most part, (if not
altogether) at such times, when there was no public Worshipe in the public
meeting places. (A superplus of caution.)

But such was the rage of the new installed Prelates, and such was their
Indignation at, and Enmity against those outed Ministers, and chiefly at and
against the work they were about, as knowing that if Christ were kept in the
Land, and a memory only of him were reserved, they could enjoy no quiet in
their usurpations; that they ceased not to stir up the Rulers, to all
extravagancies of Cruelty, for suppressing of the Innocent, Peacable and
Harmeless Assemblings. Hence came severe prohibitions, discharging all such
meetings under exorbitant Penalties, both upon the Masters of the houses, where
these Assemblies were found, and upon the Minister found there exercising, and
upon all and every one present, without exception, Hence were houses forced and
searched, and many hailed to prisons, and several necessitate to escape at
windows with the hazard of their lives; Officers and Spies sent unto and set
in several suspected places, to seize and fall upon such, as they found at such
meetings, or but suspected to have been there: whence it came to pass that
many, both men and women, young and old, have been dragged to Prisons, and
there closs kept, as if they had been the worst of Malefactors, besides
several other outrageous and illegal Acts of Violence and Oppression committed
against them, contrary to all Law, Equity and Conscience.

The faithful Ministers and people, desireing still to follow the Lord, in the
duty of the day, and finding so many and so great Difficul^ies, in their
Assembling in Houses, where they were so easily attraped, and could with so
great hazard meet, and with difficulty escape the hands of these Burrioes,
were constrained at last to keep their Meetings in the fields, though without
all shelter from Cold, Wind, Snow, and Rain: Whereupon the rage and fury of
the Rulers, instigated by the Prelates, did break forth into more excessive and
boundless Flames: Whence came severe Acts of Council and Parliament against the
same; and all ways of cruelty imaginable taken, to suppress these House and
Field meetings; field meetings being discharged under the pain of death unto
the Minister and Convocater, and other grievous penalties unto such as did
meet: Which course of severity and rigor has continued unto this day: But to
mention the several Steps, Methods, Means, Consequences and Effects of this
Tragoedie, would make too long a digression,

It is sufficient for us to notice, that the Suppressing of these Meetings has
been the butt, a^ which a great part (if not the far greatest) of the Acts and
Actings of the Rulers have been levelled, ever since they began to appear; and
the only occasion of so many Acts of Cruelty, and of Enormitie in point of
Justice and Legality* they being the only eyesore of these Enemies to Christ
and His Interest, and that which they had been hitherto, both with cruelty and
craft, seeking to destroy, by Tyrannical Acts and Laws, and by more Tyrannical
and illegal Executions; as if these Assemblers had been no more lawful
Subjects, but open Traitors, and the Worst of Rebels. Hence came the filling
of P^isons with such as were apprehended, the sending of such Ministers as were
taken into the Basse; the setting of a great sum of Money upon the Heads of
some; liberty granted to Soldiers to wound and kill, in seeking to apprehend
Ministers, and to apprehend and trouble any person they found on the
highways; the selling of honest people, as Slaves, unto the French Captains,
and unto Persons going to America; the Banishing of the Wives and Children of
the outed Ministers, that were come to Edinburgh for shelter, commanding them
to dislodge within the short day prefixed, under the pain of being forcibly
shut up, or dragged out; the appointment of a Major in Edinburgh, with command
over the Town Guards, and a good salarie for this very end, to apprehend, at
all times, all such Ministers or people, as he could find Assembling together;
the out-lawing of several Ministers, and many hundereds of Professors,
discharging all supply, were it but of bread or water or of a nights lodging,
to be given unto them; and what not?

In the midst of all this fury, and after the quashing by blood, illegal and
most falsely patcht up for saltures, of several estates escheating and
confiscating of goods, of that trouble Anno 1666., occasioned through the
Barbarous Executions of illegal Commands, against simple Non-complyers with the
course of Prelacy, the King (at whose instigation, or in compliance with whose
Desire and Request, I know not; but that it was not of God, nor of Christ, nor
of the Spirit, that I know) essayeth other means, and takes other measures;
(but all tending unto the same destructive end designed, to wit, the
suppressing and banishing out of the Land all these Memorials of the Lords
Covenanted Interest, and of his presence in the Land, the Assemblies, (I mean)
of his Servants, to serve and Worshipe him; according to the pure Order of the
Gospel, after the example of Christ and his Apostles, and those primitive
Christians, which willingly followed and heard them,) when by cruelty the
Rulers saw they were not able to attain their end, but the more they labored
that way, to suppress these meetings, the greater and more frequent they grew,
the crafty device of an Indulgence to some certain select persons of the
whole outed Ministers is fallen upon; which if it had been more General or
Universal, than it was, had in all probability, proven an effectual mean for
attaining of that, which they were so earnestly laboring for, viz. the
extinction of the whole Remnant.

Being now to discourse of this Indulgence, as it is called, we shall begin
where it began to appear; that is at the Kings Letter to the Council hereanent,
dated at W^it^hal the 7. of Iuny 1669. which was as follows.

CHARLES REX.
Right Trustee etc. We Greet You well.
Whereas by the Act of Council and Proclamation at Glasgow in the Year 1662. a
Considerable number of Ministers were at once turned out, and so debarred from
preaching of the Gospel, and exercise of the Ministry; we are graciously
pleased to authorize you, our Privy Council, to appoint so many of the outted
Ministers, as have lived peacably and orderly in the places, where they have
resided, to return to preach and exercise other functions of the Ministry, in
the Paroch Churches, where they formerly served, (provided they be vacant) and
to allow Patrons to present to other vacant Churches, such others of them, as
you shall approve. And that such of these Ministers, as shall take Collation
from the Bishop of the Diocie, and keep Presbyteries and Synods, may be
warranted to lift their stipends, as other Ministers of the Kingdom. But for
such, as are not, or shall not be collated by the Bishop, that they have no
warrant to meddle with the vacant Stipend, but only to possess the Manse and
Gleib; and that you appoint a Collector for these and all other vacant
stipends, who shall issue the same, and pay yearly maintenance to the said not
collated Ministers, as you shall see fit to appoint.

That all who are restored, or allowed to exercise the Ministry, be in our
Name and by our Authority enjoined, to constitute and keep Kirk-Sessions, to
keep Presbyteries and Synods, as was done by all Ministers before 1638. And
that such of them, as shall not obey our Commands in keeping Presbyteries, be
confined within the bounds of the Paroches, where they preach, aye and while
they give assurance to keep Presbyteries for the future.

That all, who shall be allowed to preach, be strickly enjoined, not to admit
any of their Neighbor or other Paroches unto their Communions, nor Baptize
their Children, nor marry any of them, without the allowance of the Minister of
the Paroch, to which they belong, unless it be vacant for the time. And if it
be found upon complaint made by any Presbytery to you, our Privy Council, that
the people of the Neighbor, or other Paroches, resort to their Preachings, and
deserte their own Paroch Churches, that according to the degree of the offense
and disorder, you silence the Minister, who countenances the same, for shorter
or longer time, or altogether turn out, as you see cause. And upon complaint
made and verified of any seditious discourse or expressions in the Pulpit, or
else where, uttered by any of these Ministers, you are immediately to turn them
out, and further punish them according to Law, and the degree of the offense.

That such of the outted Ministers, who live peacablie and orderly, and are not
reentered, or presented as aforesaid, have allowed to them four hundereth
merks Scots, Yearly, out of the vacant Churches, for their maintenance, till
they be provided of Churches. And that even such, who shall give assurance to
live so, for the future, be allowed the same yearly maintenance.

And seeing we have by these orders, taken away all pretenses for Conventicles,
and provided for the want of such as are, and will be peacable: If any shall be
found hereafter to preach without Authority, or keep Conventicles, our express
pleasure is, That you proceed with all severity against the Preachers and
Hearers, as seditous Persons, and contemners of our Authority. So leaving the
Managment of these disorders to your prudence, and recommending them to your
care, we bid you farewell.

Given at our Court, at Whitehall the Seventh day of Iuny 1669. and of our
Reign the 21. Year, by his Majest: Command LAUDERDAIL.


Ere we proceed, it will not be amiss to set down here some few most obvious
remarks, to the end, we may come to understand better the nature, and true
import of this Indulgen^e, where of this Letter is the ground and Basis. And

1. We see it is said, That by the Act of Council, and Proclamation at Glasgow
An. 1662. a considerable number of Ministers were at once turned out; and so
(N.B.) debarred from preaching of the Gospel and exercise of the Ministry.
Whence we cannot but observe, That those Ministers, who were by that Act at
Glasgow banished from their Paroch-Churches, were not only debarred and
hindered from preaching of the Gospel, and Exercise of their Ministry, in
their own Congregations (which could not but follow by an inevitable
consequence) But in the sense and meaning of the Court, they were by virtue of
that sentence debarred from, and incapacitated for preaching of the Gospel, and
the Exercise of the Ministry, any where; and so according to the meaning of
the Civil Magistrate, emitting this Edict, these Ministers were simpliciter
deposed from their Ministry, and looked upon as men, having no longer power or
warrant, before God or Man, to preach the Gospel, or dispense Ordinances, as
Ministers thereof. Whence it follows, that the Indulgence (as it is called)
is a full and formal opening of their mouth again; and (as to some) a Reponing
of them, according to the meaning of the Indulgers; who doubtless will not say,
(What ever the plain Language of their Practice be) that they have power to
countermand what God has commanded, or to discharge such, from serving Christ
in the Ministry, as he has strickly enjoined, and that upon all highest
peril, to serve him so; but they think, they have power from God, to silence
Ministers from preaching when they will; and again to open their mouths, and
grant them liberty to Exercise the Ministry, as they see good; and that the
Lord Authorizeth what they do; and so, they do but what Church-Judicatories
were in use to do formerly, or Prelates yet do, as to such, who are under them.

Here then being a Full, Formal, and judicial Power, granted to such, as were,
in the Courts Judgment, put from their Office, deprived of and debarred from
the liberty of exercising the same, or any part thereof, to re-enter into the
full and free Exercise of the same; it appears to me to be undeniable, That
the accepters of this Indulgence have, upon the matter, assented unto this
grievous incroachment upon the Privileges of the Church of Christ. Our Church
never thought it competent to the Civil Magistrate, to depose Ministers from
their Office, or to suspend them from the Exercise thereof. Let the Second Book
of Discipline be viewed; Let the CXI. Propositions be considered; Let the
Propositions for Government be looked upon; Let our first or Second Confession
of faith, or the late Confession, drawn up at West-Minster be pondered; Let the
writtings of our worthies Mr Rutherfoord, and Mr. Gillispy be read; Yea, let
all our public proceedings, and the whole tenor of the pub^ick actings of our
Church be remembered, and it will be seen, that the granting of this unto the
Magistrate is point blank contrary unto all these; Yea, and to all the
writtings of the Orthodox Anti-Arminian Anti-Erastian Divines.

But I know it will be said. That the Receivers of the Indulgence cannot help
what the Magistrate says; they know what themselves think; and as they did not
look upon themselves as deposed, when banished from their own Parishes, as
appeared by their preaching else where after that sentence; so they grant no
such power now unto the Magistrate: Yea, when some of the Indulged were some
years thereafter called before the Council, it was said roundly by their Mouth,
That they had received their Ministry from Jesus Christ. But I answer, (1.)
Though the Indulged could not cause the Magistrate speak otherwise, than he
would; yet they were Masters of themselves, and of their own actions; and they
had liberty to do and speak that, which before the world might testify and
declare, that they did not assent unto that assuming of Church power, but on
the contrary did dissent there from, and protest against it, as a sinful
Usurpation and Incroachment. What public Protestation was, I pray, given in
against this, first or last? What Plain and Positive Testimony was borne unto
the Doctrine and Practice of our Church, in this point, which many of our
forebearers did own unto Banishment and Blood? (2.) As for that, which was
said by the mouth of some of them, (of which more afterward) it was but a poor
salvo, in the case; because no man breathing, neither Magistrate, nor
Church-Judicatory, can properly give the Ministry; that being proper to
Christ Jesus alone: Men only can Instrumentally and Ministerially convey and
apply the power, which is of Christ, unto such or such a Person: now I suppose
these Brethren, who spoke so by their mouth, did not think or mean, that they
had their Ministry from Christ immediately, without the intervention of an
instrumental and ministerial cause: So that notwithstanding of this, by their
practice they might and did declare, that the Civil Magistrate was the
Instrumental and Ministerial cause, lawfully Authorized to repone them to their
Ministry; that is, that all that power of Deposeing and Reponing of Ministers,
which by our Reformed Doctrine, Discipline and Practice, has been asserted to
agree only to Church Officers and Church-Judicatories, is competent to the
Civil Magistrate, as such (3.) Further it may be noticed, that a Minister once
deposed, or suspended, and now reponed by a lawful Presbytery, might say the
same, to wit. That he receives his Ministry from Jesus Christ, with full
Prescriptions from him etc. Without the least questioning of the lawful
Ministerial and Instrumental power of the Presbytery, in that affair: So that
it is manifest, that this could not salve them from a real acknowledging the
Council upon the matter, to have the Ministerial power of Deposing and Reponing
of Ministers; and that, de jure. (4.) Itis true, their preaching else where,
after their Banishment from their own Congregations, will say, that in so far,
they did not acknowledge themselves deposed from the function; yet it will not
help much; for their by past faithful deportment will not lessen their fainte
at this time, but rather aggravat their cedeing, or their silence, at the
accepting of this Indulgence, springing forth of such a fountain. Their by
past honest carriage (I speak here upon supposition, that they did sedulously
preach elsewhere, when thrust from their own Charges; though I apprehend, it
will be found true, but of a few of them) should have prompted them now to a
plain declaration of their adherence to their former Principles, and of their
abhorrence of such gross and Palpable Invasions upon, and Usurpation of the
power, which Christ has granted only to his Church.

2. We may remarke, that it is said, We are graciously pleased to authorize
you, our Privy Council (N.B.) to appoint so many of them etc. and again, as
you shall approve of. Whence it is obvious (1.) That all the power, which the
Privy Council had, was from the King; and consequently, that they go no
greater length, than the Kings Letter did allow; and that their Actings could
not justle with, or cross the Scope, Intent and Design of his Maj. Letter; but
fully comply therewith in all points, and in all its Designs. So that, when
any doubt arises anent what the Council did, we must, for obtaining of
Satisfaction and Clearness, have our recourse to this primum mobile, the Spring
and Principle of this Motion, and the Ground and Basis of the Councels Actings:
Yea we must interpret the Actings and Deed of the Council by this Letter, which
was their Cynosure, by which they were to direct their course, and their Rule
and Ground of Acting. (2.) Itis obvious allo, that That power, which they are
authorized to exercise, is a Power to appoint such and such Persons, as they
think meet, and shall approve of, to go to such and such places. It was not
then a Command given, or a power granted to recall the Act of Glasgow, whereby
the Ministers were banished from their Charges; but a power to meddle with pure
Church Matters, and that immediately; that is, to judge and cognosce of the
Qualifications of Ministers; and so to approve or not approve of them; and a
power of installing such as they approved of, in such places, as they shall
think meet, and none else. These things are plain. And it is manifest, that
there is herein a Plain, Clear, Palpable and Gross Incroachment on the
Liberties of the Church, and on the Power granted to her of the Lord Christ
Jesus, as no man will deny, who is not a stranger to the Word of God, and to
the Principles of Presbyterian Government, and to all the Acts and Actings of
our Church from the very first Reformation from Popery. Wherefore, seeing it is
known, that in this case, qui tacet consentire videtur, he who is silent, is
construed to consent: And it has been always accounted in our Church (and is
so also by the Word of God) a sinful compliance with a wicked course, not to
give faithful, free and timeous Testimony against the same; it is undeniable,
that these indulged Persons, accepting this Indulgence, conveyed through such a
channel, and flowing from sucha fountain, as is already shown have not only
fainted, as to their duty; but are interpretatively assenters unto this
Usurpation.

3. The Qualification of those, who are to be restored to the Ministry, is
here also to be remarked, in those Words, So many of the outted Ministers, as
have (N. B.) lived peacable and orderly, in the places, where thy have resided.
I shall be far from saying, that Ministers should not live peacably and
orderly; but we ought to consider, what is accounted, living peacably and
orderly, by such as propose this Qualification: And that sure, to speak it in
the smoothest of Terms, is a negative compliance with all their Tyranny,
Oppression of Church and Country, Bloodshed, Overturning of the Work of God,
Establishing iniquity by Law, Perjurie, Apostasy, Re-establishing of Perjured
Prelates, and abjured Prelacie, intruding of Hirelings; Persecution of
conscientious people, for not acknowledging of these Hirelings as lawful
Ministers of the Gospel etc. That is to say, have been very quiet and silent,
as to the bearing of faithful witness unto the Cause of God, and the work of
Reformation, according to our solemn Oaths and Covenants; and have been loath
to transgres any of their iniquous Laws; and careful to walk and carry so, in
all their deportment, as not ^o displease them in the least. Now I would think
that this very thing should have been enough to have scarred tender
conscientious persons from accepting this Indulgence. What Son of the Church of
Scotland could have accepted of a favor, in the bosom of which lay this
Reproach? Who could have accepted of this Indulgence, and not with all openly
have thereby declared, that he was one of those peacable livers, for whom it
was designed, and upon whom in special, as such, it was to be conferred? And
however this peacableness and orderliness was accounted a good Qualification by
the Rulers, and a satisfactory Mark unto the^ of the fitness of these Persons,
for receiving of their favors, and a sufficient ground of security unto them,
that these Persons would not stand in the way of their further destructive
progress, nor mar them in their further pernicious designs: It seems
strange to me, that conscientious Sons of the Church of Scotland, should have
suffered themselves to be looked upon, with such a special eye of favor by
those Enemies, and to be distinguished from others by such a Character, as in
our good times, and according to the wholesome Canons of our Church, would have
exposed them unto the highest of Church Censures. Had they not then a fair
occasion here, yea and a loud ^all, to vindicat themselves from this Aspersion,
howbeit esteemed, judged and declared the prime and indulgence-procureing
Qualification by the Rulers; and to have born witness unto the Truth of God; if
their desire to the offered favor, and love to that esteem with the Rulers,
had not been too excessive and prevalent?

But there is another thing beside remarkable here, to wit. That here we see,
the Magistrate assumeth to himself power to prescribe, to determine and to
judge of the necessary Qualifications of Ministers, or of their Qualifications
sine quibus non. And moreover, That the accepters of the Indulgence after this
manner, did, upon the matter, and interpretativly, give their assent to, and
approbation of these two things: First, That the Magistrate, as such, has
power to prescribe, to specify and to declare what are indeed, and what he
will have to be looked on as, the only Qualifications, necessarily requisite in
Ministers: And next, That the Qualifications, by him here specified and
expressed, are the only Qualifications necessarily requisite in Ministers: And
consequently, that the Apostles and Primitive Ministers, who neither could nor
would have lived so peacablie in reference to the Heathen Emperou^s, and their
wicked Decrees, when no more repugnant to the Interest of Christ and of the
Gospel, than the Decrees and Executions of our Rulers have been, were not
rightly qualified for the Ministry. Add to these, That hereby they
acknowledged themselves to be duly qualified after this manner, that is, to
have been and yet to be such, (and that deservedly, after the Court
construction) as have lived peaceably and orderly, in the places, where they
have resided.

4. There is another remark in the Letter obvious, where it is said [ That such
of these Ministers, (i.e. who are indulged) as shall take Collation from the
Bi^hop of the Diocie, and keep Presbyteries and Synods, shall be warranted to
lift up their stipends, as other Ministers of the Kingdom. But such as are not,
or shall not be collated, shall have no warrant to meddle with the local
stipend; but only to possess the Manse and Gleibe and shall have such a
yearly maintenance, as the Council shall think fit to appoint, out of the
vacat stipends.] Though this, at the first view, may not seem very material,
yet it will have its own weight, when we consider these things following, (1.)
That the Law of God allows such, as serve at the Altar, to live by the Altar;
and that the very ox, that treads out the Corn, should not be muzzled; and
that the labourer should have his hire; as we see 1 Cor. 9. Gal. 6: ver. 6. 1 Timothy 5:17, 18. And that all Equity and Reason requires, that the Benefice
should follow the Office, as an accessorie and consequent thereunto. (2.) That
Ministers stipends are a part of the Church-rents and Emoluments; and are as
proper and due unto the Ministers of the Gospel, who serve in the place, as the
Rents of any man's heritage is to him, who enjoys it; these being irrevocablie
given away and dedicated to the Church, and the said Donation confirmed and
ratified by Law. (3.) Our second Book of Discipline, approven in all points by
the General Assembly, prescribes other Collectours of these Stipends, or of
the Church Rents, than such as the King or Council should name, and that in
conformity to the Word of God and Primitive Pattern; as we see Chap. 9. Where,
speaking of the Patrimony of the Kirk, and of the Distribution thereof; and
after they have told what they mean by the Patrimony of the Kirk they have
these words. To take any of this Patrimony by unlawful means, and convert it
to the peculiar and profane use of any person, we hold it a detestable
Sacrilege before God: And then they add: That the goods Ecclesiastic ought to
be collected and distributed by the Deacons, as the Word of God appoints, that
they who bear Office in the Kirk be provided for, without care or solicitude.
(4.) That there is an introduction here made to that, which may ever hereafter
prove noxious and hurtful to the Church; even way made to the bringing of the
Ministers of the Gospel under perfect slavery unto the State; for hereby we see
they must be obnoxious to them, and depend upon them, not only for the quota of
their stipend; but also for the actual and yearly payment thereof; for yearly
must there an address be made unto the Council, or to the Exchequer, by every
Minister for his Stipend: though this be altered now; yet there was no
appearance of it, at their accepting of the Indulgence, and several years
after. Though this may seem but a matter of small moment; yet we think faithful
Ministers should have been tender of the least thing, which might but occasion,
or usher-in bondage and slaverie to that poor Church, which has had a
wrestling life, what for one thing, what for another, from the very beginning:
And sagacious persons might easily have foreseen, whither such a course, as
this, did tend. And if hereafter the State should lay down such a course, as
that in all time coming, all the Stipends through the Land should be uplifted
by general Collectours, thereto appointed by them, and given-out by these
again, to such as, and in what quantity the State shall think fit, and so make
the Ministers become their slaves, and to depend upon them, as if they were
their domestic Servants, and Hirelings (the inconvenience of which upon many
accounts cannot but be obvious to any considerat and judicious person) whom had
we to blame, as first breaking the ice in this matter? And was there not here
ground enough to have refused this favor (as it is accounted) thus conveyed;
and to have declared, they would choose rather to preach gratis, than any way
contribute unto the laying of such an yoke upon the neck of the Church of
Scotland.

Further, see we not here, that such a snare was visible before their eyes,
that either they should accept of Collation from the Prelates, and so
acknowledge their dependence likewise on them, and confirm these perjured
Invaders, and comply with abjuted Prelacy; or otherwise become the Councel's
Pensioners, which did tend to a manifest prostituting of the credit of the
Ministry, and to the obstructing, of ministerial freedom and faithfulness, in
declaring the mind of God, as becomes the Ambassadors of Christ?

5. The next thing to be remarked, is the Injunctions here laid upon the
Indulged, which are expressed in the Letter at some length. Which Injunctions
either are Lawful, or Unlawful. If they be Lawful, Then (1.) They must obey
them without any hesitation. (2.) Then they must acknowledge the conformable
Clergy, as they are called, to be lawful Ministers of the Gospel. (3.) And
that it is lawful to keep the Prelat's Courts and Meetings; and thus condemn
themselves, for not doing so formerly. (4.) Then the people are also obliged in
Conscience to own and acknowledge these Hirelings, as lawful Ministers of the
Gospel, whom they are called of God to hear and obey. But if they account these
Injunctions Unlawful, how could they by their silence, and accepting of the
Indulge^ce upon these terms, tacitly approve of the same? To say, That they
did not positively approve thereof, is not enough: Yea, their not-disapproving
thereof Openly, Plainly, Publicly and Avowedly, being so stated as they were,
and circumstances considered, cannot but be accounted an Interpretative
Approbation, by all Godly, Sober and Rational persons. Nor will it avail here
to say, That these Instructions were not proposed condition-wayes: For the
Council, that are both the best Interpreters of this Letter, and of their own
deed, in consequence of and in compliance with the same, tell us in their Act
August 10. 1677. that the Indulgence was accepted upon condition of keeping and
observing of these Instructions, in these words: For as much as the Lords of
his Maj. privy Council, did confine several outed Ministers to particular
Paroches, with allowance to preach and exercise the other functions of the
Ministry within the same; and did (N.B.) deliver unto them certain
Instructions to be kept and observed, upon which they accepted the
Indulgence, granted to them: And again, after whatsoever manner these
Injunctions were proposed, yet it is certain, as we see, they were intended
so. And if these Ministers had expressly told the Council, that they would
observe none of these Injunctions, because they judged the same unlawful, and
themselves obliged in conscience to declare the same; shall any think, that the
Council would have granted them this Indulgence? Had not that been a direct
crossing of the design and purpose of the King and Court? How should then the
people have been amused into a stupide quiescence, and asse-like couching under
the burden, and blown-up with an irrational and groundless expectation of some
desirable change?

It cannot, moreover, here satisfy, to say, That they undertook nothing, but
resolved to do, as they found clearness; and when they were not clear to obey
to subject themselves to the penalty. For the Counsel, (as we see) offering the
Indulgence upon condition of observing the Injunctions, when they accepted of
the benefit, offered on those terms, they could not but also embrace the
terms, upon which the benefit was offered; and their accepting of the
benefit was a plain declaration of their acquiesceing in and satisfaction
with the terms. And further, when they accepted of the benefit, either they
accounted Obedience unto these Injunctions Lawful, or Unlawful. If they
accounted it Lawful, why were they so disingenuous, as to simulate some
hesitation, when they were clear and certain? This was not the carriage of
faithful, and zealous Servants of Christ. If they did account that Obedience
unlawful; Why did they not declare so much; especially when their silence, at
the acceptance of the benefit so offered, could not but be construed by all,
to be a full satisfaction with the Conditions? did not their silence confirm
the Council of the lawfulness of the Obedience, required to these Injunctions?
This looked not like the carriage of our worthy Forefathers, and zealous
Reformers. Moreover, what in case the Council had likewise injoined them (after
the same manner of way, that they proposed the foresaid Injunctions) to preach
Justification by works, The Popes Infallibility, or the Kings Headship over the
Church, or some such thing? Would it have been fair in them, to have come away
thanking their L L. for the favor, which was bestowed upon them, and
satisfying themselves with this mental reservation, We will do as we shall be
answerable, and take our hazard? Could any have justified them in this, or
judged their carriage Ministerial? Might not every one have said, that they had
taken up their Ministry, in an unlawful way, not approved of God; and so had
run unsent? Finally, Let me ask the Reader, if the King or a great Noble man
should grant to a Person some considerable Charge or Employment in his family,
which possible the same Person had before, but was lately thrust therefrom; and
in the mean time should lay upon him some injunctions, which seemed onerous, or
not very lawful; could any think, that his accepting of the Charge and
Employment, and returning thanks therefore, did not speak out most clearly his
acquiesceing unto the conditions, his accepting of the Charge upon these
conditions, and his tacit promise to obey these Injunctions, especially since
he made no exceptions against them, when mentioned and proposed?

6. We remark further that the Letter says, That none of these Ministers have
any seditious discourses, or expressions in pulpit, or elsewhere. And what is
understood here, by seditious discourses or expressions, we cannot be ignorant?
But now, what Conscientious Minister can either tacitly promise such a thing,
or upon the highest ^eril forbear to utter such discourses? Or who can think,
that any such thing can be yielded unto, who considers, what God requires of
Ministers, in reference to a Corrupted and Apostatized State? and what the
weight of the blood of souls is? and who has ever read Ezekiel. 3: verse. 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22. and Chap. 33: ver, 7, 8, 9, 10. and considered, what a fearful
thing it is to fall into the hands of a living God? It is true, the Council in
their act made no mention of this; for what reasons; themselves best know: Yet
it is sure, that the King and Court expected that none should have the benefit
of the Indulgence, but such only, of whom they had, or thought they, had all
the rational security imaginable, that they should be men of other Principles,
than to utter such expressions. And we may be very certain, that the Council,
in pursuance of the ends of his Maj. Letter, made choice of such, as they
accounted most peacable, and of whom they had the least fears imaginable, that
they should ever utter, whether in pulpit, or out of pulpit, such seditious
discourses and expressions. They took them (no doubt) to be men of a more
peacable disposition, as they called it, and more wise and sober (to speak
according to their dialect). But oh, what will after ages say, who shall hear
of the Kings Letter, and what the Council did in pursuance thereof; and see
also that N. N. etc. without the least Testimony to the Truth, accepted of the
offer, and never hear, where or when these Persons were challenged, or accused
for uttering of such speeches; that is, for an honorable mentioning of the
glorious work of God, so miraculously wrought and carried on; and a faithful
Testifying against the unparalled perfidie and breach of Covenant, and
against the most abominable, irreligious, inhumane and tyrannical Acts, made
for establishing of this wicked Course of Defection? What (I say) will after
ages say, when they compare this with the valiant and zealous deportment of our
Predecessors, and of some, at least, of these same persons Anno 1648. and some
years preceding?

It will not be a sufficient covering for this nakedness to say, They heard
nothing of that, while they received the Indulgence: For it is not unlike, but
they saw or heard of the Kings Letter; and the report of such an expression
therein should have made them diligent to have got a sight of it, if it was
not offered unto them: and their Mouth did clearly, in his discourse before
them (as we shall hear) intimate, that they were no strangers thereunto. And
suppose they had known nothing of this; yet they could not be ignorant, that
this was included in their qualifications. And if they should reject all this,
as importing no consent on their part; Let their practice, since the accepting
of the Indulgence, say, whether or not they have regairded that, as the maine
and only condition. However I think here was ground enough for them to have
scrupled at the embracing of this supposed favor.

7. The next thing here to be noticed in the Letter, is the Power and Command,
which the King gives to the Council, to silence those Ministers for a longer
or shorter time, if they disobey these foresaid Injunctions; and if a complaint
be verified the second time, to silence them for a longer time, or to turn
them out (that is, in plain language, to depose them simpliciter) especially
if they utter any sedicious speeches. He must be very blind, who sees not
what height of Erastianisme is here: did ever any of the Reformed Churches say,
that a Magistrate, as such, could suspend and depose Ministers from their
Office? Did ever King James assume this power unto himself? See if his
Declaration, penned with his own hand, signed and delivered to the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland at Linlithgow Dec. 7. 1585. says so
much, though at this time he had got his Supremacy in Church Matters screwed
up to the highest peg, he thought attainable? Did ever any of our Confessions
of Faith, or Books of Discipline, or Acts and Canons of our Church, give the
power of the Keys, the power of inflicting Church Censures upon Ministers,
unto the Civil Magistrate? Did ever our Divines (for I except Court Chaplains,
and Parasites, whom I account none of ours) write or say such a thing? Read
what Calderwood has said, in his Altar. Damasc. page, 23, 24. and what worthy
Mr. Rutherfoord has said, in his Due Right of Presbyteries page 427. and
forward; and read that elaborat Tractat of Mr G. Gillespie Aarons Rod
Blossoming, and see if there be any such thing hinted there. See if the CXI.
Propositions, or the Propositions for Government, mention any such thing. Now
if these Indulged be not Erastian in their Principles (as I hope they are not)
I cannot see, but they are Erastian in their Practices: For they, knowing that
such a power was assumed by the King, and now given and granted by the King
unto the Council, whereby they were authorized to put the same in practice, and
so to exercise pure and intrinsic Church Power, that is, inflict pure
Church Censures, Suspend and Depose Ministers: That is, (1.) Not only not to
suffer them to preach and administer Sacraments, in his Kingdom and Dominions,
(which yet worthy Mr Rutherfoord will not grant, in his Due Right etc. page
430. upon these accounts 1. Because the King as King has not Dominion of
places, as sacred and religious, for his power in Church Matters is only
cumulative, not privative; so as he cannot take away an house, dedicated to
Gods service, no more than he can take away maintenance alloted by public
authority upon Hospitals, Schools, Pastors and Doctors. 2. The Apostles might
preach in the Temple, though Civil Authority forbad them. 3. And all know, that
he cannot hinder the exercise of the Ministry, in any other Kingdom,) it is
not this only, I say; but simply not to preach, and administer the
Sacraments. (2.) It is not only to discharge the exercise of the Ministry
(which yet Mr Rutherfoord, ubi supra page 431. with Calderwood take to be a
degree of Suspension, which is an Ecclesiastical degree to the censure of
Excommunication; and therefore the King may as well Excommunicat, and remit and
retain sins, as he can suspend:) but it is to take away the very power of
Order, given instrumentally by the Church; if; with Papists and Formalists,
they asserte not an indeleble Character. And (3.) It is the taking away of what
he never gave; for he never ordained, nor could ordain a Pastor, by any Law of
God; that is, Ecclesiastically design, appoint, set apart, and constitute a
qualified Person to the Ministry, by prayer and laying-on of hands; for this
was always done by Church Officers Act. 13: v. 3. and 14: v. 23. 1 Timothy 4:14.
and 5:22. 2 Timothy 2:2. Tit. 1:5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Does it not hence appear, that this was a manifest Usurpation of the Power and
Privilege of the Church? And what can the silence of such, as were indulged, as
to this, when they accepted of the Indulgence, from such as were, in the very
giving thereof, openly and avowedly declaring this their Usurpation and
Incroachment, say before the world, but that they acquiesced thereunto? This
matter was not hid under ground; It was plain enough to all, who would not put
out their own eyes, that the King was assuming to himself Church Power, and
was robbing the Church of her Privileges; and to make way for the full
accomplishment thereof, did here command and authorize his Council to appoint
such and such Ministers, so and so qualified, to such and such places, as they
thought good, with this manifest certificate, that they must expect no
Church Censures to be inflicted on them, for any crime or misdemanour, they
shall be charged with, and be found guilty of, but by the Civil Magistrates
immediately; not Causatively, that is, causing Church-Judicatories do it; but
doing it immediately themselves. Who then can justify them, and their practice,
in accepting so thankfully, as they did, that Indulgence, without the least
word of a Testimony against all these open and manifest Encroachments; and
that at such time, when the design of tyrannizing over the Church, in an
Erastian way, was so palpable, and might be seen and known of all, who would
but open their eyes?

But there is another thing, which here occurreth; We see here that these
Indulged Persons, are standing immediately under the Censure of the Civil
Magistrate, not only for transgressing of the Orders, and Instructions given;
but also (as must necessarily follow) for any other failing and transgression,
not specified; as for example for Fornication, Sabbath-breaking and other Sins
and Scandals, deserving Deposition or Suspension: For put the case, that some
of them (which yet I have no cause to fear) should commit any such scandal, as
did de^erve, or were usually punished by Suspension or Deposition; who shall
inflict this Censure upon them, but the Council? There is no Church-Judicatorie
having power over them for that effect; and they are not under the Prelates;
And we cannot think that they may commit such crimes, and continue in the
Ministry; Nor may we suppose, that they will suspend or depose themselves.

8. Moreover we must remark here, that the Council is to take notice of their
speeches in pulpit, who are indu^ged, and to punish them; yea, to turn them
out immediately, if they be found to have uttered any sedicious Discourse: By
which we see, that the Council is made the immediate formal judge of Ministers
Doctrine, for under the pretext of sedicious Doctrine, they may judge and
condemn the most innocent and orthodox truths. No Anti-Erastian Divine will
grant this unto the Civil Magistrate. And though it be true, that the Civil
Magistrate can only and properly judge of what is truly sedicious, and can only
civilly punish for such crimes: Yet our Divines never granted, that the
Magistrate might in prima Instantia examine, and judge of Ministers Doctrine,
when alleiged to be sedicious, or treasonable: Nor did our Church, in her pure
times ever yield to this. Our Church-Historie tells us, that Mr. Andrew Melvine,
that faithful and zealous Servant of Christ, would not answer before the King
and the Council, for his alleiged treasonable discourse in Sermon, until he had
first given-in a plain and formal Protestation; and the like was done by
worthy Mr David Black upon the like occasion, and the Protestation was approven
and signed by a good part of the Church of Scotland 1596. And we know also upon
what ground it was, that that famous late Martyr for the Liberties of the
Church, Mr James Guthrie, was questioned, and put to suffer: Now where was
there any thing spoken by the Indulged, to bear witness to their adhering to
the Church of Scotland, in this point of truth? What was said, that might
declare their dissent from this piece of Encroachment? Was not their silence
here, and accepting of the Indulgence, in the manner as it was accepted,
without any public Testimony for the Church of Scotland and her Liberties, a
Declaration, that they were willing that all their Doctrine should be
immediately, and in prima instantia, judged and examined by the Council; and
consequently, that our Predecessors in offering Protestations, in this case,
were to be condemned, and that Mr Guthrie died as a fool?

9. We may remark a snare laid in the Letter to catch more: for it is appointed,
that such of the outted Ministers, who have lived peacably and orderly (here is
a Discriminatio^ made, no less scandalous to the commended, than dangerous to
the rest) and are not reentered or presented, as aforesaid, shall have allowed
to them four hundereth merks scots yearly, etc. -- And that such as will give
assurance to live so for the future^, be allowed the said yearly maintenance:
Seeing it is not unknown what is properly here understood, by living peacably
and orderly, any may see what a snare is laid here to catch others. But some
will say, what is that to the Indulged? I think it speaks very much to them;
for had they not accepted of this Indulgence, that temptation had been removed
from the door of others, who now, seeing them without any scruple accepting of
the Indulgence offered, and granted unto them in special, only upon the
account, and in consideration of their being peacable and orderly livers, are
embolde^ed to take that gracious gift, and accept of that Princely benevolence,
upon the same account, and gape for a greater morsel, Viz. a Vacancie: And will
not others, who are not fast rooted, be ready to engage, and give-in security,
that they may also taste of the Kings gra^uity; and so sell their conscience
and fidelity, at as good a price as they can. And if it fall out otherwise (as
I wish, and hope it shall) that none shall accept of those baits, under which
the hook is so conspicuous; yet no thanks to the Indulged, who have so fairly
broken the ice for them. I know, a scandal may be given, when not taken; and
such, as give the scandal, are guilty before God of destroying those for whom
Christ died, Romans 14:15. And that word of our Savior Mat. 18:6. Luke 17:1, 2.
Mark. 9:42. is very dreadful, But who so shall offendone of these little ones,
which believe in me, it were better for him, that a mils one were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. I know they will
say, They are far from this hazard, having done nothing, but what is du^y and
necessary duty. But though I grant it an indispensible duty for Ministers to
preach the Gospel, and to be instant in season and out of season: yet they
might have preached without the Indulgence, as others did, and yet do; and the
accepting of the Indulgence was not the only necessary opening of a door to
preaching. Nor is it of simple preaching that I am here speaking; and they
shall never be able to make it appear, that it is a necessary duty to do, as
they have done, considering what is already said, and what shall yet further be
said.

10. There is another particular in the Letter, worthy of a remark, and we
shall but here name it; and that is, Tha^ the council is to allow Patrons to
present to vacant Churches such Ministers, as they shall approve of. Whence it
is clear, that without this consent of the Patron, which is his real or virtual
Presentation, the Ministers approven of by the Council cannot have access unto
these vaca^t Churches: Therefore their accepting of the Indulgence unto Vacant
places, after this manner, is an approving and an establishing of the power of
Patrons; whereby they did condemn all such Ministers, and possibly some of
themselves, who formerly had suffered ejection, according to the Act of
Glasgow, because they had no clearness to accept of this Presentation, even
though the Patron would willingly have granted it, and did of his own accord
offer it. Did they not hereby also condemn that laudable piece of our
Reformation Anno 1649. When these Presentations were abolished, and the people
restored to their liberty of Electing their own Ministers?

11. We may also take notice, That all this contrivance is not in order to
reduce our Church in whole, or in part, to her former Presbyterian state and
luster, or to weaken, or in the least deface, the re-established Prelacie; but
rather to confirm the same; for in the Letter, we see these Indulged are to be
enjoined, in the Kings name, and by his authority, to keep Presbyteries and
Synods; that is, the Prelates meetings, so called; for there was no other. As
also encouragment was given unto them to take the Prelates Collation. So that
this contrivance, as it was to gratify a few, so it was to corroborat the
abjured Prelates, in their possession of what they had obtained, as their quid
mihi dabit is. And further, they were discharged to exerce any Ministerial
function toward any of the neighbor Parishes, where there were Curats
serving. Now all these Injunctions, being manifestly sinful and unlawful, might
have sufficiently cautioned them against the receiving of a favor, so
strangely clogged with sinful conditions; or at least, prompted them to have
remonstrated freely and faithfully all these evils, and plainly declared their
fixed aversness from ever submitting unto these Injunctions,

12. The last particular, which I shall remark here, is the Result of all this;
or that rather which is the end mainly driven at, howbeit couched in words not
so manifestly expressive of a mainly designed end. The words are in the last
part of the Letter. And seeing we have by these orders, taken away all pretense
for Conventicles, and provided for the want of such as are and will be
peacable; if any shall be found hereafter to preach without authority, or keep
Conventicles, our express pleasure is, that you proceed with all severity
against the Preacher and Hearers, as sedicious person, and contemners of our
Authority. In the by, we may here take notice, that according to the import and
meaning of this letter, no Minister must preach either in or out of
Conventicles, without a borrowed Authority from the Magistrate, otherwise they
are to be looked upon, as sedicious persons, and as contemners of Authority: So
that this license or indulgence was a real clothing of the Indulged and
licensed (in the sense of the Court,) with authority to preach; as if all they
had from Christ, conveyed to them by the ministry of Church officers,
according to this Appointment, had been null, and altogether insignificant.
Which one thing, in my apprehension, had been enough to have scarred any, that
minded to stand unto their Presbyterian, Gospel and anti-Erastian Principles,
from accepting of licenses of this nature, so destructive to the very being of
an Ecclesiastical Ministry, and to its dependence on and emanation from Christ
Jesus, the only Head and King of his Church, and sole Fountain of all Power
and Authority, communicated or communicable to his Servants and Officers, as
such; and so repugnant unto the methods and midses of conveyance, instituted
and ordained by Christ, and practiced in the primitive Church.

But the other thing, here chiefly to be noticed, is, That as we see this
device of the Indulgence was batched and contrived of purpose, to bear down
these Conventicles, and to give a more colorable show of justice in
persecuting the zealous Conventiclers. It is true, the Persons Indulged were
not of those chiefly, who kept Conventicles, especially in the Fields; for if
so, they had not been such as lived peacably and orderly: And so, the
Conventicle-Preachers were not much diminished in their number hereby; yet it
was supposed, that none of those* who lived under the Indulged their
Ministry, would much trouble themselves to go to Conventicles, and field
Meetings; wherein, in a very great part, their supposition failed not. But now;
with what Conscience shall we suppose this Indulgence could be accepted, seeing
thereby, every one might see a further bar and restraint put upon those
worthies, who jeoparded their lives in the high places of the fields in
preaching of the Gospel, and were owned and contenanced of God to admiration,
in the rich, yea wonderfully rich blessing of God upon their Labors, and
Ministry, dispensed by the sole Authority of Jesus Christ: yea and those of
them, who were present before the Council August 3. 1672. might have seen more
cruelty breathed-out by severe orders, against those, who still followed the
Lord, in Houses, in Valleys and in Mountains, though contrary to the Law:
For that same very day a Proclamation was issued out, commanding all Heretors
timeously to declare any, who within their bounds shall take upon them to
preach in such unwarranted Meetings (as they were called) and make their Names
known to Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords, and Bailiffs of the Regalities, or their
Deputes, and all others in public trust, within whose Jurisdiction they may be
apprehended: And Authorizing these Sheriffs etc. to make exact search and
inquiry after them, to apprehend and incarcerat their Persons, and to acquaint
the Council of their Imprisonment, And requiring the Magistrates of Brughs to
detain them prisoners, till further Order; and that under the highest pain:
And also declaring that they would put all Laws, Acts and Proclamations
vigorously in execution, against withdrawers from the public worshipe, in
their own Paroch-Churches? And thus was there a new fiery persecution raised,
both against faithful Pastors and People. May it not be thought, that they had
carried more honestly and ministerial-like, when seeing this End and Design
(which could not be hid,) if they had freely and plainly told the Council,
they could accept of no such Courtesy, unless the like were granted to all the
faithful and honest zealous Ministers in the Land; or at least, had declared
and protested, that what was granted unto them might be no prejudice unto the
rest to preach the Gospel, and to be instant in season and out of season,
wheresoever and whenever occa^ion offered? But now, when nothing of this kind
was done, did not they contribute their concurrence unto the establishing of
this Midse, made use of for keeping-down of those Assemblings of the Lords
people; I mean the Indulgence? And did they not hereby plainly enough condemn
those Meetings, when they concurred so actively and effectually with the
Council, and the Kings design to have the Land freed of them?

I know it will be said, That they could not procure favors to others: it was
enough for them to accept of what was offered to themselves. But yet, though
they were not Master of the Magistrates treasure of Indulgence, they were
Master of their own deed; and I suppose, few of the Godly of the Land would
have blamed them, if they had, out of tenderness to the poor perishing people,
and out of respect to their suffering Brethren, told the Council; that, as
matters then stood, they could not accept of that offer, though it had been
cleaner than it was, unless all their Brethren were also made partakers
thereof; or at least, that the House, and Field Preachers might not be
molested. This would have looked like the deed of men, respecting the public
good, and not seeking themselves, or their own ease and liberty. It would have
smelled of brotherly affection, if they had said; We will rather take the same
lot with our Brethren, than do any thing, how promising so ever it be of ease
and quiet to ourselves, that may render their case more lamentable and
grievous; and may seem in the least, a countenanceing, were it but
interpretatively, of the severities used against them, or do any thing that may
encourage unto more cruelty, and to the prejudging of the far greatest part of
the Land, of the Gospel, now going forth with power.

If any shall say, That possibly they did not approve of that manner of
preaching themselves. I shall Return, that possibly it may be so, as to some
of them, who were therefore looked on as most peacable and orderly; and shall
add, that certainly such must condemn Christ and his Apostles, who were the
greatest of Conventicle-Preachers and almost preached no other way, wanting
always the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate, and yet not waiting upon
their Indulgence.

But as to all these things, deduced from the Kings Letter, it may be, the
Indulged Ministers will think themselves little or nothing concerned; nor
obliged to take any notice of what is there said, in regard that the Kings
Letter was not directed unto them, but unto the Council; and it was with the
Council immediately, and not with the King, that they had to do: And therefore
are concerned only to notice what the Council did, and said unto them, and
required of them, and to notice their own carriage again, or return unto the
Council. For answer I say. It may be so, that they shall thus think, to cheat
the world and themselves, by such metaphysical abstractions, but in our actions
before the Lord, and in matters of this nature, so nearly concerning the Glory
of Christ, as King; and that in a day, when all things call aloud unto a
Faithful, Free and Full Witnessing unto and for the truth, such abstractions
are neither Christian, nor Manly. The Letter was not hid from them, nor the
contents thereof unknown to them; for when they were before the Council, (as we
shall hear afterward) they by their mouth expressed their sense sufficiently
of that Letter, and took the favor of the Indulgence with all humility and
thankfulness, as his Majesty's Royal Favor and Clemency. Our forefathers used
not to carry so, when Court-favours were pressed and urged upon them, but
searched the ground and rise of these, and considered their tendencie and
consequences; knowing, that favors, granted by standing and stated Enemies,
could not be for advantage, but for hurt. The Spirit of zeal and faithfulness
would teach us another more Moral, Plain and Christian Deportment: But though
the Indulged should be such Metaphysical Abstracters, contrare to that Spirit
of wisdom and ingenuity, that should lead all Christians; yet the Council dealt
more plainly and roundly (as we shall see) and told at all occasions, and in
all their Acts and Resolutions, that what they did was in pursuance of his
Majesty's Commands and Royal Pleasure, signified in his Letter. Finally, This
abstraction, though it were yielded to them, will not avail; for though the
Kings Letter had never been seen or heard of there was enough done by the
Council and its Committee, (of which they could not be ignorant) to have
resolved them, if they had not been prepossessed: It was the Committee of the
Council that Elected them, that Judged them qualified for the Exercise of the
Ministry in such and such places: It was the Council that did Appointe,
Authorize and Empower them to Exerce their Ministry: It was the Council, that
did Depose and Repose, Plant and Transplant, give Injunctions, Restrictions,
and Limitations, and punish for Non-Obedience: all which will be further
cleared in what follows.

Having premised these few remarks upon the Kings Letter, as necessary to the
clearing of our way, because that was the ground of all; and having, in the by,
discovered several things, to show the sinfulness of this Indulgence; we shall
now proceed to mentione more particularly what was the progress of this
Business, and how this wicked Design took effect.

The Council appoints a Committee to cognosce upon the matter, signified in
the Kings Letter, and to condescend upon the Ministers, judged fit and
qualified for such a favor, according to the mind of the King, signified and
plainly expressed in his Letter; and upon the Paroches, to which they were to
be ordered to go, and exercise their Ministry: Whereupon the Council enacteth
as follows.

Edinbr. 27. July 1669.
THe Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, in pursuance of his Majesty's Commands,
signified in his Letter of the 7. of Iuny last, do appoint the Persons
following to preach, and Exercise the other functions of the Ministry, at the
vacant Kirks underwritten viz. Mr. Ralph Rodger, late Minister at Glasgow, to
preach at the Kirk of Kilwinning, Mr George Hutcheson, late Minister in
Edinburgh, at the Kirk of Irwing. Mr William Violant, late Minister at Ferrie,
at Cambusnetham: Mr Robbert Miller, late Minister at Ochiltree, at the same
Kirk: Mr John Park, late Minister at Stanrawer, at the same Kirk: Mr William
Maitland, late Minister at Whithorn, at the Kirk of Beeth: Mr John Oliphant,
late Minister at Stanhouse, at the same Kirk, Mr John Bell, late Minister at
Ardrossine, at the same Kirk: Mr John Cant, late Minister at Kel^, at the same
Kirk, and Mr John Mc-Michen, late Minister at Dalry, at the same Kirk.

Here we see Ten were appointed to the places respectively condescended upon by
the Council; and some were appointed to preach at the Churches, out of which
they had been ejected; but this was only an accidental thing, and merely
because these Churches were at that time vacant; as appears by Mr John Park
his disappointment, because the Prelate prevented his coming to the Kirk
designed, which had been formerly his own, by thrusting in a Curat,
notwithstanding of his pleading the benefit of the Act of Indemnity, in his
own defense, against what was objected against him; and thereby acknowledged
himself to have been a Traitor in all his former Actings, and that all the
work of Reformation was but Rebellion: And there is no difference betwixt the
appointment made to them, who returned to the places, where formerly they had
preached, and that appointment, which was made to others to go to other
Churches. The Council does not so much, as verbally signify, the Sentence of
Banishment from their own Parishes by the Act of Council at Glasgow Anno 1662.
to be now annulled, as to them, whereby they had liberty to return to their
own Charges, and follow their work; but simply enjoyneth and appoints them to
go to such a place, and there to exercise their Ministry, as simply and
plainly, as if they had never been there before: So that the appointment is
one and the same, as made by the Council, in pursuance of the Kings Letter: And
all the difference, that was in their several Orders and warrands, which they
received from the Council, was in regard of the Patrons, and of nothing else;
as may be seen by the following tenors of these Acts.

Follows the Tenor of the Acts of Indulgence, given to the several Ministers
to preach, conform to his Maj. Letter of the 7. of June 1669.
THe Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, in pursuance of his Maj. Commands,
signified the 7. of June last, do appoint Mr Ralph Rodger, late Minister at
Glasgow, to preach and exercise the other functions of the Ministry, at the
Kirk of Kilwinning.

And thus did all the rest of this kind run. The other did run thus.

For same ekle as the Kirk of..... is vacant, the Lords of his Majest. Privy
Council, in persuance of his Maj. command, signified by his Letter the 7. of
June Instant; and in regard of the consent of the Patron, do appoint... late
Minister at..... to reach and exercise the other functions of the Ministry at
the said Kirk of.....

Whereby we see, that these Orders make no difference betwixt such, as were
appointed to their own former Churches, and others, who were appointed to other
places, so that as to this, all of them received a new Commission, Warrant and
Power to exerce their Ministry, in the places designed, as if they had never
had any relation unto these places before.

Further, it is observable here. That these Orders and Acts of the Council have
the same Use, Force and Power, that the Bishops Collation has, as to the
exercise of the Ministry; and that the Ordinance of the Presbyteries used to
have in the like cases: And therefore this is all the ministerial potestative
Mission, which they have unto the actual exercise of their Ministry in these
places. Thus we see the Civil Magistrate arrogateth to himself that, which is
purely Ecclesiastic, to wit, the Placeing and Displaceing, the Planting and
Transplanting of Ministers; and giving them a Ministerial Potestative Mission,
which only belongs unto Church-Judicatories. So that these Indulged Persons
may with as much right be called the Councels or Kings Curats, as others are
called the Bishops Curats, whom the Prelates Collate, Place and Displace, Plant
and Transplant, as they please. And we see no regard had unto the
Judicatories of the Church, and to their power, more in the one case, than in
the other; and possibly the Prelates transportings are done with some more
seeming regard unto the power of Church-Judicatories, such as they own under
them: but in this deed of the Council, there is not so much as a show of any
deference unto any Church-Iudicatory whatsomever; nor is there any thing like
it. It is obvious then, how clear and manifest the encroachement on the power
of the Church is, that is here made. And because Magistrates have no such power
from the Lord Jesus, and are not so much as nominally Church Officers (as
Prelates in so far are, at least) nor can act any other way, as Magistrates,
than with a coactive civil power, and not ministerially under Jesus Christ; it
is manifest, that the Indulged, having this Authority unto the present
exercise of their Ministry in such and such places, only from the Civil
Magistrate acting as such, have not Power and Authority from Christ; for Christ
conveyeth no Power and Authority in and by the Civil Magistrate, but by his own
way, by Ministers of his own appointment, who act under him ministerially. And
whether or not, they have not, in submitting to his way of conveyance of Power,
and Authority to exerce their Ministry hic and nunc, upon the matter renounced
the former way, by which Power and Authority was ministerially conveyed unto
them; as we use to speak of such of the Prelates Underlings, who have received
Collation from him, and Power to exerce their Ministry in such and such
places, where they are now placed, though formerly they were ordained and fixed
by lawful Church-Judicatories, I leave to others to judge.

But because it may be said, that in these foregoing Acts, there is no mention
made of the Injunctions spoken of, in his Majest. Letter, to be given to all
the Indulged Ministers; Hear what was concluded and enacted by the Council, on
that same day.

Edinb. the 27. of July 1669.
THe Lords of his Majest. Prive Council, in pursuance of his Maj. Royal
pleasure, signified to them by his Letter of the 7. of June last* do in his
Maj. Name and Authority, command and ordain all such outted Ministers, who
are, or shall be appointed or allowed to exercise the Ministry; That they
constitute and keep Kirk Sessions and Presbyteries and Sy^ods, as was done by
all Ministers, before the Year 1638. And the Council declares, that such of
them, as shall not obey in keeping of Presbyteries, they shall be confined
within the bounds of the Paroches, where they preach, aye and while they give
assurance to keep the Presbyteries. And also the Council does strickly command
and enjoine all, who shall be allowed to preach, as said is, not to admit any
of their Neigbour or other Paroche unto their Communions, or Baptize their
Children, nor marry any of them: without the allowance of the Minister of the
paroch, to which they belong, unless that Paroch be vacant for the time; nor to
countenance the people of the Neighboring or other Paroches, in resorting to
their preachings, and deserting of their own Paroch Churches. And that hereunto
they give due obedience, as they will be answerable on their highest peril. And
ordaines these presents to be intimate to every person, who shall by Authority
foresaid be allowed the exercise of the Ministry.

We see here, that this Act, concerning the Injunctions, was made distinct from
the foregoing Act of Indulgence, and these Injunctions were not expressly
included or mentioned in the Act of Indulgence: And some because of this may
possibly think and say, That the accepting of the Indulgence is the more
justifiable. But I am not of that mind: For this dividing of these two, which
were conjoined in the Kings Letter, was either done by collusion of the
Indulged, or wholly without their knowledge and consent. If the former be
truth, their accepting of the Indulgence is so much the more condemnable, that
it was accompanied with such unfaire dealing, devised of purpose (for no other
end of this deed can be imagined) to blindfold and deceive the simple; whom
possibly such a cheat might hoodwinke. If the latter be said, to wit, that the
Indulged themselves were utterly ignorant hereof though it is certain, as was
said above, they were not ignorant of the Kings Letter: Then I think, the first
intimation made of these Injunctions unto them should have given such a
discovery of unfaire dealing, and of the Councels purpose and intention to
have them in snared, that the credit of their Ministry, the Conscience of
their duty to God, and to the souls of people, the care of shunning all
appearance of evil, the Command of God to give no offense, and other things
considerable of that nature, should have compelled them unto a plain and full
Declaration of their sensibleness of this cheatrie, and of their unwillingness
to accept of favoures, so clogged with snares. And if they had thus carried,
they had approved themselves, (otherwise than they did) to the consciences of
all Men, as lovers of upright dealing, and as such who durst not take on them
the charge of souls, on such unlawful terms, nor run the errands of God, with
such a Pasport.

As to the Conditions themselves, I hope, even the indulged Persons themselves,
are sufficiently convinced of the iniquity of them, when (as I hear) they have
now at length laid aside the careful observance of them: But the careful and
circumspect obedience yielded unto them at the first, is standing as a witness
against them unto this day, and shows that however now they neglect the same,
because possibly perceiving the Council not so earnest in pressing observance,
as at the first; yet so greedy were they of the bait of the Indulgence, that
they cared not to swallow this hook with it, though it was an adding of grief
to such as had sorrow enough already; and had in it a condemning of such, as
scrupled the hearing of the Curats, and submitting to the Ordinances of Christ,
administered by them.

Before we proceed, it will be fit here to take some notice of that Discourse,
which Mr H. had unto the Council, in name of the rest, who were at that time
Indulged with him; for hereby we may be helped to understand, what was their
sense of the Indulgence, who did receive it; The just double of which
Discourse, as it came to mine hand, I shall here set down, as follows.

I am desired, in the name of my Brethren, here present* to acknowledge, in all
humility and thankfulness, his Maj. Favor and Clemency, in granting us the
liberty of the public exercise of our Ministry, after so long a restraint
from the same; and to return here all thanks to your L L. for the care and
pains, you have taken therein: And that your L L. have been pleased to make
us, the unworthiest of many of our Brethren, so early partakers of the same. We
have received our Ministry from Jesus Christ, with full prescriptions from
him, for regulating us therein; and must, in discharge thereof, be accountable
to him And as there can be nothing more desirable, or refreshing to us on
earth, than to have free liberty of the exercise of our Ministry under the
protection of lawful Authority, the excellent Ordinance of God, and to us ever
most dear and precious; so we purpose and resolve to behave our selves, in the
discharge of the Ministry, with that wisdom and prudence, that become faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ; and to demaine ourselves toward lawful Authority,
notwithstanding of our known judgment in Church Affairs, as well becomes loyal
Subjects, and that from a lawful principle of Conscience. And my L L. Our
prayer to God is, that the Lord would bless his Maj. in his Pers^^ and
Government; and your L L. in the public Administration; and (...) the
pursuance of his Maj. mind in his Letter, wherein his singular (...) appears;
that others of our Brethren, in due time, may be (...) of the liberty, which
through his Maj. favor we now enjoy.

I shall not long insist in descanting on this discourse; seeing it is so plain
and manifest an homologating of the Kings Letters; and consequently its
iniquity is so undeniable from what was formerly remarked upon that Letter,
that there is no great necessity of many more words to that end: only it may
suffice to touch on some particulars, in a few words.

1. We see hence, That these Brethren were not ignorant of the Kings Letter and
of the contents thereof, when they do here acknowledge a favor and clemency,
granted unto themselves thereby.

2. Nor were they ignorant of the scope and design of that Letter, seeing they
pray, that the Lord would bless the Council, especially in the pursuance of his
Maj. mind in that Letter.

3. Nor were they Ignorant particularly of the Instructions, contained in that
Letter, and which were to be given unto them: as these words, with full
prescriptions from him (i.e. Christ Jesus) to regulate us therein, do clearly
show; for by these words, as it would appear, they gave their L L. to
understa^d, that it was not needful that these Instructions, or Prescriptions,
contained in the Kings letter, should be laid before them.

4. Nor were they Ignorant, that what the Council did herein, was by virtue of,
and in full compliance with the design of the King's Letter; and consequently,
that the King's Letter, and the contents thereof, were the only spring and
original of all this Indulgence, and of the Councels power in acting in
conformity thereto, and actually granting the Indulgence; for they thank their
L L. for the care and pains, they had taken therein; and they pray, that the
Lord would bless them, especially in the pursuance of his Maj. mind, in his
Letter.

5. It is matter of astonishment to me, considering what is said, how they
could acknowledge this for such an Act of favor and clemency; And how they
could say, that in this Letter, the King's singular Moderation did eminently
appear; when from what is said, and what shall hereafter be more fully held
forth, it is so notoure. That the contents of this Letter did hold forth a
design of overturning all Church Power, as exercised by Church-Persons, and of
clothing the Council with power to impose Prescriptions, to prescribe Rules and
Limitations, and to order and regulate Ministers, in the exercise of their
Ministry, as also with power to Place and Displace, Plant and Transplant
Ministers, without regard had either to the previous Call of the People, or to
the Mission of any Church Judicatory; and of subjecting of the Exercise of the
Ministry wholly unto their will and pleasure; not to mentione the severity
breathed out, in that Letter, against the Assemblings of the Lord's people.

6. It is manifest from what is already marked, that the Indulged Brethren did
own that Letter of the Kings, as the only rise and fountain of the favor,
which they were made partakers of; and therefore did not take the Indulgence
only from the Council, but from the King principally, as the only spring
thereof, conveying the same to them, through the channel and medium of the
Council, who did nothing but by virtue of that Letter, and in obedience
thereunto. Whence we see, that there is no ground to abstract the stream from
the fountain, or to think that these Ministers could imagine, that they were
only to notice what the Council did, and no more; for as they neither did
this, so it were unreasonable to think they could do so.

7. They acknowledged here, that as to the liberty of the public exercise of
their Ministry, they were only beholden unto this Indulgence; for, for this
cause they give thanks: And thus did tacitly grant, that there ought to be no
public Exercise of the Ministry, without liberty granted from the Magistrate;
whereby they not only condemned all these faithful Ministers, who ventured,
without that liberty granted, to preach publicly, where occasion offered in
houses, or in the fields; but they likewise condemned Christ and his Apostles,
the greatest of Conventicle-keepers. So like-wise they do tacitly here grant,
that when the Magistrate prohibiteth the public Exercise of the Ministry, for
longer or shorter time, he must not be disobeyed; whereby the Magistrate has
the power yielded to him of Suspending and Deposeing Ministers, from the
exercise of their function. It is true, Magistrates can hinder the peacable
public exercise, or free public exercise, by outward force and constraint;
but they speak not here of the freedom of peacable public exercise, but
simply of the freedom of public exercise of the Ministry. Our own
Church History tells us; how famous Mr. Bruce was cast in a fever, through
terror of conscience, for promising silence but for ten days, though in hopes
of greater liberty.

8. It is observable here; how thankful they are for partaking alone (as chosen
out from their Brethren) of this favor; whileas this very act of separating
them from their Brethren, should have been a sufficient ground for them to have
rejected the tendered supposed favor, seeing by the accepting thereof, in this
separated way, they suffered themselves to be divided from their Brethren,
contrary to their sworn Covenants: not to speak of the stigma, they received
thereby.

9. They say, That they received their Ministry from Jesus Christ. But why was
it not said, as some of them (if I be not misinformed) desired, only from I.
C? When this was designedly and deliberatly left out, let all the world judge,
whether in this, they carried, as faithful Ministers of the Gospel, or not: for
my part, I cannot but judge, that this was a manifest betraying of the cause,
and a giving up of all to the Magistrate: for hereby they declared, that in
their judgments, either they had their Ministry from others, as well as from
Christ; that is, from the Magistrate, as well as from Christ, and that in a
co-equality and co-ordination; or else that they had it not from Christ
immediately but from men, from the Magistrates, in subordination to Christ. Now
neither of these can assort with truth, and with our Principles: Not the
former; for then Christ should not be sole King, but half, and the Magistrate
should have the half of Christ's Thron, Crown, Scepter and Glory: which were
blasphemy to think. Not the latter; for Magistracy is not subordinat in a
direct line unto Christ, as Mediator; nor has Christ substitute the Magistrate,
as his Vicar; nor has he given to him, as such, a ministerial power under him,
to convey ministerially (in respect of the Subjects) or with a ministerial
Authority, as his Servants, what power of Mission he gives to his Ministers;
Magistrates, as such, act not ministerially, or with a ministerial Authority,
in reference to their Subjects, but with a Coactive, Autocratorical and
Architectonick Power and Authority. If it be said, that they reserved only to
the Magistrate hereby, the power to grant the liberty of the free exercise; but
they meant, that they received the Ministry it self from Jesus Christ alone. I
answer, had they spoken so, we might then have understood them so. But though
they had said so, the cause had been betrayed, for if they have their Ministry
from Christ alone, they must also have the free exercise of the same from him:
If Christ give the Office, he gives the power to exercise the Office: And if
they depend upon others, in reference to the Exercise, they in so far rob
Christ of what is his due, and hold that of men, which they should hold of
Christ alone. No man needs to say here, that by this means we take away the
Power of Church-Judicatories, by whom Ministers receive both the Office, and
the Power of its exercise: For what Church-Judicatories do herein, they do
ministerially under Christ, and Christ by them conveyeth the Office to such and
such a Person, and with the Office a power to exercise it, according to the
Rules of the Gospel; and notwithstanding of this, these Officers may and must
say, that they receive their Ministry only from Christ Jesus. But this cannot
be said, if the Magistrate be substitute in the place of Church Officers,
either in reference to the Office it self, or in reference to its free
Exercise; because no Magistrate, as such, (as is said) acts with a
Ministerial Power, under Christ, in a right line of subordination: And
therefore when they kept out the word, only, they did plainly declare, that
they held the Ministry partly of the Magistrate. If it be said, that they
would hereby only have reserved to the Magistrate, power to grant the Peacable
Public Exercise of the Ministry. I would answer, that though they had meaned
thus, yet they might safely and should have said, that they received their
Ministry only from Christ; for I cannot be said to receive my Ministry from
every one, who can hinder my peacable public exercise thereof, otherwise I
must be said to receive it, in part, from Satan and his Instruments, who can
hinder my peacable public exercise thereof. So that, use what devices men can
to cover this matter, a manifest betraying of the cause will break through, and
a receding from received and sworn Principles will be visible.

10. They said, They had full prescriptions from Jesus Christ, to regulat them
in their Ministry. Who then can justify them, in receiving other
Prescriptions from the Magistrate, and such as Christ never made mention of in
his Law; yea some where of do directly militate against Christ's Prescriptions?
Does not their receiving of these Instructions or Prescriptions, which were
contained in his Maj. Letter, say, that the Prescriptions of Christ were not
full? But again, seeing they had not freedom to say, that they received their
Ministry from Christ alone, how could they say, that they had their full
prescriptions from Christ? unless they meant, that they had them not from
Christ alone. And then they must say, that they had them partly from some
other, and that other m^st either be the Magistrar, or Church Officers: not
Church Officers; for neither had they any call to speak of that here; nor does
Church Officers hold forth any Prescriptions, but Christ's, and that in the name
of Christ. If that other be the Magistrate, than it must either be meant,
Collaterally, or Subordinatly to Christ: not Subordinatly, for they are not
appointed of Christ for that end; nor do they, as Magistrates, act
Ministerially, but Magisterially; not Collaterally, For then they should have
these Prescriptions equally from the Magistrates, as from Christ; and the
Magistrate should be equal and King of the Church with Christ, which is
blasphemy.

More might be here noted, but what is said is enough to our purpose, at
present; and what was said above needs not be here repeated.

But now we must proceed: These forementioned were not all, who were that year
indulged: For the same supposed favor was granted to others shortly
thereafter, as appears by these Extracts out of the Register.

Edinburgh, August 3. 1669.
THE Persons underwritten were licenced to preach at the Kirks after specified
viz. Mr John Scot, late at Oxnam, at the same Kirk, Mr William Hammiltoun late
at Glasfoord, at the Kirk of Evandale: Mr Robert Mitchel, late at Luss, at the
same Kirk: Mr John Gemmil, late at Symming town at the same Kirk: Mr Patrick
Campbel, late at Innerary, at the same Kirk: Mr Robert Duncanson, late at
Lochanside, at Kildochrennan: Mr Andrew Cameron, late at Kilsinnan, now at
Lochead in Kintyre.

Edinburgh, 2. September. 1669.
For as much as the Kirk of Pencaitland is now vacant, by decease of Mr
Alexander Vernor, last Minister thereat; and there being some questions and
legal pursuits before the Judge ordinate, concerning the right of Patronage of
this Kirk: Until the decideing whereof the Kirk will be vacant, if remeed be
not provided: Therefore the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, in pursuance of
his Maj. pleasure, expressed in his Letter of the 7. of June last, have thought
fit at this time and for this Vacancie allennerly, To appoint Mr Robert
Douglas, late Minister at Edinburgh, to preach and exercise the function of the
Ministry, at the said Kirk of Pencait land. And it is hereby declared, that
their presents shall be without prejudice of the right of Patronage, according
as the same shall be found and declared by the Judge ordinary.

Edinburgh, September. 2. 1669.
The Persons underwritten were licensed to preach at the Kirks after specified
viz. Mr. Matthew Ramsey, late at Kilpatrick, to preach at Paisley: Mr Alexander
Hammiltoun, late Min. at Dalmenie, at the same Kirk: Mr Andrew Dalrymple, late
Min. at Affleck, at Dalganie: Mr James Fletcher, late Min. at Neuthcome, at the
same Kirk: Mr Andrew Me-Claine, late Min. at Craigneis, at Kilchattan: Mr
Donald Morison, late at Kilmaglais, at Ardnamurchant.

Edinburgh, September. last 1669.
The Persons following were ordained to preach at the Kirks after specified;
viz. Mr John Stirling, at Hounam: Mr Robert Mowat at Harriot: Mr James
Hammiltoun at Egleshame: Mr Robert Hunter at Downing: Mr John Forrester at
Tilliallan with Mr Andrew Reid. infirm.

Edinburgh, December. 9. 1669.
Mr Alexander Blair at Galstown: Mr John Primrose at Queensferrie: Mr David
Brown at Craigie: Mr John Craufurd at Lamingtoun with Mr John Hammiltoun aged
and infirm: Mr James Vetch at Machline.

Edinburgh, December. 16. 1669.
Mr John Bairdie at Paisley with Mr Matthew Ramsey infirm.

Thus we see there were this Year 1669. Five and Thirty in all licensed and
indulged, and ordained to preach, in the several places specified, upon the
Councels Order, in pursuance of the Kings Royal pleasure. And in the following
year, we will find the same Order given unto and obeyed by others.

But ere we proceed, it will not be amiss, that we take notice of the first
Act of Parliament, holden this year November. 16. 1669. and consequently, before
the last Six were licensed. The Act is an Act asserting his Majesty's Supremacy
over all Persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical. Whereby what was done by
the Council, in pursuance of his Majesty's Pleasure, signified by his Letter,
in the matter of granting these Indulgences, is upon the matter confirmed and
ratified by Parliament, when His Maj. Supremacy is so ampliated and explained,
as may comprehend within its verge all that Ecclesiastic Power, that was
exerced, or ordained to be exerced, in the granting of the Indulgence, with its
Antecedents, Concomitants and Consequences: And a sure way is laid for carrying
on the same design of the Indulgence, in all time coming.

The Act is as follows. Nov. 16. 1669.
THE Estates of Parliament having seriously considered, how necessare it is,
for the Good and Peace of the Church and State, That his Maj. Power and
Authority, in Relation to Matters and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
asserted by an Act of Parliament: Have therefore thought fit it be Enacted,
Asserted and Declared: Like as his Maj. with Advice and Consent of his Estates
of Parliament, does hereby Enact, Assert and Declare, That his Maj. has the
Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical, within this His Kingdom: And that by virtue thereof, the
Ordering and Disposal of the external Government and Policy of the Church, does
properly belong to His Maj. and His Successors, as an inherent right to the
Crown. And that His Maj. and His Successors may Settle, Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same; and concerning
all Ecclesiastical meetings, and matters to be proposed and determined therein,
as they in their Royal Wisdom shall think fit: which Acts, Orders and
Constitutions, being Recorded in the Books of Council and duly published, are
to be observed and obeyed by all his Maj. Subjects; any Law, Act or Custom to
the contrary notwithstanding. Like as His Maj. with Advice and Consent foresaid
does Rescind and Annul Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof, and all Customs and
Constitutions Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary to, or inconsistent
with His Majesty's Supremacy, as it is hereby asserted. And declares the same
Void and Null, in all time coming.

Concerning the Irreligiousness, Antichristianisme and Exorbitancie of this
Explicatory, and (as to some things) Ampliatory Act and Assertion of the Kings
Supremacy in Church Affairs, much, yea very much might be said; but our present
business calls us to speak of it, only in reference to the Indulgence; that
we may see with what friendly aspect this Supremacy looks toward the
Indulgence, and with what Veneration the Indulgence respects this Supremacy;
to the end it may appear, how the Indulgence has contributed to the
establishment of this Supra-Papal Supremacy; and how the Accepters thereof
stand chargeable with a Virtual and Material Approbation of, and Consent to the
dreadful Usurpation, committed by this Supremacy.

In order to which, we would know, that this Act of Supremacy, made Anno 1669.
was not made, upon the account, that the Supremacy in Church Affairs had never
been before screwed up to a sufficient height, in their apprehensions; for upon
the matter, little that is material is here asserted to belong unto this
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which has not been before partly in more general,
partly in more special and particular terms, plainly enough ascribed unto this
Majesty, or presumed as belonging to his Majest. In the 11. Act. Parl. 1. Anno
1661. where the Oath is framed, he is to be acknowledged, Only supreme
Governor over all persons, and in all causes; and that his Power and
Jurisdiction must not be declined: So that under all Persons, and all Causes,
Church Officers, in their most proper, and intrinsecal ecclesiastic Affairs
and Administrations, are comprehended; and if his Majest. shall take upon him
to judge Doctrine, matters of Worship, and what is most essentially
Ecclesiastic, he must not be declined, as an incompetent Judge. We find also
Act. 4. Sess. 2. Parl. 1. Anno 1662. (which is again renewed Act. 1. Anno
1663.) that his Majesty, with advice and consent of his Estates, appoints
Church Censures to be infflicted for Church-transgression, as plainly and
formally, as ever a General Assembly, or Synod did, in these words; That
whatsoever Minister shall without a lawful excuse, to be admitted by his
Ordinary, absent himself from the visitation of the Diocese -- or who shall
not, according to his duty, concur therein; or who shall not give their
assistance, in all the Acts of Church Discipline, as they shall be required
thereto by the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, every such Minister (N.
B.) so offending shall, for the first fault, be suspe^ded from his Office and
Benefice, until the next Diocesian meeting; and if he amend not, shall be
deprived. But, which is more remarkable, in the first Act of that Second
Session. Anno 1662. for the Restitu^ion and Re-establishment of Prelates, we
have several things, tending to clear how high the Supremacy was then
exalted: The very Act begins thus, for as much as the ordering and disposal
of the external Government and Policy of the Church does properly belong unto
his Majesty, as an inherent right of the Crown, by virtue of his Royal
Prerogative and Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. This is the same, that is
by way of statute asserted in the late Act 1669. In the same Act it is further
said, That whatever (this, sure, is large and very comprehensive) shall be
determined by his Maj. with the advice of the Archbishops and Bishops, and such
of the Clergy, as shall be nominated by his Maj. in the external Government and
Policy of the Church (the same consisting with the standing Laws of the
Kingdom) shall be valide and effectual. And which is more, in the same Act, all
preceding Acts of Parl: are rescinded, by which the sole and only Power and
Jurisdiction within the Church, does stand in the Church, and in the General,
Provincial and Presbyterial Assemblies and Kirk-Sessions. And all Acts of
Parliament or Council, which may be interpreted to have given any Church Power,
Jurisdiction or Government to the Office-bearers of the Church, their
respective Meetings, other than that which acknowledges a dependence upon, and
subordination to the Sovereign ^^wer of the King, as Supreme, So that we see,
by virtue of this Act, all Church Power and Jurisdiction whatsomever, is made
to be derived from, to have a dependence upon, and to be in subordination to
the Sovereign power of the King, as Supreme; and not to stand in the Church:
Whereby the King is made only the Foun^aine of Church Power, and that exclusive
(as it would seem) even of Christ; Of whom there is not the least mention made;
and for whom is not made the least reserve imaginable. So in the 4. Act. of the
third Session of Parl. Anno 1663. For the Establishment and Constitution of a
National Synod. We find it said, that the ordering and disposal of the
external Government of the Church, and the nomination of the Persons, by whose
Advice, Matters relating to the same are to be settled, does belong to his Maj.
as an inherent right of the Crown, by virtue of his prerogative R^yal and
Supreme Authority in causes Ecclesiastical. And upon this ground is founded his
power to appoint a National Synod; to appoint the only consti^uent Members
thereof, as is there specified; to call, continue and dissolve the same, when
he will; to limit all their Debates, Consultations and Determinations to such
matters and causes, as he thinks fit; and several other things there to be
seen.

Seeing by these Particulars, it is manifest and undeniable, that this
Ecclesiastic Supremacy was elevated presumptively before the Year 1669. to as
high a degree, as could be imagined; It may be enquired, why then was this Act
made Anno 1669? I answer. This act (so I conceive) was not framed so much to
make any addition to that Church power, which they thought did Iure Coronae
belong orginally and fundamentally unto the King; for that was already put
almost beyond the reach of any additional supply, though not in one formal and
expressive Statutory Act: As to form the same, when screwed up to the highest,
into a plain and positive formal Statute, having the force of a Law, for all
uses and ends; and particularly to salve, in point of Law, the Council in what
they did, in and about the Indulgence, according to the desire and command of
the King in his Letter, in rega^rd that the granting of this Indulgence, did
manifestly repugne to and counteract several anteriour Acts of Parliament, and
was a manifest breach and violation of Laws, standing in full force, and
unrepealed; which neither their place, nor his Maj. could in Law warrant them
to do, by his Letter, That the granting of the Indulgence did thus in plain
terms repugne to standing Laws, I thus make good. In the Act of Restitution
of Prelates Anno 1662. Prelates are restored unto the exercise of their
Episcopal function, Presidence in the Church, power of Ordination, Inflicting
of Censures, and all other Acts of Church Discipline. And as their Episcopal
power is there asserted to be derived from his Maj. so withal it is expressly
said, that the Church Power and jurisdiction is to be Regulated and Authorized,
in the Exercise thereof by the Archbishops and Bishops; who are to put order to
all Ecclesiastical matters and causes, and to be accountable to his Maj. for
their administrations. Whence it is manifest, that the King alone, or with his
Privy Council, cannot put order to Ecclesiastical matters and causes, or
exerce Church Power and Jurisdiction, without a violation of this Law, and
manifest controlling of it. And further in the 4. Act of that same Second
Session of Parliament it is expressly ordained, that none be hereafter permitted
to preach in public or in families within any diocese; -- without the license
of the Ordinary of the Diocese. So that this license and permission, granted to
the Indulged by the Council, to preach and exercise the other parts of their
function, being without the license of the Bishops, is manifestly contrary and
repugnant to this Law. Moreover Act 1. in the third Session Anno 1663. we have
these words. And the Kings Maj. having resolved to conserve and maintain the
Church, in the present State and Government hereof by Archbishops and Bishops*
and others bearing Office therein; and not to endure, nor give way or connivace
to any variation therein, in the least; does therefore, with advice and consent
of his Estates, conveened in this third Session of his Parliament, Ratify and
Approve the before mentioned Acts, and all other Acts and Laws, made in the two
former Sessions of Parliament, in order to the settling of Episcopal Dignity,
Jurisdiction and Authority within the Kingdom, and ordains them to stand in
full force, as public Laws of the Kingdom, and to be put to further
execution, in all points, conform to the tenor thereof. Here is a further
Ratification and Confirmation of the Laws mentioned, and the Council hereby
yet more firmly bound-up from emitting any Acts or Edicts, contradictory to,
and tending to weaken and invalidat the public standing Laws of the Kingdom.
And, which is yet more considerable, in the following words of this same Act,
the effectual putting of these Laws in execution is specially, and in
terminis, recommended by King and Parliament, unto the Privy Council, after
this manner. And in pursuance of his Maj. Royal resolution herein, his Maj.
with advice foresaid, does recommend to the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council,
to take speedy and Effectual Course, that these Acts receive ready and due
Obedience from all his Maj. Subjects; and for that end that they call before
them all such Ministers, who having entered in or since the Year 1649. and have
not as yet obtained Presentations and Collations as aforesaid, yet darred to
preach in contempt of the Law; and to punish them as seditious persons, and
contemners of the Royal Authority. As also that they be careful, that such
Ministers, who keep not the Diocesian meetings* and concur not with the
Bishops, in the Acts of Church Discipline, being for the same suspended or
deprived, as said is, be accordingly after deprivation, removed from their
Benefices, Gleebs and Manses. And if any of them shall notwithstanding offer to
retain the Possession of their Benefices or Manses, that they take present
Course to see them dispossessed. And if they shall thereafter presume to exercise
their Ministry, that they be punished, as seditious Persons, and such as
contemn the Authority of Church and State. Now, notwithstanding of this
express reference and severe recommendation, we know, that in the matter of the
Indulgence, they were so far from punishing such, as had not obtained
Presentations and Collations, and yet had continued to preach, and exercise
their Ministry; that in perfect contradiction to this Injunction of King and
Parliament, and other forementioned Acts, they licensed, warranded and
empowered some such, as by Act of Parliament were to be punished as seditious
Persons, and contemners of Authority of Church and State, to preach publicly,
and to exercise all other parts of their Ministry, and that upon the sole
warrant of the Kings Letter, which cannot in Law warrant and empower them to
contraveen express Laws, and Acts of Parliament; and not only to disobey the
Injunctions of Parliament, but in plain terms to counteract and counterwork
the Established and Ratified Laws; and so to render them null and of no effect.

Whence we see, that there was a necessity for the Parliament An. 1669. to do
something, that might secure the Lives and Honors of the members of Council,
in point of law, in granting of that Indulgence, which was so expressly against
law, and which the two Arch-Prelates, members of Council, would never give
their assent unto, as knowing how it entrenched upon the power granted to them,
and the other Prelates, confirmed by Law; and so was a manifest rescinding of
these Acts and Laws. And though this might have been done by a plain and
simple Act, approving and ratifying what the Council had done, in compliance
with his Maj Royal Pleasure, and authorizing them in time coming, to pursue the
ends of the same Letter further, with a non obstante of all Acts, formerly made
in favoures of Prelates and Prelacie: Yet it is probable, they made choice of
this way of explaining, by a formal and full Statute and Act of Parliament, the
Supremacy, in these plain, full and ample terms, wherein we now have it;
that thereby they might not only secure the Council, but also make the Kings
sole Letter to the Council, in all time coming, a valid ground in Law,
whereupon the Council might proceed, and enact and execute, what the King
pleased in matters Ecclesiastic, how intrinsecally and purely such soever;
without so much, as owning the corrupt Ecclesiastic medium or channel of
Prelacy: And withal it might have been thought, that such an act, so necessary
for the legal preservation of the Indulgers, and consequently of the Indulged,
in the enjoyment of the Indulgence, would go sweetly down with all the
Indulged, and such as gaped for the like favor, howbeit so framed, as that it
was not very pleasant, at the first tasting: For it cannot be rationally
supposed, that such, as are pleased with their warm dwellings, will cast out
with the walls and roof of the dwelling, without which they would enjoy no
more warmness than if they were lodging beside the heth in the wilderness: And
who could think, that any indulged man could be dissatisfied with that, which
was all and only their legal security, and without which, they were liable to
be punished as seditious persons, and as contemners of Authority, even for
preaching by virtue of the Indulgence, according to Laws standing in force
unrepealed?

Whence also we see, what a fair way was made unto this Act of Supremacy, by
the Indulgence; and how the Indulgence is so far beholden unto this Act, that
it can not stand without it, nor the persons Indulged be preserved from the
lash of the Law, notwithstanding of all that was done by the Council: And thus
these two are as twines, which must die and live together; for take away the
Act of Supremacy, and the Indulgence is but a dead illegal thing. We may also
see; what to judge of this illegal and illegitimat birth, that cannot breathe
or live, where Law reigns, without the swedling clothes of such a Supremacy,
nor can stand but as upheld by such an Antichristian Pillar.

We may also see here, that the very embraceing of the Indulgence was, upon the
matter, a recognition of this Power in the King, to do in and by his Privy
Council, in Church Matters, what he pleased, even though contrary to antecedent
Acts of Parliament; and that such as are so satisfied with the effect, to wit,
the Indulgence, cannot but comply with the cause, to wit, the Supremacy, as
asserted in this Act; as the man that has a complacencie in drinking of the
streams, cannot be displeased with, but delight in the fountain, from whence
they proceed. If any of these Brethren had received the same Indulgence from
the Prelates immediately, had they not thereby complied with the Prelates,
homologated their Power, and plainly assented and submitted thereunto? Yea,
had they not in this assented also mediatly unto the Supremacy, seeing all the
Prelates Power did flow from the Supremacy? And shall they not now much more be
looked on, as homologating the Supremacy, and as assenting thereto, when they
receive the Indulgence, that immediately flows therefrom, and must be
vindicated and defended solely by the asserting thereof? How is it imaginable
that I can receive a favor, and not homologate, assent to and acquiesce in
that Power, that gave it, when the asserting of that Power, is the only mean to
keep me in legal possession of the favor received;

But now, for further confirmation of what is said, let us take a view of the
Act of Supremacy it self, and there see a ground laid of sufficient warra^dice
for the Council, in what they did, in granting the Indulgence; and also be able
to read the Indulgence it self out of the Supremacy, as here asserted; and for
this end, it will be sufficient for us, to take notice only of the last words
thereof, where it is said. And that his Maj. and his Successors may Settle,
Enact and Emit such Constitutions Acts and Orders, concerning the
administration of the external Government of the Church, and the Persons
employed in the same, and concerning all Ecclesiastical Meetings and Matters, to
be proposed and determined therein, as they in their Royal wisdom shall think
fit: which Acts* Orders and Constitutions, being recorded in the books of
Council, and duly published, are to be observed and obeyed by all his Maj.
Subjects. Before this time, as we heard, all Acts, Orders and Constitutions,
concerning Church Affairs, Church-meetings; and Church-administrations; were to
be put in execution by the Prelates, empowered by the Supremacy unto this end:
And what was lately done in the matter of the Indulgence, was done by the
Council, and not by the Prelates, and therefore contrary to law: whereupon,
that this deed may be valide in law, it is here asserted, that the King, by
virtue of his Supremacy, may Emit what Acts, Orders and Constitutions, he, in
his royal wisdom, thinks fit, and after what manner he pleases; and so, if
he will, may order and dispose of all Church-administrations, Ecclesiastic
Persons, Church-meetings and matters, by himself immediately, or by his Council;
yea or by his lackeys; so that if the Laws, Constitutions, Acts and Orders,
concerning these Matters, Meetings, Persons and Administrations, be signified
to the Council, by Letter, or any other way, and be recorded in their books,
and duly published, (which they must do whenever required) they must be
obeyed and observed by all Subjects: Now this power being asserted to belong to
his Maj. as an inherent right of the crown, no deed of gift* formerly granted
to the Prelates, could weaken or diminish it; and therefore nothing done of late
by the Council, in granting of the Indulgence, according to his Maj. will and
pleasure, signified by his Letter Iuny 7. 1669. can prove prejudicial unto the
said PrivieCouncel, they doing nothing but what was consonant unto the Kings
Supremacy, here more clearly asserted, and not granted of new, save in the
form of a formal Statute and law asserting the same. Yet notwithstanding, for
the more security, (for abundance of Law breaks no Law) it is added in the Act.
(as we see) Any Law, Act or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And
moreover they rescind and annul all Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof, and all
customs and constitutions, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary to and
inconsistent with his Maj. Supremacy, as it is hereby asserted; and declare
the same void and null in all time coming: According to the usual course and
manner.

As to the other particular, we may see the native feature and lineaments of
the Indulgence, in the face of the Supremacy, so manifestly, that none who see
the one needs question the intimate Relation, that is betwixt them. We see it
now asserted as belonging to his Maj. Supremacy, in Church Affairs, tha^ he may
Settle, Enact and Emit what Acts, Constitutions and Orders, he thinks good,
whether concerning Church-Administrations, or Church-meetings, or
Church Matters, or Church Officers; and that there needs no more to make
these Laws, to be obeyed and observed by all the Subjects, but the recording
of them in the books of the Council, and duly publishing of them. Now, as we
saw above, in the Kings Letter, concerning this Indulgence, there
areConstitutions, Acts and Orders emitted and settled concerning
Church-administrations, showing what shall not be preached under the pain
ofCensure: whoseChildren may be baptized, whose not: who may be admitted to
hear the word, and who not. Concerning Church-persons; who shall be accounted
qualified for preaching, who not: who shall be accounted fit for the charge of
such a flock, and who for the charge of another: Such and such Ministers are
ordained to go to such or such Congregations, not by virtue of a Call of the
people, but merely by virtue of the Councels designation. Concerning
Church-meetings, They are appointed to keep Diocesian Visitations, or Synods,
and to resort to Prelates Exercises, though the Prelates look not on them as
suitable company. So it is ordained, whom they are to marry and whom not. In a
word, let any but compare the Kings Letter with this part of the Act of
Supremacy, and he shall be forced to say, that the Letter is nothing but the
Supremacy exemplified and put in practice.

Hence it is manifest, that no man can submit to, and accept of the Indulgence,
but he must eo ipso submit to and accept of such Constitutions, Acts and
Orders, as did constitute, qualify, and limite the same; for the Effect
includes the Causes Constituent and Discriminating. And again, no man can
submit to and accept of Constitutions, Acts and Orders, flowing from a power,
but they must eo ipso recognosce that Power to be properly residing in the
person, giving forth these Acts and Orders; or grant, that he is vested with
that power: and seeing it is plain from the Act of Supremacy it self, that
such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, so given in Church Matters, and about
Church Persons, as these were, whereby the Indulgence was midwif'd into the
world, do flow from the Supremacy; it is also manifest, that no man can accept
of the Indulgence, as so and so conveyed, as it was, but they must withal
virtually, implicitly, and interpretativly at least though yet really and
consequentially) acquiesce, and submit unto, and acknowledge the Supremacy, in
so far, as concerns the matter of the Indulgence, and the Acts, Orders a^^
Constitutions, ^^erein comprehended.

I am, in all this, far from thinking, that these Indulged brethren did
formally and expressly Own, Acknowledge, Acquiesce in or Approve of the
Ecclesiastic Supremacy, in and by their accepting the Indulgence; or that
they had any such Intention therein, as to make way for, approve of, or to
confirm the said Supremacy. No: I am only showing what is the native
consequence thereof, and inevitably follows thereupon; and what
consequentially they may and ought to charge themselves with, and others, not
without ground, account them interpretatively guilty of; and what a Conscience,
when rightly awakened and illuminated, will challenge them for; and the
Posterity will think they have failed in, and many now a days are stumbled
by, or induced to stumble upon the occasion of: not to mention the design of
the Contrivers, which yet, when known and discovered, may occasion yea and
cause a sad and wakening reflection; Nor yet to mention, what afterward, upon
several occasions was discovered, of which more afterward, and which might
have been sufficient to have made some bethink themselves, and search more
narrowly what they had done, and give glory to God by turning out of such
dangerous, and so many ways scandalous and offensive paths.

Having thus briefly spoken of the Supremacy, as relating to and friendly
corrosponding with the Indulgence, its native daughter, we now proceed in our
History, and shall show, who were Indulged even after this Act of Supremacy
was thus made and published: And of these we have found already five or six
licensed, that same year, within a month or thereby after the Parliament,
(which gave us such a full, and large explication of the Supremacy,) sat down.
But we proceed to the following years.

Edinbr. 27. 1670.
Mr Alexander Wedderburn at Kilmarnock.
Edinb. March. 3. 1670.
Mr John Lauder at Dalzel: Mr George Ramsey at Kilmars: Mr John Spadie at
Dreghorne. Mr Thomas Black at Newtyle: Mr Andrew Mc claine at Killaro and
Kilquhanan: Mr Andrew Duncanson at Kilchattan in Lorn.
Thus we have this year seven more; in all forty three. Toward the beginning
of the next year, there is a Proclamation of the Privy Council, re-inforcing
the punctual observation of the forementioned Injunctions, delivered unto the
Indulged; after this form.

Edinb. Ian. 26. 1671.
For as much as the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, in pursuance of his Maj.
Royal pleasure, signified to them by his Letter the 7. of Iun. 1669. did by
their Act of the 27. of July 1669. Ordain all such outted Ministers, as should
be allowed to exercise the Ministry, to keep Kirk Sessions, and keep
Presbyteries and Synods, as was done by all Ministers, before the Year 1638.
And did declare, that such of them, as should be allowed to Exercise the
Ministry, and should not obey in keeping of Presbyteries, should be confined
within the bounds of the Paroches, where they preach, aye and while they give
assurance to keep Presbyteries. And the said Lords being informed, that
hitherto Obedience has not been given to the foresaid Act of Council: Do
therefore command and require all and every one of these Ministers, allowed to
preach by order of Council, to keep Presbyteries in time coming. And do hereby
confine all these, who shall not give Obedience in keeping Presbyteries, within
the bounds of the respective Paroches, where they preach. And ordains Extracts
of this Act to be sent to every one of the said Ministers, that none of them
pretend ignorance.

How or what way this Injunction was observed, I am not much concerned to
enquire. Only the Reader would know, that the Presbyteries now, and before the
year 1638. were not the same; so that however honest Ministers did observe
those; yet no honest man could, with a good Conscience, keep these meetings
now; because before the year 1638. Presbyteries had never been discharged, or
removed: Howbeit many complied with the Prelates then, and frequented these
meetings, yet good men kept their Possessions; only the Synods then were so
far changed into Episcopal Visitations, that several honest men had not peace
and freedom in going to them. But in our Days, Presbyterian Government was
plucked up by the roots, and wholly cast away: And there was no Presbytery or
Synod, but what was purely Episcopal, depending upon him, and recognosceing his
Power. Whence we see, that by this Injunction, a compliance with Prelacy was
designed. And I suppose, such of those Indulged Ministers, as had not freedom
in Conscience to yield obedience unto this command, thought that by compliance
herewith they should have Homologated the Prelates Power, and abjured Prelacy,
notwithstanding that they were obliged by the Command of God, to hold such
meetings for the exercise of Discipline, according to the Pattern of the New
Testament, if such circumstances had not made it sinful in them: Why then might
they not also have judged it unlawful for them, to have accepted of the
Indulgence, as homologating the Magistrat's usurped Supremacy, and abjured
Erastianisme, notwithstanding of their Obligation to preach the Gospel? Why did
not the Obligation to observe Presbyterial Assemblies, for the Exercise of
Discipline, make them willing to step over the inconvenience of Prelacie,
without acknowledging of which they could not keep these meetings hic and nune;
as they supposed their obligation to preach the Gospel did warrant them to step
over the inconveniencie of Erastianisme, without acknowledging of which they
could as little preach hic and nune; Especially seeing if they observed not
these Presbyteries and Synods, they could observe none: But though they
preached not in these places designed by the Indulgers, they could have
preached elsewhere, with as much Glory to Christ, Good to souls, Edification of
the whole Body, and Peace in their own minds, if not more. I see not, how
they, who scrupled not at preaching, though, as circumstantiated, attended with
abjured Erastianisme, could rationally scruple the Exercise of Presbyterian
Discipline, though, as circumstantiated, attended with abjured Prelacy. Yea, I
think there was less ground for scrupling this of Discipline, than for
scrupling that of Preaching; because, as I said, they could have preached
without the Erastian Indulgence, and that to much more advantage, as experience
has proved in others; But they could not have exerced Discipline, such I mean
as used to be exerced in Presbyteries and Synods, without the Prelates Courts.

We have now seen the Progress of this device of the Indulgence, contrived
mainely to suppress and keep down the Meetings of the Lords people in houses,
and in the fields, which were the eyesore of the Rulers, and which they were
seeking to destroy by all means: As appears by that grievous Act of Parlia.
made against them August 13. 1670. with the Act against Baptismes August 17.
1670. and that made August 20. 1670. against withdrawing from public meetings;
all tending to this End. But notwithstanding of all th^se Midianit ish wiles,
and cruel Acts, such was the presence of the Lord in the Assemblings of his
people, and so powerful was the Operation of his Spirit with the labors of a
few, who laid out themselves to hold up the Standart of Christ, though contrary
to the Law of men; that the number of converts increased and multiplied daily,
to the praise of the glory of Gods free grace, and to the great Encouragement
of the few hands, that wrestled through all humane discouragment. Therefore our
Rulers cast about again, and fall upon another device, which they supposed
would prove effectual for destroying the work of the Lord; which was this.
Besides the Ministers Indulged, as said is, there was a great company of
Non-conforme Ministers, not yet Indulged, who they supposed either did, or
might thereafter hold Conventicles (as they are called;) and therefore to
remeed or prevent this in time coming, they appoint and ordain them to such
and such places, where Indulged Ministers were settled, there to be confined,
granting them liberty to preach, and exercise their Ministry there, according
as the Indulged men would allow and employ them; or of new Indulging them by
pairs, and appointing to places; thinking by this means to incapacitate so
many Ministers from holding of Conventicles or private meetings there, or else
where: All which will be clear by the Acts of Council, which follow.

Halyrudhouse Septembr. 3. 1672.
THe Lord Commissioner his grace and the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council,
considering the Disordres, which have lately been by the frequent and numerous
Conventicles; and being willing to remeed so great an evil, in the gentlest
manner that could be thought on; and his Maj. Commissioner being sufficiently
instructed herein. They do order and appoint the Ministers after-named, outted
since the year 1661. to Repair to the Paroches following, and to remain
therein confined, permitting and allowing them to preach and exercise the other
parts of their Ministerial function, in the Paroches, to which they are, or
shall be confined by this present Act, and Commission after specified, viz.

In the Dioces of Glasgow.
In Egelsham Paroch, with Mr James Hammilton, Mr Donald Cargil. Paislay, with
Mr John Bairdy, Mrs William Eccles and Anthony Shaw. Neilstoun. Mrs Andrew
Miller and James Wallace. Kilmakolme, Mrs Patrick Symson, and William Thomson.
Kilbarchan, Mrs John Stirling and James Walkinshaw. Killiallan, Mrs James
Hutcheson and Alexander Iamison.
Irwing.
Newmiles, Mrs John Burnet and Georg Campbel. Phinick, Mrs Thomas Wyllie and
William Sheil. Stewartoun, Mrs William Castellaw, Andrew Hutcheson and Andrew
Mortoun. Dunlop, Mrs Gabriel Cuninghame and William Meine. Larges, Mrs John
Wallace and Alexander Gordoun. Kilbride, Mrs Robert Boid and Gilbert
Hammiltoun. Comray, Mrs Archbald Porteus and John Rae. Kilminning, with Mr
Ralph Rodger, Mr Robert Fleming. Irwine, with Mr Georg Hutcheson, Mr John Law.
Kilmarnock, with Mr. Alexa. Wederburn, Mrs James Rowat and William Hay.
Kilmares, with Mr Georg Ramsey, Mr John Park. Dreghorn, with Mr John Spading,
Mr James Donaldson. Beith, with Mr William Maitland, Mr William Creightoun.
Kilbirnie, with Mr William Datlidafe, Mr Patrick Anderson. Ardrossine, with Mr
John Bell, Mr James Bell.
Air.
Cultoun, Mr William Fullertoun. Riccartoun, Mrs Hugh Campbel and Hugh
Crawfurd. Dundonald, Mrs John Osburne and John Hutcheson. Machline, with Mr
James Veitch, Mr Robert Archbald. Ochiltrie, with Mr Robert Miller, Mr Patrick
Peacock. Gastoun, with Mr Alexander Blair, Mr Adam Alison. Cragie with Mr David
Broun, Mr Robert Maxwel. Dalganie, with Mr Andrew Dalrumple, Mr John Campbel.
Symentoun, with Mr John Gemil Mr Francisce Irwing.
Kircudbreight.
Carsfairne, John Semple, and Mr William Erskine. Kelles with Mr Cant, Mr Georg
Wauch. Dalry, with Mr John Mc Michen, Mr Thomas Thomsoun. Balmaclellan, Mrs
James Lawrie and Thomas Vernor, in place of John Ros, when he shall be
transported to Staniekirk.
Hammiltoun.
Avendale, Mrs James Hammiltoun and Robert Young. Glasford, Mrs William
Hammiltoun and James Nasmith. Shots, Mrs James Curry and Alexander Bartoun.
Dalserfe, Mrs Thomas Kirkaldy and John Carmichel. Stanihouse, with Mr John
Oliphant, Mr Matthew Me Kell. Cambushnethen, with Mr William Violand, Mr Robert
Lam. Dalzel, with Mr John Lauder, Mr Thomas Melvil.
Lanerk.
Carlouk, Mrs Alexander Livingstoun, and Peter Kid, now at Carlouk. Carmichel,
Mrs John Hammiltoun, and William Sommervail. Culter, Mrs Anthony Murray and
Robert Lokhart. Lamingtoun, with Mr John Crawfurd, Mr William Baillie.
Lesma^ago, with M^ Thom. Lawrie a regular incumbant, Mr James Brotherstons
Carstairs, Mrs James Kirktoun and John Greg.
Linlithgow.
Westealder, Mrs John Knox and William Weir. Burrowstouness, Mrs Robert Hunter
and John Ingles.
Lothian, etc.
Lintoun, with ^r Robert Elliot, Mr Robert Elliot, his Son. Oxnam, with Mr John
Scot, Mr Hugh Scot. Hownam, with Mr John Stirling, Mr..... Ker.
Argyle.
Killerne, Mrs John Cunninson, and Alexander Mc Claine. Kilfannan, Mr John
Cameron. Campbeltoun, Mrs Duncan Campbel and Edward Keith. Kilchattain in Lorn,
Mrs John Duncanson and Alexander Mc Claine. Knapdail with Mr Dougal Campbel a
Regular Incumbent, Mr Duncan Campbel. South Kyntire, Mr David Sympson.
And yet notwithstanding of the said confinement, the Lord Commissioner his
grace, and Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, give full power, warrant and
commission to the Lord Chancellovr, the Lord Duke of Hammiltoun, the Earls of
Argyle, Tweddale and Dundonald, The Lords President of the Session, Register,
Treasurer Depute, and Justice-Clerk, with the Bishop of the Diocese, wherein
the said Ministers are confined, or any four of them, within the space of Six
Months after the date hereof, to alter and change any of the Persons foresaids
from any of the said Paroches, to another of those Paroches; or to allow and
confine other Persons in their place; They always pitching in the first place
upon some outted Ministers from that Diocese, wherein the Paroches, to which
they are to be confined, dolye: And allowing none to preach, who were outted
before the year 1662. or being outted since the year 1661. are under
^ertifications, or sentences of any Court of this Kingdom: With power to the
said Commissioners and their quorum, to confine to and allow outted Ministers,
as said is, in the Paroches of Tarboltoun, Barnweel, Stevenson, Lochguenoch,
Inchanen and Mearns: and that so soon as the present Incumbents in these
Paroches shall be provided, and transported to other Kirks. Recommending to
Patrons, to give them Presentations at Kirks that shall vaik; and particularly
to....... Patron of the Kirk of Gallouwsheils to give a Presentation thereto Mr
Alexander George. To..... Patron of the Kirk of Burghtoun, to present thereto
Mr William Naismith. To...... Patron of the Kirk of Maclue, to present thereto
Mr Robert Kincaide. To..... Patron of Grainae, to present thereto Mr...
Stewart. And for the Intertainment and maintenance of the Ministers foresaids,
confined and allowed by this Act, and of these formerly indulged by the
Council: The said Lords do think fit, that the half of the Stipends of the
Respective Paroches, wherein they are confined, of the Crope and Year of God
1672. be paid to the Ministers, formerly indulged therein; and that the other
half of the said stipend be equally divided amongst or betwixt these formerly,
and now allowed to preach in the said Paroches. The said whole stipends,
receiving in the future Division proportionably, according to the number of
Persons formerly and now allowed to preach therein. And where there was no
Person formerly indulged, the third part of the stipend of the year 1672. is to
be paid to these confined and allowed by this present Act, in the respective
Paroches foresaids. And in case any of the Ministers foresaids shall not serve;
as they are allowed by this Act or Commission foresaid; their proportion of the
said stipends are to be holden as vacant, and to be employed, conform to an
Act to be made in this Session of Parliament, anent the disposal of the Vacant
Stipends. And ordaines letters to be directed, at the Instance of the several
Ministers foresaids, serving as said is, against these liable for payment of
their proportions of the said stipends. And the Lord Commissioners Grace, and
Lords of his Maj. Privy Council considering the extent of the Indulgence given
by this Act, and that if the same should be any further enlarged, the regular
Ministers might be discouraged, and the orderly and peacably disposed people of
this Kingdom disquieted; do declare that hereafter, they are not to extend the
said Indulgence, in favors of any other people, or to any other Paroches, than
to those mentioned in this Act; nor to allow outted Ministers to preach in any
Kirks, not herein expressed, and wherein there are not already Ministers
allowed to preach by this Act.

Thus we see this Indulgence very far extended, and as far as the Counsel
minded to extend the same, in all time coming: But you will say, we hear of no
Orders, Instructions and Prescriptions, given unto them, whereby they were to
be regulated in the exercise of their Ministry, as others formerly allowed and
licensed were. Therefore in order to this, there is an Act of Council, of the
date of the foresaid Indulgence, to this effect.

WHereas by an Act of the date of their presents, and by former Acts of Council,
diverse Ministers ou^ted since the Year 1661. have been and are warranted and
licensed, to preach at certain Kirks, therein specified; and it being
necessare for the better keeping of good Order, that the Rules following be
observed by these Ministers indulged, by an Act of the date of their presents,
and these Indulged by former Acts of Council. Therefore the Lord Commissioners
Grace, and the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council do enjoine the punctual and due
observance thereof to the said Ministers, as they will be answerable.

1. That they presume not to marry or baptize, except such as belong to the
Paroch, to which they are confined, or to the neighboring Paroches vacant, or
wanting Ministers for the time.

2. That all Ministers indulged in one and the same Diocese, celebrate the
Communion upon one and the same Lords Day, and that they admit none to their
Communions belonging to other Paroches, without restificats from the Ministers
thereof.

3. That they preach only in these Kirks, and not in the Churchyards, nor in
any place else; under the pain, to be repute and punished as keepers of
Conventicles.

4. That they remain within, and depart not forth of the Paroch, to which they
are confined, without license from the Bishop of the Diocese only.

5. That in the exercise of Discipline, all such cases, as were formerly
referable to Presbyteries, continue still in the same manner; and where there
is no Presbyterial meeting, that these cases be referred to the Presbytery of
the next bounds.

6. That the ordinary dues, payable to Bursers, Clerks of Presbyteries and
Synods, be paid by the said Ministers, as formerly.

And that the said Ministers may have competent time for transporting of their
families, and disposing upon their goods, The said Lords suspends their
confinement for the space of three months, to the effect, in the mean time,
they may go about their affairs, providing that during the time of the said
Suspension, they do keep and observe the rest of the Orders and Instructions
foresaids, and other Acts, made anent outted Ministers.

There was another act of Council made this same day, concerning all the rest
of the outted Ministers, nor as yet by name Indulged and licensed, and
concerning some newly ordained, as follows.

Halyroodhouse, September. 3. 1672.
THe Lord Commissioner's Grace and the Lords of his Maj. privy Council,
considering that by the Act of the date of their presents and former Acts of
Council, certain Ministers outted since the Year 1661. are confined in manner
ther^in contained; and that there are remaining diverse of that Number not
disposed on by the said Act, it ought also to be provided, that these may not
give scandal to any, by with drawing themselves from the public worshipe, in
the Kirks of these Paroches, where they reside, nor ensnare others to do the
like by their practice and example; do therefore give order and warrant to
Sheriffs, Baylies of Regalities, Baylies of Baylieries, and their respective
Deputes, and Magistrates within Brughs, to call and conveen before them all
outted Ministers since the Year 1661. And not disposed on as said is, and who
are not under a sentence or censure of State, resideing in the respective
jurisdiction or bounds, or who shall in any time thereafter reside therein, to
require them to hear the word preached, and communicate in the Kirk of those
Paroches, where they dwell or repair to; or dwell in some other Paroches,
where they will be ordinary Hearers and Communicate; and to declare their
resolution herein; and condescend upon the Paroches, where they intend to have
their residence, and hear the word and Communicate: with power to the said
Sherifs and other Magistrates foresaids to seize upon and imprison their
Persons, within the space of a Month after they should be so required. And in
case any of the said Ministers shall reside in the Paroch, where there are
Ministers indulged by the Council, they are hereby warranted and allowed to
preach in the Kirks of those Paroches, where they reside, upon the Invitation
of the Minister therein confined and allowed; and not else.

And whereas some within the Kingdom, without any lawful Authority or
Ordination, take upon them the calling of the Ministry, preach and do other
Acts, peculiar to those of that function; and considering that such Presumption
and Intrusion upon the sacred O^fice, tend to the Disordering and Disquieting
of the Church and Kingdom. Therefore the Lord Commissioner's Grace, and the L
L. foresaid of his Maj. Privy Council do enjoin the said Sheriffs and other
Magistrates foresaids, within the respective bounds, to make search for, and
seize upon and imprison such, upon trial that they have exercised the Office of
a Minister: To acquaint the Council of their Names and place of their
Imprisonment, that such course may be taken with them as they shall think fit.
And further, the said Sheriffs are ordained and commanded to enquire, how the
Ministers, confined and allowed to preach in their several Jurisdictions, do
obey the Rules prescribed to them, and contained in another Act of Council, of
the date of their presents, and whereof extracts are to be sent to the several
Magistrates foresaid, who are hereby appointed to report to the Council there
anent, every six months, and betwixt and the first of june next their
diligence in the execution of the order, contained in the Act, certifying them,
that if they shall be negligent or remiss in the execution of the orders,
given to them herein, or falzying to give in the said account, they shall be
proceeded against and censured, according to their demerites.

By this Act we see what course was laid down to have all the outted Ministers
cantonized, and brought under restraint, that so the Word might also be under
bonds, and restricted to these bounds, to which they had been pleased to extend
the Indulgence. We see also, how the Council looked upon such, as had been
ordained, but not by Prelates, and how they were to be persecuted by their
Order. We see also, how the ministry of those, who were thus to confine
themselves in places; where Indulged men were, is restricted by their
Prescriptions, in its exercise.

But by the preceding Act of Indulgence, we saw a number of Ministers
Indulged. who were to repair to the several places specified; and to this end
every one of them were to receive their own particular Act or Summonds, to this
effect.

Halyroodhouse September. 3. 1672.
THe Lord Commissioner's Grace and the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council,
considering the disorders, which have lately been by frequent and numerous
Conventicles, and being willing to remeed so great an evil in the gentlest
manner could be thought on: and his Maj. Commissioner being sufficiently
instructed herein. They do hereby order and appoint... to repair to the Paroch
Kirk of... and to remain therein confined, permitting and allowing him to
preach, and exercise the other parts of the Ministerial function in the said
Paroch, with... formerly Indulged.

But where no Minister had been formerly Indulged, this last clause was left
out. As also there was sent alongs with this act to every one of them an
extract of the Councels Instructions, of the date thereof.

Here we see the Former Injunctions renewed, and pressed on all, formerly and
now of late indulged; and moreover we find some new Injunctions superadded, to
wit, concerning the time of their celebrating of the Lords Supper; of purpose
to hinder the greater Good and Edification of the people, who used to go to
other Churches, than their own, to partake of that Comforting and
Strengthening Ordinance; Whereby also an insupportable yock was put upon their
necks, to celebrat the Sacrament at times (as to some in particular possibly)
most unseasonable, when neither they nor their people were in case, and when
the season of the year might prove an impediment in Landward Kirks, though none
to Towns. And further they are injoined not to preach without the Walls of the
Kirk, nay not so much as in their House; such hatred and indignation had these
Rulers, at all House and Field Meetings, that they would not suffer even their
own licensed and warranted Ministers to do any thing, that might carry the
least appearance of any such thing. So they are ordered to acknowledge their
subjection unto the Prelates Courts, by referring cases, usually referable to
Presbyteries, unto them; as also to testify their acknowledgement of the
Prelates Courts, by paying their proportion of the Salarie, now alleged to be
due to the Clerks of these Courts. Any may see what snares were laid here; and
what obedience was given hereunto by these Ministers, who accepted of the
benefit of this Indulgence, I know not. It is sufficient for me to note here,
that these Injunctions flow from an Usurped Power, and are not proper
Magistratical Acts, circa sacra, but Intrinsecally Church-Constitutions (at
least several of them:) and therefore the accepting of these, which were a
piece of the complex Business of the Indulgence, as tendered and granted by the
Rulers, bewrayed their falling off, in so fa^, from former Principles, owned
and sworn unto. And beside, this addition of New Instructions did show, that
the Council looked upon them, as their Curats, and as Obnoxious to their Orders
in Church Matters, and what concerns the manner and way of their exerceing of
the ministerial function, as the other Curats are unto the Prelates, or as ^ver
any Minister was obnoxious to the Canons and Constitutions of General or
Provincial Assemblies, in our best times. And let me enquire of these
Accepters, how they think such an act as this, had it been done, while the
Church was in possession of her Power, would have been looked upon? And how our
General Assembly would have looked upon such Ministers, as should have
submitted unto the like then, as they have done now? I suppose they will think,
that if they had done so, they would have met with no less, than Deposition.
And then let them consider, if that can be a commendable duty now, which would
then have been such a Transgression. And let them say whether or not, such do
them great wrong, who, adhering to their former Principles, must needs look on
them, as ipso jure deposed.

It deserves to be noted here, that a Lybel was formed against one Mr William
Weer, at this time Indulged, and permitted to preach in West-calder; and he was
looked upon by the Council, as one, that most basely slighted their Favor and
Indulgence, and was severely to be punished, because he thought it not
sufficient to enter unto that charge, mee^ly upon the Act of the Council; but
to satisfy himself the more, as to his ground of en^rie, did receive a call
from some of the Heritors and People; and because in his first preaching to
that people he declared his adherence to the So^emne League and Covenant, and
that he did not acknowledge the power either of King of Bishop, in matters
belonging to the Church of Christ: And in his next Sermon said, that neither
King nor Council were the Treasurers of the Gospel, or of the Ministry of it.
And because the following day, he preached against the Supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical, and against Prelacy: And because he had in preaching declared,
that the Civil Magistrate had no power to appoint a day to be kept holy and
observed in holy worshipe. By which we see, That the Council takes upon them
to make this man a Minister, though they plainly show, that he was never owned
as a Minister by the Church-Judicatories. Further we see, That the Councels
Act, thus ordering these Indulged Ministers to the respective Kirks, was all
the call they had, or that they would acknowledge should be had, or required;
and therefore the Indulged have no call, but the call of the Council as their
ground. Further we hence see that the Councels aim and end (among others) was
to have the Supremacy established, and Prelacie; so that the very speaking
against these, by such as were Indulged, was sufficient to be the matter of a
Lybel, and was looked on as criminal: What Interpretation can then be given of
the silence of others, thus Indulged, as to these great points let sober men
judge; and whether or not, the Council did suppose, that by this Indulgence,
they had obtained so many coyduks, as did willingly submit thereunto.

I know several Ministers, mentioned in this Act, had not freedom to accept of
this supposed favor of the Indulgence, and were therefore cited before the
Council: Among these, faithful and worthy Mr John Burnet, Minister at Kilbride
near Glasgow, was one, who thought it his duty to give an open and plain
account of his Reasons to the Council, why he could not submit to that
Indulgence, and for this end, drew up his Reasons in write, directing it to the
Council: But being prevented by sickness, and thereafter by death, did not get
it presented, yet sent it to the Chancellor, and left it, as his Testimony
against that evil, not changing what might have been changed in the manner of
its address, because of sickness and other inconveniences. I shall here set it
down, as he left it; not only because it was his Testimony to the Truth (and
Testimonies should be carefully kept, and Committed to posterity;) but also
because his Reasons are weighty, and may help us to see more of the iniquity
of this Indulgence. His paper was as follloweth.

The draught of this Paper was framed purposely to the S. Council, as will
appear in the very entry thereof, which mould I could not change, because of
the want of health, and other Inconveniences.
BEing called before his Majesty's Privy Council to give an account of the
reasons, why I have not accepted of this present Indulgence, granted by his
most excellent Majest. to several Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, I desire
humbly and in the fear of God (who stands in the Congregation of the
Mighty, and Judges among the Gods) to give this true, sober and ingenous
Relation of such things, as did and do invinciblie bind me, why I cannot
accept of this late complex Indulgence, framed in three distinct Acts of
Council, of the Date Sept. 3. and 7. 1672. To which I shall premit these things
briefly.

1. That it is well known to all the Protestant Reformed Churches abroad,
concerning the Constitution and Government of this ancient Church of Scotland
for many years, and particularly in the year 1660. That it was framed according
to the Word of God, confirmed by many laudable and ancient Laws of the
Kingdom, and solemnly sworn to by all Ranks within the same.

2. It is also found by lamentable experience, that since that time this
Ancient and Apostolic Government is wholly overturned in its very Species and
kind, and that by the Introduction of Lordly Prelacie, which is tyrannically
exercised; whereby the Church was suddenly deprived of her lawfully called
Pastors, and their rooms filled by strangers, violently thrust-in upon the
people, many of whom have proven scandalous and insufficient.

3. The sad Effects of these things are conspicuously apparent upon the face of
this Church this day, such as involving the Land in great backsliding and
defection, the abounding Ignorance and Atheism, the overflowing spa^e of
Sensuality and Profanness like to Sodom, the increase of Popery and Error
through the Land, even to the height of Antichristian Paganism, and
Quakerisme; The sharp suffering and smartings of many of his Maj. loyal
Subjects through the Land, merely because they cannot conform to the present
Prelatical frame; and finally the increase of Animosities, Dissentions,
Divisions, Jealousies, and Differences among the Subjects.

4. Whatever Power sound and orthodox Divines do acknowledge the Magistrate to
have, and may have exercised in a troubled and extraordinary state of the
Church; yet it is not at all yielded by them, that the Magistrate may in any
ways, alter its warrantablie established Government, and so turn that same
^roub^ed and perplexed state and frame of the Church, made such by himself,
merely to be the subject of his magisterial authoritative Care and Operation.

5. That I be not mistaken, as denying to his Maj. his just Power in
Ecclesiastic matters. I do humbly and with great alacrity acknowledge, that
the Civil Magistrate has a power circa Sacra, which power is objectively
Ecclesiastic; so as he by his Royal Authority may enjoin that whatsoever is
commanded by the God of Heaven, may be diligently done for the House of the God
of Heaven; which Power also is by Gods appointment only Cumulative and
Auxiliary to the Church, not Privative, nor Destructive, and is to be exerced
always in a Civil manner.

As to the Reasons of my not-acceptance of the present Offer, and not repairing
to the place designed by the Council: They are

1. That our Lord Jesus Christ, Mediator, the King and Lawgiver of his own
Church, has committed all Ministeria^ Authority, for Government of his House,
to his own Church Officers, as the first proper subject and receptacle thereof,
Ioh. 20: v. 21. As my Father sent me, so send I you. Math. 28:18.19.20. All
Power is given to me in Heaven and Eearth, go ye and preach the Gospel. 2 Cor.
10: v 8. Our Authority which the Lord has given us for edification, and not
for destruction* etc. But so it is that the Act explanatorie of his Maj.
Supremacy in the Church, (whereupon the Act of Indulgence is grounded) does
not only claim the Power to belong of right to his Maj. and Successors, as an
inherent privilege of the Crown, but does actually also invest and cloth him
with the formal exercise thereof in his own Person, and that he may derive the
same, and convey it to others, as in his Royal wisdom He shall think fit: For
his Majest. is pleased to design and make application of Ministers to
Congregations, and that, without the previous call of the People, and power of
the Presbytery (which would suppose the Civil Magistrate to have Authority to
judge of the suitableness of Ministers parts and gifts to labor amongst such
and such a people.) As also to frame and prescribe Ecclesiastic Rules,
relating to the exercise of the Ministerial Office, as also appointing a
Commission to Plant and Transplant Ministers, as they shall think fit;
Notwithstanding that it has been unanswerablie evinced, that Presbyte^ian
Government is founded on the Word of God, and confirmed otherwise abundantly.

2. Although I do freely disallow and condemn all tumultuarie and seditious
meetings (among which it is sad and grievous, that the peacable meetings of the
Lords People for Worship, and hearing the Word soundly preached, should be
reckoned;) yet I am so convinced and persuaded in my heart of the Lords
blessing, attending the preaching of the Gospel (though not in a pub^ick Parish
Church) as that I judge the narrative of the first act to go near to involve my
acceptance of this Indulgence, being an interpretative condemning of the said
meetings.

3. There is a standing relation betwixt me and another Flock, overwhich I was
set, by the appointment of Jesus Christ in his word, which tie c^n never
reallie be dissolved by any other Power, than that which at first did make it
up, and give it a being: And after that I had Ten years (during the English
Usurpation) wrestled in opposition to Quakers and Independants* in the place,
where the first breach had been made upon the Church of Scotland, I was without
any Ecclesiastic sentence thrust from the public exerci^e o^ my Ministry in
that place, where there will be 1200. examinable Persons, whereof th^re were
never 50. Persons, yet to this day, who have subjected themselves to him, who
is called the Regular Incumbent; And that even when I was living 30. mi^es
distant from the place. Now what a door is hereby (by my being kept from my
Charge) opened to Error, Atheism and Profanness may be easily conj^ctured by
those, who hear of the deplorable case of that people? And what a g^ief must it
be to them, to have their own Lawful Pastor shut up in a Corner, whereby we
are both put out of a capacity to receive any mo^e Spiritual comfort flowing
from that Relation, which is yet in force betwix^ us? Or how is it to be
imagined that any new supervenient relation can result betwixt another Flock
and me, by virtue of an Act only of a mere Civil Judicatorie? Beside, that the
people, in whom I have present Interest, are utterlie rendered hopeless by a
clause in the end of the first Act viz. That the Indulgence, is not hereafter
to be extended in favors of any other Congregation, than these mentioned in
the Act, whe^eof they in that Parish are none.

4. That I will not offer to debate the Magistrat's sentence of Confinement,
let be his Power to do the same; yet I shall soberly say, there are so many
things attending the present application thereof to my Person, that it cannot
be expected, I should give that Obedience hereto, which might infer my own
Consent or Approbation, for 1. Though this Confinement be called a gentle
remedy of the great evils of the Church, in the narrative of the first Act,
yet it is found to be a very sharp punishment, as it is circumstantia^. 2. All
punishments, inflicted by Magistrates on Subjects, ought to relate to some Cause
or Crime, and cannot be done arbitrarilie, without oppression, which truth is
engraven on the light of nature: For Festus, a heathen Man Acts 25:27. could
say, It seems to me unreasonable to send a Prisoner and not withal to
signify the crime laid against him; yet am I sentenced and sent in fetters to
a Congregation, without so much as being charged with any crime, And all the
world are left to collect the reason of this Censure. 3. If my Confinement
relate not to any crime, it must needs relate to a design, which design is
obvious to Common sense, viz. that I should preach and exercise the Office of
my Ministry, wholly at the appointment and disposal of the Civil Magistrate;
and a sentence of Confinement is less obvious to debate and dispute by the
Subjects, and will more easily go down with any simple man, than an express
command to preach, grounded on his Maj. Royal Prerogative and Supremacy, and
cannot readily be refused by any, unless a man make himself to be constructed,
a squimish wild Phanatick, and expose himself to great sufferings; so this
Confinment, which has both his Maj. Prerogative and Supremacy in
Ecclesiastic matters in it, comes to me in room, and that directly, of the
Peoples Call, and Presbyteries Authority and other Ecclesiastic Appointment.
Now this design, however closely covered, I dare not in Conscience, yea I
cannot (with the preservation of my Judgment and Principles) concur with, or
be consentient thereto. 4. By the Confinment I am put to an open shame before
the world, and particularly in that place, where I am permitted to preach the
Gospel: For what weight can my preaching or ministerial Acts of Discipline and
Government have, while I my self am handled and dealt with as a Malefactor and
Transgressour, a Rebel or Traitor to my Prince and Nation? Or how can I preach
the word of the Lord freely and boldly against the ^innes of the time (as
against Profanness, Error, Injustice and Oppression) as Ministers ought
impartially to do, while I am kept under a perpetual check of the sword of the
Magistrate at my throat? This to me is not preaching, but an overawed
discourse: Morover, I become a prey for any malicious prejudicat hearer, who
shall happen to accuse and inform against me. Can I be answerable to God who
sent me, to render up my self willingly to be a servant of men? Were not this
to cut-out my own tongue with my own hands? 5. This Confinment is not simply
or mainly of my Person, (which sentence if it were so, I should most willingly
undergo) but it is of the Office it self (the imprisonment of which ought to be
sadder to me, than any personal suffering whatsoever) while 1. It is not of me
alone, but of all the Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, a very few only
excepted. 2. While the propagation of the Gospel by the personal restraint of
us all is manifestly obstructed. 3. We are cut off from the discharge of many
necessary duties, which we owe to the Nation and Church, and specially at such
a time, while she is in hazard to be swallowed up with a swarm of Jesuits,
Quakers and other damnable Subverters of the Truth; and (which is yet more)
while three parts of the Kingdom, are groaning under ^he want of the Word,
faithfully preached, and some few Shirs only here in the West are made, as it
were, the Common Goal of all the Ministers, that are permitted to preach. 4. By
this Confinment, I lose an essential part of my Ministry, which is the
exercise of Jurisdiction and Church Government; which yet Mr Baxter, (a very
favorable nonconformist) asserts to be as essential to the Office of a
Minister, as Preaching of the word; The staff being as needful to the shepherd,
as either the pigg or the horn is; so says the Scripture of preaching Elders
Acts. 20.28. The Holy Ghost has made you Overseers or Bishops, no less then
Teachers; a principal part of which Government is Ordination of Ministers, for
preservation of a succession of faithful men in the Church; whereof by the Act
of Confinment (as also is expressly provided by the last c^ause of the last Act)
we are intentionally deprived for ever, while it is in force: In loseing of
which one branch of our Government, we undo our own cause with our own hands.
I remember the first thing the ambitious Roman Clergy invaded and usurped,
was the Jurisdiction and Authority of Presbyters, turning the Ministers of
Jesus Christ into the Prelates jurney men, making Curates of them, only for
preaching and intimating the Bishops mandats, And what else do I in this case,
but make the Ministry of the Gospel in my Person Immediately dependant, in the
exercise of it, upon the arbitriment of the Civil Magistrate.

5. As for the Permission and Allowance I have to preach* when confined, This
Permission seems very fair, while I look on it abstractly, without relation
to the rest of the Particular circumstances of the Act; for this would look
like opening the door in part, which the Magistrate himself had shut; but while
I take it complexly with what else is joined with it, it does presently carry
another ^ace, like some pictures or medals that have two or three different
aspects to the eyes of the beholder: For Permission to preach in any vacant
Church within the Kingdom is so very great a favor, as for which I would
desire to bless God, and thank hi^ Maj. most heartily: But take it without the
praevious Call of the people, the Authority and Assistance of a Presbytery,
as it may be had; and take it without the exercise of Discipline and
Government, but what is Congregational; and so it is ^ame. Again, take it with
the Confinment and other claggs and cavea^s, contained in the 2. Act, Or take
it with the burden of being obliged to follow all matters (formerly referable
to Presbyteries and Synods) before these Presbyteries and Synods, which are now
constitute by Bishops and their De^egats; and so it is nothing but that same
Accommodation, which we formerly had in our offer from the Bishop, and did
refuse: And take it yet with the robbing of our own Congregations, and with
the depriving of three parts of four of the whole rest of the Land, and then I
have it to consider, whether this my Permission to preach be not the putting of
my neck under a heavier yoke, than it could be under before.

6. The last Reason (for brevity) is from the Affinity with and dependence this
Act of his Maj. Royal Indulgence has upon the late explanatorie Act of his
Maj. Supremacy, (which I desire with sorrow of heart to look upon, as the
greatest Incroachment can be made upon the Crown and Authority of Jesus Christ,
who is only King and Lawgiver of his Church upon Earth) as will be evident by
comparing the two Acts together; For the Act of his Maj. Supremacy (besides
the narrative) contains two principal parts, viz. (1) The Assertorie of his
Maj. Supremacy, which is the main Theme proposed to be explained, in these
Words* The Estates of Parliament do hereby Enact, Assert and Declare, that His
Majest. has the supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons, and in
all Causes Ecclesiastic* within this Kingdom. (2. The Explanatorie part
follows, in so many most comprehensive and extensive Branches and Articles,
thus: That by virtue thereof the Ordering and Disposal of the external
Government of the Church does properly belong to his Maj. and his Successors,
as an inherent righ^ of the Crown, and that his Maj. and Successors may
Settle, Enact and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the
Administration of the external Government of the Church, and the Persons
employed in the same, and concerning all Ecclesiastical meetings and matters,
to be proposed and determined therein, as they in their Royal Wisdom shall
^hink fit.

Again the Act of his Maj Royal Indulgence, which is the exercise and actual
application of his Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastic, may be taken up in
these particulars comprehensively. (1) The nomination and election of such and
such Ministers, to such and such respective places. (2) A power to plant and
transplant, put out and put in Ministers to the Church. (3) The framing and
prescribing Rules and Instructions, for limiting Ministers in the exercise of
the Ministerial Office. (4) The ordaining Inferior Magistrates, as Sherifs,
Justices, etc. to inform the Council every six months, under highest pains,
anent the carriage of Indulged Ministers, and how they observe the foresaid
Rules. (5) The Confining of licensed Ministers to one small Corner of the
Kingdom, and declaring all other Places and Congregations whatsoever within
this Nation to be incapable of any share of this Royal Favor, except such
places only as are exptesly contained in the Act itself. Now, that these
Particulars of the Act of Indulgence are of the same nature and kind with the
Articles Explanatorie of his Maj. Supremacy, will demonstratively appear by
this plain Argument, viz. To Settle, Enact, Emit Constitutions, Acts and
Orders concerning Matters, Meetings and Persons Ecclesiastic, according to
their Royal pleasure, is the very substance and definition of his Majest.
Supremacy, as it is explained by his Estates of Parliament. But the Act of his
Majest. Indulgence, in the whole five fornamed particulars thereof, is only to
Settle, Enact and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning matters,
and Meetings, and Persons Ecclesiastical, according to Royal pleasure:
Therefore the Act of his Maj. Indulgence is the substance and definition of his
Maj. Supremacy, as it is explained by his Estates of Parliament. The Rules and
Instructions for limiting Ministers in the exercise of their Office, as also
the rest of the two forenamed Particulars of the Indulgence, are such, as I
declare I cannot accept of them, or any other favor whatsoever, upon such
terms and conditions; because they contain the downright exercise of
Erastianisme (as I humbly conceive; and a discretive judgment of such Acts as a
man resolving to practice can not be denied him, unless men be turned into
bruits, and so be ruled no more as reasonable creatures) namely, the Magistrate
by his proper and elicit Acts, doing that which is purely Spiritual and
Ecclesiastic, as a Nomothetick Head and Lawgiver, framing such Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastic, as are not competent for any Ministerial or
Declarative Power to enact or impose; but of that Power only, which is
absolutely Sovereign: and whatsoever will militat against an Ecclesiastic
Person, to arrogat to himself to be Christ's Vicar on Earth, and a visible Head,
to give and make Laws for the Church, according to his pleasure; The same also
will make much against any other, though the greatest in the World, to assume
to himself this Prerogative, so long as he can produce no divine warrant for
this claim. A more particular consideration of these Rules, and other
Particulars, I must needs (for brevity) forbear.

My Noble Lord. HAving, in the singleness of my heart, and I trust without any
just ground of offense, given this short and sober account of the Reasons, why
I have not made use of his Majest. Royal favor and Indulgence, And being fully
persuaded in my Conscience, that both Magistracy and Ministry are Gods
Ordinance, and no ways destructive, but mutually helpful one to another; so
that I can not but earnestly long, That the Lord, who has the hearts of Kings
and Rulers in his hand, would put it in the heart of our great Sovereign (and
in your Gr's heart to be instrumental therein) that he would grant us,
Ministers, liberty to make full proof of that Ministry, which the Lord has
given us for edification, and not for destruction; that we might have the
opportunity to make it appear, that the Government, which the Lord Jesus has
appointed in his Church, does well consist and agree with the Magistrates Civil
Government in the State, that so I and all others, my outted Brethren, may have
access to our former Charges, or other Congregations, as we shall have
opportunity of a cordial Invitation from the people, with the assistance and
help authoritatively of lawful Church ^udicatories, until such time as God
shall grant a patent way to return to our own Charges. (2.) And that
Presbyterian Ministers may have access to his Maj. for representing just
grievances, which press heavily our Consciences, and the consciences of the
people, his Maj. loyal and faithful Subjects in the Land. In granting of which
necessary and just desire, I your Gr's. Servant shall be a humble Supplicant at
the Throne of Grace, for the preservation of his Maj. Person, the establishing
of his Throne in righteousness; and that the Lord would pour forth the Spirit
of righteous judgment on your Grace that the Lord may be blessed, and your Grace
may find mercy in the day of visitation.

J. BURNET.

By this free and faithful Testimony, we see what Reasons moved him not to
accept of this supposed favor; and particularly we may observe, that one maine
Reason was, the Relation and Affinity, that was betwixt the Act of Indulgence,
and the Explicatory Act of Supremacy; so that who ever accepted of this
Indulgence, could not but be looked upon as virtually and materially (at least)
approving and consenting to the Supremacy; and what iniquity lies wrapped-up
in this, a few words could not express.

But Moreover there were Ten Ministers (I suppose worthy Mr John Burnet
forementioned was one of them) who did meet together upon the same account, to
draw up reasons of their refusing the Indulgence, to be presented unto the
Council: But though the Paper was drawn up and subscribed; yet I did not hear,
that it was presented. However, because it may also contribute some light and
confirmation, I shall set it down here, as I had it.

ALL of us being concerned and reached by the late Act of Indulgence and
Confinement, and some of us being already cited to give an account, why we have
not accepted the same, do humbly desire, in the fear of God, (who stands in
the Congregation of the Mighty, and judges among the Gods) to give this true,
sober and ingenous relation of the Reasons, which lie weighty on our
Consciences, and bind us up from compliance with your LL. Commands, in this
matter; briefly premitting first. That our non-compearance has not flowed from
any contempt of, or disrespect unto Authority (which we always highly esteem
in the Lord, as our Consciences bear us witness, resolving through grace to
submit thereto, in all things Lawful) but from the apprehension, we have
conceived of the hazard of our Ministry and Persons thereby, lest by our
personal appearance, and signifying our reasons coram, we might have probably
irritated your LL. Secondly. That we be not mistaken, as denying to his Maj.
his just power, in reference to Ecclesiastic matters, we do heartily and with
great alacrity acknowledge, that the Civil Magistrate has a power circa sacra,
objectively Ecclesiastic; so as he by his Royal Authority may enjoine, that
whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, may be diligently done for the
house of the God of heaven: Which power is only cumulative and auxiliary to the
Church, not privative nor destructive, and is to be exercised always modo
civili.

As to the reasons amongst many, which might be adduced (not willing to trouble
your L L. with prolixitie) we humbly propose these few.

1. That our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, Mediator, the only Head, King and
Lawgiver of his own Church, has committed all Ministerial Power and Authority
for Government of his House, to his own Church Officers, as the first proper
Subject and Receptacle thereof Ioh. 20:21. Matthew. 16:19. and 18:18, 20. and 28:
v. 18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 10:8. But so it is, that the Act explanatory of his Maj.
Supremacy in the Church, whereupon this Act of Indulgence is founded, does
ascribe this Power to His Maj. and His Successors, as an inherent right of the
Crown; and actually invests him with the formal exercise thereof, in his own
Person, deriving and conveying the same to others, as he in his Royal Wisdom
shall think fit: And that the Act of Indulgence appears to be the Exercise
and Actual Application of the Supremacy in Matters Ecclesiastic, is obvious
by comparing the two Acts together; namely in these 3. Particulars, (1.) The
Nomination and Election of such and such Ministers to such and such respective
Congregations, and that without the previous Call of the People, and Power of
lawful Church-Judicatories; which supposes the Civil Magistrate to have
Authority to judge of the sutableness of Ministers Gifts and Qualifications, to
labor among such and such people. (2.) A power to plant and transplant, to
put-out and to put-in Ministers in the Church, and actually clothing Persons
merely civil with Power for that effect. (3.) The framing and prescribing
Ecclesiastic Canons and Instructions, for regulating the exercise of the
Ministerial Office: all which are proper, intrinsic and formal Acts of
Church Power, belonging by virtue of Christ's Institution to Church Officers.

2. Although we do freely disallow and condemn all tumultuary and seditious
Meetings (amongst which it is sad and grievous that the peacable Meetings of
the Lords people, for Worship and hearing of the Word soundly preached, should
be reckoned) yet are we so convinced and persuaded in our hearts of the Lords
blessing, attending the preaching of the Gospel, though not in a public
Paroch-Church; as that we judge the narra^ive of the first Act goes near to
involve the Accepters of this Indulgence in an interpretative condemning of the
said Meetings; which we in Conscience da^ not do, being commanded to abstain
fom all appearance of evil 1 These. 5:22.

3. There being a standing relation betwixt us and those flocks, over which the
Holy Ghost has made us Overseers, according to Christ's Institution in his
word* the sense of which tie engages us, to have special regard to these
flocks, until that be dissolved by the same power, that made it up and gave it
a being; besides that by keeping us from our Charges, a wide door is opened to
Error, Atheism and Prophanity, and we disabled to discharge the trust,
committed to us by Christ, for which we must be answerable to him, in that
great day of accounts: What a grief must it be to the people to have their own
Lawful Pastors shut-up in a Corner, whereby both we and they are put out of a
Capacity for performing of those duties, which tend to our mutual Comfort and
Edification; which no doubt is much aggravated by the Intrusion of others, whom
they cannot acknowledge as their Lawful Pastors, they looking on the former
relation, as yet in force.

4. Though we be far from questioning the Magistrates just power to confine any
of his Subjects within his Dominions; yet there are several things in the
present complex case, which we do humbly desire to present to your L L. as
burdensome to our Consciences, as (1.) That this Confinement is not simply of
our Persons, but of the Ministry it self, the Imprisonment of which should be
sadder to us, than any personal suffering whatsomever: while, First, It is not
of one or two, but of all the Presbyterian Ministers of the Church of Scotland,
a very few only excepted. Secondly, While the Propagation of the Gospel, by the
personal restraint of us all, is manifestly obstructed. Thirdly, We are cut off
from the discharge of many necessary duties, which we owe to this National
Church; and specially at such a time, when so much in hazard to be swallowed up
with the flood of Jesuits, Quakers and other damnable subverters of the Truth;
and which is yet more, that the three parts of the Kingdom are groaning under
the want of the word faithfully preached. As also by this Confinement, we lose
the exercise of an essential part of our Ministry viz. Jurisdiction and
Church Government, a Principal part whereof is Ordination of Ministers, for
preservation of a succession of faithful men in the Church, whereof by this Act
of confinement (as is also expressly provided by the last clause of the last
Act) we are intentionally deprived for ever, while it is in force; in loseing
of which, we do bury our cause with our own hands (2.) We cannot but sadly
regrate, that no Physical restraint is put upon Papists and Quakers, yea while
their Meetings and Conventicles have been found and known, yet not all
quarrelled. But the Meetings of Orthodox Protestants hunted, pursued and
obstructed, to the great grief of all the Godly in the Land, though nothing
has been found in them to the prejudice of the peace of the Kingdom, or his
Maj. true Interest (3.) It is no small grievance, that we are cast in two's and
three's in one Paroch, where there is no need of our Ministry, nor
accommodation for our families, while there are Thousands left to the oversight
of others, both in sufficient and scandalous.

5. By the last Act of this Indulgence, all Ministers not indulged are
prohibit the exercise of their Ministry, even as to the preaching of the
word, except in the places of their respective confinements, and that upon a
call from the Incumbent allannerly: And in their summonds are required to
engage to the same; which being contrare to the Scripture commands, and the
Commission delivered to us by the Lord Jesus, for feeding of his people by the
everlasting Gospel, does cast us upon a sad dilemma either of disobeying God,
or your L L. so that we must say, Whether it be better to obey God or Men,
judge ye.

And now, My Lords, having in the singleness of our hearts, and, we hope,
without any just ground of offense, given this short and serious representation
of our thoughts, in this affair; we humbly entreat your L L. to give a
favorable hearing to these our subsequent just and necessary desires viz. 1.
That your L L. would not construe our noncompliance with the Indulgence, as
tendered in the forementioned Acts, to proceed from humor and peevishness; but
from Conscience, which makes us, that we dar not be ^ilent in matters of so
great concernment to our Lord and Master, to whom in the first place we owe
fidelity, upon all highest pains; and that our hearts may not condemn us, in
withholding from Caesar what is Caesar's, nor in giving to him, what is the
Lords. 2. That we be not pressed to go to our Confinements, nor proceeded
against as disloyal, and contemners of Authority, on that account; and that we
may have liberty to preach the Gospel to our own respective flocks, and to
others, as we have access in providence. 3. That your L L. would be pleased to
deal with his Maj. to take off the legal restraints on our Ministry and
Persons; that we may peacably give ourselves to the work of the Ministry, for
the Edification of the body of Christ. 4. and Lastly. That your L L. would
seriously consider, in the sight of the most high God (before whose tribunal we
are all shortly to appear, and give an account of our actions) the heavy
pressures and burdens, lying on the Consciences of Ministers and People for
mere preaching, and hearing of the word; which pressures have mainly flowed
from the heavy yoke of Prelacy (a plant that our heavenly Father never planted)
under which this Church has groaned those many years. And also we most humbly
beseech your L L. that what favor it shall please his Maj. in his Royal
Clemency to grant, may not be inconsistent with our known Principles, to which
we stand engaged by solemn Covenant and Oaths. In granting of which desires,
as your L L. will undoubtedly make glade the hearts of many Thousands of his
Maj. Loyal Subjects; so ye will much encourage us, your humble Petitioners, to
continue serious Supplicants at the throne of grace, for Establishing his Maj.
Throne in righteousness, and for pouring out a spirit of righteous judgment;
that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all Godliness and honesty.

By these Testimonies and Papers, howbeit not all presented either to the
Chancellor or Council, as was in singleness intended by some, we may see, that
there wanted not weighty reasons to have moved such, as loved to walk tenderly,
and circumspectly, in such a day of trial and snares, to have peremptorily
refused this so dangerous, so ensnaring, so scandalous and so destructive an
Indulgence.

We shall now proceed in our History, and hasten to an end thereof. The
following year, to wit, 1673. Some Ministers, who had been Indulged, were now
cited before the Council, for not observing the 29. of May. and other
Instructions given unto them, of which, and of the carriage of these Ministers
at that time, we shall take occasion hereafter to speak more fully, and shall
content ourselves now with the simple relation of the matter, as it stands in
the Registers.

Upon the 8. day of July 1673. The Ministers underwritten, who were Indulged to
preach, at the Kirks, specified in the Councels Act of the 3. of September. 1672.
and formerly, being conveened before the Council, viz. Mr John Crawfurd, Mr
Anthony Murray, Mr John Hammiltoun, Mr John Oliphant, Mr James Currie, Mr John
Lauder, Mr John Stirling, Mr James Hutcheson, Mr John Bairdy, Mr John Eccles,
Mr Andrew Dalrymple, Mr John Gemmil, Mr Hugh Camphel, Mr Alexander Blair, Mr
James Veitch, Mr William Fullertoun, Mr John Hutcheson, Mr Robert Miller, Mr
George Ramsay, Mr John Bell, Mr Ralph Rodger, Mr William Dillidaff, Mr Georg
Hutcheson, Mr John Spading; Mr John Wallace, and Mr William Maitland; and all
of them, except the said Mr John Bairdy, Mr John Crawford and Mr William
Fullertoun, compearing, and all of them, except the said Mr John Spading, Mr
John Wallace, and Mr William Maitland, acknowledging that they had not observed
the 29* of May 1673. The Council did find them to have contraveened the 12.
Act of the third Session of his Majest. second Parliament, and therefore fined
ilk one of them, in the half of their respective proportions of the Stipends,
allowed to them by the Act of Indulgence, and that for the Crope and year of
God 1673. And in regard the said Mr John Spading, Mr John Wallace, and Mr
William Maitland did observe the 29. of May* the Lords of Council assoiled
them; and ordained the three Persons not compearing to be denounced Rebels. And
further, the said Mr Alexander Blair Minister at Castoun, having publicly
disowned the King and Councels Power, in giving them these Instructions,
appointed for the Indulged Ministers; the Lords of Council did ordain him
immediately to be carried to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, and there to be kept
close prisoner, until further order. And in regard diverse of these Indulged
Ministers did pretend, they had not received the said Instructions, did cause
deliver to them extracts thereof at the Bar, that they might pretend no
ignorance of the same.

Edinbr. the 10. of July 1673. The Ministers underwritten being conveened for
the cause foresaid, were fined ut supra, upon their own Confession, viz. Mr
John Mc Michen and John Sempil. And Mr John Colt not compearing was ordered to
be denounced.

Edinbr. the last of July 1673. The Ministers underwritten were also fined upon
their own Confession, ut supra, for the causes foresaid, viz. Mr John Scot, Mr
James Fletcher, and Mr Robert Mowat.

Upon the 4. of September. 1673. Mr Alexander Blair is ordered to have liberty
upon caution, that dureing the time of his Inlargment, he should keep himself
in the House of Iean Weir, nigh the Weigh-House of Edinbr. and re-enter his
Person within the Tolbooth thereof, within the space of one Month. And that
dureing the said space, he should not keep any Meetings, contrare to the
standing Laws of the Kingdom, under the pain of 5000 Merks Scots money. And
upon the 8. of Januar. 1674. his Inlargment is prorogat for the space of
fourteen days, upon caution of the sum, and in the former terms.

But before this short time was fully at an end, He was called home to his
Master's joy: of whom, and of the ground of his particular sufferings, we will
have occasion to speak something hereafter; and therefore it will be sufficient
at present, for clearing of what is past concerning him, to give a short
deduction of the matter. When Mr Alex. Blair, and others (as we saw above) were
called before the Council, upon the occasion mentioned, The Council enquired if
they had observed the Instructions that were given unto them; some answered
that they had never seen them; where upon the Council resolved, to prevent this
excuse in time coming, to give to every one of them Coram, a Copy of these
Instructions. When the day appointed here unto comes, they all compear, (what
was their Deliberations and Resolutions, in the Interim, and what was the
carriage of the rest, that day, we will have a fit occasion to speak hereafter)
the Copy of the Instructions is given to each of them, standing Coram at the
Bar; Several had received them, before, they were presented to Mr A. Blair. But
when they are given to him, he, being moved with zeal, and remembering whose
Ambassador he was, told the Council plainly, that he could receive no
Instructions from them, to regulat him, in the exercise of his Ministry;
otherwise he should not be Christ Ambassador, but theirs; and herewith lets
their Instructions drop out of his hand, knowing of no other Salv^, or manner
of testifying for the Truth, in the case. The Council, seeing what a direct
Opposition this was unto them in their Designs, in a rage sent him with a
Macer unto prison; which made a great noise in the City, the more serious,
though sorrowful at his sufferings, yet rejoicing that he had witnessed a good
Confession, and so had perpetuated the Testimony of the Church of Scotland her
patience. This could not but carry some sad reflection with it on the rest, who
had received, and come away with these Instructions in their hand; wherefore
some Judicious and serious Ministers in the Town, being filled with shame and
sorrow both at what past, endeavored to call the rest together, that they
might own Mr Blairs Testimony, vindicat themselves, and prevent the contempt,
under which otherwise they would lie; but though they did meet, yet nothing of
this kind could be granted; some would not move one step forward; and the rest,
out of a pretense of love to Union, though in evil, would not leave them; but
they all, notwithstanding of all their love to Union, left Mr Blair alone, who
yet was not alone; his Masters presence making up the want of his Brethren
their fellowship: at this meeting, I heard there was a motion made, that some
should be appointed to write about the Magistrates Power in Church Matters; as
if they, forsooth, could have found-out new Principles, to have justified their
own proceedings, so point blank contrary to all the Actings of the Church of
Scotland, and of the faithful in it, from the beginning; and if the Person that
drew up their Vindication (of which afterward) was appointed hereunto, I should
have expected nothing but a piece of Vedelian Pedantrie: But it was good, that
this motion was also laid aside. However faithful and honest Mr Blair must
moreover suffer by their Tongues; for they were not ashamed to say, that all
his suffering was for his rude and unsuitable carriage before the Council,
though all that knew him, knew him to have as much of a Gentleman, and of good
breeding, as any of them: But the Truth was (as a faithful Person, to whom he
himself spoke it, did report) he had that day bowed the knee to the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with much earnestness begged Counsel and Courage, in
order to a suitable carriage, at that appearance, and finding his heart
enlarged, did not leave praying that morning, until he had obtained some
assurance, he should be assisted; and therefore came before the Council, with
Micajahs Rudness (if so it must be called,) as having got a sight of his Royal
Master, and durst do, or receive nothing, that might countenance an
encroachment upon his Prerogative Royal. It was also known, that some of those,
who in their previous Meeting voted for Mr B. being their mouth before the
Council, said now, they were glade he was not, for then he had marred all their
Business: And in a Vindication of the rest, emitted by some of their number, he
is also (as we shall hear) lashed, and that with the Intrado of hinc illae
lachrymae, as if he had done more hurt by this Testimony, than his own, and
the lives of many were worth. While worthy Mr B. is (as we have seen) in
prison, he falls very sick, and friends and Physicians fearing his disease
should prove mortal, he with much difficulty obtained the liberty mentioned,
until he was taken home to glory. It is worthy of our noticeing, That dureing
the time both of this Imprisonment and Confinement as the Sufferings of Christ
abounded in him, so his Consolations also abounded by J. C. for all who
conversed with him returned comforted, by seeing and sharing of his
Consolations; and particularly when drawing nigh to his end, how was his Soul
made to rejoice, in reflecting on his being honored and helped to give that
Testimony? And with what Horror and Indignation would he express himself, upon
supposition he had done less than he did; yea, all his grief and regrate was,
that he had not done more. At length, when the time of the liberty granted, to
abide in his Chamber, was almost expired, his glorious Master, who would want
him no longer, nor suffer him to want the Confessors reward, sent and rescued
him from the rage of Persecutors, and from the Reproaches of his deserting
Brethren, and took him home to his Masters Joy; and the sound of, well done
good and faithful Servant, filling his ears, made him shut his eyes singing,
and give up the Ghost in assurance of being embraced, and of having access to
embrace.

From all this, these things are observable, 1. That God, by the speaking
significations he gave of his complacency in the Freedom and Fidelity of his
Servant, wrote a sufficient refutation of all that was said by some, to
disgrace both him and his Cause. 2. That here is a new witness from Heaven
against these Invasions. 3. As also against the Indulgence, and the taking of
these Instructions. Beside 4. The Encouragement given to all to abide faithful,
in avowing Christ's Prerogatives, and the Privileges of his Church and Kingdom,
even though abandoned of all, who should bear them Company, or go before them.

Ere we return to take further notice of what past, when the forementioned
Indulged Ministers compeared before the Council, we shall for a close out of
the Registers mention these following Acts.

Edinbr. 6. of Feb. 1673.
A Nent a petition, presented by Mr Robert Hunter, now Minister at
Burrowstouness, that conform to an Act of Council, the petitioner did serve
the cure at the Kirk of Duning for the 1671. and 1672. years, and after
Martimass last did transport himself to the Kirk of Burrowstowness, conform to
the Councels Order. And therefore humbly supplicating, that the Stipend of the
said Paroch of Duning for the said two years might be appointed to be paid to
him. The Lords of his Maj. privy Council, having heard and considered the said
Petition, do ordain the said Stipend of the said Paroch, for the said two
years, to be paid to the Supplicant; and that Letters of Horning be direct for
that effect.

In the Year 1676. there came forth an open Proclamation, Dated March 1.
THE Lords of his Maj. Privy Council considering that by their Act of the 3.
September. 1672. they did Order and appoint diverse outted Ministers, to repair
to the several Paroches, therein specified; and to remain therein confined,
permitting and allowing them to preach and exercise the other parts of the
Ministerial function in those Paroches, and did require and enjoin these
Ministers, or any other Ministers indulged by former Acts of Council, to keep
and observe the Instructions following, as they would be answerable.

That they should not presume to Marry or Baptize any, except such as belonged
to the Paroch, to which they were confined, or to the neighboring Paroches
vacant or wanting Ministers for the time.

That all Ministers indulged, in one and the same Diocese, should celebrate the
Communion upon one and the same Lords Day; and that they should admit none to
their Communions belonging to other Paroches, without testificats from the
Ministers thereof.

That they should preach only in these Kirks, and not in the Churchyards, nor
in any place else, under the pain to be repute and punished, as keepers of
Conventicles.

That they should remain within and not depart forth of the Paroches, to which
they are confined, without license from the Bishop of the Diocese only.

And whereas it is informed, that the said outted Ministers, indulged as
aforesaid (at the least many of them) have violated and contraveened the
foresaids Orders and Instructions (upon which terms they were permitted and
indulged to preach and exercise the other functions of the Ministry) whereby
many disorders are occasioned. The said Lords do therefore, of new again,
require and command all these Indulged Ministers to keep and observe the
foresaids Orders and Instructions, in time coming, and specially for keeping
within the bounds of their Paroches, and celebrating the Communion upon one and
the same Lords day, as they will be answerable at their perril. And ordains
these presents to be printed, and Copies thereof sent to the several Ministers.

Nothing needs be here observed beside the Parenthesis, where it is said,
that the Observation of these Instructions was the terms, upon which they were
indulged; and therefore when they accepted of the Indulgence on such terms,
they consented to them, and professed and declared their willingness to accept
of their Ministry, and of the free Exercise thereof upon these Conditions; So
that whether they observed them punctually afterward, or not, the bargain was
established, and they became obliged by their own deed, in accepting of these
favoures granted on these Conditions, to observe the Instructions carefully;
and it was too late to say afterward, that the Conditions were not lawful, and
therefore could not be observed, for that should have been said at first; and
even upon that account alone, had there been nothing else, they should have
plainly and peremptorily rejected the supposed favor. Nor will it avail to
say, that they knew not, that the punctual observing of these Instructions was
made the Condition of the granted favor; for though at first these
Instructions, when given, were not expressly so called; yet the manner of
proposal was such, as all who desired not willingly to run into a s^are, might
have been convinced, that so and no otherwise they were intended, and upon the
matter could carry no other import. And if any were invinciblie ignorant
hereof, at their first accepting of the Indulgence; yet now, when such a
Printed Proclamation came forth, wherein this was in terminis expressed, and
the Printed Proclamation ordered to be sent unto each of them, they could no
longer pretend ignorance; and therefore were called, if they had been formerly
really circumvented and cheated, now openly to have declared their
unwillingness to accept of the Indulgence on these terms; and henceforth to
have abandoned the same, and followed their Brethren to the Mountains. But now
when this was not done, but they remained in their warm nests, how they can
plead innocent before God, or Man, I see not.

We proceed to relate a few things following.

Edinbr. 3. August. 1676.
THe Lords of his Maj. privy Council do hereby ordain Mr John Stirling,
Minister, who is confined to the Paroch at Hounam, by an Act of Council and
Indulged to preach in that Paroch, to transport himse^f from thence to the Town
of Irwing, and confine himself to the Town and Paroch of Irwing, with liberty
to preach and exercise the other Functions of the Ministry, in that Paroch, as
he did in the former, according to the Instructions of the Council, given to
the rest of the Indulged Ministers.

By which we see, that the simple Act of the Council is the all and only ground
of transportation from one place to another; and that always the Instructions
must go alongs with them, as the constant Companion of the Indulgence.

Edinb. 9. November. 1676.
HAving heard and considered a Petition, presented by the Magistrates of the
Brugh of Irwing, supplicating that the Stipend of the Paroch of Irwing, vacant
in the year 1676. might be allowed to the Petitioners, for defraying the
Expenses, that Mr John Stirling will be at, in transporting himself to Irwing,
and repairing the Kirk, School and Bridge of Irwing. Do allow the Supplicants
the Stipend of the said Paroch, for the said year 1676. Instant, which is
vacant, for defraying the expenses of the said Mr John Stirling, and repairing
the Kirk, School and Bridge of Irwine; and if need bees ordained Le^ters of
horning to be direct hereupon in form as effeits.

Edinb. 1. March 1677.
Anent a petition presented by Mr William Maitland, Minister at Beeth, showing
that the petitioner has served the Cure, at the said Kirk; the two by gone
years 1675. and 1676. without receiving any stipend, albeit he has himself and
a numerous family to maintain, which he will not be longer able to undergo,
unless the Lords of Council be pleased to allow him the said stipend for the
said two years service: And therefore humbly supplicating, that an order and
warrant might be granted for that effect, in manner underwritten. The Lords of
his Maj. Privy Council, having heard and considered the foresaid Petition, do
hereby grant order and warrant to the Heritors and others liable in payment of
the stipend of the said Paroch of Beeth, to make payment of the same to the
Petitioner, and that for ilk one of the said crops and years of God 1675. and
1676. and ordains Letters of horning and others to be direct thereupon, in
form as effeirs.

Edinb. 7. of March. 1677.
The Lords of his Majest. privy Council, do hereby ordain Mr Alexander
Hammiltoun, who is by Act of Council confined to the Paroch of Dalmeny, and
permitted to preach there, during their pleasure, to remove himself from the
said Paroch of Dalmeny to the Paroch of Dalserfe, and that betwixt and the fifth
day of Aprile next, and to confine himself within the said Paroch of Dalserfe
till further order, as he will be answerable at his peril. And do hereby permit
and a^low the said Mr Alexander Hammiltoun to preach and exercise the other
functions of the Ministry in the said Paroch, till further order from the
Council, upon the same terms, that he has exercised his Office formerly in
the said Kirk of Dalmeny.

So that we see the whole exercise of the Ministry, is, by this Indulgence,
wholly at the free and arb^^riarious disposal of the Council, and depending
upon their Orders. As also, we see, that the observation of the Instructions is
an essentia^ part of the bargane, being the terms and condition, on which the
Indulgence is granted.

There came forth a Printed Proclamation August. 10. 1677. as follows.
FOR as much as the Lords of his Maj. Privy Council, in pursuance of his Maj.
Commands, signified to them by a Letter of the 7. of June 1669. did confine
several outted Ministers to particular Paroches, with allowance to preach and
exercise the other functions of the Ministry within the same, and did deliver
to them certain Instructions, to be kept and observed; upon which they did
accept the Indulgence granted to them. And a^beit these Instructions have been
frequently repeated, and sent to these Ministers, yet diverse of them have
con^raveened the same, without any manner of regard thereto. And whereas by
his Maj. Letter foresaid, it is left to the said Lords, to allow to these
Ministers such parts of the Stipends, as they should think fit; and that from
time to time, the Council has gi^en Orders and Wa^rands to the Heretors and
others, liable in payment of the stipend, to make payment thereof, as they saw
cause; without which special war^and, they could not, nor cannot, warrantably
pay the same. Notwithstanding whereof, it is informed that several Heretors
have paid, or intend to pay these stipends, without special Warrant and Order.
The said Lords do therefore Prohibit and discharge all Heretors, Fewers,
Liferenters, and others, liable in payment of the stipends of the Paroches,
where these Ministers are confined, to make payment of any part of the Stipend
to them, for the cropped and year 1677. and in time coming without a special
Order and Warrant from the Council, under the penalty of being liable in
payment of the said Stipend again, to such as the Council shall appoint, and
further censured for their Contempt, and ordains these presents to be printed,
and published upon a Sabbath day at the several Paroch-Kirks, where the said
Ministers are confined, that no Person pretend ignorance.

In the Proclamation-emitted in the preceding year 1676. the Council said in
plain terms, that they granted the Indulgence, upon condition that the
Indulged should observe the Instructions given; and here in this Proclamation,
they say, that the Indulged did accept of the Indulgence granted to them, upon
these terms; whereby we see that it was a full and formal compact, and the
Indulgence was both granted and Accepted upon the terms specified. What can
now be said for vindication of these accepters, I cannon imagine. If they
should say: That all this is but the deed of the Council, with which they are
not concerned. Yet it is certain, that every one is Master of his own favors,
and may dispense them on what terms he pleases; and when the terms are
known, upon which such favors are granted, and the favors formerly accepted
are held, though the conditions should seem hard, yet the favor is embraced
cum hoc onere; and any after signification of a dissatisfaction cannot but be
unseasonable and insignificant. It would now have been thought, if the Indulged
had not been satisfied with the terms, after such public Intimations were
made unto the whole Nation, both of the grant of the favors, and of their
acceptance, upon these terms, they would have signified their dissatisfaction
with the bargain, and rejected the favor of the Indulgence, which they could
have upon none, but sinful terms; especially now when their silence, and
continuing in the possession of the favor, did not only interpretativly, but
plainly and expressly, in the sight of the whole Nation, say, they were
satisfied with the terms, and would rather submit unto them, than lose the
benefit they had received in and by the Indulgence.

Upon which account possibly it was, that the Council, seeing that they had
attained their end, in granting the Indulgence, and had found the Indulged so
calm and pliable to submit to any terms they pleased to propose, did
mitigate, within two months thereafter* the severitie of the last Act, in so
far, as concerned the stipends; for October. 5. 1677. this Act was made, with
which I shall end this historical Relation.

Edinb. October. 5. 1677.
The Lords of Council thought fit, of that the Indulged Ministers shall not be
put to a necessity of seeking yearly warrands for their stipends: But
authorizeth and appoints the Heretores of the Paroches, where they serve, to
pay them their stipends, according as they serve the cure, in whole, or in
part. And do declare, that if any of these Indulged Ministers shall be found to
contraveen their Instructions, the Council will proceed against them, as they
shall see occasion. And recommends to the respective Commissioners, appointed
by the Council, for putting the Decreets of Council etc, and Acts against
Conventicles and others, in execution, to see them keep their confinements; and
to report if they find them transgre^s.

We have thus deduced this Business of the Indulgence unto this period; and, as
occasion offered, have hinted all alongs such remarks, as might suffice to give
understanding in the matter, and to clear up the true state of the question
unto the understanding and unprejudged Reader. And from what is said, the
judicious may see what is to be said of the Indulgence, and of those Ministers,
who have thus accepted thereof, though no more were said: Yet that fuller
satisfaction may be given in this matter, I shall, according as I promised,
turn back a little; and take notice of some things, that fell out Anno 1673.
when severals of the Indulged were (as we heard) called before the Council, for
not observing the 29. of May, and the Instructions that had been given to them,
where by we may be helped to some further clearness in this affair.

And in this examination, I shall, as to the ground I go upon, be favorable to
the Indulged, beyond all exceptions; for I shall only take notice of the
relation of what passed, as made by one of themselves, in a Narrative (as it is
called) concerning the carriage of some Ministers, who appeared before the
Council in July last) to wit 1673) written in answer to afriend, who de^ired
to be informed about that affair; and truth or falsehood was in that Paper,
scattered up and down among the People; concerning the same. And I suppose, no
man will blame me for grounding my discourse against the Indulgence, and
Indulged, upon this Narration, seeing it may be supposed, that this would be
made as favorable to them and their cause, as truth would suffer; and I shall
be loath to question matters of fact; nor shall it be necessary for ^e to
examine every word in that Paper it being sufficient for my present business,
to touch upon those things, which are most material, and which concern our
present question.

This Author tells us; that there were a considerable number of Ministers, who
had obtained liberty from the Magistrate to preach publicly, without hazard of
that legal restraint, under which they lay before, cited before the Council.
But, not to exaggerat that word obtained, which would import, that these
Ministers had been too active in procuring to themselves that liberty, as it is
called; which, whether it was so, or not, I cannot determine, though this
expression would give the Reader ground to suppose that indeed it had been so;
I only observe, that his Construction of the Indulgence, and his Description
thereof here given, appears too favorable, and more favorable than true;
for sure there was more than this in the Indulgence; Matters had been thus, if
the Act of Glasgow had been simply repealed, and every man permitted to return
home to his own Charge: But when that is not done; but every one of them sent
to such places, as the Council thought meet, and appointed and ordained, there
to abide, and to exerce the function of the Ministry, with such and such
limitations, and upon certain Conditions held forth and made known, and (as
the Council says) accepted and submitted to, it is manifest that the matter
had a far other face. Beside, that the granting of liberty to preach publicly
without hazard, needed no such Act of Parliament, as is the Act of Supremacy,
to salve the granters in Law, and make the grant to stand good in Law. But what
for a Possession this liberty is, the Charter, by which it is confirmed, may
tell us. It can be no lawful Possession before God, which must have such a de
Novo damus, and Charter to secure it: And that the Indulgence could not stand
without this* we have seen above; and how, notwithstanding of all that liberty,
the Indulged could not be secure, in point of Law, until this explanatory Act
of the Supremacy had past in Parliament Anno 1669. whereby not only what was
done by King and Council, in licensing of so many, before that Act, was
declared to be legal, because of the Kings Supremacy in Church Affairs, never
before so amply and fully declared and explained; but way made for prosecuting
the same design, in time coming; according as it came to pass. When the
Indulgence stands engaged thus unto; and under the favorable aspect of that
unparalleled Supremacy; who, that is not wholly devouted unto the Supremacy,
can give such a favorable verdict of the Indulgence, as this Author did?
Beside, that impartial On-lookers will judge, that there was much more in this
Indulgence, seeing it is obvious enough how the contrivance was made to break
the honest suffering party, and (as some of the chief Contrivers said) to
divide betwixt the Mad-Cap Phanaticks, and the more sober; to confirm the
Usurpation, to strengthen the hands of Adversaries, to suppress and keep down
the glorious and blessed Assemblings of the Lords people, and to settle people
in a Sinful silence and stupide Submission to all the Encroachments, made on
the Prerogatives of the Crown of Christ, and on the Privileges of his Church,
and to the overturning of the whole Work of God; and not only the Intentio
Operantium, (which Wise men so circumstantiated, as they were, were called to
eve and consider) was obvious and clear; but also the Intentio Operis was
undeniable; however we may please ourselves, in devising terms of mincing and
extenuating, whereby to paint it forth, as well as we can, if not so, as that
it shall appear beautiful; yet so as that it may not appear so deformed, as
indeed it is, and will be to all that view it in a just and upright mirror.

He says that it is not easy nor necessare, to tell what was said to or by
every one of them, they being called-in one by one; but this is certain, that
all of them (except two, who were dismissed upon their declaring that they had
preached on that day only because it fell to be their lecture-day) declared
they had not preached on that day, and did agree in substance upon this ground
of their forbearance, that it did not flow from any disloyalty or disaffection
to Authority; but that they had not freedom to observe any s^lemne fixed
anniversary Day for religious Worship, besides the Lords Day. To which I
shall only crave leave to say, not questioning the account he gives here,
though the Council's books tell us* that there were Three assoiled, and that
because of their observing that day; nor taking notice, that the Lords day is
no anniversary day, but a weekly solemn day; nor doubting of the first part of
their Apology; for as to some, it may be more than probable, that such was
their loyal affection to Authority, that for fear of offending, they did not
hold forth and plainly show the true ground as they ought to have done. I
grant the Parliaments calling that day, an holyday, might give ground of
scrupling to Conscientious Persons: Yet I suppose, it is well enough known,
that this denomination was not the effect of true Devotion, nor yet of
Superstition; the day being observed, rather in honor of Bacchus, than of the
true and living God; and that the Principal thing intended, was, a Solemn,
Universal and Anniversary Condemnation of the work of Reformation, which was so
fully signified in the very narrative of the Act, that I wonder these Brethren
did not give this, as the ground of their non-observing of that day. I shall
not think, that they thought themselves free to abstract from that Narrative,
and not once to notice it; seeing they could not abstract simple preaching on
that day, from its due observation; and seeing every one knows, that every
observation of a day holy, or civil, appointed by Men, does homologat the
Grounds and Reasons of the Institution.

But passing this, which is not of moment, as to our present business, he tells
us, that there were four of the Brethren called-in together, upon particular
summonds, for baptizing of Children of other Congregations: To which among
other legal defenses (whereof he can give no particular account) they gave this
answer; that these Acts, relating to that matter, were never intimate unto
them. Upon which they were told by my L. Chanc. they should get them; and so
all were commanded to appear again the following Tuesday. As to this, we may
see, that the Council did suppose those Acts to have been made known unto them.
And that, so far as the Council did know, all the rest, save these four, had
observed the Injunctions, otherwise they had been challenged upon the violation
of them, as well as these four. As to this answer, given by those four, I
suppose, the rest will willingly acknowledge, that it was not sufficient; and
that another answer had been both more pertinent, and less introductive of new
troubles; for probably, if this answer had not been given, they had not got
such a return from my L. Chanc. Had they ingenously said, that their
commission bare them to Baptize, as well as to Preach; and that they might not
be answerable to their Master, to refuse to Baptize any Child within the
Covenant, brought unto them for that end, much trouble and temptation had been,
in all appearance, prevente^. And though I will not condemn all legal
defenses; yet I must say, that Ch^istian prudence might soon have taught them
to have waved this defense, not only because it was obvious enough what would
follow: but mainly because it contained a tacit acknowledgment, that they
would not have done what they did, if the Act had been intimat to them; and
that in time coming they would willingly obey the same; and consequently, that
the Injunctions were just and righteous, and such as neither they, nor any
other should disobey, whether because of the matter, or because of the power
enjoining them: But more of this purpose afterward.

He gives us next an account of what they did in the Interval, and how they did
meet almost every day, to consult what they should do, at their next
appearance, in case these Acts (called, says he, Rules) should be intimate
unto them: And how a Paper was produced by some, appointed thereunto, which was
only relative to these Instructions or Rules, with a touch of the reasons of
their not-observing of the 29. of May, to which (says he) afterward was
prefixed a pretty large Introduction, concerning Christ's power, in and over
his Church; and asserting the Magistrat's just right about Ecclesiastic
affairs, as amply as any thing Mr Hutcheson spoke; and denying him no more,
when it was finished, than he ^enied unto him. Concerning this Paper, I can say
nothing, having never seen it; only I find, it contained (as himself tells us,
in the following words) this clause: That we could not receive from the
Magistrate any Instructions, to regulate us in the exercise of our Ministry:
And I find by his own relation; that three or four days they debated upon
this clause, which he calls, Unqualified: And that many of the Brethren were
against it, as an Assertion, which being so generally and indistinctly
expressed, would not hold water, nor be found agreeable with the Word of God, or
Concessions even of our Orthodox Anti-Erastian Divines, concerning the
Magistrates just right.

As to this Assertion, which, as he says, Was not satisfying to some; though I
do not know, what particularly was objected against it by these some; yet I may
take liberty to say, that it appears not to me contrary either to the Word of
God, or to the Concessions of Orthodox Anti-Erastian Divines, if it be
understood, either as relative to the case than in hand (as it behooved to be,
if pertinently adduced,) or according to the true and native import of the
words, wherein it is expressed: and that because.

1. Nothing occureth to me, in Scripture, whence it can with any show of
probability be inferred, that this Assertion is not consonant to Scripture,
except what is recorded of David's giving Instructions to the Levites, Porters
and Singers, and Marshalling them in their several Orders and Work. But sure I
am, all Anti-Erastian Divines look upon that practice, as no precedent to
Christian Magistrates now, as is well known: And their ground is clear and
irrefragable; for David* did what was done herein, not as King, by any proper
Magistra^ical power, as is clear from what he said himself* when he was
delivering all these Orders and Instructions, mentioned 1 Chronicles. 23. and 24.
and 25. and 26. over unto Solomon Chap. 28. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. he tells
him verse 19. That the Lord made him understand all this, in writting by his
hand upon him: And accordingly we find Solomon doing nothing in this matter by
his own proper Magistratical power; 2 Chronicles. 8: v. 14. But according to the
order of David his Father. And moreover, when King Hezekiah is about this work,
reforming what was am^sse, he does nothing of this kind, Iure Regio, by his
Magistratical power; but according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the
Kings Seer; and Nathan the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 29: v. 25. and it is added; for it
was the commandment of the Lord, by his Prophets. In like manner King Josiah,
when he is ordering Church Affairs, and reforming abuses, assumed nothing to
himself of this Nature, as King, but appointed all to be according to the
writting of David King of Israel, and according to the writting of Solomon his
Son, 2 Chronicles. 35:4.

2. Nor can I call to mind what that Concession is of our Anti-Erastian
Divines, that can seem to contro^e this, (1.) It cannot be that Concession,
That Magistrates may and should put Ministers to their Duty, in following the
Rules and Injunctions, prescribed by Christ, viz. in their Political Way, and
by their Political Penalties: For hence it will no way follow, that Ministers
receive Instructions from Magistrates, to regulate them in the exercise of
their Ministry; more than it can be said, that Magistrates receive their
Instructions, for regulating them in the exercise of their Civil Function, from
Ministers; because Ministers, in their Ministerial Way, put Magistrates to
their Duty, in following the Rules prescribed by God in his Word. (2.) Nor can
it be that Concession, That Magistrates may, by their Political and Civil
Sanction, confirm and enforce civilly Canons and Rules, Ministerially cleared
and concluded by Church-Judicatories: For that is but to press the Rules of
Gods Word to be observed, and is no prescribing of Injunctions; but an
enjoining civilly the Observation of Injunctions, imposed and proposed
Ministerially by Church-Judicatories. (3.) Nor can it be that Concession, That
the Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, for the Reasons already given; The
Minister also may be said, to be Custos utriusque tabulae, in his way and
manner; and yet none will hence infer, that he may give Instructions unto
Magistrates, to regulate them in the exercise of their Office. (4.) Nor can it
be that Concession, That the Magistrate is Episcopus (...), an overseer of
things without; for these external things are properly and formally political
things, belonging to the Civil Government of the outward man; among which the
function of the Ministry, as such, cannot be reckoned; this being purely
Ecclesiastic, and properly belonging to the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ. (5.)
Nor can it be that Concession. That the Magistrate may limite and confine the
Person of a Minister, whereby, per accident, there is a confinement laid upon
the further extension of the exercise of his Ministry: for every body sees,
that this is properly a confinement of the Person, and but consequently of the
exercise of the Ministry; and no man will say, that is Orthodox, that the
Magistrate has the same Power over the Office of the Ministry, that he has
over the Person of the Minister.

3. Some such thing may, I grant, be gathered, with some probability, from that
Assertion of Vedelius, viz. That Magistrates have an Inspection of the Office of
Ministers, as he urges it. But he is no Anti-Erastian, but an Erastian Divine:
And I suppose no such thing will follow from this Assertion, or the like, as
qualified or explained by our Orthodox Divines, who have written against
Vedelius, such as Apollonius, Triglandius and Revius: Beside what Walaeus and
Voetius have spoken hereunto.

4. I conceive that Assertion was very orthodox and safe; for these Reasons,
(1.) This Power of giving Instructions, for regulating the exerci^e of the
Ministry, would infer or presuppose, that the Office of the Ministry, and
its exercise are subordinat to the Magistrate in linea recta: For Instructions
and Orders or Rules coming from a Superior (for from such they must come and
not from an Inferior, not yet from a Co-ordinat Power) to an Inferior, say,
that the Superior has Power to grant a Commission to that Inferior, be it
Court or Person, to Act in that function and sphaere; and a Power to Limite,
Restrict, Enlarge or Qualify the exercise of that function, as he sees good:
But none of our Orthodox Anti-Erastian Divines grant a Subordination, but
assert a Collaterality. (2.) No Orthodox Anti-Erastian Divine will say, that
Ministers, as such, are so subordinant unto the Supreme Magistrate, as other
inferior Magistrates are. But if the Supreme Magistrate might give Instructions
to Ministers, and prescribe Rules to regulat them in the exercise of their
Ministry; what difference shall there be, as to this, betwixt Ministers, as
such, and inferior Magistrates? Can the Supreme Magistrate do more, as to the
regulating of the Magistratical function, in inferior Magistrates, than Limite
them, Restrict them, Qualify them by such and such Instructions? and what less
shall now hereby be granted to him, in reference to Ministers, as such?

5. But now if we speak of Injunctions and Instructions, in particular, the
matter will be yet more clear, that that Assertion was truth, and nothing but
truth: For either the Instructions are concerning such things, as are at all
times necessary to the right exercise of the Ministry; or concerning alterable
circumstances, which only hic and nunc can be called neces^ary: If the former
be said, it must be granted, that these are set down to us in the Word; for all
necessaries are there contained; and if so, the Magistrate either enjoineth
these Ministerially, as holding forth the mind of God; but this cannot be said,
for then were he no Magistrate, in that, but a Church Officer and a Minister: or
Magistratically and Autocratorically, as a Civil Magistrate. And then this must
either be, in Ecclesia reformata and been instituta, that is, in a well
reformed and instituted Church; or in Ecclesia reformanda and confusa; that is,
in a Church wholly confused and needing reformation; In the former case,
Orthodox^Anti-Erastian Divines will say, there ought to be an antecedaneous
judgment of the Curch, or of Ministers, who are the only authoritative and
authorized Ministerial Interpreters of the Word: And then the Magistrate does
not give the Instructions, but by his Civil Sanction politically inforceth the
observation of Gods Instructions, authoritatively and ministerially held forth
by the authorized ministerial Interpreters. The latter case is not our case,
unless by this Concession we would grant Power and Liberty to any Magistrate,
to overturn the best reformed Church that is, to the end he may order all
things in it, as he pleases; which was never understood by the Users of this
Distinction. If the Instructions respect only the alterable Peristatica: Either
Christ has given Power to his Church, in these cases, to judge, according to
the General Rules of the Word; or not. No reformed Orthodox Anti-Erastian
Divine will say not, and if the former be said (as it must be said) Then quo
jure? By what Law can the Church be robbed of this Power? And by what right can
the judgment of this matter be committed, in prima inflantia, at the very
first, unto the Magistrate; or rather wholly and solely unto him? For thus the
Ministers are altogether excluded, when it is said, that the Magistrate can
give Instructions in these matters: For the granting of this power unto the
Magistrate, will necessarily bring the examination and judgment of Ministers,
as to the Acts of the exercise of their function, unto the Civil Court, either
wholly, or in the first place at least, contrare to the Orthodox Anti-Erastian
Doctrine.

I think then, that all, who minded honest and plain dealing, in this day of
trial, and of witnessing to the truth; and to that truth, that so nearly
conce^ned Christ, as King and Head of the Church, should have consented unto
this Assertion, and in plain terms have told the Council. That they were to
receive no Instructions from the Magistrate, to regulat them in the exercise of
their Ministry. He tells us next, that Some supposed this question was
determined, in the Concessions, that were in the Introducto^y part of the paper
wherein the Magistrat's power objectively Ecc^esiastical is asserted. Bu^ if
all those concessions, set down in the Introductory part of the Paper, issued
in the clearing of the Magistrates power to be objectively Ecclesiastical, they
expressed nothing to weaken the forementioned Clause: For, who will say, that
because the Magistrat's power is objectively Ecclesiastical: Therefore he can
give Instructions to regulat Ministers, in the exercise of their Ministry? It
were as good a consequence to say, The Magistrate is keeper of both the Tables
of the Law. Ergo he may set down Instructions, Limitations and Rules, showing
when the Law o^ God shall oblige as the Law of God, and when not. And to lay,
Because he has the Scriptures for the object of his care: Therefore he may set
down Rules how this or that Prophecy, this or that doctrinal Book, or History
should be understood and Interpreted. So to say, Because his care reaches to
Doctrine, and he must countenance the preaching of Truth, and discountenance
the preaching of Error. Ergo he may appointe Ministers what to preach, and
what not; and command them to preach of the Seven deadly sins, and not of
Predestination, as the King said in his Letter to the Archbishop of York And
because his power objectively reaches to the Worship of God: therefore he may
do as Jeroboam did. So because Discipline and Government are also the object of
his care, therefore he may give Rules and Instructions, how the Church shall be
governed; that is to say, whether by a Pope, or by Prelates, or by the People,
or by Himself and his Undermagistrates. Yea and from this power objectively
Ecclesiastical, it may as well be Inferred, that he may regulat Controversies
and other debates, handled in Church Assemblies, and prescribe what Arguments
pro and what Arguments contra shall be used, what sins shall be so and so
Censured, etc. Yea, in a word, we may as well infer from this objectively
Ecclesiastical power, all that is summarily contained, in the Explicatory Act
of Supremacy: As that he may give Instructions, to regulat Ministers, in the
exercise of their Ministry.

How did this debate issue? He says, in end, some made a motion, which, with
common consent, so far as could be discerned, was embraced: And what was this?
That the Assertion should be thus qualified, That we would not receive from the
Magistrate Instructions, Formally and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, to regulat
us, etc. Which, in my judgment, was either nothing to the purpose; or (which is
worse) was a betraying of the Cause: For either this was understood, in
reference to these Rules, which the Council prescribed in their Act Sept.
2.1672. or not. If not, what was it to the purpose then in hand? If it was
understood with this reference, then either hereby they meant to justify and
defend their refusing to accept of these Instructions, or to justify their
accepting of them, but not of others. If the former be said, Then (1.) Why was
Mr Blair so much condemned, who did but refuse the accepting of these, that had
been expressed in the Act, and were then exhibited? (2.) Why was it not plainly
affirmed, that they would not receive these, that the Council tendered unto
them? (3.) Why was there so much debate in private, about a general Thesis,
when the clear assertion of the Hypothesis, would have salved both Credit and
Conscience? If the Assertion was thus qualified, to justify their accepting of
these Rules, then sure, the cause was betrayed: And if they were clear to
accept of these Rules, what necessity was there for this general blind? If
they intended it for a Testimony, was that a fi^ season for a Testimony, when
they were resolved to yield to all, that was at that time desired, without
hinck or scruple? Further, I suppose it will be found, that some of these
Instructions were indeed formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical. And if
these were excepted, they should have been particularly mentioned, that all
might have been clear; for in Testimonies we cannot be plain and clear enough.
If they were not clear to embrace these Instructions; why did they not
unanimously agree to tell this in plain terms? And if reasons of their
refusal had been demanded, ingenuity and plain, dealing had furnished them with
reasons sufficient, taken both from the matter of the Rules, the manner of
enjoining them, and from the sad consequences of obeying them, beside several
other circumstances, not to be despised.

When all agreed unto the Assertion thus qualified, and so to the whole Paper
that was drawn up, he tells us, there fell out another question, whether that
Paper should be made use of, as a Directory, when they should be called to
speak, before the Council, or if it should be subscribed by all, and so given
in as their answer, and sense of these Matters? This was, no doubt, a weighty
debate, and such as might have occasioned their breach among themselves: But
when the Lord is away, what Light or Counsel can remain? Well, what came of
this question? The generality (he says) were indeed for the subscribing of it.
Which I confess I would not have been for; Nor yet for using of it as a
Directorie; for reasons already given. But now the generality being for the
subscribing of it, what became of it? Was it subscribed indeed? No, says he;
and thus the Minor part prevailed. But he says, there were Reasons moving
hereunto. And I shall be glade to hear these. The first is, One, who was then
withdrawn about some necessary affairs, had declared before, upon reasons
ponderous to him, that he was not free in his mind to subscribe any such Paper,
at that time. It seems strange to me, that the unclearness of one should have
proven such an effectual mean to stop the rest, in that, whereabout they had
no scruple; especially when that one did not show, what his ponderous reasons
were. I humbly judge; the Zeal of God would have determined them another way.
But there was good cause for this; for says he, They judged it not safe, but
prejudicial to the cause, and to unity to break bulk, and Act in a divided way,
when all were ready to concur in the matter, though they differed in the
form and manner: And how inconvenient was it, says he, that differences about
the manner should be seen in public, when they were one upon the matter? But
what prejudice had come to the cause, if a Testimony had been given-in to the
Council, unto which all had assented, though it had wanted the subscription of
one, who was necessarily absent, when it was subscribed? Yea, though it had
wanted the subscription of one, who was unwilling to subscribe? In so doing
they did not break bulk; but that one, if ever he had been within the hold, had
made the breach, by abandoning his Brethren. Unity and Harmony is good, I
grant; but I know not, why every man should have a negative voice, in all such
matters; and why nothing should be done by a Company or Society, if but one man
dissent. I know no Divine rule for this; nor will Christian prudence teach it:
and I am sure, it is one to an hundred, if ever any thing be done of moment,
or hazard, by a company, on these terms. And I much doubt, if, when one only
Person, yea or two are refractory, all the rest of that Society should think
themselves exonered in Conscience, to forbear a duty, clearly called for. The
form and manner here was (I judge) a material thing; and who were not clear,
as to it, could not be very clear as to the matter.

There was another reason of this forbearance, Had they (says he 2.) been free
to subscribe Papers, at that time; yet they could not look on that Paper, as it
was hastily and crudely patched up, as beseeming so many Ministers of the
Gospel, to give-in to the State; as their mature and formed thoughts. In thesi
I grant, it is good, that no man should subscribe a Paper, with which he is not
satisfied; and I think, it is exception relevant enough against the subscribing
of a Paper, called or looking like a Testimony, when it is not plain nor full
enough, even though what is said be otherwise not reproachable. But as to this
Paper, I think, this reason of his very strange, when he told us before, that
the generality was for subscribing of it, as it was rude, hasty and raw. Whence
came this change? Second thoughts, it seems, have taken place. But in
soberness, I cannot but think strange, that so many able Ministers of the
Gospel could not, after so many days debate, give their formed and mature
thoughts of a Business, in which every Minister of the Gospel, and Servant of
Christ was obliged to be ready always to give, upon less, than a few hours
warning, yea at the first demand, an account of his Faith; especially in this
Controversy, wherein all were called to be most clear; and they especially,
who could not but know, that their silence, as to bearing Testimony to the
Truth, at their first receiving the Indulgence, had given such offense: for my
part, though I cannot judge of the Paper, having never seen it, and though I
see not, how all he says of it can prove it raw and indigested, considering
the account he gave of it before: Yet because of that one clause, he tells me
was in it, and universally assented unto, I am as glade it was not subscribed
and given-in, as he was; and upon that account do judge, it was unfit to to be
a standing thing (as he speaks) for friends and foes, at home and abroad, to
descant upon. Only I wonder how this Consideration could prevail with them,
rather to commit the expressing of the matter unto their chosen Mouth; seeing
words spoken are more liable to Mis-constructions, and Mis-representations, and
other Mistakes; than words set down in write; and it was one to to an hundred
if that one Brother, their Mouth, should so happily, in a set discourse, hit
upon the very expressions, that were only accomodat to declare all their
minds; or if that Brother could have expressed the matter, in more lively,
masculine, digested and significant Expressions, why might he not have been at
so much pains, as to have set these down in write, and then the Paper, being
no more raw and indigested, might have been subscribed and given in? But the
plain Truth is, litera scripta manet: And it was to be feared, that a written
Paper would have provoked the Council, more than a transient and volant
Expression, in a running discourse, buried under an heap of words, and so not
fully understood, could have done. Finally, I would tell him, That an honest,
well meaning, and plain Testimony, though not set off with the paint of
Words, and Expressions, having all their amiable cadencies and flowrs of
Rhetoric, would go far with honest well meaning Friends, both at home and
abroad, and have been very acceptable; yea and more convincing unto Enemies,
whether at home or abroad, whose angry descanting upon it would have been a
further Confirmation of its honesty and validity.

There is yet a Third Reason given, which is something long. There being (says
he) such a clashing among Ministers and People, some being for an utter refusal
of any benfite of the late liberty; and others being free to make use of it,
having given a Testimony in their Station; and that Paper relating only to
these Instructions, and not to the whole cause, they could not but foresee,
that the giving-in of that Paper would have been looked upon, as a Testimony;
and therefore being so defective, relating only to these Instructions, and not
speaking to other cases, it would raise greater debates, and heighten
differences; and this they were confirmed in, when a Brother, coming-in among
them, told them expressly, their Testimony (as it was called) was defective,
and would do more hurt, than good, except it were fuller: yea certified we were
upon good grounds, that if that Paper had been given-in, more tongues and pens
would have been awaked, and set on work against it, than now are against the
forbearing of it. In which case, albeit I could heartily have wished a full,
free general, unanimous Testimony were given-in; yet I cannot see, how their
prudence can be blamed for forbearing that, which would certainly have
ministered fuel to the fire, which is like (if mercy prevent it no) to consume
this poor Church, and may perhaps burn their fingers, who are so eager to
kindle and blow at it. Not to insist nere on enquiring who were those, who were
free to make use of that, (which he calls Liberty) having given a Testimony?
And what was that Testimony, and when and in what Station, was it given by
such, as were free to make use of it? Nor on showing how Improbable it was,
that such as could not agree on a Paper, relating only to these Instructions,
could agree to a more full Paper: I would only say (1.) Matters being so, as he
here says, could they not also foresee, that the Words, uttered by their
Mouth, following this Directory, would be also looked upon, as a Testimony;
and that that Testimony, relating only to the Instructions, would have been
judged defective; and so occasion new Differences? (2.) If the Paper was
defective (as very like it was) why was it not helped? Why was the matter made
worse, by giving-in no Paper at all, but committing the matter to the uncertain
Expressions of one of their number? Could this more prevent the trouble of
Tongues and Pens both? (3.) If he commend their Prudence for not ministering
Fuel to the fire, he cannot approve them, for casting in Oil; for certainly
the Course which they took, did contribute more to the burning fire, than that
course could have done, which they did forbear. (4. Woe to them, that first
kindled that fire, which is like to consume that poor Church; and to them also,
who Administer fuel thereunto; but let some labor, as they will, to free
themselves of this, It shall, I fear, lie at their doors.

But now, when all thoughts of subscribing that Paper were laid aside, what
course was taken? It was resolved (says he) that one should be mouth to the
rest, to speak their sense of these Impositions, in case they were to be
intimate to them: And that this one was Mr. H. and that he was to hold him to
the matter, agreed-on in the Paper. Though I could rather have been satisfied,
that a full and faithful Paper, subscribed by all, had been given in, than that
this course had been taken; yet, to wave reports of some circumstances, that
then went abroad, I think it was requisite, that they had particularly
condescended upon the fit season, when their Mouth should have uttered their
mind; and I cannot be of this Authors mind, who thinks, that he was not bound
to speak in that affair, until he was called upon by the Council; which might
have been, for any thing I know, after all and every one of them had been put
to speak their own mind, in particular, or say nothing, which the Council could
not but take for a compliance. Yet he gives this reason. That the time not
being determined by his Brethren, he was to be ruled by Prudence, which
dictated his own being called-upon (whenever it might be) to be Gods
opportunity season and call, to speak what he had to say: The thing also it
self, and the usual practice in like cases says, it was the most fit time to
speak to the cause, when all had been gone through, and then when he had spoken
his light in the matter, the Brethren (as he willed them to do, when they named
him) might add, diminis^, or alter, as they thought fit. This is a wonderful
thing, that one should be appointed to speak the sense of the rest of certain
Impositions, or Injunctions, in case they were intimate; and yet that prudence
should not teach him to speak, when the Intimation was first made: Was not his
speech to be in reference to these Impositions? Was not his speech to be (at
least) a virtual Protestation, Apology or Insinuation of Reasons, why they
could not in conscience accept of these Impositions? or an Explication and
declaration of the sense, in which they were clear to accept of them? And if
so, does not Nature and Common sense teach, that the only season for this had
been, when the first offer of these Injunctions was made; and that it was a
manifest loseing of the opportunity, to delay, till after the Instructions had
been tendered, and accepted by severals of the Brethren? did not the accepting
of the Paper, containing these Instructions, virtually (at least) if not
formally say, that they submitted thereunto, and were satisfied therewith? And
then, what could their giving of a sense afterward import? Neither the thing it
self (as every one knows) nor any (set be the usual) practice, in such like
cases, says, that it was the fittest time to speak, when all had been gone
through. Had he been only to speak his own judgment, in the matter, he might
have forborne, until the offer had come to his own door; but being appointed
mouth to the rest, and to speak the sense of all the rest, when these
Impositions were offered, his delaying until some, yea till many, had received
the Impositions and Rules in write; was really a crushing of what Testimony was
intended by his speaking in their names: And what could the Council judge
otherwise, than that the mouth, that spoke, was not their public mouth,
having been so long silent; but his own, speaking only when it came to his own
turn? And if what that mouth spoke had been dissatisfying to the Council, and
contradictory to their sense and meaning, might they not have judged the
silence of such as went before, and had received the Injunctions, a plain
homologating with their Meaning and Intention? and that their Mouth's speaking
had discovered them not to be all of one mind?

This is concerning what passed among these Brethren, in private, before they
compeared, according to the order of the Council. We would know, what was their
deportment, when they compeared: And our Info^mer tells us, that when they
compeared, the sentence of the Council for not-preaching May 29. was read unto
them. After which, we are told, that Mr H. addressing his speech to my L.
Chancel. did declare, That his Brethren and he did very cheerfully submit to
any out ward prejudice they might sustain, in following their light, yet
humbly desiring that the true state in their case might be remembered by their
LL. And that they were brought under that sentence, not upon account of any
disloyalty to Authority; but upon a scruple of conscience, concerning that
particular way of expressing it. Of which I shall not now speak (having spoken
to this matter before) and it does not concern our present business: only it
is obvious, that more, yea much more, might and should have been said.

It is more to our present purpose, to notice what was further said. With all
(says he) not knowing, whether these Instructions were to be presented, but
rather to obviat them, Mr. H. added another desire, That their LL. would be
pleased not to burden them with Impositions, in the matter of their Ministry,
wherein they were the Servants of Christ, and they being men, who demeaned
themselves, as became loyal Subjects. Here is my former remarke confirmed; for
prudence taught, we see, this their Mouth, to speak something to the matter,
even though as yet the Impositions were not presented, and offered to them.
Moreover, this desire does import, either that he and the rest were unclear to
submit unto Impositions, in the matter of their Ministry, because of their
being the Servants of Christ; or that, though they looked on these Impositions
as burdens, and so wished to be free of the yoke; yet being imposed they would
submit unto them, as to an outward prejudice, which they behooved to sustain;
as he spoke before in reference to the sentence, read against them. If this
later was his meaning, it is past doubt, that the Cause was betrayed, and his
mouth stopped from giving that Declaration or Testimony, in all their names,
which he was ordered by them to give. If the former was his meaning, as I am
apt to think; why were the Brethren so offended with what Mr Blair said
hereafter? (as we shall hear they were) was it because Mr Blair's words were
too too plain and distinct? Sure, Christianity will tell us, that Testimonies
cannot be plain enough.

Upon this he tells us, they were (as they thought) dismissed. But the L
Chancel. forthwith called them again, as they were turning their faces toward
the door, and told them, that seeing some of their number had said, these Papers
viz. the Papers containing the Instructions) were not given them, the Clerck
was to give every one of them a Copy, which accordingly he went about to do.
May not every body now think strange, that prudence did not now teach their
mouth, to express what he had to utter in their names, when all of them were
thus spoken to in Common, and particular mention was made of that Paper of
Instructions, which before, when no mention was made thereof, he labored to
obviat and prevent the giving of?

When their faces are now again turned toward the Council, the Clerk went
about to deliver each the paper of Instructions, and we are told that they had
been delivered to the one half or more of the Brethren, even to all cited out
of Clidsdale, Renfrow, and some of Kill before they came to Mr A. Blair. And
our Informer tells us, he believes there were few or none of these behind, that
resolved to speak any thing till Mr H. who was not called upon yet, should
begin, (as they had agreed upon, Mr A. Blair consenting thereto, as well as
the rest) if Mr Blair's speaking had not drawn some of them, who had been
spoken to before, and others, as they were called thereto thereafter, to speak
somewhat: But all stood still in one body, waiting till it should come to Mr H.
who was to be their common Mouth, to speak their mind, and they to homologat,
add, or alter, as they should think fit. This is our Informers relation of the
business, and I shall not question the truth thereof, but come and see what he
says of Mr A. Blair and his discourse, which (as would seem) broke the
intended method and order.

As for his Reverend Brother Mr A. Blair's speaking, he says, as I hope in
Charity, his motive was zeal and forwardness; so I wish heartily it had been
forborne till its season; for hinc illae Lachrimae; and the rather I wish he had
not first filled the field; because that lax assertion (of which before) of
receiving no Instructions from the Magistrate etc. (albeit it had been limited
and qualified by Common consent; Yet) he I know not how repeated it to the
Chancellor, in terminis, telling, That he would not receive Instructions from
them, for regulating him, in the exercise of his Ministry; and added this
reason, That if he did so be should not be Christ's Ambassador, but theirs. To
which I shall only desire to say. That I am of the mind, that as true Zeal and
Conscience of duty moved M. A. Blair, to say what he said; so the same should
have moved all of them, to have said the like, or more. And I cannot but think
strange, that this Informer thinks it was not seasonable for Mr Blair to
speak, when the trial came to his own door; and that notwithstanding their
Common mouth had been so long silent, and neglected his opportunity: Our
Informer told us lately, that it was seasonable for Mr H. to speak, when it
came to his turn: and was it not as seasonable for M. B. to speak, when it
came to his turn? As for his calling Mr Blairs Assertion, lax; I shall pass
it, having sufficiently shown above, how consonant it was to truth, and how
groundless all the exceptions were, that were taken at it, so far as I could
conjecture. And I wish himself had hinted (at least) some one ground or other,
whereupon he judged it lax. And what difference, I pray, was there upon the
matter, betwixt Mr H's requesting, that they might not be burdened with
impositions in the matter of their Ministry. And Mr B's saying, that he would
not receive Instructions from them, for regulating him in the exercise of his
Ministry. Mr H's expressions wanted the limitation, that they had all agreed
upon, to wit, formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, as well as Mr B's; and
no man will say, that the word, Impositions, do more import Instructions
formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, than the word, Instructions: Nor is
there any such difference betwixt these words, in the exercise of the
Ministry, which were Mr B's words; and these words, in the mattter of the
Ministry, which were Mr H's words, as to make the one discourse Lax, and the
other acurate. Nay, I am ready to say, that Mr B's Assertion was both more
congruous to the truth and to good sense, than the words of the other. And
finally, This Informer is not well satisfied with the Reason, which Mr B.
added; and yet the same was insinuat, in Mr H's discourse, in these words,
wherein they were the servants of Christ; for these words did either contain a
reason, why their L L. should not burden them with Impositions; or they sounded
forth nothing but nonsense; as every understanding Reader will see.

Yet this reason is made the ground of a great outcry, for he adds, which
reason, if it do not als strongly militate against Ministers receiving of
Instructions and Rules (for the prescriptions in that Paper go by these names)
from Church-judicatories as well, as from the Civil, and strick equally at the
Diatactick power of both, I leave to you to judge; And then to make all strong,
the matter is cast into a Syllogism, but with this mishap, that it is made up
of four terms, contrary to the law of Syllogismes. But this is but trivial. It
is more to the purpose to say, that this same absur^ity will follow upon what
Mr H. spoke, (unless he pleases rather to let it pass under the notion of
Nonsense) and therefore what ever way he shall think to salve Mr H's credit,
was hall by the same way salve Mr B's. Though this might satisfy: Yet I shall
tell him, that it is far worse for him, by his discourse here, to grant unto
the Civil Magistrate a Diatactick power, in matters ecclesiastical^, in such an
illiminated and unqualified manner, as he does, when he talks of the Diatactick
power of both: for this is a manifest homologating the Supremacy, as lately
explained by the Patlia. But for vindication of Mr. B. he would know, that he
was speaking only of Instructions coming from Magistrates, acting by their
Magistratical and Architectonick power; and not of all Instructions coming from
any what somever beside Christ; and his reason was against the receiving of
Instructions from Magistrates, as such, to regulat him, in the exercise of his
Ministry; and did not militate against receiving of Instructions from Church
judicatories. For clearing of this, and for his instruction, I shall tell him
first. What Instructions Ministers or Church-judicatories give, they give them
by a Ministerial Power, explaining, applying and authoritativly declaring, what
are the Impositions, Rules, and Instructions of Christ; so that they are but as
Heralds and Messengers, Proclaming and declaring, with a Ministerial Authority,
the mind of Christ: and therefore the receiving of such is but the receiving of
the Instructions and Impositions of Christ, sent and delivered by Christ
mediatly by such, as stand in a right line of subordination to Him, as sole
Head and King of his Mediatory Kingdom, and act only as in that relation and
subordination. But on the other hand, as Magistrates, as such, are not
Ministers of Christ, as Head of his Mediatory Kingdom; so nor do they act, in
giving out Laws and Instructions, as Christ's Heralds and Ministers,
ministerially explaining and applying the Rules and Instructions of Christ: Nor
do they press these Instructions, as Christ's Instructions, nor in his Name and
Authority; but as in all other things, so here, they act with an Autocratorical
and Architecctonick power: So that, when they give Instructions to Ministers,
to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry, they do it by their
Magistraticall and Architectonick power, by which they do all other
Magistratical Acts. Hence is it, that such as receive Instructions, to regulate
them in the exercise of their Ministry, from Magistrates, do acknowledge this
Magisterial and Architectonick power in Church Matters, to be competent to the
Magistrate, as such; and themselves to be formal Ambassadors and Servants of
the Magistrate: for, who receive Instructions from one, acting Magisterially
and Architectonically, in Church Matters, do own themselves as his Servants:
which cannot be said of such, as receive Instructions from Church-judicatories,
which act but ministerially; and thereby formally declare, that the
Architectonick and Autocratorical power, over Church Matters, agrees alone to
Christ, whose servants they declare themselves to be, in that very act of
holding forth these Instructions, as the Instructions of Christ, and that in
His name. This is one maine difference. Hence Secondly, Ministers receiving
Instructions, for regulating them in the exercise of their Ministry, from
Magistrates, acting like themselves, Magisterially and Architectonically, do
(if not formally, yet at least) virtually deny Christ to be the only Head and
Lawgiver of his Church Acting and Ruling with a supreme power: for this
Architectonick and Supreme power, in the Church, is competent to Christ only;
and he has substituted none, as his Vicar General, neither Prince; not Prelat,
Pope nor other: As were easy to evince, if needful: And so there is but one
Architectonick Supreme Magisterial Power in the Church; and if this be
attributed to the Magistrate, Christ is put from his Right: And so such
Ministers, as by receiving Instructions from Magistrates, to regulate them in
the exercise of their Ministry, do attribute this Power to the Magistrate,
must of necessity take and have their Commission from Magistrates, and become
their Ambassadors, and not Christ's; because by this deed, as they spoil
Christ of his Prerogative and Crown, attributing that unto Magistrates, which
is proper to Him; so they acknowledge their Dependence on, and Subordination to
Magistrates, and not upon and to Christ. But nothing of this kind can follow
upon receiving of Instructions from Church-Judicatories, acting as Christ's
Servants; and, in the very way and manner of their Acting, declaring Christ to
be the Sole Head and Supreme Governor of his Church: For, as the
Church-Judicatories act but Ministerially, so the receiver of Instructions from
them, can own no other Power in them; because they receive these Instructions
from them, as authorized of Christ, with power Ministerially to declare his
mind and will. And this is a Second Difference, which leads me to a Third,
which is this, Christ has never appointed Magistrates, as such, to Act under
him, after such a manner, in the regulation of his Church and Mediatory
Kingdom; as he has appointed Ministers and Church-Judicatories. Now, to
receive Instructions from an Usurper, is to acknowledge the power of the
Usurper, and a dependence upon him, as his Servant: And therefore, as a King
will not own that man, as his Ambassador, who takes his Instructions from an
Usurper: So nor can that Man formally look upon himself, as the Kings
Ambassador; but as the Ambassador of that Usurper. But when one takes
Instructions from the Council, acting in subordination to the King, and
clearing his mind by virtue of his Commission, impowering them thereunto, he is
truly the Kings Ambassador, though the Council did immediately give him his
Instructions: So a Minister, receiving his Instructions immediately from
Church-Judicatories, is nevertheless the Ambassador of Christ; for the
Church-Judicatory acts in subordination to Christ, and only clears up his
mind, by virtue of his Commission, impowering them thereunto. Thus I have
manifested the Invalidity of this Informers Argument; and withal shown that Mr.
B. had good ground to say what he said, and to reject these Instructions, upon
that very ground, that if he had accepted of them, he should have acknowledged
himself not Christ's, but their Ambassador; and withal have shown, that the
Indulged Ministers, in receiving these Instructions, have declared themselves
not to be the Servants and Ambassadors of Christ, but of the Magistrates; and
therefore can be owned as no other.

Our informer tells us, in the next place, That there were some speeches,
betwixt My L. Chanc. and Mr B^. and that Mr B. did not deny that the Council
might confine him, when the Chanc. asked that at him. And this being one of the
Rules, our Informer supposes, that hereby he overturned his own universal
negative. Wherein he is no less mistaken, than he was in his last reasoning;
for though it be true, that the Council did confine them to these places,
(which, among other things, as then circumstantiat, might have moved them to
have refused that Indulgence, they being thereby declared no more free
Subjects, and unworthie of the Common Privilege of all Free Subjects; and so
actually under the Scandal of Disloyal and Censured Persons, which, as it was a
Reproach to the Ministry; so it could not but expose them to Contempt, and
make their Office vile, in the eyes of the World, and their pains fruitless,
when their Ministry was made contemptible: And if there was some further
Design in this obvious, it was so much the more worthy of their
Consideration.) Yet it is as true, that this Confinement was properly and
directly of their Persons; and cannot, in any propriety of speech, be called a
regulating of them in the exercise of the Ministry. The Ministers Body and his
Ministry is not one and the same thing. It is true, by confineing of the
Minister to such a particular place, the exercise of the Ministry is
consequently confined: But hence it will no more follow, that the Magistrate
may give Injunctions, to regulat Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry;
than it will follow, that he may depose a Minister from his Ministry, because,
when he condemns him to death, and accordingly causes the Sentence to be
execute, or keeps him in closs and perpetual prison, he does consequentially
put him from the exercise of his Ministry. Yet he cannot but know, that this
Consequence is naught, and that a Physical restraint and a Moral Restraint or
Limitation much differ.

When Mr B. upon this honest Testimony and Declaration, was committed to a
Macer to be carried to prison, the Informer tells us. That the Brethren, being
surprised, with his speaking unexpectedly (besides the Common agreement) and
with the Asser^ion that dropped from him and affected with the Apprehension of
the Issue, began to be much Afflicted in their Spirits But why were they not
also surprised with Mr H's speaking unexpectedly, besides the Common agreement;
for the Common agreement was not, that he should say any thing in reference to
the Instructions, before the Council had made any motion there about? And why
were they not also surprised with the Assertion that dropped from him, seeing,
as is shown, it was the same upon the matter, with what Mr. B. said, unless we
think he meant it in a most corrupt sense?

After this he tells us, that upon Mr B. his commitment to the Macer one
Minister told My L. Chanc. that he believed diverse Ministers of that Company
were, upon the matter of Mr B's judgment, whereof himself was one: And another
declared, that one of these Rules did bring Ministers into direct Subjection to
Prelacie, contrary to their Principles. Whereby I see, that the Consternation
and Affliction of Spirit, was not so universal, as he did just now hinte: and
that all were not of a Contrary judgment to Mr B. and that the agreement to the
forementioned limited Clause, was not so unanimous and cordial, as he would
have made us believe: But passing these smaller matters, let us hear what
followed.

He adds, Mr H. also, though his time was not come to speak, yet stepped in
with them, to see what he could do to remove mistakes. Whereby I see, that even
he was at length forced to transgress the Rules of Prudence, and to anticipate
even God's Opportunity, Season and Call (as this Informer supposes;) and to
cross the Usual Practice in all such like cases, that is, to speak before his
own turn came. I suppose, if Mr H. had spoken what he was obliged to speak, in
Gods true Season and Opportunity, that is, when the first motion was made of
delivering to them these Rules, he had prevented much of this mistake, and also
Mr B's suffering. What were these mistakes, that Mr H. stepped now in, before
the time, to remove? Were they betwixt his Brethren? Or betwixt the Council and
such of his Brethren, as spoke? And what were these mistakes? Whatever and
betwixt whomsoever they were, if he stepped-in to remove them, that which he
said must be looked upon, as having a tendency to the removing of these
mistakes; and therefore we must suppose, that his Discourse tended either to
rectify Mr B. and such as were of his judgment, or to rectify the Council,
tha^ had committed Mr B. to the Macer. If the Former, then in his judgment, Mr.
B. and the rest, were not to be owned and approved in what they said, being in
a mistake: If the Latter, his discourse should have tended to have vindicated
Mr B. and to have shown the iniquity of what the Council had done: But it may
be, it was of a mixed Nature, tending partly to Approve, and partly to Condemn
both.

Let us hear what it was he said. Our Informer tells us, He spoke according to
the tenor of the Paper agreed upon, to this purpose, He humbly desired their L
L. not to misunderstand his Brother Mr A. B* for as for Rules intrinsecally
Ecclesiastical (the other term Formally was forgotten, through occasion of
the present jumble, as our Informer supposes) For regulating Ministers in the
exercise of their Ministry; he hoped their L L. Intended not to make and
impose any such upon them, who were the Servants of Christ, in these matters.
But for the Magistrates Power objectivly Ecclesiastical whereby they might
judge of Matters of Religion, in order to their own Act, whether they would
approve or discountenance such a way, he knew no Reformed Divine, that did deny
it unto them. And judging that was his Brothers (i. e. Mr Blair's) sense, in
what he spoke, did again desire, he might not be mistaken. Now if we look on
these Words, as they are here set down, we must take them either as an Apology
for, or as a Defense of Mr B. or as Explicatory of his Assertion; and what way
soever we take them, I cannot but observe their uselesness: For when he speaks
of Rules Intrinsecally (let us add Formally, though that was then omitted)
Ecclesiastical etc. he must mean either the Rules, which were then offered to
Mr B. and the rest; or some other: If some other, then he could not desire
their L L. not to misunderstand Mr B. for Mr B. meant and spoke of the Rules,
which were tendered unto him, and which he neither could in conscience, nor
would accept of: Nor could he then be supposed to be speaking any thing in
favors of Mr B. whether by way of Apology,, Defense, or Explication: If he
meant the same Rules, that were then tendered, Then (1.) he must grant, that
these were Intrinse^ally and Formally Ecclesiastical; and so such, as the
Magistrate might not make, nor impose upon the Servants of Christ, and that
because they were the Servants of Christ, in these matters: And so
consequentially, his Words confirm Mr B's Argument, which this Informer (as we
heard lately) judged most absurd. (2.) if he meaned the same Rules, why was the
matter expressed in such general and not obviously intelligible Terms? Every
one does not understand what the Terms Formally and Intrinsecally mean, in
this Business, which is about Rules, to regulat Ministers, in the Exercise of
their Ministry. And the mentioning of these Terms, Intrinsecally and
Formally, here, would say, that there were other Rules Extrinsecally and
Materially Ecclesiastic, which the Magistrates might impose, and they might
receive, to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry: Now I would
gladly know, what these are? Will the Confinement, or Imprisonment of a
Ministers Person, go under that Name? Or will Rules made, concerning the length
of time, which a Minister is to spend, in the exercise of this or that Act of
his Ministry, or the like, be accounted such? The first is wholly Political,
and no more Ecclesiastical, than any other thing, which immediately concerns a
Ministers Person, as his Hat, Books and Clothes, and the like. The Latter, as
they partake more of the Nature of Ecclesiastical Rules, being more formally,
and more nearly related unto the exercise of the Ministry, but yet only in so
far, as they belong to public Actions; so it is a question, if Magistrates may
either solely, or in Prima Instantia, prescribe such Rules unto Ministers.
However this being, at best, but dubious, and the other so clearly Political;
and it being (to me at least) very uncertain, what Rules these are, which may
be called Externally and Materially Ecclesiastical etc. I could have wished,
that some Instances hereof had been given; that so not only, it might have been
known, what Rules were not Formally and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastic; but also
it might have been better understood, what Ecclesiastical Rules were Formally
and Intrinsecally such.

(2.) The other part of the discourse, concerning the Magistrates power
objectively Ecclesiastical, is as useless for any thing I can perceive, either
for clearing of Mr B. or of his discourse: for. (1.) There was nothing in Mr
B's discourse, giving the least hint of his denying that power to the
Magistrate, which all Orthodox Anti-Erastian Divines grant; For the denying to
the Magistrate a power of giving Instructions, for regulating of Ministers, in
the exercise of their Ministry, has no affinity with this; as all know, who
know any thing of these Controversies. Nor (2.) does this piece of the
discourse, in any manner of way clear, in what sense Magistrates may give
Instructions to Ministers, to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry,
and Ministers may receive them; and in what sense not. These two questions are
so far distinct, that I cannot imagine to what purpose this discourse was
brought in; or what it was that gave the least occasion thereunto.

But as to this maine Business, I would further enquire, whether the Brethren
do judge, the matter of giving these Instructions, about which the debate did
arise, did belong to the first part of the discourse; and so to be
Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastical; or to the later part; and so belong
to that power of the Magistrate, which is Objectively Ecclesiastical, whereby
they judge of the matters of Religion, in order to their own Act, whether they
will Approve, or Discountenance such a way? This question must be judged
necessary, unless that whole discourse be accounted Unnecessary and
Impertinent. If the former be said, then why was any troubled at Mr B 's
refusing to receive these Instructions? Why were not those condemned, who had
received them? Why did not such as had received them cast them back again? How
came it that all of them did not unanimously agree in this Testimony? Or how
came it, that their Common Mouth did not speak what was the Common opinion of
all? Why was it not more distinctly and in fewer words said, That they could
not receive these Instructions, as being Rules Intrinsecally and Formally
Ecclesiastical, regulating them, who were the servants of Christ, in these
matters. If the Latter be said, Then was not only Mr B 's both Practice and
Discourse condemned; but the whole cause was basely betrayed; because under the
pretext of the Magistrates power Objectively Ecclesiastical, that which is as
Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastical, as many other, at least, are, was
granted to the Magistrate. Will the Magistrat's power to act as a Man, and not
as a Brute, in his Magistratical work, about an Ecclesiastical Object; that is,
his power to judge by the judgment of discretion, which is Common to all the
members of the Church, yea, to all men, as Men; which Papists deny unto
Magistrates, allowing them only to see with the Churches eyes, but Protestants
grant unto them: Will, I say, this power warrant him, to give Instructions, and
set down Rules, for regulating the exercise of the Ministry? Yea, or will his
Authoritative Judgment, in matters of Religion; that is, his sentence of
Approving or not Approving; of Tolerating, or not Tolerating in his Dominions;
of Countenancing or not Countenancing by his civil Laws, such a Way or
Profession of Religion, warrant him also to set Rules to the very exercise of
the Ministry? By what argument shall this consequence be proved; seeing (1.) In
the one case, he judges of Religion, only in order to his own Act; but when he
prescribes Instructions, Rules and Orders, he judges of Religion, or of that
part of Religion, concerning which the Instructions are, in order to it self,
and the Intrinsic manner of its Administration (2.) In the one, his judgment
is purely Political and Civil, in the other case it is really Ecclesiastical.
(3) In the one case, his judgment is Objectively only to be called or
accounted Ecclesiastical; but in the other, it is Formally and Elecitely
Ecclesiastical. (4.) In the one case, he acts as a Magistrate, considering
the outward Good, Quiet and Advantage of the Commonwealth; In the other, he
acts as a Church Officer or Head, considering the Intrinsic Nature, and
Spiritual Ends of that part of Religion. (5.) In the one, he acts in
subordination to God, as Supreme Governor of the World; but in the other, he
acts, as in a right line of subordination to Christ, the Supreme Head and
Governor of his Church, and Institutor of all the Administrations and
Ordinances, dispensed in the Church, and sole Appointer of the Qualifications
of the Officers, and Rules of Administration: Or rather, if he act as a
Magistrate, in this last, he Acts by an Architectonical power, and so as an
Usurper, or by a power, which is only proper to Christ; or if he be said to Act
ministerially, than also as an Usurper, because never empowered thereunto by
Christ, the Supreme King, and Head of the Church.

If we look upon this discourse of Mr. H. as a Testimony, (and so it may be it
was intended) or as a Declaration of the Judgment of the Ministers, concerning
the Magistrat's jus, or Right, to impose Instructions or Rules on Ministers,
for regulating them, in the exercise of their Ministry; and concerning
Ministers their call and warrant to receive or refuse such Instructions; I
cannot but observe (1.) That it is very defective and short of a fair and full
Testimony, against the Practice of such, who were known to have invaded the
Rights of the Church; yea and the Prerogatives of Christ, as sole Head and King
of his Church; and, in prosecution of this design of invading the same more,
to have devised this medium of the Indulgence (2.) That it is not a plain and
full Testimony against the present Act of Usurpation, whereby a power was
assumed to judge in matters Ecclesiastical, Intrinsecally and Formally such;
Yea, and to perform Elicite and Formal Church-Acts, either Ministerially, as
Ministers of Christ, clothed with Ministerial Church Power from him, which
cannot be Instructed, nor does it compete to a Magistrate, acting as such; or
rather Magisterially, as Supreme Governors in the Church, and Appointers of
Qualifications, Rules, and Manner of Administration of Spiritual Institutions.
(3.) That it was not a full and plain Vindication of the Doctrine of the
Church of Scotland; Nor an Assertion thereof, according to former Vows,
Covenants and Solemn Engagments. 4. That it was not candide and ingenuous, nor
pertinent to the purpose in hand, as it should have been, by holding forth the
Iniquity of such Impositions. (5.) That it was conceived in such General and
Scholastic terms, that neither they, to whom it was spoken, could well
understand what was the drift thereof; nor others conceive what was yielded, or
denied, in the then present case; yea, did not some of the Council say plainly,
they did not understand it? (6.) That it contained desingenuous Insinuations
and unfaire Reflections on honest and worthy Mr A. B. and a tacit Condemning
(at least in part) of his Plain and Honest Testimony; as if it had contained
something, either as to the matter, or expression, unjustifiable; or, at least,
liable to exceptions. (7.) That it contained (at least) as worded, a design
too obvious of humoring and pleasing the Magistrates, while actually stated in,
and prosecuting an opposition to Christ's Supremacy, and to the Right and
Power, granted to the Church-Office-Bearers. (8.) That as it speaks not home
to the point; so it is not clear in it self; opposing unto Giving and Imposing
of Rules, Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastical, a power only Objectively
Ecclesiastical, whereby the Magistrate judges of the matters of Religion, in
order to his own Act of approving or disapproving of such a way; and nothing
else: And so either accounting all things to be Rules Intrinsecally and
Formally Ecclesiastical, which is not a mere judging in order to the
Magistrates own Act; or, on the other hand, accounting all things, in and about
Religion, to belong to that power, which is Objectively only Ecclesiastical,
and so to be no less competent to the Magistrate, than is that Judgment of
discretion, whereby he judges, in reference to his own act of Countenancing or
Discountenancing such a way, which are not real prescribing of Rules,
Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastical: And thus either giving the
Magistrate too little, or else too much.

He tells us of another, that spoke before it came to Mr H's turn; and that this
Person told, He could not receive Ecclesiastical Canones from their L L. but as
for civil significations of their pleasure, under the hazard of civil
penalties, he could say nothing to that; and that another did homologate this
speech. But under favor, this is secundum artem violatilizare densa and
densare volatilia; a pretty whim wham good for nothing. On a serious solid
zealous Minister should have been ashamed, to have substitute such Whity
Whaties, in the place of a plain Testimony, clearly called for in the case. But
these two Persons not only brake their own Order, and might have occasioned
some Consternation to the rest, as well as Mr B 's speaking did, but also spoke
indeed nothing to the purpose; and might as well have been silent, For (1.) By
this Distinction (little better than a mental reservation) they might have
scrupled at nothing, that theMagistrate might attempt to prescribe, in
Church Matters; no, nor at his giving Rules Intrinsecally and Formally
Ecclesiastical; for these might also pass under the Notion of Civil
Significations of their pleasure etc. and thus contradict Mr H. their Common
Mouth, and the Paper also, to which they had unanimously agreed: For, can they
say, that the Magistrate gives, or can give a Civll Signification of his will,
only when he judges in order to his own Act of Approving or Disapproving such
a way: and so exerteth that Power of his, which is only Objectivly
Ecclesiastical; and not also in many other Acts, merely Ecclesiastical, even
Formally and Intrinsecally? Or can they say, that all the Intrinsecalness and
Formality, in Matters Ecclesiastical, consists in their being done by
Church Officers, acting in a Church-Judicatory; and that ^here is no Act, which
in it self can be called Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastical; but that
the sole ground of that Denomination, is their being performed by Men, in
Church-office; and so the very Act of Preaching and of Administrating of
Sacraments, might be done by the Magistrate, as Civil Significations of his
pleasure, being not Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastic, but when done by
Church-O^ficers: And thus all the Ecclesiastickness of Actions, which are
Intrinsecally and Formally such, flows from, and depends upon the
Ecclesiasticalness of the Agents. Whence it will follow, that all, which such
Ecclesiastical Persons do, must be Intrinsecally and Formally Ecclesiastic;
and so their judging Civil matters, condemning Malefactors etc. (not to speak
of other actions) should be actions Formally and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastical,
Ergo it is competent only to Church Officers. And on the contrary, this should
be a good Argument. This man is an Ecclesiastic Person; therefore the Action,
which he does, must be Formally and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastic. And, as by
this means, there should be no Cause, or Action, Formally and Intrinsecally
Ecclesiastical, in it self; so there should be no Cause, or Action,
Intrinsecally and Formally Civil in it self, but that only which is done by
the Civil Magistrate: And this consequence were good; This is done by a Civil
Magistrate. Ergo it is Formally and Intrinsecally Civil; and this should be a
bad consequence, This is an action Formally and Intrinsecally Civil Ergo it is
to be done by the Civil Magistrate only (2.) This answer of these two
Brethren must either Homologate what Mr H. said; or be dissonant therefrom: If
Dissonant, then they did not keep to the Paper, which they had owned, as Mr H.
did Then also Mr H. in his discourse spoke not truth; for I suppose, these two
will think, they spoke right; and then either the Paper, that was agreed on,
was not right, or Mr H. spoke not according to it; for I also suppose, that
these two will say, they spoke nothing disagreeing with their Paper. If their
answer did Homologate Mr. H's discourse, then what necessity was there for
it: And why used they other expressions, if they had a mind to speak: And it
would seem, that all that Mr H. said, was this and no more: Mr B. and we must
be excused, if we look not upon the Council as a Church-Judicatory, making
Ecclesiastical Canons; but only as a Civil Court, emitting Civil significations
of their pleasure, under the hazard of Civil penalties. (3.) This answer
seems to me a more plain giving up of the Cause, than all which Mr H. said;
for it is no other in effect, than this; Let the Magistrates enjoine what they
please, we need not scruple, upon the account of any encroachment made upon the
Prerogatives of Christ, or Privileges of his Church; for this distinction will
salve all; Let us receive all, not as Ecclesiastical Canons, but as Civil
significations of their pleasure etc. and so there is no danger, though they
should use both a Dogmatick, Critic and Diatactick power, determine
Controversies of faith, Appoint Rules of Ordination, Condemn Heretics,
Debar from the Sacraments, and Admit thereto by their sentence; judge of
Church Members, or determine who should be admitted, as such, and who not: In a
word, do all which Church-Judicatories do. This distinction will make all go
down. (4.) By parity of Reason, if these Brethren were before a
Church-Judicatory, meddling with all Civil affairs, determining Civil pleas,
giving-out civil Injunctions, Laws and Rules etc. they might and ought as
willingly submit, and salve all with this distinction, saying. We cannot
receive Civil Laws from you, but as for Ecclesiastical significa^ions of your
pleasure, under hazard of Church Censures, we can say nothing to that: And thus
they would sweetly comply with all the Invasions made upon and Usurpations of
the Civil power, whereof the Popes Conclave, and other Popish and Prelatical
Courts, are justly accounted guilty, without scruple.

Now at length, it came to Mr H's turn, who, as our Informer says, received
not these Instructions publicly, as having seen them before: Let us hear what
he said. He tells us, that he resumed what he had said formerly, concerning a
Formal Ecclesiastical Power, which could not be allowed to the Magistrate; and a
Power Objectivly Ecclesiastical, which was allowed to him: Intimating with all,
that the Brethren would either observe, or not observe their Directions,
according as they judged of them, in their Consciences, upon their peril. On
what was here resumed, I have given mine Observations before, and shall only
add. That this Formal Ecclesiastic Power must point forth a Power in it self
such, and therefore so called; and not so denominated merely because it is
exerted by Churchmen; as the two Brethren fore mentioned hinted in their
Answer and Distinction; otherwise his Distinction should have run thus, betwixt
a Power Subjectivly Ecclesiastical, and Objectivly Ecclesiastical. But this
would confound all Causes and all Power; and would bring all Civil Causes
objectivly under the Power of the Church; and all Church-Causes objectivly
under the Power of the Magistrate: Yea and make all Things and Actions, done by
the Civil Magistrate, though otherwise but Objectivly Ecclesiastical, to be
Formally Civil; and on the other hand, make all Actions, done by Churchmen,
though otherwise but Objectivly Civil, to be Formally Ecclesiastic. As to the
Latter Part of this speech, I judge the same might have been said, had been
before the Church-Judicatory, receiving the same, or the like Instructions. And
was this all? Was there no more requisite in this case? Is it all one thing, at
whose hands Ministers receive Directions, Rules, Restrictions and Injunctions,
or the like, to regulate them, in the exercise of their Ministry, whether at
the hands of the Pope, of a Prelate, of the Magistrate, or of a
Church-Judicatorie, providing they be such, as may be observed, or otherwise to
take their hazard? I suppose, our Forefathers would have said something else:
And, I trow, Civil Magistrates, if called before the Prelates Courts, to
receive Injunctions or Rules, to regulate them, in the exercise of their
Office, would say some other thing, than that they would observe, or not
observe these Directions, according as they judged of them in their
Consciences, upon their peril. And if they would have stood to their Rights, as
is to be supposed, the greater fault it is for Ministers, to quite the Rights
of the Church so easily, wherein the Glory of their Master does so much
consist. Yea moreover, this superadded Insinuation makes me suspect the
forementioned Distinction the more: For had that Distinction been honestly
proposed and intended, this superadded clause had been utterly needless.

Upon this (as we are told by our Informer) followed my L. Chanc. Answer, which
was this, That the King gave them these Instructions by his Council, and if
they did not observe them, the Council would punish them. By which we see, that
these Instructions were gi^^^ by an Autocratorick power, by the Magistrate, as
such; and consequently being in Church Matters, Intrinsecally and Formally
such, by an Usurped power. We see next, that the commanding of the observation
of these Instructions, comes from the Magistrate in prima Instantia, and so
are not Civil Sanctions, and Confirmations of Injunctions, ministerially
proposed by Church Officers, upon both which grounds, I conceive Mr H. had a
fair occasion to have vindicated both the Prerogatives of Christ, the sole
Head of the Church, and the Privileges of the Church, bestowed on her by
Christ, her King and Lord: Yet we find, that all the reply, which he made, was
this. That for the matter of Civil punishments, they had never denied the
Magistrates right in them: And that he took notice from that Answer, that
their L L. acted in a Civil way, only competent to them, in their dealing with
Ministers, which they could not decline; hoping their L L. designed not to
stretch their power beyond their Civil line, Which reply, in my judgment, was
neither Pertinent, nor Sufficient: Not Pertinent, because the question was
never moved, concerning Magistrates executing civil punishments, but concerning
their power of Imposing Injunctions and Rules, to regulate Ministers, in the
exercise of their Ministry, which the L. Chanc. owned and avouched in his
Answer, little regarding Mr H's distinction, betwixt a Formally Ecclesiastic
power, and power Objectively Ecclesiastical. Not Sufficient; because the maine
business was unhandsomly waved. Nay, moreover, this Reply was an yielding of
the whole cause, and a granting that Magistrates might meddle with any Church
power, and enjoyne what they pleased, providing they punished only civilly
such; as transgressed. Hence they might ordain a Minister, and command him to
preach to such a people, that would not call him, and depose another, and
discharge him to preach any more, as a Minister or Administer Sacraments, under
a Civil penalty. So under a Civil penalty they might prescribe the matter of
preachings, decide Controversies of Faith, and appeals in Church-maters, etc.
Yea, in a word, meddle with the most Intrinsic and Formal Church Matters.
Finally, I do not see what ground my L. Chanc. gave, yea or occasion to make
this Reply; for though his L. said, the Council would punish, yet the said not,
the Council would punish civilly only: No, his expression might comprehend
Ecclesiastical Punishments also, conform to the power granted to them by the
Kings Letter.

After a great deal of Discourse, spent upon personal reflections; and
vindications, with which the cause is not much concerned, and therefore the
less to be noticed by me, our Informer comes in end to vindicat Mr H's speech,
which, as it would appear, had given no small offense, and he tells us, that in
it we may perceive, an Assertion of an Ecclesiastical power to make Rules for
regulating Ministers, which was not yielded to the Magistrate; with a
concession of his power Objectively Ecclesiastical: And a declaration of their
receiving Papers of them under that notion did not oblige them to observe these
directions; but they were to act therein upon their peril. We heard indeed of
Rules Intrinsecally (and afterward) Formally Ecclesiastical, for regulating
Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, which he hoped their L L. did not
intend to make or impose upon them, who were the Servants of Christ. But we
heard of no Assumption. That such were the Rules, contained in the Paper,
tendered unto them: Nor of a Conclusion. That therefore they could not, they
might not in conscience, accept of them. We heard of a Concession also of the
Magistrates power objectively Ecclesiastical: But we could not understand, to
what purpose it was adduced, unless for justifying of the Magistrates, in
giving those Injunctions, and themselves in receiving of them. Nay, I perceive
here, our Informer asserteth, that which I was but suspecting formerly, and
durst not positively affirm, viz. That they looked upon these Instructions, as
flowing from the Magistrat's Power Objectively Ecclesiastical; For nothing else
can be Imported in these words, And a declaration of their receiving Papers,
under that notion. Now, what can this notion be, under which they received
these Papers, but the Magistrat's power Objectively Ecclesiastical? And what
may hence be gathered, we shall hear anon. We heard lately, that Mr H. did
intimate, that the Brethren would either observe, or not observe their
Directions, according as they judged of them in their Consciences, upon their
peril: But that he declared that the receiving of these Papers did not oblige
them to observe these Directions, I did not hear till now. However, since this
Informer says, that this was Mr H. declaration, I profess, it seems strange
to me, that he should have spoken so; for the public and Judicial receiving,
even at the bar, of such Instructions, was a solemn declaration of their
present purpose and willingness to obey these Injunctions, there being no
exception made against any of them in particular; nor no desire expressed of a
liberty to be granted, to consider and examine them. And sure, if they had
suspected the irrelevancie or unlawfulness of any of them upon the matter,
Ingenuity and Conscience would have said, that so much should have been
expressed; and that the Paper, (if so be they would not refuse to accept of it)
should have been accepted, with that clause of exception; or rather rejected,
until they were assured, it contained nothing but what was lawful upon the
matter: For to accept a Paper, containing Instructions; and to say withal, they
would obey, or not obey them, as they thought good, on their perril, was
neither to act with an Ingenuity, becoming Christians; nor with an Zeal,
becoming Ministers, nor with that Respect due to Magistrates from them, both as
Christians, and as Ministers; nor with that Care and Circumspection requisite
for avoiding of scandal, and especially at such a time, when the eyes of many
were upon them, both of friends and of foes. And if any say, That that
Declaration was a sufficient Protestation, I crave leave to add, that it was a
Protestation annulled by their deed, Protestatio contraria facto. How much
better then had it been, to have forborne that deed, which bad in it, at least,
an appearance of evil; and to have dealt faithfully with the Council; and told,
That they could not obey these Instructions; and therefore behoved to be
excused from receiving of them. But I confess, when that great matter was so
lightly passed over, I mean, the Power, making and imposing these
Instructions, it is to me little wonder, that this was swallowed down also.

Our Informer tells us next, that in all this discourse of Mr H's he cannot see
such Heterodoxie and Noveltie, as to give occasion to any to say, That he gave
to them all, that the Godly Divines give unto the most Godly and reforming
Magistrates on earth; or that Ministers receiving these Papers, on these terms,
should warrant honest people to think, that they gave up the right of the
Church, with their own hand, to the Civil Magistrate; or that any Ministers
should highly resent their treachery. But to answer, Though this Informer
cannot see such Heterodoxie, or Novelty, as to give occasion to pass that
censure on Mr H's discourse; yet it may be, others shall see ground for that,
and for more too. And I shall willingly grant, that what agrees to
Magistrates, as such, agrees to all Magistrates, good and bad: Yet it may be
maintained, that more may be allowed in such Magistrates, as are really minding
Reformation, the Glory of God, the good of the Church and all her Rights and
Privileges; than in such, as are open Enemies thereunto; and are seeking by all
means to destroy the Church, to rob her of her Rights, Privileges; and Power,
and to enrich themselves with the spoils of Christ's Crown. And therefore when
Ministers have to do with such Open and A vowed Enemies, they are called to
more strick watchfulness and care, lest they do, or say any thing, which may
confirm such in their Usurpations, and encourage them to encroach more. And
whether this care was used at this time, I leave to all, who are acquainted
with what passed about that time, and with what daily is observable, to judge.
For my part, if Mr H. did grant to the Magistrate, by virtue of his Power
Objectivly Ecclesiastical, a Right or Power to Make and Impose Rules and
Injunctions, to regulate Ministers, in the Exercise of their Ministry, as our
Informer lately himself hinted, I think, he has not only given to them all,
that the Godly Divines, give to the most Godly and reforming Kings: But much
more; except it be that, which was given to Extraordinary and Immediately
Inspired Magistrates, that were Prophets also, and Men of God, such as David
and Solomon: Or in a time of Universal Defection and Deformation, which can no
other way be remedied. Neither of which can be applied to our case. And
further, I wonder how he thinks, any can judge otherwise, than that,
interpretatively at least, the receiving of these Papers, on these terms, was
a giving-up of the Right of the Church, with their own hands; seeing it is so
clear and manifest, by what we have said. And seeing it is so, himself will, I
suppose, grant, that every Minister is called highly to resent this treachery.

What says our Informer for Vindication; But who so will read, says he, Our
Anti-Erastian Writters, will find that they yield to the Magistrate, as
Magistrate, (and consequently to all Magistrates, be what they will, good or
bad, though upon his perril, as he shall answer to God for it, if he shall
determine wrong) a Public Politic Definitive judgment, concerning Matters of
Religion, in reference to his own Act about them; or (for they diversifie the
phrase) a Power of judging of his own Act, about Spiritual or Religious things,
to be observed, or not observed by their Subjects. And to make out this, he
cites some words out of the CXI. Propositions, Propos. 97. where these Words
are, As to each member of the Church respectively, so unto the Magistrate
belongs the judgment of such things, both to apprehend and judge of them: For
although the Magistrate be not ordained and preferred of God, that he should be
a judge of Matters and Causes Spiritual, of which there is a controversy in
the Church; yet he is questionless judge of his own Civil Act about spiritual
things; namely of defending them, in his own Dominions, and of approving or
tollerating the same: And if in this business* he judge and determine,
according to the Wisdom of the Flesh, and not according to the Wisdom which
is from above, he is to render an account thereof, before the Supreme Tribunal.
But to what purpose is all this waste of Words? Does he, or any man think, that
we deny to the Magistrate a judgment of his own Civil Act; or that we suppose,
that Mr H. and others have betrayed the Cause, because they granted to the
Magistrate a Power Objectively Ecclesiastical, so far, as to judge thus of his
own Civil Act of Tolerating such a way within his Dominions? No, that is not
the ground we go upon. But this we say, that if Mr H. or others, do infer
from this power of judging, in reference to his own Act competent to the
Magistrate, that the Magistrate, may Impose Rules and Injunctions, to regulat
Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry; then they have betrayed the
Cause: And either they must infer this therefrom, or they speak nothing to
the purpose: And himself lately told us, as much as all this. Now let him, or
any man show me, where any Anti-Erastian Divine reasons thus, or draws such
an Inference, from this Power Objectively Ecclesiastical. Yea I much questione,
if Vedelius or Maccovius his Colleague, did ever so argue. And sure I am, the
Author of the CXI. Propositions Propos. 45. etc. clears up that Difference
betwixt these two Powers, which is taken from the Object and Matter about
which. And Prop. 54. he shows, that those things, wherein the Ecclesiastical
Power is exercised, are preaching of the Word etc. And Prop. 55. That though
the Civil Magistrate is occupied about the same things; yet it is but so far,
as concerns the outward disposing of Divine things, in this or that Dominion.
Nay. I must say, that I cannot see, how this will follow, That Magistrates may
prescribe such Rules unto Ministers, to regulate them in the exercise of their
Ministry, because of a Power granted to them, to judge of their own Civil Act,
about spiritual things; more than that every Churchmember may do the like; for
in that Prop. as the Words cited do clear, the Author gives that same Power to
every Member of the Church respectively, and how can it be denied to them, or
to any rational man? Nay, let me say more. Have not Ministers, and every
private man, this power of judging of his own Act about things Civil; and in
this respect also an Objectivly Civil Power? Will it therefore follow, that
they can prescribe Rules, to regulate Magistrates in the exercise of their
function? And if a Magistrate should come to the Prelates, or Pop's Bar, and
take a Paper from him, containing such Instructions, and give this only as his
Apology, that he acknowledged a Power Objectivly Civil, competent unto the
Pope or Prelate? because they had power to judge of their own acts about civil
things; would not others have cause to judge, that that Magistrate had denied
the Co-ordination of the Po^ers, and had professed his Subordination as
Magistrate to Pope or Prelate? Now, Verte Tabulas and see how the parallel
runs in our case, and then judge.

From the foregoing discourse, and particularly from that cited out of the CXI.
Propositions, our Informer, now a Disputer, Infers, That he hops no man in
reason can allege Mr H's recedeing from the Principles of this Church, in the
matter. But for my part, though I will not judge of the Thoughts or Intentions
of Mr H. or of any other of his Brethren; yet considering the work it self, as
this Informer has represented it unto me, in its circumstances, I cannot but
say, that in the thing, and as to the Intentio operis, there was a recedeing
not only from the Principles of the Church of Scotland, but also from the Zeal
of our former Worthies, who ventured all to transmit the truth, pure from
Erastianisme and Caesario-Papal Invasions and Encroachments, And from the
strick Obligations, lying on us all, to stand to the Truth, and to the Defense
of the Power and Privileges of the Church, against the Usurpation and
Encroachments of the Magistrates, seeking always to inhaunce all Church Power
into their own hands; not out of love to promove the Glory of God, and the real
good of souls; but out of a desire to have the Ministry, and the outward
Administrations of grace enslaved unto their wills. Is it not certain, out of
what ground this Indulgence did grow; and how the Act of Supremacy (which no
Conscientious Minister or Christian can own or acknowledge,) as it was
occasioned and necessitated by the Indulgence; so it became the Charter
thereof, and gave legal life and being unto all that followed? And was it not
as certain, that a Design to procure a Requiem to themselves, in all their
Usurpations, and intolerable Invasions of Church Power, and overturning of ^he
whole Work of God; and withal to make way for the further Enslaving of the
Church* and of all Church Power to their ^usts, did midwife this Bastard-Child
into the World? And could it be uncertain to rational observing Persons, what
was the Design of King and Council, in-giving these Instructions, First and
Last? Yea, was not the whole Business so carried on from First to Last, as half
an eye might have discovered a wicked Design therein? And was not the
Explicatory Act of the Supremacy a more than sufficient proof of an Erastian
Spirit, that led and acted them, in some things, beyond what the Antichristian
Spirit could for shame prompt the Pope to arrogate to himself? And when from
these things, and many others such like, yea from the whole Procedour of King
Parliament and Council, in their Actings, since this last Revolution began, it
is more than sufficiently clear, what they did and do Intend; will any say, it
was not their Duty, while so Providentially called to witness to the Truth, to
give a more Plain, Full, Ministerial and Christian Testimony, to the Truth,
which our Predecessors maintained, with so much Hazard, Expense of blood, Loss
of Liberty, Tossings, Imprisonments, Confinements, Condemnation to Death and
Banishments etc. and which we were so solemnly sworn to stand to? And will
any Ingenuous Christian say, that, all circumstances being considered, the
Testimony given was such, as became men standing in the Fields for the Truth of
Christ, and engaged in point of Conscience and Christian Valor, Honor and
Credi^e, to cover the ground they stood on with their dead Bodies, rather than
cede to such a manifest Encroaching and Invading Enemy? Will any, who reads
the carriage of our valiant and renowned Worthies, in opposing the
Encroachments of King James, (who yet never did, nor for shame could arrogate
to himself such a transcendently Superlative Supremacy over Church Matters, as
now by Act of Parliament is declared to be an Inherent Right of the Crown)
think, that they would have satisfied themselves with such a General,
Impertinent, Confused, Indistinct and Defective Testimony to such a Glorious
Truth? Will any, who considers the Zeal, that ordinarily acted our faithful
Progenitors, from the beginning to this late Catastroph, and of our valiant
Worthies, who valued this Truth of Christ's Kingship above their lives, think
that there was not here a palpable cedeing from that Spirit and Zeal, which
moved them to postpone all things, to this chief matter? And can any say, that
this way of vindicating Truth, wherein so much Pusillanimity, Disingenuity,
carnal Consultation occasioning Misconceptions and Blindness, appeared, did
keep correspondence with our frequently reiterated Vows and Engagements? Was
it pertinent or seasonable, or could it be satisfying to propose, in such an
exigent, a mere Cothurnus; I mean, that general Assertion of the Magistrates
Objectively Ecclesiastical Power, no less ambiguous till fitly explained, than
impertinent to the case then in hand? Nay, let this very Informer tell me, if
he think not, that more Plain, Clear and Full expressions might have been
fallen upon, if plain and home dealing had been Intended? This I suppose may
serve for an Examination of that matter, as this Informer has declared it unto
us.

Reasons against the Indulgence.
THough by what is said, it may be sufficiently seen, how sinful that
Indulgence was upon the Accepters part (with which we have only here to do) as
it was conveyed and circumstantiated; and occasionally we have here and there
discovered several particular Evils, wrapped up in it, beside its sinful Rise
and destructive Tendencie: All that now remains to be done, is to draw the
several Eviles, comprehended in this complex business, to their own proper
Heads, that the Reader may see at one view, what was formerly scattered up and
down the foregoing Relation: And, considering what is said, it will not be
necessary to insist on particulars; to touch them in a word will be sufficient.

I. How injurious it is to Christ, as Head of the Church.
WE shall begin with this Head of Arguments, and show in how many
particulars, injury was done, by the Indulgence, as accepted, unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, the only Head and King of his Church; And

1. In that hereby they declared, they did not hold their Ministry wholly and
solely of Jesus Christ: Sure Christ alone, as Head and King of the Church his
spiritual Kingdom, did Institute this Office of the Ministry, and did Empower
men unto the exercise thereof: As the Scriptures do prove: And Ministers depend
solely upon Him therein, if they renunce not their own place and standing. But
we saw above, how the Indulged did plainly and positively refuse to say, that
they held their Ministry of Jesus Christ alone: See what is remarked on Mr H's
speech, when the first Ten were Indulged, where ex professo the word alone was
left out; and what is said in Answer to the Informer, who was dissatisfied
with Mr Blair. whereby an injury of a very high Nature was done unto our Lord
Jesus, who alone ascended up on high, and led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men; even, gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4: v. 8, 11. It was God alone, that set
some in the Church, first Apostles, secundarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
after that Miracles, etc. 1. Cor. 12:28. So that as the office of Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, etc. were only from Christ; so was the office of
Pastors or Teachers. Hence they are said to be made Overseers by the Holy
Ghost, Act. 20. v. 28. Whoever therefore will not confess, that Ministers hold
their Ministry alone of Christ, do derogat hugely from His glory, and rob him
of his Prerogative; and set these others (who ever they be) of whom they hold
their Ministry, in part, or in conjunction with Christ, down upon Christ's
Throne, and make Christ no sole King, and Head of his Kingdom; and consequently
no sole Prophet or Priest and Mediator. And what an affront this is unto our
Lord, let any judge. And if (as we know) the clay-Kings of the Earth will think
themselves sufficiently dethroned, and unpardonably injured, if any Subject be
made partaker with them of their petty Soveraignity, in whole, or in part; let
any consider, how Christ shall take this injury done to him by his own
professed Servants. But some will possibly say, Though this was their fault and
great escape; yet it was but personal, and accidental, as to the Indulgence;
and so cannot not affect the same: Or make it an incroachment upon Christ, of
such an high Nature. I answer; This being spoken at that occasion, when the
King and Council were acknowledged thankfully for the granting of the
Indulgence, cannot but have a reference unto the Indulgence it self; and
supposing (as all reason will allow us to do) that what was said, was spoken
with understanding, it must be granted, that they had their eye upon the
Indulgence granted; and so their discourse was to this purpose in effect. We
declare, that we hold not our Ministry of Christ alone, but of Christ and of
the Magistrate; and therefore do accept of this Indulgence, without scruple,
Whence also it is manifest, that they looked upon the Indulgence, as a
consequent of their holding of the ministry partly of the Magistrate. And
whether the Magistrate did intend the granting of the Indulgence, as a
declaration of their accounting Ministers to hold their Ministry partly of
them, or not; yet the accepting of the Indulgence thus, was a plain
declaration, on the accepters part, that they held their Ministry partly of
the Magistrate, and not solely of Christ; And consequently that they owned not
Christ, as sole Head of the Kirk. Further, This discourse of theirs, so worded
purposely and deliberatly, says, that if they had not believed, that they held
their Ministry not of Christ alone, but of others also, they could not have
accepted of the Indulgence. If any should yet say, That though this might be
said of the Indulgence, according as it was understood by the Accepters; yet it
will not follow, that the Indulgence it self is chargable with this. I answer
yet hereby it is granted, that the Accepters are chargable with high Treason
against the King of Kings, our Lord Jesus Christ: And as for the Indulgence it
self, we may safely construe of it, according to the sense both of the Granters
and of the Receivers: And by what follows, its nature will be more fully
discovered. If it be said, That the most that can be inferred from that
expression of the Accepters, at that time, is, that as to the Exercise (which
is distinct from the Office of the Ministry it self) they did depend on
others, than Christ, I Answer, No mention was made of the Exercise, but of the
Ministry it self. And even as to this, there was no small injury done to
Jesus Christ; and this leads me to a second thing, here remarkable.

2. By this Indulgence, the Prerogative of Christ, as sole Head of His Church,
is further encroached upon, in that the Indulged do hold their Ministry, as to
its Exercise, not of Christ alone, but of the Magistrates, either solely, or in
conjunction with Christ. And that this is a wrong to Christ, is manifest, in
that it says, the Office, and the Power to exerce the Office are not from
Christ alone. The Office can import nothing, but a ba^e name, if it import not
Power to exerce the Office, or do the work peculiar unto such an Office: And if
Christ be said to give the Office, but others must give the Power, Authority,
and Ius or Right, to exercise the Office, he shall be made a mere Titular King.
But he told us some other thing, when he said Matthew. 28; 18, 19. All Power is
given unto me, in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore and Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them etc. And when he said Ioh. 20:21, 23. -- As my Father has sent
Me, even so send I You -- whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them etc. See Mark. 16:15. -- go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel.
The Office was in order to the Exercise: And when he gave the Office, he gave
the Power to exercise the same. When Paul was made a Minister, he was sent to
open eyes Act. 26:16, 11, The Ministry, sure, is a Talent, and who ever get it
must trade with it, or expect a sad Sentence. If it be said, That this will
take away the Power of Chu^ch-Judicatories, who ministerially, under Christ,
both conveyeth the Office and the Power to exercise the same. For Answer, I
deny that any such thing will follow: And to clear this, I shall show a third
Injury done to Christ, by this Indulgence.

3. If it should be said, that by the accepting of this Indulgence, from the
Magistrate, they no more prejudge Christ of his Right both to give the Office
and Power to exerce the same, than when they take the same as conveyed to them
by Church Officers. I Answer, That the Difference is great, and the
Encroachment made on Christ's Prerogative by the Indulgence clearly assented to:
In that another way of Conveyance of the Ministry, and of the Power to
exercise the same, is here closed with, than Christ, the only King, has
appointed. Christ has instituted Church Officers for this end, to convey the
Office and Power, which he has appointed, unto particular Persons. The Holy
Ghost said unto Prophets and Teachers, that were at Antioch, separate me
Barnabas and Saul. for the work whereunto I have called them Act. 13:1.2. Paul
and Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church Act. 14:23. Titus was ordered to
ordain Elders in every Church Tit. 1:5. Timothy was to commit the things, he
had heard of Paul, to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others 2 Timothy 2:
v. 2. The gift was given with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery 1 Timothy, 4:14. But here the Office, or the Exercise thereof is conveyed by the
hands of Magistrates. whom Christ never did commit that matter unto. And thus
another, yea a quite Opposite, Medium is embraced and followed, than what
Christ thought good to make choice of, to his great dishonor and disparagment;
as if he had not been Wise enough to appointe the best means; nor had not
Authority enough solely to appoint the means and ways, he thought fit.

4. The wrong done to Christ, by the accepting of this Indulgence, will be
hence manifest (which will also clear up the Difference betwixt what is
conveyed from Christ, by his own Ministers, and what is conveyed by
Magistrates.) That the Office or Exercise of the Ministry is received from
them, who in this deed, do not, neither can Act, in a Ministerial Subordination
to Christ, as sole Head and Fountain of all Church Power; so that their
interveening betwixt Christ, and those, who receive the Office or its Exercise,
as a Medium of Conveyance, says, that Christ is not sole Head of the Church,
and Fountain of Church Power. The ground of this is, because Magistrates, as
such, do not Act in a direct line of Subordination to Christ, as Mediator, as
Church Officers do: And further, what they do as Magistrates, they do not (in
reference to their Subjects) with a Ministerial Authority, as Church Officers
do; but with a Magisterial, Imperial, Coactive, Autocratorical and
Architectonick Power and Authority: And as to the Church, this Magisterial
Power belongs to Christ alone: So that the submiting unto any other
Magisterial and Supreme Autocratorical Power, in Church-affaires, than what is
solely in Christ, is an acknowledging of another Head and Supreme Governor in
the Church, beside Christ; and this is a plain dethroning of Christ, who will
either be sole King, or no King.

5. The accepting of this Indulgence contains another wrong done to Christ,
in that thereby, there is an acknowledgment made of the Insufficience of all
the Rules, Prescriptions and Instructions granted by Him, for the ordering of
the exercise of the Ministry, and for information unto his Ministers,
concerning the way, how they should go about the exercise of that Employment:
For in the Indulgence, there were with all first and last Instructions given,
how to regulat them, in the exercise of their Ministry: And so when the
Indulgence was embraced, as accompanied with these Instructions, the Power,
granting these Instructions, was acknowledged and submitted unto; and when
these Instructions were not holden forth ministerially, as when the like are
given by Church Judicatories, but by such, as Act in all things, which they do
as Magistrates, by a Magisterial and Autocratorical power, not subordinat unto
Christ, as Mediator, in a right line of subordination; an Autocratorical,
Magisterial, and Supreme power to make Rules, and to give Instructions to
Ministers, to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry, is granted to
the Magistrate, to the robbing and spoiling of Christ of that sole Supreme
power, which is due to him, and is a part of his Prerogative Royal.

6. Herein also the Accepters of the Indulgence have done injury unto Jesus
Christ, in that they have taken a new holding of their Ministry, and of the
Exercise thereof; and so materially have renounced their old holding of Christ
immediately, as King of his Church, and sole Lord of his House; They have taken
a new Commission for the Exercise o^ their Ministry, and a Commission
inconsistent with, and not subordinate unto the Commission, they had formerly
from Christ. I shall not need to insist on this here, having declared it so
fully above, in vindication of M. A Blair's Assertion; to wit, That if
Ministers take Instructions from Magistrates, for regulating them, in the
exercise of their Ministry, they should not be the Ambassadors of Christ.

7. It is a part of the Royal Prerogative of Christ, to appoint the
Qualifications of his own Officers: But here the Magistrate does, by his
Magistratical Power, appoint and determine the qualifications, which he will
own as such, in reference, at least, unto the exercise of the Ministry, and
this is not done ministerially; and consequently in contradiction to the sole
power and Prerogative of Christ. The accepters therefore of this Indulgence,
granted only to such, as are so and so qualified, do not only acknowledge
themselves to be so and so qualified; but do sweetly, in so far, acquiesce unto
the Magistrat's Autocratorical determineing of these qualifications; and unto
his assuming a Supreme Nomothetick power, in Church Matters. As for these
qualifications, we have seen above, what they are: See our 3. remark upon the
Kings Letter.

8. It is also a part of Christ Prerogative Royal, to prescribe and set down
the way, how he will have such and such an Officer in Particular, set over such
or such a Flock in Particular; that so the Minister, so fixed to his special
work, may have ground to say, that this is the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made me an Overseer. But here in this Indulgence, the matter is so
conveyed, as that the Indulged can not with good ground say, the Holy Ghost
has set me over this people, but only, this is the flock over which the King
and his Council have made me the Overseer. But against this it is said, May not
the Man, who returns to his own Congregation, from which he was unjustly
thrust away, say this? And may not he also speak thus, who has the Cordial
Invitation and call of those concerned? And what shall then be said of them,
who preach in the fields? Answ. 1. If the Minister's return to his own place
were fair and cleanly, and so as the old method and ground were not
questioned, or weakened, then he might indeed so speak; but it is not so here;
for his returning to where he was before, was a mere accidental thing, and his
ground is not his former relatione unto that people, but the Order of the
Council, which was of the same nature with the Order given unto others, as we
saw above, and so he can only now say; though this be the flock, over which the
Holy Ghost did once make me an Overseer; yet now I am set over it by the
Councils Order. (2.) As for that Cordial Invitation, which some possibly did
obtain, it was no such call, as Christ's Law allows, it was not the rise and
fountain of those Ministers going to those places; but a and posteriour mere
precatious thing, whereby the Ordinance of Christ was rather prostituted, than
followed: It is sufficiently known, that the Council made the free Election,
and not the Parish: And withal, where was the Act of the Presbytery, giving
them Ministerially a Potestative mission? This belongs to the Method, that
Christ has Prescribed; but here the Council both called, choosed and sent, and
so were both the Flocks and the Presbytery. (3.) As for the third Particular,
every one may see how impertinent it is; for this preaching in the Fields, or
Houses, is no fixed stated Oversight over a distinct company, as is that of a
Minister over a Particular Flock, but a m^er occasional Act, depending upon a
Providential call from God, and the cordial entreatie of this Persecuted
people; which is all that is requisite thereunto.

9. There were among these Instructions, given by the Council, several
Restrictions and Limitations in and about the administration of Christ's
Spi^itual Institutions, as of Preaching, of Administration of Baptism, and of
the Lords Supper, as also of Discipline: And these Restrictions and
Limitations, not being made by a Ministerial Power, with a Ministerial
Authority explaining and applying the General Rules, given by Christ
thereanent, as Church Officers, and Church-Judicatories do; but by the
Magistrate, who acts with a Magistratical Migisterial, and Autocratorical
power; that is, by a power, which in Spiritual matters of the Church; belongs
to Christ only, who is sole Head and King thereof. The receivers therefore of
this Indulgence, thus conveyed, and accompanied with such Limitations and
Restrictions in and about the Administration of Christ's Ordinances, do
contribute their concurrence unto this Invasion.

But against this and other Particulars formerly mentioned, taken from the
Prescriptions, Rules and Instructions, wherewith this Indulgence was attended,
it is said, That in the accepting of this Indulgence there was a simple use
making of a favor offered, and no formal engagment unto the prescriptions,
which the Magistrate did not expect plainly resting upon the intimation of his
own will: For here the Magistrate was not treating and expecting our formal
consent or security for performance of what was required; but did simply
appoint and command, as they would be answerable. So that the embracer of the
Providential favor gives no complex consent unto the Prescriptions. I
Answer, The favor offered was no favor indeed, as circumstantiated; nor
could there be a simple use making of that supposed favor, which was so
attended with imposed Conditions, Instructions and Limitations, without at
least a virtual acknowledgment of a Right and Power in the Magistrate, to make
and impose such Conditions etc. for howbeit the Council propose the matter by
way of Command, as thinking it below them to Act otherwise; yet both the Nature
of the thing, and the concomitant Acts, made of purpose of Restrick, Limite and
Qualify the favor proposed, and to Instruct and Oblige the Receiver, say,
that the accepting of the first, is with an engagement to perform the second,
both being but one complex thing. Nay the Council (as we say above) in their
Acts and Proclamations do expressy hold forth the favor to be granted and
accepted condition ways: and Mr A. Blair, for renouncing of the conditions,
was deprived of the favor. Who accepts a favor offered with its burdens, in
accepting the one accepts both, and takes the favor cum onore, and this
cannot be otherwise understood, howbeit the Council did not wait for their
express consent unto the Conditions, for their receiving of the favor so
offered was sufficient thereunto; as when a Father grants such or such a
piece of land to his Son, but withal lays this burden on that favor, that he
must pay so much debt, if the Son accept: of the land so clogged, he cannot but
take on the debt, though he gave no express consent thereunto before.

II. How contrary it is unto Presbyterian Principles.
We shall in the next place show, how injurious the accepting of this
Indulgence was unto our Presbyterian Principles; and what wrong was hereby done
unto the Church, as to her Privileges, and that Power, which Christ has
granted unto her.

1. It belongs to the Church, and to Church Officers, to try and examine the
gifts and Qualifications of such, as are to be exercised in the Ministry, and
to declare Ministerially, by explaining and applying of Christ's Rules and
Laws, who are fit and qualified for the work of the Ministry, and who not:
But here the Magistrate declares what that is, which he looks upon as a due
Qualification, and judges who are so qualified, as to be fit for the
Ministry; and that without the least deference imaginable unto any
Church-^udicatorie whatsomever. If it be said, That they Indulged none, but
such as were Ministers already, and so were supposed to be sufficiently
qualified for that work. I Ans. The Church Officers, or the Presbytery, are
not only to judge of Qualifications, in reference to the Ministry in general,
but also in reference to the Ministry, in this or that Particular place, where
he is to be fixed; and no Church-Judicatory had this judgment, in the matter of
the Indulgence; but the Council only. And as they Indulged them, so they might
have Indulged others, who had not been placed Ministers before, as we see they
did Mr Weer, whom they did not account a Minister before, If it be said, That
the Qualifications, which were here considered, to wit, peacable and orderly,
belong properly to the judgment of the Civil Magistrate, who, as he makes
civil Laws, so can judge, who observes or transgresses the same. I Answ. Not
to mentione here the Magistrat's true sense of that peacable and orderly
living. I say, though the Magistrate be the proper judge of this peacable and
orderly deportment: in order to civil punishment, or exemption therefrom; yet
Church-Judicatories are the only competent judges thereof, in reference to the
exercise of the Ministry: And it was in reference to this exercise of the
Ministry, that these Qualificatio^s were here taken notice of.

2. It belongs to the Church, or Church-Judicatories, to convey Ministerially
the Office and Power unto Persons qualified, and to grant a Potestative
Mission, whereby they become authorized to exerce the Ministerial function; as
was seen above. But in the Indulgence, all this was done by the Magistrate
immediately; the Council sent the Indulged to such and such places, as they
thought fit, and they only clothed them with Authority for that effect; or did
all, that Presbyteries do or ought to do, in the like cases. See what was said
above upon the Acts of Indulgence granted July 27. 1666. Page 21.

3. It is a part of the Power and Privilege of Church Officers and
Church-Judicatories, to loose Ministers relation unto a place, and to Plant and
Transplant, to Place Ministers in Particular Charges, and to Transport them to
others, as the good of the Church requires. And this we know was constantly
practiced by our Presbyteries, Synods and General Assemblies. But here in the
Indulgence, all this was practiced by the Council, without once consulting any
Church-Judicatory whatsomever. They planted and transplanted according to their
own pleasure, as we saw above, in several Instances, sending severals from one
Church to another, and many from their own Churches unto others. See further
our 2 Remark on the Kings Letter. It will not here be said, I suppose, That by
the sentence of banishment, their relation to their former Charges was
annulled: And though it were said and granted too (which yet cannot be) though
it would follow that such were not properly transplanted, yet our argument
would remain strong; for there were others, whom the Council had Indulged to
such and such places, and thereafter transported to other places, as they
thought fit. And beside, as to all of them, it was the Council their deed
alone, which did constitute them Ministers of such and such places, and so made
up that relation: And if they should think, that they are not Formally
Ministers of such places; they could not then say, that they were set as
Overseers ove^ these places by the Holy Ghost, as possibly they will; and they
should also think themselves free of the burden of that Charge, and of the
souls of the people, as not being committed to their Charge; and the people are
not obliged to own them, as their Ministers; and then they are called to
consider, with what Conscience they can take the Stipend and Benefice, only
allowed by the Law of God to such as take on the cure of souls. And beside,
what ever they think; yet the Council did design and Formally intend their
fixed relation un^o these places, as proper Pastors thereof, for the Patrons
were thereunto to be consulted, and their consent to be obtained, which
according to the Established Law, is the way of admitting Formally such and
such Persons, to be Ministers of such places; the other Formality of the
Bishops Collation being dispensed with, as to its necessity, and only enjoined
under a penalty, or they encouraged to seek it, by a farther favor, as to
their stipend; and however, it was ordered, that Intimation should be made to
the Bishops and Archbishops, when any Person was Indulged within their Diocies.

4. It is a part of the Power granted unto Church-Judicatories, to make Canons,
and prescribe Rules, and to give Injunctions, concerning the Exercise of the
Ministry, the Administration of the Ordinances of Christ, and the like; and
this is that Diatactick power, acknowledged by all the Orthodox to belong to
the Church-Judicatories; and we might confirm it here, if it were necessary.
But in this Indulgence, we see the Magistrate assuming to himself this Power of
making proper Church-Canons, giving Rules to regulat Ministers in the Exercise
of their Ministry, and imposing such like Injunctions, as used to be
prescribed and imposed, by the Judicatories of the Church, in former times. Of
these Injunctions, we have had often times occasion to speak before, and need
not repeat here what has been said: Nor need we in sist on that again, which
is commonly said, To wit. That their accepting of the Indulgence has no
necessary connection with their approving of this Power, to make such Canons,
and to impose such Injunctions. For, as we have shown, this cannot be evited,
and this one thing will abundantly evince it, to wit. If they had received ^his
same or the like Indulgence, at the hands of the Prelates, (and this had been
likewise more consonant to the established late Acts, before the Act
ofSupremacie was made) and if the Prelates had clogged the same supposed Favor
with the same or the like Injunctions; had not their accepting of the
Indulgence, accompanied with these Injunctions, been a granting of that power
unto the Prelates, to make such Canons, and to give out such Injunctions and
Restrictions? And if it had been so, as to the Prelates, why not here also, as
to the Council?

5. Upon the same account, we find by this Indulgence, that the Council has
assumed Power of exercising real Church Censures, such as Suspension from the
exercise of their Ministry, and total Deposition, or turning out, as they call
it. See our first and 7. Remarkes on the Kings Letter. This most be a great
invasion on the Power of the Church; and by the Indulgence, this Power, granted
by the King to the Council, is confirmed both in the King and in the Council:
And who is not convinced how sad this is, when every one might see what
invasions daily were made upon the Power of the Church by the Civil Magistrate;
and therefore all were clearly called aloud to cry against this, and to stand
and withstand, and do nothing that might contribute to fortify them in their
Usurpations, or to occasion their further Incroachment, which might have been
forborne without sin. And sure I am, if these Brethren had forborne to accept of
the Indulgence, as several others did refuse it, the occasion of this and many
other Invasions had not been given, and Church Power had not been so formally
usurped, as it has been; not the Magistrates so fixed in the possession
thereof, as they are by such cedings.

III. What Affinity it has with the Supremacy.
OUr third Head of Arguments against this Indulgence, is taken from its
relation to, affinity with, dependence upon, and con^irmation by that woeful
Act of Supremacy, made by our Parl. 1669. And sure, all, who are tender of the
Concerns of Christ's Crown, and of the Privileges of his Church, will have an
utter detestation of and abhorrence at any course, which flows from, is
continued and confirmed by, and cannot stand without that Act, which with one
dash does dethrone our Lord, and spoil him of his Royal Prerogative, and his
Church of all her Privileges. What occasion or rise the Indulgence gave unto
the Act of Supremacy, and what a foundation it laid for m^re of that kind, and
what a near affinity and likeness is betwixt them, we have shown above, and
need only recapitulat things here.

1. Had this Indulgence been utterly refused, we had never yet seen that Act of
Supremacy; for the Council having granted the Indulgence upon the Kings
Letter, contrary to many Acts of Parliament, knew no other way to salve
themselves, but by framing this Act, which both secured them for times by past,
and against all hazard also, in going on in the same course, as they had begun,
for the future. The grant of the Indulgence was never lawful, nor the
granters-secured by Law, until this Act was made. How shall we then judge well
of the Indulgence, that gave the necessary rise unto that prodigious Act?

2. The Indulgence it self would be still an illegitimat brood, notwithstanding
of all that King and Council both did, were it not for the Act of Supremacy;
for by the Act of Supremacy, that is now made a legal deed, which otherwise
was directly against Law. What shall we then think of the Indulgence, that must
be legitimat by such an Act? And what a possession that must be, that has such
an Act for its Groundright and Charter, let sober men judge.

3. The Indulged would, notwithstanding of all that is done by both King and
Council, be still seditious Persons, in the account of the Law, and lie under
hazard of the same, were it not for this Act, which alone secureth them from
the lash of all Laws, made for that end. This Act is their only Right and
Ground of Security, whereby they can plead themselves free from all that could
be brought against them by foregoing Laws. So that among other things, wherein
the Indulged do now differ from all the Nonconforming Ministers, this is one,
that the Indulged are under the Protection of the Supremacy, and lie in saftie
under the wings thereof; whileas others have it not stretched over their
heads, and so do not enjoy that chilling warmth, that is to be had thereunder.

4. This is further confirmed by all the Particulars, mentioned under the two
foregoing Heads; for they all belong to this Supremacy, and are parts of the
same; and the Supremacy is but one comprehensive, complicated and compounded
Act of Usurpation of the Crown of Christ, as Head and King of his Church, and
of the Power and Privileges belonging to the Church, and to the Officers of the
House of God.

5. We saw before the same asserted by Worthy Mr John Burnet, in his Testimony
against the Indulgence, whose Argument is worth Consideration, and I shall here
repeat it: To Settle, Enact, Emit Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning
Matters, Meetings and Persons Ecclesiastical, according to Royal Pleasure, is
the very Substance and Definition of his Maj. Supremacy, as it is explained by
his Estates of Parliament. But the Act of his Maj. Royal Indulgence is only to
Settle, Enact and Emit such Constitutions Acts and Orders, concerning Matters,
Meetings and Persons Ecclesiastical according to Royal Pleasure. Therefore the
Act of his Maj. Indulgence, is the substance and definition of his Maj.
Supremacy, etc.

6. Seeing by what is said, it is apparent, that not only is the Usurped
Supremacy put in exercise, and confirmed in the hands of the Usurped, by the
Indulgence; but also the formal asserting of the extravagant Supremacy, by a
plain Statute and Act of Parliament, explaining and confirming the same, is
looked upon as necessary to support the Indulgence, and to keep it in legal
being: It can not be well denied, that such, as have accepted of this
Indulgence, have homologated this Supremacy, and contributed, by virtue of
that acceptance, all their power to the fixing of this Usurpation; for more was
not required of them for this end; and if they had refused the Indulgence, this
Statutory establishment of the Supremacy had never been accounted necessary;
nor possibly once thought upon.

7. As he who accepts a benefit from a Person, which that Person cannot
bestow but by an usurped Power, and does formally flow from that Usurped Power,
does homologat by his acceptance that Usurped Power; So the Accepters of the
Indulgence, from the King and Council, which they could not give but by the
Usurped Supremacy, and which formally and kindly flows therefrom, cannot
but, in so doing, homologate that Usurped Supremacy.

8. If this Indulgence had been granted by the Prelate of the Diocie, would not
the acceptance thereof have homologated Prelates Usurpation, and been an
acknowledgment thereof? Why then shall not the accepting of this Indulgence,
when granted by the King and his Council, be an homologating of their
Usurpation? Especially seeing the Usurped Power of the Prelate is but a branch
of the Supremacy, and flows therefrom, Prelates, as such having no
Church Power with us, but what is granted by the King by Virtue of the
Supremacy, by the Statute Law of the Land. Wherefore if the accepting of the
Indulgence at the hands of the Prelates, would have homologated the Usurpation,
that yet flowed from the Supremacy, and consequently the Supremacy it self,
though at a step further off; how is it imaginable, that the accepting of the
Indulgence from the King and Council immediately, shall not be an homologating
of the Supremacy, which is the immediate root and ground thereof?

9. Such as accepted of the Prelates Collation, whether to new places, or to
the same places, where they had been, before the restoration of Prelacy, will
I suppose be looked upon, as homologating, in that act, the Prelates Power, and
consequently the Supremacy, from whence that Power flows to the Prelat: And
what difference is there. I pray, betwixt the Prelates Collation (which
possibly was freer of concomitant Instructions, Rules and Directions, how to
regulate them in the Exercise of the Ministry, than was the Indulgence) and
the Councils Collation, as to the Fountain, the Kings Supremacy, from whence
both do flow? By virtue of Power descending from the Head to the Left arm, the
Prelates, is the Episcopal Collation granted, and by virtue of Power descending
from the same Head to the Right arm the Council, is the Council their
Collation granted.

10. Who homologate a Supreme Authority in the King over all Persons, and all
Causes Ecclesiastic, by virtue whereof he may Settle, Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Persons employed in the External
Government of the Church, and concerning Meetings and Matters Ecclesiastic, as
he in his Royal Wisdom shall think fit; they homologate the Supremacy: This is
certain; for this is the Supremacy, as appears by the Act explicatory: But
so it is, that the Accepters of the Indulgence do homologate this Supreme
Authority in the King. Which I thus prove. Such Ecclesiastic Persons, as are
willingly disposed of by the Supreme Authority in the King over all Persons,
and Causes Ecclesiastic, and go to what places he by his Council appoints,
for the exercise of their Ministry and of Church Government, and withal
receive Orders, Acts and Constitutions concerning Ecclesiastic Persons, to
regulate them in the Exercise of their Ministry and Government, made by him in
Church affairs, according to his Royal Wisdom, by virtue of his Supreme
Authority; these do homologate the Supremacy. But so it is that the Accepters
of the Indulgence have done this. Therefore, etc. The Minor is
uncontrovertable, and certain, from the Councils disposing of them, and
ordering of them to such Kirks, as they pleased, and their yielding thereunto,
and accepting of Instructions, Orders, Acts and Constitutions, made by virtue
of the Supremacy, to regulate them, in the exercise of their Ministry: all
which has been cleared above. The Major is manifest from this, That to be
willingly dis^osed of by a Power, is to homologate it; and to receive
Instructions, Orders, Acts and Constitutions from a Power, is to homologat it;
By homologating a Power, I understand an acknowledgment of such a Power in such
a Person, by a suitable and answerable compliance therewith, and yielding to it,
or Acting under it: And this may be materially, as well as formally done,
implicitly as well as explicitly, by the Intention of the deed, as well as by
the Intention of the doer: As he who obeys an Usurper, and acts under him,
in some place of trust, and receives Ins^ructions from him, for to regulate
him, does homologate that Usurped power, by his very deed, though he should
hate the Usurper and the Usurpation both, and really wish he were thrust from
his Usurpation altogether, and would possibly concur thereunto himself.

It cannot weaken this Argument to say, that the Indulged Persons never did nor
will own the Supremacy, but plainly disown it: For though I am ready to
believe this to be true; yet the Argument holds; for I speak not of a
Positive, Explicit, Formal, Intentional and Express Homologating; but of a
Virtual, Implicit, Material Homologating, and such as is included in the deed;
and work it self, abstracting from the Intention of the Worker, which is but
extrinsick and accidental, as to this: And that the accepting of the Indulgence
is an homologating, and a virtual acknowledging of this Supremacy, is clear
from what is said, though the Indulged should intend no such thing.

IV. How it is injurious unto the Power of the People.
A Fourth Ground of our dissatisfaction with the Indulgence, is the wrong, that
is ^ereby done unto the People, as to their Power and Privilege of Free
Election of their Pastor. In the accepting of the Indulgence, there was the
accepting of a Charge of a Particular Flock, without the previous due Call,
free Election, and Consent of the People: (this holds, as to such of the
Indulged, as were sent to other Churches, than their own.) The mere
Appointment, Order and Designation of the Civil Magistrate, was all the Ground
of this Relation, and was the only thing that made them Pastors to such a
people, together with the Consent of the Pa^ron. This was a way of entry unto
a Pastoral Charge, that our Principles cannot assort with, wanting either
precept or precedent in the pure primitive times. Our Divines have abundantly
shown the necessity of the previous Call of the People, unto a Ministers
Admission to a Charge. See Mr Gillespy in his Miscel. Questions Quest. 2. Nor
need I hold forth the iniquity of entering by Patrons, whereof our Par. 1649.
were fully sensible, when the Church was restored to her Privilege, conform to
our First Book of Discipline, Chap 4. Concerning Ministers, and their lawful
Election: And to the Second Book Chap. 12. It will be here said possibly, That
they obtained the full and unanimous consent of the people. But I Answer (1.)
I doubt if this was either universally sought, or obtained. (2.) Where it was
had, it was but a mere b^inde, and, to me, a mere prostituting of that
Appointment and Order of Christ, rather than any conscientious Observation
thereof. For (3. This call of the People ought to be a free Election and
Choice, but here was no free Election left unto them; but whether they did
consent or not, the Person designed by the Council was to be set over them.
(4.) The free Election of the People should go before the Persons Designation
to that Charge, and become the Foundation of his Relation to that Flock; but
here it was posteriour unto the Councils De^ignation, and was a mere precarious
thing, coming in ex post facto. (5.) This Call and Election of the People was
not in the least presupposed, as any way requisite, either in the Kings Letter,
or Councils Nomination and Election. (6.) Nor did they make any mention hereof,
when before the Council; nor make exception against the Councils Order or
Collation, until this was had. (7.) Nor did they testify their Dissatisfaction
with, or protest against, the unlawful usurped Interest of the Patron, and his
necessarily prerequisite Consent. (8.) Did such as wanted this unanimous Call
or Consent of the People, give back the Councils Warrant, as weak and
insufficient?

2. I would ask, whether they look upon themselves, as the fixed Pastors of
those particular Flocks and Churches, or not? If they own themselves for fixed
Pastors, what is become of their relation to their Former Charges? They cannot
be Pastors of both places, for we own no Pluralities; nor can it be said, that
the Councils mere Act did loose their Former Relation, and make it null. And
whether they protested at their entry to this new charge, that it was without
prejudice to their Former Relation, when the Lord should open a free passage in
his good Providence to return, I know not. If they look not on themselves as
fixed Pastors, then are they mere Curates, sent of the Council to those places,
to preach and perform the other Acts of the Ministry, till further Order, or
during their pleasure: And then they cannot be offended, if the people look not
on them, as their Pastors; nor carry toward them, as such.

V. How Erastianisme is hereby established.
ANother Ground of our Dissatisfaction with the Indulgence, and with the
accepting thereof, is, that thereby Erastianisme, the professed Enemy unto and
perfect destruction of all true Church Power and Church-Jurisdiction, is
established and fortified.

1. This is manifest from all the Particulars, mentioned above, under the
First, Second and Third Heads, which need not here be repeated; for these are
parts of Erastian Doctrine, which the Orthodox disowne, and our Church has
resisted and opposed from the beginning: and beside.

2. Hereby are the Magistrates confirmed in that Usurpation of being proper
judges of Ministers Doctrine, even in the first Instance; that is, before any
Church-Judicatory take cognition thereof, and pass a judgment thereupon. See
our 8. Remark. upon the Kings Letter.

3. Hereby they are confirmed in this Usurpation, that Ministers may not preach
in public, or in private, without Authority and License had from the Civil
Magistrate. See our 12. and last Remark. upon the Kings Letter.

4. How this was confirmed and yielded to by the Indulged, we saw above, in our
Examination of Mr H's speech before the Council, Anno 1669. and of that
Relation of the carriage and speeches of those, who were before the Council
Anno 1673.

5. We were not ignorant, how from the very beginning of this Catastroph, and
in the very First Session of Parliament Anno 1661. an exorbitant Supremacy in
Church-affaires was acknowledged to belong to the King, in that, he was
declared to be Supreme Governor over, all Persons, and in all Causes; beside
what was presumptively asserted in other Acts of Parl. thereafter, as in the
Act for the National Synod, and for the Restoration of Prelacy, and others:
And how by all these, and other things considerable, it was manifest and
undeniable, that Erastianisme was in the ascendent, and that the design of the
Rulers was to subject all Church Power unto themselves, and to assume as much
thereof into their own hands, as they thought fit, and to have the whole of it
subordinate unto them. Now when this design was open and above board, out very
not-withstanding and not-opposing, in our Places and Stations, this Erastian
Design, was a virtual cedeing and yielding unto these Invasions and
Usurpations; how much more are they chargable herewith, who willingly submitted
unto the Magistrat^s Actual Usurpation of Church Power; and by accepting of
this Indulgence, did put them in Actual Possession of what was but notionally,
and in the theorie, arrogat formerly, as to Non-conformists?

6. It is granted by some, and cannot well be denied by any, That the
Magistrates principal design, in granting the Indulgence, was the
establishement of the Erastian Supremacy: And if so, sure, it was the part of
those, who accepted of the Indulgence, rather to have withstood this design,
at least by simple refusing of that, the accepting of which (as every one might
have seen) would contribute unto this Erastian design, and put them in actual
possession thereof. Whether the Magistrate himself does look upon the
Accepters, as hereby acknowledging his Erastian Supremacy, or not, is not much
to the purpose; seeing the acceptance, as circumstantiat, was a virtual and
real enough acknowledgment and confirmation thereof: And, it is like, the
Magistrate did design no more, not regarding whether they should openly and
professedly acknowledge such a thing, if he himself were confirmed and secured
in the possession of that Erastian Usurped Power.

But it will be said, That though it be granted, that the Supremacy is now in
its exaltation, and that Erastianisme is the great design; and that such, as
minded to be faithful, should not cede in the smallest of the Churches Rights,
not to the loosing of one pin of the Government: And that this Erastianisme and
Supremacy has acted, outed and overturned, at its pleasure; and that the
Magistrate, in this offer of the Indulgence, does still act, according to
Erastianisme, and own the same Supremacy, and intend its further
establishement: Yet the Indulged did only accept of a license, which, when
abstracted from its offensive circumstances, is a mere relaxation of the rigor
of former Edicts.

To which I Answer. (1.) If this Indulgence did respect nothing but the Persons
and Estates of Ministers, then it might be looked on as a mere relaxation of
the rigiditie of former Edicts, under which they groaned: But it is past all
denial, that this Indulgence relates more, yea and Principally, unto their
Office and function, and is designed (as is confessed) for the Estabishment of
an Usurped power over the Function and Ministry; yea, and includes an
acquiescing and submission unto Acts, made and proposed by such, as confessedly
act from a Principle of Usurpation, and that for the better Establishment of
the same, and confirmation of themselves in the possession thereof; and
therefore the accepting of the Indulgence, cannot but contribute to the
iniquous ends, proposed by the Indulgers. (2. Whatever that license (as it is
called) may be, or be supposed to be, when abstracted from its offensive
circumstances; yet taken complexly with these circumstances, it must be
condemned; and however in our imaginations, we may abstract it from these
circumstances, yet we cannot do so in point of practice; seeing it is confessed,
that the morality of actions do much (at least) depend upon circumstances.

7. This contrivance of Erastianisme being so notour and undeniable, the
yielding unto and accepting of the Indulgence, so conceived, so clogged, and
restricted, as it was, cannot but be contributive unto the same; and a plain
(though not professed) helping forward of the design. Sure, the refusing of
the Indulgence had been a sensible defeating of the design, and would have
necessitated the designers, if so be they would still have prosecuted their
Intendment (as is probable they would) to have taken other measures, and
invented other means, how to have accomplished their ends; and this supposable
defeat is sufficient to show, how suitable a medium this was unto the projected
end. It cannot be said, for obviating of this, That this is but accidental, and
a mere probability: for it has a necessary connection with the end, as not only
experience has proven; but the very nature of the thing evinceth, as is
abundantly cleared above.

VI. How Prejudicial this is unto the good of the Church.
THe discovery of this will serve for another head of Arguments against the
lawfulness of this Indulgence: for certainly that cannot be a way approven of
God, which is not for the Edification of the Body; much less that, which is for
its hurt and prejudice. Now that the Indulgence is of this nature, may hence
appear.

1. Church-Historie shows, what hurt came to the Church by such a course as
this, when Arian Emperors, by their own sole power thrust-out faithful,
zealous and Orthodox Ministers, and put-in Arian heretics in their places; and
now by this Indulgence, the way is paved for the same Course: so that now the
Magistrate has no more to do, to get all the Ministry on his side, and to
carry on some corrupt and erroneous design, but to thrust-out honest faithful
men, and put-in brevi manu, whom he will. Who will scruple at this now, after
the Indulged men have thus broken the ice? and who will once question the
Magistrates power to do this, seeing they have so sweetly submitted, in the
beginning: Turpius ejicitur quam non admitiitur hospes, it is better
holding-out, than thrusting-out.

2. Our own History shows us, how noxious it was to our Church, when K. James
obtained but so much, as to have an eminent and active hand, or a negative
voice, directly or indirectly, in the planting of all the eminent places of the
Land, especially of Edinburgh; though he never had the confidence to seek a
liberty to do it brevi manu; but did it by collusion with the Commission of the
Kirk, which was made to his mind: How quickly had he overturned all, if he had
assumed the power to have transplanted Ministers, as he pleased; and if
Ministers had complied with him therein, and upon his sole call, or act of
Council, had left their own Charges, and gone to places, whither he sent them?
And what would these worthies, who opposed all his designs, in maintenance of
the Established Order of the Church, and of her Power and Privileges, if alive,
now say, to see so many Ministers, under so many obligations to maintain the
Liberties of the Church, willingly obeying the Councils Call and Act?

3. If according to this Method, and the way now laid down, and put in
practice, our Magistrates, in all time coming, should follow this course, and
put away what Ministers they pleased from one place, and thrust others in where
and when they pleased; and in all this should meet with nothing but sweet
submission; how long should our Church enjoy purity? And how long should the
Gospel be preached in power, in any eminent place in the Land? How long should
Gospel freedom be kept up, and the Gospel flourish? And if all this should
be, whom have we to thank therefore, but the Indulged? Would not they have all
doing, as they have done? Are not they a sad preparative? May not their example
prove noxious to the following Generations? And whither shall we then cause our
shame to go?

4. According to this Example, the Magistrate might quickly banish all purity
out of the Kingdom, and turn all the Land over into Popery, by sending all the
Orthodox Ministers to the Highlands, or to some one small and inconsiderable
corner of the Land (according as in the late Act of Indulgence so many scores
were cantonized to one or two Diocies) and suffering Papists to preach where
they pleased, or fixing Popish Priests, in every Paroch. And if such a thing
were intended, has not the Indulgence broken the ice thereunto?

5. Nay, we see that in the very Indulgence, some such design is carried on;
for by it, the far greatest part of the Non-conforme Ministers were Cantonized
and shut-up in twoes or threes together, in one Corner of the Country, and all
the rest of the Land was given over to the will of Prelates, Papists, or
Quakers: And if all the Ministers named, had followed the example of others,
what had become, ere this day, of the greatest part of the Land? Was then this
Indulgence the thing, which the General good of the Church and Kingdom called
for? Were the Indulged put in best capacity by the Indulgence, to serve their
Generation, according to the necessity of the day? Was this the only duty of
the day? Or did the Lord call for nothing else? Well is it, that we have such a
proof of the contrary, this day, legible upon the face of that Land; and that
the very prisones can declare some other thing.

6. It being beyond all doubt now, that the Assemblies of the Lord's people in
Houses, or Fields, to partake of pure Ordinances, with full freedom of
Conscience, has been signally owned and blessed of the Lord; and has proven a
mean to spread the knowledge of God beyond any thing that appeared, in our best
times, whereby the Lord preached from heaven to all, who would hear and
understand it, that this way of preaching, even this way, was that wherein the
Soul of God took pleasure, and to which he called all, who would be co-workers
with him, this day, to help forward the Interest of his Crown and Kingdom. Now,
when in despite of this signal appearance of God, and out of enmity to the
good done in these meetings, ways of cruelty are fallen upon, to suppress
utterly all these Randezvouzes of the Lord's Militia; and these coming short of
effectuating the thing, Midianit ish wiles are fallen upon, of which this of
the Indulgence was the chief, of purpose to keep the Country free of these
solemn occasions of the Lords Appearances; can it be thought to be the duty of
the day, and that which the Lord is calling to, to contribute our concurrence
unto these stratagemes of Satan, and welcome an Indulgence, devised of purpose
to destroy the work of God? I leave the thoughts of this to themselves, when
they are thinking of appearing before their judge.

7. I shall not insist on that yoke of bondage, in the matter of stipends,
which was hereby begun to be wreathed about the necks of Ministers; to the
inexpressible hurt and prejudice of the Church. See what was remarked in the 4.
place on the Kings Letter.

8. It will be more to our purpose, as in it self it is of greater moment, to
consider how hereby a Pathway was made, to make all the Ministers of the Land,
in all time coming, wholly subject unto the Council, even in all Matters
Ecclesiastic, whether concerning Doctrine, Discipline, or Manners; For hereby
they became wholly subject unto the Council, as being accountable only to them;
and were so wholly at their Devotion, that they were to stay in the places,
where they were set, only dureing their pleasure; and so might be couped from
Kirk to Kirk (as some of them were) no otherwise, than the Prelates Curates
are, at the pleasure of the Prelate: Thus was the ice broken to the bringing of
the Ministry under perpetual Slaverie; and what should then become of the
glorious Liberty of our Church?

9. Nay, as we saw above attested by open Printed Proclamations of the Council,
there was, in this Indulgence, a base and sinful compacting for the same,
which, to me, is the basest of Simoneie. A conditional accepting of the
supposed favor, and, as it were, a formal barganing for it, by taking the
liberty to preach and perform the work of the Ministry, on sinful Conditions,
even such Conditions, as contained a giving up of the Cause to the Supremacy,
and the Erastian Design, as has been shown above. And what a preparative this
was, let any judge. I know, the Indulged themselves will say, they are free of
all compacting: And I shall not accuse them further than I know, or have
ground: Yet this is certain, that the Kings Letter mentioned such and such
Instructions to be given to all the Indulged; and it is also certain, that
this Letter was not altogether unknown to them, And when the Instructions
(which the Council, in plain Expressions, calls, terms on which they granted
the Indulgence, and the samine was accepted) were tendered unto, and put in the
hand of each of these in particular, who were called before the Council Anno
1673. I heard not of their expressing their Dissatisfaction with these Terms,
so as to quite the benefit, or, as we say, to cast the bargane thereupon; And
if all the Ministers, that shall ever hereafter be admitted to preach the
Gospel, in Scotland, must follow this example, and give but an implicit
consent unto these, or the like terms, imposed by the Council, where shall
then our Gospel Liberty be? And what shall then become of the Liberty of our
Church? And how shall the Ministers then be called the Servants of Christ, and
not the Servants of Men?

10. By the very subjecting to the Councils Instructions, to regulat them in
the exercise of their Ministry; they become thereby as formally subject unto
them, in Matters Ecclesiastic, as any inferior Civil-Officers, such as
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace Baylies etc. who yet, it may be, shall as little
observe all their Instructions, as the Indulged have observed theirs this
subjecting of the Ministry, in its exercise, unto the Magistrate, is a
manifest enslaving of the same, to the unspeakable prejudice of the Gospel, and
hurt of the Church.

11. What prejudice it is to the Church, to want the free and full exercise of
Discipline, and that in the lawful Courts of Christ, needs not here to be
told: And yet, in this Indulgence, there was an accepting of the exercise of
the Ministry, without the full exercise of Discipline, save what was to be had
in a sinful way, by compliance with Prelacie; and so a tacit (at least)
consent given unto this want. It will not be of advantage here to say, that the
Field-Preachers or Non-indulged Ministers, have no Discipline, and yet preach:
For all their preaching is sub cru^e, not having so much as fr^edome to exerce
any part of their Ministry, and so are allowed of God to do all they can* when
they cannot do all they would: and beside, it is alleged without ground; for
with no less signal countenance, they exercise some Acts of Discipline, such
as receiving of penitents, than they preach, and in both are countenanced as
His ^mbassadours. But the indulged are under the lee sheet of the Supremacy,
having full peace, countenance and protection, as much, as in our best times,
and when our Church was most flourishing; and yet dispense calmely with the
want of Church Discipline, in Presbyteries and Synods; and how some of their
Sessions guide, and are constitute, is none of our Glory.

12. Nor needs it be told, what prejudice will inevitably follow upon the
want of Ordination, whereby a Succession of the Ministry is kept up, and the
word committed to faithful men, according to Christ's Appointment, who may serve
the Lord in the Work of the Gospel, in their Generation: How quickly, upon the
want of this, a faithful Ministri^ shall of necessity cease, every one may
see: And yet the Indulged have accepted of the exercise of their Ministry, on
such terms, or in such a way, as does utterly incapacitate them for going
about the Necessary Work of Ordination. Their Transgressing their Bounds, and
violating the Injunctions upon their peril (if so be they do so, that they may
ordain some) in order to the keeping up of this Ordinance, is in so far
commendable; but is not sufficient to expiat the guilt of accepting the
Indulgence, which was thus clogged; as their whole relinquishing of the
Indulgence, and betaking themselves to the Fields, with the rest of their
Brethren, would prove a commendable after-wit; but would not say, that there
was no evil, in their accepting of the Indulgence, but the contrary rather.

VII. How hereby our Cause and Ground of Suffering is vvronged.
THE Lords good hand of Providence having so ordered it, that once a
considerable Company were willing to endure Hardshipe. Want and Tribulation,
for the Truths sake (and therefore choosed suffering rather than sin); which,
howbeit it was upon some accounts sad and afflicting; yet upon the account,
that the Cause of Christ was owned, the Work of Reformation not condemned, but
accounted still the Work of the Lord, was no small matter of Joy: Though it
might have been expected, that few or none of all the Ministers, that had seen
the great Works of the Lord, should have so relinquished the Interest of
Christ, and embraced what once they had abjured; yet we ought to bless the
Lord, that so many abode steadfast in the day of Temptation. But how joyful so
ever it was to see such a goodly Company, adhering to their Principles, and
fully following the Lord; it cannot but be as sad and afflicting, upon the
other hand, to see this goodly Bulk wretchedly broken. and to see men stepping
off, and that such Men, and so many such, and that after such a way, as cannot
but be accounted a falling off from formerly received Principles, and from the
Cause and Ground of our Sufferings. Now that the Embracers of this Indulgence
are justly chargable herewith, may appear from these Particulars.

1. It was a part of the Reformation, which through the special goodness of
God, our Church at length, after long wrestling, attained to, that the people
should be restored to their Right and Privilege of Calling, and making a free
Choice of their own Pastors, according to the example of the pure and primitive
Church: And it was because they would not renounce this way of entry, that so
many Ministers were thrust out from their Congregations, by the Act of Council
at Glalgow. But in the Indulgence, there was an entering into the Pastoral
Charge of a people, upon the Act and Call or Order of Council, without this
Free and Full Election of the people. The Nominal Call, that was precariously
had thereafter, as to some, was but a mock-call, and no foundation of their
Relation unto these places, as has been seen. And how the Councils Act and
Order was exclusive thereof is manifest, and confirmed by the Instance of Mr
Weer's Process. Sure, as the Election here was null, there being none to choose
upon, and the Call prelimited, because the Councils Order did set such an
indulged Man over them, whether they would, or not; so the making a show of
seeking or of getting a Call from the people, after the Ground of the Relation
was already laid, was the exposeing of that Order of Christ's to ludibrie.

2. Multitudes of the Non-conforme Ministers were ejected, and cast-out of
their Places and Congregations, because they would not acknowledge the Power
and Interest of Patrons, nor accept of their Presentations unto Flocks: But in
this Indulgence, as we saw above, the Interest of Patrons is reserved entire:
Though they should say, That they sought no Presentations from Patrons, nor had
they any active hand therein, it will not much avail: For even several of the
ejected Ministers might have been free of ejection, if they could in Conscience
have yielded to so much, and acquiesced in this, that the Patron should have
signified to the Bishop his presenting of such a Person, and that without his
express Consent, or Formal Acceptance thereof: Yea how many had the
Presentation willingly and cheerfully offered unto them undesired?

3. It is the chief Corner stone of our Reformation, and the fundamental
point, whereupon all the wrestlings, and sufferings of our Church from the
beginning have been stated, viz. That Christ is the alone Head of the Church:
But by the Indulgence another head is acknowledged beside Him; when thereby it
was declared, that the Indulged held not their Ministry of Christ alone: as we
saw above on the first head, and first particular thereof.

4. So by the rest of the Particulars, mentioned under that head, we see how
many ways, there was, in this Indulgence, a defection from former Principles,
and a falling off from our grounds, all which we need not here repeat.

5. We fall from our Principles, and from the cause, upon which our sufferings
are stated; when we cede and yield to Adversaries, seeking to overthrow the
pillars and grounds of Presbyterian Government: And in how many Particulars
Presbyterian Principles are, by this Indulgence, receded from, we have seen
above, in the 2 head.

6. It has been the Lot of the Church of Scotland, from the very beginning, to
be put to wrestle against the Powers of the Earth, encroaching upon the
Prerogatives of Jesus Christ, and the Privileges of his Church; and in
contending for the same, against all such Usurpation, did the faith^ulness and
steadfastness of our worthy and renowned Predecessors appear and shine forth;
and upon the account of their faithful adhering to the Truth, and bearing
witness against all Usurpations, made upon the Rights of the Church, and on the
Jurisdiction of Christ, sole King of Zion; and for declining Judicatories
acting by usurped Authority, were they all alongs put to suffer in their
Freedom, Persons, Goods etc. by Tossings, Citations, Letters of Horning,
Confinements, Imprisonments, Confiscation of goods, Relegations, Sentences unto
death, and Banishments. But now, what a falling off this ground, ceding to
Usurpations, Homologating of the Supremacy, and Establishment of Erastianisme
is in the Indulgence, is manifest from the Particulars mentioned under the 3.
and 5. head.

7. We need not forget, what was one maine ground of the actings of our worthy
and valiant Predecessors, in the years 1637 and 1638. viz. That Ecclesiastic
causes should be determined by Lawful Ecclesiastic Judicatories, and Civil
causes by Parliaments and other Civil Judicatories. But to Homologate a Power
in the Civil Magistrate, as such, to cognosce upon, and judge in Church
affairs, immediately and formally, is to condemn all these actings, and all the
actings of Church and State since, upon that ground; and a plain relinquishing
of that foundation. And that by the accepting of the Indulgence, such a power
is acknowledged to be competent to the Civil Magistrate, as such, has been
manifested above, in several Particulars, Let us here but name that one
Instance of the Councils sole judging of the fitness and Qualifications of a
Person for such or such a charge, in reference to his settling there, as Pastor
of the place; which is an Ecclesiastic cause, and has been always so
accounted. But it will be said, No man needs question their abilities, some
having been Ministers, in the most eminent places of the Kingdom. For answer. I
shall not question their abilities, though it may be, the carriage of some of
them has been such, since this defection began, as would make a Conscientious
Church-Judicatory not a little averse from admitting of them within their
bounds, if the Acts of our General Assemblies, by which they stand censurable,
were in any regard. But however, the Civil Magistrate is here made sole
competent judge of this fitness; and by what right he has appointed these to
go to the places, particulary designed, he may appoint others to go to such
places, for which no Church-Judicatory, acting conscientiously, would judge
them Qualified: And who can challenge them upon this account, seeing they are
sole judges, themselves?

8. In King James his days, several faithful and honest Ministers were
banished from their own Churches, and confined in other places of the Land, and
seeing no hope of getting the Civil Sentence taken off, were necessitate to
accept of a call to serve the Lord, in the places where they were confined; but
we never find, that they took the Charge of such or such a Flock, upon the
Edict or Act of Council, enjoining them thereunto.

9. Who ever heard before, in our Church, Ministers compeating before the
Privy Council, and there receiving Directions, Instructions, Rules and Canons,
directing them, how to regulate themselves in the exercise of their Ministerial
Function? And when the Indulged Persons did thus, who can assoile them from a
plain Defection from our Cause and Principles? Put the case, that some
Ministers had done so in the Year 1649. how would they have been looked upon by
our General Assembly? Or if our Parliament and Council Anno 1648. had turned
out such as were against the Duk's Engagment, and thereafter had ordered them;
to go to such and such places of the Land, as they thought fit, giving them
withal such Instructions, as here were given to the Indulged, if these
Ministers had carried but just, as our Indulged did, I leave to all to judge,
whether or not they had been looked upon, as Deserters of our Cause.

10. We know what sufferings those faithful men underwent, when after so long
imprisonment they were at length condemned at Linlithgow Anno 1606. for
declining of the Privy Council, when about to judge them in the matter of a
meeting kept, or offered rather to be kept, at Aberdeen: But now we find
severals Indulged called before the Privy Council, there to be judged
concerning their Baptizing of some Children within the Covenant; a matter no
less unquestionably Ecclesiastic, than was that meeting at Aberdeen; and in
stead of giving-in a Declinature, we heard of nothing, but of a simple excuse,
that they had not seen those Orders, plainly showing, that if they had seen
them, they had obeyed them: was not this a manifest defection from our
Principles and Cause?

11. I might mention under this Head, the Indulged persons their forsaking and
laying aside, at the command or desire of the Council, that useful and
commendable piece of our Reformation, I mean, the Lectures, or Explication of
the Scriptures; against which nothing can be supposed to move our Adversaries,
but only that it is a piece of Reformation; yea the only remaining monument of
that blessed work, all which they abhore.

12 We are engaged, as will not be denied, against Prelacy; and yet the
Indulged did virtually engage to support that, which they stand obliged to pull
down, by receiving of these Injunctions, which ordered them to do many things,
tending to the strengthening of the Prelatical Invasion: Of which more
particularly in the following Head.

VIII. How the hands of Prelates are hereby strengthened.
COnsidering how we stand engaged against Prelates and Prelacie, every sinful
course, that has a tendencie to strengthen their hands, and to fix them in
their tyrannical Usurpations over the Church, should be so much more abhorred
by us; Yea, what otherwise might be lawfully done, in this case, should be
wholly forborne. We shall therefore take notice of the Advantages given to
Prelacy by this Indulgence. As.

1. Not to mention the open door, that is left unto them, to accept of the
Prelates Collation, nor the encouragement they have unto the seeking and
obtaining of this from the Bishop, in and by this Indulgence; we may take
notice of this, That hereby they put themselves in prison, and the key of their
Prison, door is in the Prelates hands; for without license, granted by the
Bishop of the Diocie, they may not go without the bounds of their confinment.
And, sure, as this is no small disadvantage to themselves, but a manifest
exposeing of themselves unto temptation; so it is a great power and advantage
granted to the Prelate over them; which slaverie and bondage they had been free
of, if refusing the Indulgence, they had remained in the same Condition with
the rest of their Non-Indu^ged Brethren.

2. There is in the accepting of the Indulgence, a voluntary withdrawing of
an helping hand from the greatest part of the Land, groaning under the Tyranny
of Prelacy; and a leaving of the same unto the will and pleasure of the
Prelates and of their Curates; for hereby they willingly did give up themselves
to be enclosed within their several designed and limited places, and were
content their Ministry should be their confined, let the necessity of the
Church be what it would, or could be. Thus, as to them, the Prelates, and their
Curats were left in the peacable possession of all the rest of the Land, which
was no sma^l advantage, seeing they were secured as to them, in all time coming,
and had no ground to fear, that they should ^^ssen their Kingdom, and beat-up
their quarters, with Field and House-Meetings, as others Non-Indulged did, and
are doing, to the Glory of God, and to our Comfort.

3. Not to mentione the friendly and brotherly love and correspondence, that
some have observed betwixt some of the Indulged, and their neighbor Hirelings,
who are under the Prelates the general deadness and slackness as to any zeal
against the Prelates and their wicked courses, which is commonly observed,
wherever the Indulgence is, is no small proof of the advantage, which Prelates
and Prelacie have had by the Indulgence: Prelates themselves will possibly
say, that one field Conventicle has done them and their cause more prejudice,
than many preachings of all the Indulged men: Though I am far from: thinking,
that the preachings of the Indulged, have any direct tendencie to strengthen
the Course of Prelacie; yet what I have said being generally observed to be
true, themselves are concerned to search, whence and how it comes to pass,
that it is so; as also, how it is that so many observe a greater keenness in
them, against the field preachers, than against the Prelates; yea and the
Supremacy, even in their Sermons.

4. It may have some weight, as to this, to consider, how by their accepting of
the Indulgence, which flows from the Supremacy, the Prelates are ready to
look upon themselves as justified, in accepting of Prelacie from that same
Supremacy, for, may they think, These men cannot blame us for acquiesceing
unto the determination of the King, acting by virtue of his Supremacy in
Church Affairs, and over all Church-Persons, and accepting of that Charge and
Place, which is given to us, in the Church, from him, who has full power to
dispose of Ecclesiastic Persons, as he will; seeing they themselves have
acquiesced unto the determination of the King, acting by virtue of his
Supremacy over Church-Persons, and accepted of what charge and place in the
Church he thought fit to give them, and took their Instructions, to boot.

5. In accepting of the Instructions, they virtually engaged themselves to
several things, which could not but strengthen the hands of the Prelates and
their Curates. As (1.) To admit none of the people, who live under Curates,
unto their Sermons. (2.) Not to admit them to their Communions, without the
allowance of the Curates. (3.) Nor to baptize their Children, without the same
allowance. (4.) Not to marry any, living within their bounds, without the said
allowance, if the place be not vacant. (5.) They are ordered also to observe
Presbyteries and Synods, which are now wholly Prelatical. (6.) Matters of
Discipline and Censure, which usually came before Presbyteries and Synods, are
ordered to run in the same channel. By all which (not to mentione their praying
of dues to the Clerks of those Episcopal Meetings, which was also injoined) it
is obvious and plain, how the hand of the Prelates and their Curates were to
be strengthened; and if these Orders had been punctually observed, themselves,
I hope, will grant, that hereby the hands of these Adversaries had been
strengthened; and if so, sure I am, their receiving of these Injunctions, and
of their license upon condition of observing them, was a virtual engaging of
themselves hereunto.

IX. How it is against our Covenants.
I Hope, it will be granted, that the obligations of the Covenants, Vows and
Solemn Engagments are upon us; and that I need do no more here, than show,
wherein the accepting of this Indulgence was against our Covenants; and this is
to me manifest from these Particulars.

1. It is a chief part of that Religion, and head of that Doctrine, that we
are obliged by all our Covenants and Vows to defend, viz. That Christ is sole
King and Head of His Church, which is His House and Kingdom; and consequently,
we are obliged to do nothing, that may wrong His Right, and entrench upon His
Royal Prerogatives. But what wrongs the accepting of this Indulgence carries
alongs with it, against the Royal Prerogatives of Christ, as sole Head and King
of His Church, we have seen above, under the first Head, and we need not here
repeat them.

2. We are obliged by our Covenants to defend and own Presbyterian Government,
as is granted by all: but in how many particulars this Indulgence crosses the
principles of Prebyterian Government, we have seen above, under the Second
Head; and as to all these particulars our Covenants are violated.

3. How we are engaged by our Covenant against P^elacy, the second Article of
the Solemn League and Covenant can tell us; and how many ways the accepting
of this Indulgence, did contribute expressly or virtually, unto the
strengthening of Prelacy, we saw above, under the foregoing Eight Head: And it
is past all question, that these particulars there mentioned are utterly
inconsistent with an Endeavor to extirpat Prelacie.

4. We cannot be ignorant, that in the Solemn Acknowledgment of sins, and
Engagment to duties, we vowed and swore to study and endeavoure to preserve
Religion in purity, against error etc. and particularly against Erastianisme,
in these words, Because many have of late labored to supplant the liberties of
the Kirk, we shall maintain and defend the Kirk of Scotland in all her
Liberties and Privileges, against all who shall oppose and undermine the same,
or encroach thereupon, under any pretext whatsomever. And certain it is, that
Erastianisme was never so regnant in Scotland, as it is, and has been, since
this Catastrophe began, and that the Liberties and Privileges of the Church are
not only now opposed, encroached upon, and undermined, but overturned and quite
taken away. Now, how became it all, who minded faithfulness and steadfastness
in their Covenant, to stand fast in this Particular, and be tender of all the
Privileges of the Church, and to guaird against very thing, which might
contributee in the least, or be justly interpreted to contribute unto this
Invasion, or prove a consent thereunto? But on the other hand, in how many
Particulars, the accepters of the Indulgence stand guilty here, has been shown
above, and may be seen under the Third and First heads.

5. We are expressly bound by our Covenants, not to suffer ourselves Directly,
or Indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion, Suggestion, Allurment, or
Terror, to be divided or withdrawn from our blessed Union and Conjunction,
whether to make defection to the contrary Party, or to give ourselves to a
detestable Indifferency or Neutrality. But, now, as to this Indulgence, what a
divisive motion it was, is notour enough; and it was, by the confession of some
of the chief of the Indulgers themselves, said to be intended for that end;
and beside this, the thing it self speaks out this with a loud voice. How
manifest and great a breach is hereby made among the suffering remnant, is
beyond all denial; and how great, consequently, and manifest the breach of
Covenant is, upon this account, is Alas! too obvious and plain.

X. How hereby the condemn themselves.
THis Consideration may also furnish us with another head of Arguments against
this Indulgence, That the accepters thereof have thereby, in several
Particulars, condemned themselves, as to their former Principles and Practices:
And this Consideration may be looked upon, as an Argumentum ad hominum, as it
is called: An argument, that may militate against them. Now this self
contradiction of theirs appears in these Particulars.

1. I shall suppose, that several of them at least (for I love to judge the
best) were no Enemies to Field and House-Meetings, howbeit condemned by the
Law; and that possibly some of them did preach sometimes at such meetings;
though the Qualification, required in the Kings Letter, and presumed by the
Council to be in them, to wit, of living peacably and orderly, would say some
other thing. And if they did approve of these Meetings, and of that way of
preaching, for spreading of the Gospel, and doing good to the suffering Church
of Scotland; they could not but, in so far, condemn all courses and ways
taken, or to be taken, of purpose to hinder that good work; and consequently
condemn the Indulgence, which was manifestly contrived for that end. But now
in accepting of the Indulgence, they have approved what formerly they
condemned, and have condemned what formerly they approved.

2. They all, I suppose, do condemn the Supremacy, as an Usurpation, not to
be allowed; for I never heard of any of them, save one, of another judgment, in
that particular. But in accepting of the Indulgence, they accept of that, which
purely flows from the Supremacy, and which had never been, if the Supremacy
had not been usurped, and which has no legal being but by the Supremacy and
its explicatory Act, which is all their legal ground of security, as has been
manifested above: And therefore do Homologate, and virtually approve of that,
(as was manifested under the 3. Head, which they have condemned; and so have
acted inconsequentially to their own Principles.

3. I likewise suppose, that they condemn the entry of the Curates, who have
entered by the Prelates: And whatever accidental differences may be betwixt
their entry, and the entry of the Curats; yet in this maine and Principal
ground, whereupon both are to be condemned, they agree; to wit. That the entry
of both is founded upon the Supremacy: For the Prelates have their power in
the Church from the Supremacy: and so does the Council act in Church affairs
by virtue of power, flowing from the King, as Supreme in Churchs-affairs; and
Curats enter immediately by the Prelates, and the Indulged enter immediately by
the Council; and both enter mediatly by the Supremacy, but with this
difference, that the Conveyance seems to be more Ecclesiastical, as to the
Curats, Prelates, as such, being supposed at le^st, Ecclesiastic Persons, and
so called; than it is as to the Indulged, the Council neither really, nor
nominally being a Church-Judicatory.

4. They formerly refused to stay with their Charges, by virtue of a
Presentation of the Patron, who possibly would have granted it undesired; and
yet now they have accepted the same Charges, and some have accepted of other
Charges, not without the Consent of the Patrons, according to the standing Law;
and the same is expressly mentioned, as had and obtained by the Council, in
order to their Legal Estab^i^hment. In so far therefore, they cannot but have
condemned themselves and their former Principles and Practice.

5. We know how many of these same Brethren refused the Accommodation, that was
offered by B. Lightoun; and therefore would not join nor concur with the
Prelates, or their Curats, in their Presbyteries and Synods; and yet with the
Indulgence, which they embraced, was this, among other Instructions, given,
that they should repair to these Meetings, and refer Causes, usually
referable, thereunto; and though they did not obey the said Injunctions, yet
their receiving of them, at the Councils Bar, was a virtual Approbation yea and
a promise of performance; and that so much the more, that the favor was
offered upon these terms, as the Council expressly declared. But further, we
may draw a parallel here, whereby it may distinctly appear, that their refusing
of the Benefit, offered by the Accommodation, did condemn their accepting of
the Benefit, offered by the Indulgence: As (1.) as the exercise of the
Ministry in preaching is a part of the Ministerial Function; so is the
exercise of Discipline. (2.) As the one exercise does natively and originally
flow from the Appointment of Christ, and Power given by Him; so does the other.
(3.) As it is unlawful to acknowledge and submit to the Usurpation of Prelates,
in the exercise of Discipline; so it is unlawful to acknowledge or submit to
the Usurpation of the Council, in the exercise of other parts of the
Ministerial Function* (4.) As in following the Indulgence, we may possibly
imagine, that we act by virtue of our Ordination, solely and purely; so in
sitting in Presbyteries, we may likewise imagine, that we act by virtue of our
first Ordination. (5.) As the Interposition, or Intervention of the Prelates
Usurpation alters the current of the exercise of Discipline; so does the
Interposition or Intervention of the Magistrates Usurpation alter the current of
the Exercise of Preaching etc. (6.) As in the exercise of Discipline, in those
Meetings, the Accepter of the Accommodation would have yielded himself up to be
accountable to the Prelat; so, in the exercise of the Ministry, the Accepter
of the Indulgence yields himself up to be accountable to the Magistrate, who
gave him these Instructions; in so far as concerns these? Yea, in the offer
of the Accommodation, there was this advantage, That the Accepter had full
Liberty granted to him, at his entry to these Meetings, to declare, that he did
not renounce his own private Opinion anent Church Government; and to enter his
Declaration in what form he pleased: But the Accepter of the Indulgence had no
such Liberty granted to him, though the deed was as manifestly a compliance
with Erastianisme, as the other had been with Prelacie. But it will be said,
that the maine ground of scrupling at the Accommodation, was, that these
Meetings were not true Presbyterial Meetings, these being discharged by
Authority, and all their warrant in Law removed, and those new meetings being
enjoined for establishment of Prelacie, on which they were wholly to depend. I
Answer, I am not seeking to weaken any ground of scruple, which these Brethren
had against the offered Accommodation; but am only showing, that what grounds
moved them to scruple at the Accommodation, these same should have prevailed
with them, to scruple at the Indulgence; and therefore shall hold forth the
Parallel of the two Cases, even as to this ground: So that (1.) As no act of
Civil Authority can lawfully depose a Minister from the Ius and Right of
preaching; so neither from the Ius and Right of exercising Discipline. (2.) As
Civil Authority can only impede the Actual exercise of the one, in such or such
a particular place; so only can it impede the Actual exercise of the other.
(3.) Civil Authority could not take away the Ius of Presbyterial Meetings, but
only impede their exercise; as Civil Authority could not take away the Ius of a
Ministers preaching, as Pastor over such a Ch^rge; but only impede the exercise
of that Function. (4.) As notwithstanding of all that the Civil Authority did,
Ministers retained a fundamental Right to exerce the Office of a Minister, in
their several Congregations; so, notwithstanding of what the Magistrates did,
they retained a fundamental Power and Right to meet in Presbyterial Assemblies
for the exercise of Discipline. (5.) I^ yet, notwithstanding of this,
Presbyterial-meetings are said to be quite overturned* by the Magistrates
discharge, and cassing the Laws made for the establishment thereof; why may
not also the Ministers Relation to such a flock as Pastor thereof, be said to
be annulled by the Magistrates Act, discharging him to preach there, and
cassing the Law establishing the right way of entry by Free Election of the
People, without Presentation of the Patron? (6.) And if after what has been
done by the Magistrates, in taking away the Old Presbyteries with their legal
Ground, any new Meetings that are, being appointed for establishing of Prelacy,
be Prelatical Meetings; why may not also this new Pastoral Charge, being
appointed by the Magistrates, for Establishment of Erastianisme, after all that
has been done, in taking away the Old Relation with its legal ground, be an
Erastian Relation; and consequently as much to be scrup^ed at, as these
Meetings?

6. No doubt, these Brethren would have scrupled to have taken the Bishops
Collation: And in accepting of the Indulgence, I judge, they have condemned
themselves in this: For what ever Reasons could have moved to have scrupled
that, the same, or the like should have moved them to have scrupled this; as
will appear by the parallel, in these Particulars, (1.) If the Indulged think
that the Indulgence is but a partial Restitution of the Liberty, whereof he was
totally deprived; so the Minister, that accepts of the Prelates Collation, may
judge and say, that it includes not Ordination, for he was an ordained
Minister before; but is only a granting of Lberty, for the free exercise of the
Ministry. And he may think, that by no reason he can be construed to
acknowledge more, as well, as the Indulged Minister may think. (2.) As he, who
submits to Collation, acknowledges and prefers the Prelate, as a proper
Minister of Jesus Christ; So he, who submits to the Indulgence;
acknowledges the Magistrate, or the Council to be the proper Subject of Fo^mal
Church Power, which is tantamount to the making of them Ministers of ^e^us
Christ, yea, which is worse, he ascribes unto the Magistrate, that
Architectomick Power in Church Matters, which is proper to Christ, the only
Head of His Church. (3.) As in Collation there is a formal acceptance, a direct
Submission and Recognizance and as significant a Transaction, as if the Bishop
did expressly stipulat, and the other Consent and Promise; so in the Indulgence,
(as has been cleared above) there is a formal Acceptance, and a plain
Submission and Recognizance; and as Significant a Transaction (if the Council
be to be believed) as if the Council did expressly stipulate, and the other
Consent and Promise. (4.) Suppose the Prelate should send to an outted Minister
a warrant, licensing him to go to another Church, than his own (I state the
Supposition thus, in case any should think there is a Difference betwixt a
Collation, and such a License) would the outted Minister, or any of those, who
are now Indulged, accept of the same, and upon that sole Ground, look upon
himself as Minister of such a place? If not, why did they accept of such a
License from the Council?

XI. How thereby the Meetings of Gods People are prejudged.
IF the Indulged Ministers be not real Enemies to, and utterly dissatisfied
with the Assemblings of Gods People in Houses, or in the Fields, against which
the rage of Rulers has appeared so much, by terrible Acts and Proclamations,
and more terrible Executions, (as I desire to think they are not) it will
easily be granted, that if their accepting of the Indulgence, be really
Prejudicial unto the carrying on of the Work of God, in and by these Meetings,
nicknamed Conventicles; or if it be found, that by the accepting of the
Indulgence, they have contributed unto suppressing of these Meetings: and
consequently, that interpretativly they may be charged in part with the
Severities, exerced against the same, if, I say, this be made probable and
likely, we will have, upon this account, a new Head of Arguments against the
accepting of this Indulgence, which deserve some Consideration here.

What have been the Tossings, Harassings, Afflictions, Vexations and
Sufferings, that the Servants and People of God have met with: because of their
following of this Necessary and Signally blessed Duty, none of the Inhabitants
of the Land can be ignorant of; and the Jailours can abundantly witness unto
this very day, together with the Barbarous Soldiers, who readily did and do
put in exec^tion the cruel Commands of their enraged Masters: And it would be
too long and too Tragical an History to make a full and faithful relation of
the same. It would be too tedious also to make mention only of all the Acts,
Edicts, Proclamations and other things of that kind, that have been made and
emitted against the sa^ds Meetings, breathing forth nothing but the height of
cruelty and rage, imposei^g exorbitant fines upon all Persons found at those
Meetings, threatening death to he Ministers; giving encouragement to Soldiers
to apprehend the hearers, by the pomise of their fines and escheats, and to
apprehend some certain Ministers by the Promise of two thousand Merks; and to
apprehend all others, preaching at ^uch Meetings by the Promise of one thousand
Merks, besides other rewards. It would likewayes prove too long, to give but an
acc^unt of the Letters of Inter commu^ing, against multitudes both of Ministers
and Professors, simply upon this account, Datted Aug. 6. 1675. Whereby all the
Subjects were prohibited to Reset, Supply or Intercommune with any of the
Persons therein mentioned, or to have intelligence with them by Word, Write, or
Message; or furnish them with Meat, Drink, House, Harbor, Victual, or any
other thing useful, under the pain of being repute ai^t and part with them, in
the Crimes of Rebellion mentioned, and pursued therefore with all rigor. Only,
from all these it is manifest, what an eyesore these Meetings have been, and
yet are unto the Rulers, and with what edge and eagerness they have labored by
all means possible, to suppress and quite destroy the same.

This premised, in order to our Design here, we desire that these following
Particulars may be pondered.

1. It has been manifest above, both from the Kings Letter and other
Particulars, beside the notoriety of the thing it self, that the Indulgence was
contrived of purpose, for this special end, among others to bear down and
extinguish these Meetings, nicknamed Conventicles.

2. It is certain, that all such, as have accepted of the Indulgence, have for
the most part laid themselves wholly aside from this necessary work of the
Lord, this day, and have received a Letter of ease from this troublesome and
hazardous employment of carrying the news of the Gospel, from mountain to
hill; (to which the Lord is calling aloud, this day, and graciously encouraging
by his wonderful blessing the labors of these few, who yet venture) and have
given themselves to rest, under the covering of the Supremacy.

3. It is likewise manifest, that if all the rest of the Ministers, named in
the Councils Acts, had done as they have done, and had accepted of that
supposed favor, and submitted unto their Order of Indulgence and Confinement,
there had been few left to have carried on that great work of the day, which
appears to be the work, that God is in a special manner calling unto.

4. If all had refused to accept of that Indulgence, and had concurred with one
shoulder to carry on that great and necessary work of the Lord, the Rulers had
been utterly frustra^ in their design of banishing these Solemn Assemblies,
these Royal Rendevouzes of Christ's militia, and these solemn occasions of the
Lords appearing in the power of his grace, out of the Land: And, on the other
hand, the accepting of the Indulgence has encouraged them in their wicked
Purpose, fortified them in their Resolution, and animated them unto a following
forth of their Design, by all their cruel Acts and bloody Executions.

5. By accepting of the Indulgence, not only have the Accepters laid themselves
aside from this necessary and blessed Work; but likewise all these people, over
whom they are set by the Council, are withheld or withdrawn from waiting upon
the Lord, at these blessed and wonderfully countenanced Occasions. Whereby the
Followers of the Lord are broken, divided, and weakened, and so become a more
ready prey unto the Adversary: For

6. If all the outted Ministers had faithfully and diligently gone about this
Work, and had, for that end, divided themselves thorrow the Land, the work had
been more succesful, the Followers of the Lord had multiplied, and had remained
unite in one entire Body; the Adversaries had been put to a demurre, and had
not got such Advantage, as now they have got; and the people of the Lord had
had more Freedom to serve him, and had been more secured from Danger: Whileas
now, when re^^cted to a few number, their Assemblings are the more laid open
unto the persecution, and fiery pursuit of Rulers, and exposed more to hazards
and grievous Difficulties, as experience has proven.

7. Wherefore, seeing by accepting of and submitting to this Indulgence, there
is a contributing of a concurrence with the Rulers, in their wicked Design of
banishing all these Meetings out of the Land, which manifestly had been defate
by a plain and positive refusal of that supposed favor; and seeing the same is
so inconsistent with the keeping up of these Meetings, and infallibly
effectuateth a relinquishing of them by many, and a diminishing of their
number; it is undeniable that the Accepters of this Indulgence have, in so far,
and upon the matter, condemned all those Meetings; and consequently approven
all the Opprob^ious and false Epithers given unto them, and persecution made
against them by the Rulers.

8. Having thus exposed the residue of the faithful of the land, (who through
grace are resolved to follow the Lord with full purpose of heart), unto the
fury of the Adversaire, They become interpretatively guilty of and accessorie
to all the Cruelties and Barbarities, used and exercised upon Ministers and
Professors, for adher^ing unto that way.

These things might be further enlarged and exaggerated; but I choose only to
mention them, and proceed,

XII. How Scandalous and Offensive it is.
The real ground of Offense, that was in the accepting of this Indulgence, and
the Scandal that was thereby given to one and other, is valide enough alone to
militate against it, and sufficient to condemn it, unto all, who understand
the nature of Scandal, and the dreadfulness of the sin of giving scandal by any
thing we do, whether as to Matter, or Manner; and who remember what Christ and
His Apostles have said of this Matthew. 18:6, 7, 8, 9. with the Parallel Places
Mark. 9:42. and Luke 17:1, 2. Romans 14. throughout 1 Cor. 8, and 9: and 10.
Chapters. And there is no way to evi^e the force of this Argument, but by
affirming and proving, That the Action, at which offense is taken, or may be
taken, is not only lawful in it self; but, as circumstantiat, is expedient and
necessary to be done; as all Orthodox in this matter know, and as may be seen
in the Disputes of our Predecessors against the Formalists, especially in the
English Popish Ceremonies; and in the Debates of the Non-conformists in
England, this day, with their Adversaries, upon this Head.

Wherefore, seeing it will be easily granted, that the accepting of the
Indulgence, was not a thing in it self necessary, so as it could not be refused
without manifest sin against the Lord; and we have sufficiently, by our
foregoing Arguments, proven the same to have been sinful. And seeing it will not
be sufficient to say, That it was a matter in it self Lawful, or Indifferent,
seeing what is Lawful in it self may become, by reason of some Circumstances,
Inexpedient, and what is Inexpedient, in so far as Inexpedient, is Unlawful;
and by what we have said, we suppose it is apparent, that none can with any
show of Reason affirm, that it was Expedient. Seeing I say, the matter stands
thus; and seeing withal it had such a manifest appearance of evil in it, and
that upon so many accounts, as has been cleared, upon all which, it cannot but
be conceived, to have been very Scandalous and Offensive.

In prosecuting of this Head, I might here make a large recapitulation of the
Particulars, wrapped up in that complex Business, considerable in the
circumstances thereof, and in their carriage, at the receiving thereof, and at
their receiving of their Instructions, and otherwise; and show how, by all of
these, they gave offense: But to shun prolixity, I shall leave that, knowing
that the Judicious Reader will have observed these things, in the perusal of
what is said above.

All therefore that remains here to be done, is to show what appearance of
evil, and real matter of scandal there was, in the accepting of this
Indulgence: And while I am to do this, I would have no man thinking, that
hereby I do in the least weaken my foregoing Arguments, proving it sinful; for
it is a truth, that the open committing of a manifest sin is scandalous; and no
man can say, that the scandal, arising from an action, makes that action
indifferent, and not sinful, in it self, or extra casum scandali. But because
we ought all to be tender of the Spiritual welfare of our Brethren, and
carefully to guard against the laying of a stumbling block before them, or do
any thing that may induce them to sin, or tends thereunto, or to retard them
in their Spiritual journey etc. Therefore ex superabundante, an argument hence
may be convincing.

In order therefore to the holding forth of the scandalousness of this action,
I shall only mentione the several Persons, unto whom hereby scandal was given,
and clear the same in a word.

1. The accepters of the Indulgence, did hereby give offense unto such of their
Brethren, as had the offer, but were not clear, nor convinced of the Lawfulness
of the embraceing of such a favor, at such a time; for by their example these
were encouraged and moved to do that, which they judged sinful and unlawful for
them to do: And thus was there a stumbling block, and an occasion to fall, put
in their Brother's way Romans 14.13. And it is evil for any to do such a thing
with offense, even though it were in it self, and as abstracted from
circumstances, Lawful and Pure Romans 14:20. Nay suppose, that those Brethren had
scrupled out of mere weakness; yet, if the taking of the Indulgence be not said
to be a necessary duty, (as I suppose it will not be said to be) in this case,
it should have been forborne, according to the Doctrine of Paul 1 Cor. 8:9.10,
11. But take heed lest by any means, this liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak: for if any man see thee, which last knowledge* sit
at meat in the Idols temple* shall not the Conscience of him, which is weak, be
emboldened to eat those things, which are offered to Idols? And through thy
knowledge, shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died.

2. They gave offense unto others, who had not this in their offer, yet Judged
the accepting thereof unlawful, upon the ground last mentioned; and t^erefore
should have hearkened unto the direction of Paul, in a like case 1 Cor. 10:28.
But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not;
for his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake -- verse 29. Conscience, I
say, not thine own; But of the others. And accordingly have refused that
Indulgence, seeing there wanted not who told them of the evil, they conceived to
lie therein.

3. They gave ground of offense unto the Godly Professors of the Land, who
looked upon that course (as they do to this day) as homologating the Supremacy
and as strengthening the Erastian Invasion, and so gave ground to them to
think, that they had departed from their Principles, and to be grieved
thereupon: The consideration of which should have prevailed with them, to have
refused this pretended favor, according to the direction of Paul Romans 14:15,
16. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. Let not then
your good be evil spoken of.

4. It was a great ground of offense unto the whole suffering Church of
Scotland, in them, thus to withdraw from their Brethren, and leave them in the
furnace, contrare to their former Engagements; not to mention the other
Particulars, wherein we found their sacred Bonds hereby violated, which
necessarily became a ground of great offense unto all: Nor to mention these
Particulars, whereby we manifested above, that the accepting of this
Indulgence, was injurious unto Christ's Headshipe, unto the Privileges of the
Church, and to the Principles of Presbyterian Government, and others; from all
which it is undeniably clear, that a palpable ground of stumbling was laid
before, and offense given unto all the honest party.

5. Great offense and matter of grief was hereby given unto the few, that
continued at their Masters work, in preaching in Houses, or in Fields, as
occasion offered; for, hereby their hands were weakened, the number of the
bearers of burden waxing smaller, even while the work was growing upon their
hand; and they were made, out of a preposterous tenderness unto them, who had
thus stepped off, to forbear preaching in such places, where these were
Indulged unto, though formerly they used to meet with some encouragment in
those places.

6. Hereby was offense given unto the Prelates, and to their under Curates,
when they were hereby confirmed in their Usurpation and Defection: That action
is indeed scandalous, that edifieth not (as the Apostles word is 1 Cor. 8:10.)
or emboldeneth, or confirms any, in an evil course; the Particulars hereof
were mentioned above, under that Head.

7. There was hereby a stone of stumbling laid before the Rulers, for they were
hereby encouraged to proceed in their Encroachments upon Christ's Prerogatives,
and on the Privileges of the Church, when they saw their contrivances for that
end so sweetly complied with, and heard nothing of a Plain, Direct, Apposite
and Intelligible Testimony given against them, and their proceedings.

8. There is a stone of stumbling hereby laid, before the Posterity, in all
time coming; for if the Rulers shall follow this course, and suffer no Minister
to be settled any where, but as they please, and shall plant, and transplants as
they please, without any regard had either unto the free Call of the people,
or the Trial or Examination and Ministerial Mission of Church-Judicatories, and
prescribe unto them what Rules and Instructions, they think good; what shall
the Posterity do? Will nor Intrants, in that case, willingly submit, and think
themselves obliged to do so, having such a preparative before them?

9. Will not this be an Afflicting and stumbling Consideration to any, that
shall read the History of our Church; when they shall there see, with what
Courage, Faithfulness, and Heroic Resolution, the Faithful and Zealous
Ministers of Christ, maintained by Petitions, Declarations, Protestations,
Declinatures, and Sufferings of all sorts, the Power and Privileges of the
Church, against all Encroachments and Invasions, made thereupon by King and
Court; and now shall see such a company of Ministers, upon such small
Temptations, at least, as to hazard, complying with and submitting to more
grievous Usurpations, that ever King James did attempt? We no where read, that
ever King James, notwithstanding of all the Supremacy, in Church affairs, and
over Church-Persons and Officers, that was assumed by him, and attribute by
Parliament to him, did exerte such a Supremacy over Church. Officers, or
Ministers, as to plant them, and transplant them brevi manu, as he pleased. And
is it not an heartbreaking thing to think, that now, when this Usurpation has
transcended all imaginable bounds, there should not only be no opposition made
thereunto; but even a peacable compliance with, and quiet submission unto the
same, now in its exaltation?

10. What a stumbling thing is this unto all the Reformed Churches, when they
shall hear, that so many Scottish Ministers, who refused to comply with
Prelacie, have yet submitted to such an exercise of Erastianisme, as is no
where else to be found, through the whole Christian world, for any thing I
know? Where shall we find the Magistrate, at his own hand Immediately, planting
and transplanting Ministers, as he will, fixing and limiting them, according to
his mind? Nay I doubt, if even in the Pala^inat, where this wof^l weed of
Erastianisme did first grow, such an exercise thereof is to be found: or if it
be, what a shameful thing is it, that the like should be found in the Church of
Scotland, which the Lord has honored from the very beginning, to be tried and
exercised, upon the point of Christ's Kingly Power, and Headship over his
Church, beyond all other Reformed Churches?

Objections Answered.
HAving thus shown how sinful the accepting of this Indulgence was, upon many
accounts, it remains, that we remove out of the way what we conceive can be
said, in the defense thereof; to the end, we may give all Satisfaction possible.

Obj. 1. May not the Magistrate, for ends known to himself, discharge Ministers
to preach, for a time; and thereafter permit them to preach? And seeing the
Business of the Indulgence was but of this Nature, why might it not be
acquiesced unto? Answ. (1.) That the Indulgence was some far other thing, is
manifest from what is said: And beside other Particulars, fully spoken to
above, this one may manifest the disparity; That it is one thing to permit
Ministers to exerce their Office without molestation; and it is a far other
thing to Appoint and Order them, to take upon them such or such particular
Charges; and to plant and transplant them, at their pleasure, and subject their
Ministry in its exercise unto themselves, by giving Injunctions, Rules and
Prescriptions, to regulat them in the same. (2.) We heard above, how Mr
Calderwood and Mr Rutherford did account even that discharge a degree of
Suspension, which is a Church-Censure, and consequently is to be inflicted only
by those, who have the power of the Keys. (3.) Worthy and learned Trochreg,
in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians Chap. 6: V. 20. Page (mihi)
1122. proves solidly, that this Power of discharging Ministers the exercise of
their Function, does neither agree to Heathen Magistrates; nor yet unto
Christian Magistrates, who, by their Christianity, have received no new Power or
Right over Christ's Servants and Messengers; nor may discharge them from
delivering their Message; nor depose them, whom they could not ordain; nor
stop their mouth, whose mouth they ^ould not open; nor silence them, whom they
could not send-forth to preach. (4.) When the Magistrate silenceth, it must
either be for a Civil, or for an Ecclesiastic Crime: If for a Civil Crime, he
can only do this consequently and indirectly? as Solomon removed Abiathar from
the Priesthood, by banishing and confineing him to Anathoth. But then (as Mr.
Rutherfoord in his Due Right etc. Page 434. says well) he no more removes a
Minister from his Ministry, than a Master Fashioner, a Sailer, a Plower, a
Soldier, a Father or an Husband, from their Work and Respective Employments,
when he causes imprison, hang or behead them for some Crime; nor does he at
all remove him from the Ministry directly, neither can he do it; for that is a
Church-Censure, and the Keys are not committed unto him. Nor can he do it for
any Ecclesiastic Transgression, wherein he is no competent judge: Nay nor can
he indirectly and consequentially, in this case, remove any Minister from the
exercise of his Ministry, where the Church is settled in her Power, except
only Causatively, by Commanding the Church-Judicatories to do their Work first;
that is, first to judge; for in prima Instantia, he may not do it: or
Corroborativly, by backing the Sentence of the Church-Judicatory with his Civil
Sanction and Authority.

Obj. 2. Though the Magistrate has not Power to silence altogether, yet he
has Power to discharge the Public Exercise of their Ministry; and again,
when he thinks fit, to grant that Liberty unto them. Ans. (1.) Though this
were granted, it will not help, in the case of the Indulgence, wherein was
some far other thing, than a mere grant of Freedom for the Public Exercise of
the Ministry, as is seen above. (2.) Illud tantum possumus, quod jure
possumus: We can be said to have Power to do that only, which we have right to
do. Now, I would enquire, how it can be proved, that the Magistrate has Power
granted of God, to discharge the Messengers of Christ the free and public
exercise of their Ministry, Directly, Formally and Immediately? (3.) The
Practice of the Apostles tells us, that such Commands are not lawful, nor to be
obeyed; for they preached publicly, where occasion offered, notwithstanding of
the prohibition of the Magistrate. (4.) The Magistrates lawful Power reaches
private places, as well as public places; as D. Voetius maintains against the
Arminians: If he may hinder an Heretic from preaching Heresy publicly; so
may he hinder him from doing it from house to house. And therefore, by the same
Argument that he may hinder public preaching, he may hinder the whole exercise
of the Ministry.

Obj. 3. Our Second Book of Discipline Chap, 10. grants, That Magistrates may
place Ministers, when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things are out of Order:
And so it is now with us. Answ. Yet it is added in that same place. [That where
the Ministry of the Kirk is once lawfully Constitute, and they that are placed
do their Office faithfully, all Godly Princes and Magistrates ought to here and
obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of the Son of God, speaking in
them.] And though our Divines grant, that when the Church is not Constituted,
or is wholly corrupted, Godly Magistrates, after the example of some Godly
Kings of Judah, and diverse Godly Emperors and Kings also, in the Light of the
New Testament (as the words run in the place cited, in the Second Book of
Discipline) may do much more, than at other times: Yet I suppose, none, for
shame, can make use of such a Concession now; seeing our Church was a
Constituted and well ordered Church, and had all her Rights and Privileges
ratified and confirmed by Law; and all the Magistrates of the Land, from the
highest to the lowest, were under Solemn Vows and Covenants, to maintain her
Constitution and Order: And what could be more desired, in order to the
settling of a Church? Whence then the Confusion, that now is, is come, we all
know. And when the Magistrates with their own hand overturne all, shall this
Objection be made use of, to countenance their After-practices? That were
indeed to teach Magistrates a way, how to usurp and take to themselves all
Church Power, Viz. Let them once, by Iniquity and Tyranny, break the Glorious
Order of the Church, and bring all into Confusion; and then forsooth they may
warrantably assume to themselves and exercise all Church Power, according to
their mind.

Obj. 4. Hezekiah did apply his Regal Power to the Reformation of the Levites,
and to the purging of the Temple 2 Chronicles. 29: v. 5. and did also appointe the
Courses of the Priests and Levites, every man, according to his Service 2 Chronicles. 31. So likewise did Iosia^ 2 Chronicles. 35. Answ. Neither of these Kings did
destroy the Order and Beauty of the Church, but reformed what their
Predecessors had corrupted. Neither of these did take away the just and legal
Power of the Priests, (as our Rulers have taken away Presbyteries and their
Power) that they might exerce it themselves, as our Rulers do immediately what
Presbyteries should do, in the matter of the Indulgence. Neither of these Kings
gave new Instructions, out of their own Heads, unto the Priests and Levites,
that they might thereby formally subject the exercise of the Ecclesiastic
Power unto themselves; as our Rulers have done. But beside what has been said
to this before, I shall only subjoine the Answer of Worthy Mr G. Gillespie in
his Aarons Rod Blossoming Page 138.139. [ Hezekiah (says he) in exhorting the
Levites to sanctify themselves, and to cleanse the Temple, does require no
other thing, than the Law of God did require Number. 8: v. 6, 11, 15. and 18: v.
32. Which Hezekiah points at 2 Chronicles. 29:11. And why should nor the Magistrate
Command Ministers to do the duties of their Calling, according to the Word of
God? As for his appointing of the Courses of the Priests and Levites, he did
nothing therein but what the Lord had commanded by his Prophets 2 Chronicles. 29:25.
The like I answer concerning King Josiah; for it is recorded that what he did,
was according to the writting of David and Solomon 2 Chronicles. 25:4. and according
to the Commandment of David and Asaph and Heman and Ieduthun, the Kings Seer
Ver. 15* as it is written in the Book of Moses Verse. 12.] thus he; and thus
wi^hall we see, how impertinent this is to the present purpose.

Obj, 5. But what can be said of such of the Indulged, as were sent to their
own Charges? Several of the Arguments adduced cannot strick against them.
Answer, Though some of the Arguments will not militate against them directly,
yet the most part will. And further, let these things be considered, (1.) That
it was a mere accidental thing that they were sent to their own Charges, viz.
because at that time they were vacant; and so, had they not been vacant, these
Ministers had been appointed and ordered either to go elsewhere, or not
indulged at all. (2.) They were not barely permitted to go to their own
Charges, by rescinding the Act of Glasgow, or taking off the Sentence of
banishment, by virtue of which they were put from the Actual Exercise of their
Ministry, in their own Congregations, which might easily have been done, if
the Council had intended no actual Invasion of the Power of the Church; nor had
designed the Subjection of the Exercise of the Ministry unto their own
Authority. But (3.) They get the same immediate Right to the exercise of their
Ministerial Function, which others got, who were ordered to other places; and
this Right is nothing but the Councils Order and Appointment. (4.) And thus in
a manner, their case is worse, than the case of such, as were sent to new
flocks; for upon the matter they did renounce their old right to the exercise
of the Ministry, in those Congregations, where once they had been settled,
according to the Order of the Gospel, and took a new Right from the Magistrate,
and acted upon his Order. (5.) And why may they not also repair to the
Presbyteries and Synods, upon the Councils Order, as well as to these
Congregations, seeing they had a right formerly, to exerce the Ministerial
Function in the one, as well as in the other; and the Magistrates discharge can
no more invalidate the right to the one, than to the other?

Obj. 6. If it be a ground sufficient to reject the benefit of this
Indulgence, because it is supposed to flow from the Supremacy, then much more
might we refuse to preach, if the Magistrate should command it expressly by
virtue of his Supremacy: And if this be yielded, then it is manifest, that the
Magistrate, if he had a mind to banish all preaching out of his Dominions,
needs use no other medium than only tell the Ministers, that he commanded
them to preach by virtue of his Supremacy. Ans. (1.) We do not condemn the
accepting of the Indulgence, upon a mere supposal, that it flows from the
Supremacy, having seen and manifested, what a real relation it has thereunto,
and dependence thereupon. (2,) Nor is its being a native result and proper
effect of that iniquous, and usurped Supremacy, the only ground whereupon we
go, in condemning the acceptance thereof, there being many other Heads of
arguments adduced against it, and such as prove it unlawful, as it was
circumstantiat, though wholly abstracted from all Consideration of the
Supremacy, yea and though granted and enjoined by a Church-Judicatory; and
though the Magistrate, in granting of it had expressly said, that he did not
grant it by virtue of the Supremacy. (3. Yet I shall say further, That the
Command to preach simply, and without Limitations, Restrictions, or sinful
Conditions, cannot properly be said to flow from, nor to have such a dependence
upon that Usurped Supremacy, as this Indulgence has: For, to command Ministers
to do their duty, in preaching of the Gospel, according to the command of God,
belongs to the power, which God has granted to the Magistrates; and so,
natively flows from his Office: But to set down Limitations, Restrictions and
Conditions, regulating the exercise of the Ministry, does not so flow; and
when ^hey are such, as are opposite to the Rules of Christ, it must of
necessity be by virtue of an Usurped and abused power: Whence it is apparent,
that this Indulgence, containing such Limitations, Restrictions and Conditions,
does not, neither can natively flow from the Office of a Christian Magistrate,
nor is an act of Lawful Magistratical Power; as all will confess, who are not
taught in Erastus's school. Therefore, though in the case of simple preaching,
the injunction ushered-in with an express mention of the Supremacy, as its
ground and rise, would be but a ridiculous scar-crow; yet in this other case
(which is the case of the Indulgence) it would be an open spreading of the net
in the sight of the bird, and more than a sufficient warning for wise men to
beware (4.) Though a Command to preach, according to the Rules of Christ;
cannot be accounted to flow from this corrupt Supremacy, even though the
Magistrate shall say so much, in plain terms; Yet a command to preach in this
place, and not in another place, and to preach so and so, according to such
Limitations, Rules and Prescriptions, and according to no other (as it is in
the case of the Indulgence) may be said to flow natively from the corrupt
Supremacy, even though the Magistrate should say in express terms, that it did
not; because it is done by an Usurped Power, viz. a power of judging Ministers
Qualifications, of Ministerially sending them, of Regulating them in the
exercise thereof etc. All which belong properly to the power of
Church-^udicatories; not to mention the spoiling of the people of their power
of free Election. Therefore preaching, when simply commanded, cannot be
condemned, even though the Magistrate should affirm, that the command is given
by virtue of his Supremacy; when the accepting of the Indulgence cannot be
justified, though in the granting of it no mention was made of the Supremacy;
much less, if this were expressly prefixed. (5.) The visible ends of Magistrates
giving forth of commands, which may be known by several Circumstances, may do
much to clear and determine Christians, to obey, or not obey, and so a
command, materially the same, may in some cases be obeyed, in some cases not.
So that, when the Magistrate, manifesting his Intention to root-out the Gospel,
shall command all Ministers by virtue of an Usurped Supremacy, to preach the
Gospel, the material command may be obeyed, and yet the Magistrate frustrate of
his Intentions: But when he commands a few, and only a few, by virtue of his
Supremacy, to preach here or there, as he pleases; and upon such and such
terms, as he is pleased to prescribe, and under such and such Limitations and
Restrictions, as he is pleased to enjoin, to the manifest hurt and detriment of
the Kingdom of Christ, he is to be disobeyed, and frustrated of his pernicious
ends. Whence we see, how different the cases are. (6.) When the thing enjoined,
and that expressly by virtue of the Supremacy, is not only Lawful, but Necessary
by virtue of a command of God, as is the simple preaching of the Gospel; the
prefixing of the express mention of the Supremacy cannot alter the Nature of
the duty, nor be any ground of laying aside the duty so enjoined. But when the
thing enjoined is not only not necessary, but, as circumstantiat, is not
Expedient nor Lawful, then the expressing of the Supremacy, as the ground of
the command, is to be noticed, and may ex super abundante deter from
Obedience: Now this is the case of the Indulgence, as is cleared above. (7.) If
that supposed command of preaching the Gospel came forth to Ministers, already
settled in their Ministry, the mention of the Supremacy might be sufficiently
delete, by a Protestation or Declaration of their preaching, and purposing to
continue in preaching by virtue of Christ's Supremacy; and silence as to this,
I judge, would be dangerous: But if this command were given to such, who had
been by violence ejected, and put from their work, and detained therefrom,
until they should thus acknowledge the unlawful Supremacy of the Magistrate, I
suppose there might be ground here for a demurre.

Obj. 7. It seems then, you would not be for Ministers returning to their own
Charges. if the Magistrate should grant such an Order or Permission? Ans. (1.)
Either this Order or Permission would be granted with an express mentioning of
the Supremacy, as its ground, or not: If the Supremacy be laid down as the
ground, and nothing else in the circumstances be observable, to creat a
scruple; I judge it necessary, that even in that case a plain and positive
Protestation against that Supremacy be given in, that it might appear, they
would not so much as seem to homologate that sinful Usurpation. (2.) If no
mention were made of the Supremacy, but only a simple permission granted to
return each to their own Charges; than this liberty would either be granted to
all without exception of any, or only to some: If only to some, I must needs
say, that as matters now stand, I should think it should not be accepted, even
though freed of many other clogs; and that because, the wicked design of
further dividing the honest party, should hereby be made manifest and obvious,
contrare to our Covenants; and hereby, though the Persons themselves should be
freed of trouble, and the Particular Congregations might receive some
advantage, if withal freed of the Curats; yet the public good of the Church,
which is preferable to any particular good, should be prejudged; and the Rulers
should be also confirmed in their Usurpations and Encroachments; which by all
means should be guarded against. (3.) If this liberty were granted to all,
then it would either be granted with a confinement to these bounds, or without
it; if the former were said, then the design would be obvious, to stop the
free course of the Gospel, and to prejudge other places of the Land of the
benefit thereof; (for though all the outted Ministers, now on life, were
restored to their former Charges, many places would remain void of faithful
Pastors) Now this should be guarded against, and that the more carefully at
this time, when by Reason of the prevailing course of Apostasy, so great a
part of the Land has been drowned in Ignorance, and led away with a prejudice
against the work of God: For every Minister of the Church of Scotland is bound
before God, to do what in him lies to remedy this evil. If any should say,
what can be more required of a Minister, at any time, than to be faithful in
his particular station; seeing he has no oversight over the whole Church, and
he is not to carry, as an Apostle. I Answer, Every Minister has a p^ior
relation to the Church universal, and a near relation to the particular
National Church, whereof he is a Member; and this Relation is antecedent to his
relation to a particular flock, in order of Nature. And as in a Church well
ordered and consti^uted, the edification of the whole requires, that each
Minister be particularly fixed, in the ordinary exercise of his Ministry, to a
particular Charge, with a capacity to officiat elsewhere, as providence
calls: But in a time of general corruption, the edification of the whole body
requires, that Ministers (when few) be not restricted or limited to particular
places, to the manifest and inevitable prejudice of the whole, or of the major
part of the Church. Seeing then providence has n^w loosed these Ministers from
the actual exercise of their Ministry, in their respective paroches; I think
they are called to consider, how and on what terms they b^come fixed again;
especially to see that their fixing be not to the undeniable prejudice of the
Church National, and be not a virtual denying of their relation to the (...).
Further, by this confinement they should be out of all capacity to meet
together for the exercise of discipline in Presbyteries and Synods, conform to
our p^inciples; as also to ordain a succeeding Ministry, and to provide for
other vacan^ places, which this time calls for; as also they should be out of
a capacity to help others at Communions, according to our laudable custom, and
to preachto such as are under Soul murderers, and Traitors to Christ and his
Interest, in this day of de^ection. (4) If it be without this Confinement, then
it will either be with some one or other of the Prescriptions, Rules,
Instructions, and Conditions, with which the present Indulgence is clogged; or
not: If it be, then the same reasons that militat against the present
Indulgence, upon that account, will equally militate against this. 5. If it
should be free of all these entanglements and grounds of scrupling, I leave it
to Christian prudence to consider; Whether, as matters now stand, the Lord be
not rather calling them to preach his name on the mountains, seeing this way
has been so signally blessed of the Lord, and is daily more countenanced of
him, than their laboring in their respective Particular Charges usually has
been; and seeing it is undeniable, that the Adversaries are not as yet really
repenting of their opposition to the work of God; and therefore, that any such
permission (if granted) could not be supposed to flow from any love to the
Prosperous progress of the Gospel; but rather from the contrary, as is clear in
the Indulgence already granted; and to flow from a purpose to entangle and
ensnare, yea and endanger both Soul and Body; if not from a purpose, or design
to destroy all at once.

Obj. 8. The benefit of freedom and liberty of preaching the Gospel, is so
great, and the duty is so lawful and necessary, and of so great import to
souls, that many things may be warrantably comported with, in order to the
obtaining of it. Ans. I willingly grant the lawfulness and necessity of this
important duty of preaching the Gospel: But I see not the strength of this
Argument; for the Gospel was never in bonds, except by our timorousness and
sinful relinquishing of duty, because of a supposed Lion in the way. The Gospel
might still have been preached, with no greater Inconvenience, than it was by
the Apostles and others in the primitive times, and possibly with much more
success, than it has been done by the Indulgence. And every one may see, that
the Indulgence was granted by such, as did not design the Gospels advancement,
but the imprisoning of the same rather with the preachers there of, both by
confineing the Persons Indulged, and by hindering, so far as they could, the
remarkable progress of the Gospel, in the blessed Assemblies, in Fields and
Houses. This objection then can have no force, seeing the Gospel was and might
s^ill have been preached, without this Indulgence, though it is true, with less
ease, peace, and quietness to the preachers and hearers; yet, I am sure, with
more inward quietness of mind, and acceptance with God, and with more ground of
hope of a rich blessing to follow their pains, as experience has proven:
Unless it be said, that the Gospel should not have been preached, without
freedom and liberty granted by the Magistrate; and if this be said, not only
shall all those, who have preached at Conventicles (as they are called) be
condemned; but even Christ himself and his Apostles, who preached to few
Assemblies, but such as might have been called Conventicles, shall be condemned
also.

Obj. 9. The outed Ministers having hitherto groaned under Edicts, which they
no otherwise acknowledged, than by a submission purely passive, the present
license, abstracted from its offensive circumstances, is such a relaxation,
that if only limited to its rigide measures by casual impossibility, it would
not be rejected. Wherefore unless it be proven, that the use-making of this
favor does Homologate with these exorbitancies, the rest is nothing material.
Ans. The outted Ministers groaning under, and no otherwise acknowledging than
by submission purely passive such Edicts, as respected their Persons and
Estates firstly, and Principally, can say nothing for an active submission unto
such Edicts, as more nearly relate to their Office and Function; or for
acknowledgment of such Edicts, as are made and emitted by such, as act from a
Principle of Usurpation, and in order to the strengthening of themselves in the
same; seeing the difference is vast betwixt an Active and a Passive Submission;
and an acknowledgement herein, by an Active Submission, contributeth to the
iniquous ends, proposed by the Supremacy, which is sufficiently confirmed by
the Magistrat's projecting, in this offer made and accepted, his further
Establishment in the Usurpation. (2.) Hence we see, that this License, (as it
is called) if not abstracted from its offensive circumstances, will be granted
to be such a Relaxation, that though limited to its rigide measures, even by a
casual impossibility, could hardly be accepted: And though in our imaginations,
we may abstract Actions from their offensive circumstances; yet in point of
Practice of moral Actions, such abstractions cannot be made, as will salve
Conscience; seeing it is confessed, that the morality of Actions does much
depend upon circumstances. (3.) Though a license so abstracted, and limited to
its rigide measures by a casual impossibility, may be accepted: Yet, a license,
which cannot be abstracted from all its offensive circumstances, ought to be
rejected. And though a Relaxation, made rigide by casual Impossibility, may be
accepted; yet that will say nothing in our case, where no casual Impossibility,
but a moral transgression, comes in consideration. A casual impossibility is
such a restraint, as may quiet the Conscience, if so be it be not caused or
occasioned by our sin; but such has no place here. (4.) How the accepting of
the Indulgence does homologate with these exorbitancies, has been seen above.

Obj. 10. The Rulers did not assign the Ministers to particular Charges by
express Deputation, but only appointed them to repair to the Paroches
designed, permitting and allowing them there to preach and exerce the other
functions of the Ministry. Answ. We saw above, that by the Indulgence, there
was an express Deputation, and a particular assignment, and a plain warrant
and license granted. Hereby it would seem that none of these Indulged do look
upon themselves, as proper Pastors of those places; and so can take no Pastoral
Charge of them: And if so, they cannot be offended, if the People own them not
as Pastors, but go and hear others, according to convenience, and look upon
them, as such, as are allowed to preach by the Magistrate, without molestation;
but not as having any Pastoral Charge over them; and yet forsooth they must
enjoy the maintenance of a Lawful Pastor: Which things cannot well hang
together.

Obj. 11. Though to yield to the Magistrate, only appointing as in the Act,
would be a sinful compliance, in a settled enjoyment of our Liberty; yet after
the ruineing overthrow, given to all Church her Liberties, the acceptance of
something, in effect a Relaxation, however sinful upon the Granters Part; yet
on our part not burdened with sinful Conditions, cannot be condemned; for the
real Opposition of things and determination of events set the periods,
according to which, that, which in the beginning of an evil Course, may be
duty, in its prevailing and establishment, through change of circumstances,
whereon its morality depends, may be impertinent. Answer (1.) Though I yield,
that a change of events may, in some cases, call us to the use of other means,
more effectual, as matters then stand, for gaining our point, or for keeping
our Rights: Yet to assert in general, that the Determination of events sets
the periods to moral Duties, seems to me dangerous, especially in our case,
wherein the contest is not for our own Rights, Privileges, or Advantages; but
for the Prerogatives of our Masters Crown, and the just Privileges of our
Mother, the Church, wherein we have no liberty to come and go, as in our own
Particulars. (2.) It is then confessed, that the Rulers, by this Indulgence,
have made an Encroachment upon the Liberties of the Church; and that to yield
unto this appointment had been a sinful compliance formerly, when the Church
was in possession of her Liberties, even though the Appointment had not been so
burdened with sinful Conditions, as now: Hence we also see, that even this
Usurpation is inconsistent with the Churches Liberty, and that it is no
maintenance of this to yield to the Usurpation. (3.) Then it must be said,
that all our former Engagements, to maintain the Prerogatives of Christ's
Crown, and the Privileges of the Church, are now so far annulled, by the
overthrow given to both by the Rulers, that we may freely comply with them in
that, which formerly had been a betraying of all: This, I confess, would open a
door to a large compliance. When a ruineing overthrow was given to our Civil
Rights and Government, by an Invading Enemy, the very acceptance of what in
effect might have been accounted a Relaxation, was by men accounted a
treasonable Compliance, and accordingly punished, at the Kings return; and shall
we carry thus in sublunary things, which are both alterable in themselves, and
under men's Power; and yet be less Zealous and more Indifferent, in the Matters
of Christ, which as Christians we are obliged to own; and by the Supervenient
Obligation of Vows, Oaths and Covenants engaged to maintain, as well against
Erastians, as against Papists, Prelates and Malignants? (3.) This Assertion
will condemn the Zeal of our Forefathers, as not being according to knowledge,
nor morally good, according to the change of circumstances, and periods, set by
the determination of Events. Yea if this be a fixed Rule, that such a change of
circumstances will make it impertinent, yea and sinful for us to refuse to do
that, which, while matters were entire, had been a sinful compliance; how much
more will it make it impertinent and unlawful for us to endeavoure a change:
For if it allows a compliance, which in so far confirms the Usurper, in his
unjust Possession, after the ruineing overthrow given, it will certainly not
allow of any Opposition. (4.) I grant, when a Robber has spoiled us, we may
lawfully take part again, rather than lose all; or when an Invader overrunneth
the land, and spoileth us of all our former Privileges, we may receive some
again, though when matters were entire, it had been a compliance to have done
so: But that will not answer our case; because we have more Power over our own
Particulars, than overChrists Matters: we may in some cases voluntarily give
all our own away; but we cannot do so, in the Matters of Christ, and of His
Church: And therefore, what at any time would be a sinful compliance, or an
unlawful giving away of Christ's, and the Churches Rights, cannot be lawful,
even after the Enemy has overthrown all. (5.) I grant likewise, that after an
Universal overthrow of the Privileges of the Church; we may lawfully accept of
little, when more cannot be had; yet that little must be such, as was not
unlawful, at any time, to be accepted of; and we must accept of it, in another
manner, than could ever have been accounted a sinful compliance. (6.) Though
what is said in the Objection might have some weight, when that thing can be
had no other way, than such, as would formerly have been accounted a
compliance: Yet it can have no weight, in the case of the Indulgence; because
liberty to preach (which is here called a Relaxation) may be had without this
appointment of the Rulers, and that with no less countenance, and approbation
of God: So that in the Accepting of the Indulgence, there is a needless
compliance with the Usurper, and an unnecessary confirming of him in his wicked
Usurpations.

Obj. 12. That, which in the case of standing Liberty, would be an insufferable
Imposition, and its refusal, duty, may, as it is from God, in the case of lost
Liberty, be looked upon, as a little reviving in our bondage, and embraced with
a sinless Submission; and he, who thus humbly and sincerely lays hold on it,
may be very assured of the Lords Approbation therein. Answ. When a people have
been following their Duty, in defense of their Lands and Liberty, and are in
Providence broken by an Enemy; their Posterity, or even they themselves, may
willingly submit to, and lay hold on that, which formerly had been an
insufferable Imposition, and might have been justly refused; but then they must
have had no sinful hand, in the loseing of their Liberty, otherwise it shall be
but a continued compliance; and we must suppose, that they are now out of case
to own and contend for their Liberty. Which holds not, as to the Indulgence;
for as there was a sinful cedeing at the first, in not resisting unto blood,
striving against these Usurpers, by Protestations, Declarations and other
Means called for, in the like case, whereby this acceptance becomes but a
continued compliance, on the matter, in the same Persons: So the manifold
Obligations we are under, bind unto a constant and perpetual contending for
the Prerogatives of our Prince, and the Privileges of his Church, against all
the Enemies thereof: And no case of lost liberty will warrant us, to submit, or
accept of that, which formerly we were bound to have refused, and to have
looked upon, as an insufferable Imposition. What may be said of the Posterity,
born and brought up under that loss of Liberty, cannot advantage us in this
Generation, who, when we can do no more, are obliged to transmit the
Controversy of Zion, and the Cause, as in foro contradictorio, to the
Posterity; that they may see the Cause, though not prevalent, yet not quite
sold and given up; and so may serve themselves heirs to our Contendings for the
Interest of our Lord. And for this cause, ought we to be tenacious of these
Rights, and do nothing that may strengthen our Adversares, and weaken our
Cause: and this, I suppose, would yield more peace, than the accepting of that,
which is called a little reviving, but indeed is a weakening both of the Cause,
and of our Party. It is laudable Constancy, in this Case, not to yield or grant
one hoof: But what pusillanimity, yea and treachery will it be, by cedeing and
accepting of such supposed revivings, to put ourselves and our Posterity out of
all case to recover our Liberty, and to bury with our own hands the very
memory of the good old Cause, for which our Predecessors, and we sometime,
have contended with Zeal and Earnestness; especially when, we may have the same
thing, which is called a reviving in our bondage, another way, with Approbation
of God, with less Scandal to others, with more Advantage to the Cause, and less
Advantage to the Enemy, though with more trouble and less quiet to our selves?

Obj. 13. Though the Magistrates principal Design, in this matter, be the
Establishment of his own Supremacy: Yet the accepting of this favor cannot be
so much as an Interpretative yielding thereunto, as may be clear by this
Supposition, that the Magistrate, without any change of Principle or Design,
had ordered all Ministers to their own Churches. Answ. (1.) This being
confessedly the Magistrat's principal Design, in granting this supposed
favor, our acceptance cannot but be accounted by him a real contributing of
all, that is required of us, thereunto; and as it was circumstantiat, could not
but be, on our part, even because of what the Magistrate did rationally account
to be unto him, a virtual acknowledgment, and a real Confirmation thereof.
(2.) If the sending of the Ministers to their own Congregations, had been by a
Civil annulling of the former Sentence of Banishment, as it could not have
flowed from the Supremacy; so neither could it have contributed unto his
Usurpation: But if the sending of them to their own Charges had been every way,
after the manner of this Indulgence, it would not have altered the case to me;
for as I said above, his re-entrie to his Former Charge, after this manner,
would have been a virtual annulling of the Ground of his Former Call, and
Interest in that place, and over that People, and not a returning with full
Freedom and Liberty.

Obj. 14. The Magistrate proposing this Indulgence by way of Command, not
attending my pleasure, my obedience to the Command cannot imply an engagement
to the Prescriptions annexed; nor does the Magistrate discover the least
Intention, to oblige me thereunto by consent; nor is in this matter treating
with us, expecting our formal consent for his security; and therefore I may
accept the favor, without the prescriptions, there being no formal Compact
here. Answ. (1.) Though the Indulgence be propounded by way of Command, the
Council thinking it below them to Act otherwise: Yet both the Nature of the
thing, and the concomitant Acts, made of purpose, to Limite, Restrict and
Qualify the thing proposed, and to Instruct and Oblige the receiver, says,
that the accepting of the First does virtually engage to the Second, both
making up one complex grant, or one Indulgence so qualified, limited and
cautioned. (2.) Though the Council did not call for any formal and express
engagement from them, unto the performance of these Injunctions; yet their
carriage toward Mr. Blair, upon hisPositive renounceing of these Injunctions,
shows, that they meant these Injunctions for Conditions; and this also they
expressly declared in their after Proclamations and Edicts, as we saw above.
(3.) Who accepts a favor, offered with its burdens, must accept it cum
onere, howbeit the offerer, being a Superior, does not expressly require an
explicit Consent, but rests satisfied with his own Intimation: As when a
Father grants to one of his Children such a portion of Land, and withal
^ntimateth, that it is his will and pleasure, that he take on him the burden of
so much d^^t; though the Son should not be required to express his consent to
the Condition of the Debt; yet his accepting of the benefit thus burdened,
obliges him to take on the Debt: So here, because Mr. Blair did disowne the
Conditions, though his formal Consent was not required, he was denuded of the
Benefit; and therefore the rest took the Benefit with its burden; and could
not, while accepting the favor, account themselves free of the Conditions, or
not-obliged to perform them, seeing in accepting the one, they accepted the
other, both making up one complex business. Wherefore, though this Indulgence
be given by Magistrates, who love to act imperiously, and by way of Edict; yet
it being granted as a favor, the accepting of it, both as to the thing it
self, and as to the sense and meaning of the Granters, includes a virtual
engagement to the Observation of the Rules and Conditions annexed.

Obj. 15. Although the Magistrate had expressly prefaced his Supremacy unto the
grant of this license; yet a Protestation on the accepters part against the
same, would sufficiently have purged their use-making of the favor, of all
sinful concurrence. Answ. (1.) Though this were granted (which yet cannot be)
yet it cannot avail the accepters, who made no Protestation. (2.) Though no
mention was made of the Supremacy; yet the accepting was so foul, upon many
other accounts, that no Protestation against the Supremacy, if mentioned,
could have salved the matter, as we saw above; and their after acceptance would
but contradict their Protestation.

Obj. 16. Though the Magistrate has carried his Supremacy above the highest,
yet he never judged the power of Order worth the assuming; so that the allowing
to preach mentioned in the Act, joined to permitting, and directed to none but
to Ministers, antecedently ordained, cannot be a just ground of scruple. If the
Magistrate had simply appointed every other Minister to his own Church, allowing
him there to preach, to have offended at the word allowing, would have been an
excessive niceness. Ans. Though the Magistrate never judged the power of Order
(strictly so called) worth the assuming; yet it may be thought, that he judged
that power worth the assuming, whereby the Authority of the Ministry, and the
Exercise thereof, should be looked upon as flowing, and as derived from him:
And Ministers were, I think, called to be careful and circumspect, lest by
doing and accepting of any thing, they might interpretatively and virtually
acknowledge and consent to this Power. (2.) Though this allowance was granted
to such, as had been ordained Ministers before, yet the same, flowing from the
Supremacy, and being more than a mere permission, could not but import their
deriving of a power to exercise the function, in such a place, from him; and so
prove a most just and weighty ground of scruple. (3.) Nor will the supposition
of his sending every Minister to his Church, wholly take away the scruple; for
his simple annulling of the prior Act at Glasgow, would have been sufficient
for that end; but when, instead of this, he not only did say, he permitted them
to preach again to their former flocks; but also that he allowed them, and
that after he had invaded the Throne of Christ, and assumed to himself the
Fountain of all Church power; so that both as to the exercise of the
Ministry, and as to the exercise of it in such a place, they should depend on
him, I think there should have some ground of scruple remained: For might it
not be thought, that by their ready acceptance, without a previous, full,
faithful, plain and public Declaration and Protestation, they had now derived
their power from another Head, than formerly, and stood now upon some other new
ground? And in this case, I should think, that offending at the word, allowing,
were the kindly work of a tender Conscience, zealous for the Glory and
Interests of Christ, and careful of the credit of the Ministry; and no
excessive niceness.

Obj. 17. The Ministers Indulged do above all things own their Masters
Ordination, as the only proper foundation, whereupon the exercise of their
Ministry, by the permission of this license, does subsist. All the regard
they have to the Magistrates allowance, is, that they look upon it, as the
removal, de facto, of his unjust restraints, hitherto Invincible. And neither
by form of acceptance, nor by engagement, do they in any sort acknowledge any
of the Magistrates wrongs; but are ready by a plain declaration to purge
themselves, even of the suspicion of a simple acquiescence. Ans. (1.) I shall
willingly yield, that the Persons concerned do own their Ordination; yet we
must distinguish the Intention of the work, and the Intention of the worker;
though they may have no Intention of invalidating their prior Ordination; yet
their accepting of the Indulgence may virtually include this; and so their
Practice may contradict their Principles. (2.) Their Masters Mission is only
their proper, sure and solid Foundation, whereupon the exercise of their
Ministry should subsist; but is it not manifest, that the accepting of the
Indulgence does virtually say, that as to the Ministry they depend upon the
allowance of Men; yea of those, who assume to themselves an Headshipe over the
Church, and a Fountaine-power, from which this Exercise must natively flow, and
be derived. (3.) These restraints of preaching the Gospel were not invincible
Physically, nor Moraly: Neither were any such restraints, as such, formally
removed, nor a pure permission granted. But the Indulgence contained an
Authoritative Enjoining and Warranding, as also a Qualifying, Restricting, and
Regulating the exercise of the Ministry; and all this in prosecution and
confirmation of an Usurped Supremacy; and this was a far other thing, than a
removal de facto of a former restraint. Now their Subjection unto this
Incroachment, testified by their accepting of the Indulgence, so conveyed, is
much more, than the acceptance of the benefit of a bare Permission: And all
know, that they might have exercised their Ministry, without this Indulgence,
to the Glory of God, the Edification of the Body, the Confirmation of the
Principles of Truth, concerning the Ministry, the Defeating of the corrupt
Erastian Designs of the injuriously incroaching Magistrates, and to the
offense and scandal of no Person. (4.) Though they do not expressly and in
terminis acknowledge any of these Wrongs; yet, by their accepting of the
Indulgence, so conveyed, as is said, they may virtually and upon the matter
acknowledge this: and their plain Declaration to purge themselves, will be but
a contradiction to, and a condemnation of their own deed, because the Imposer
can only put a sense and gloss upon his own Injunctions; and the granter of a
warrant and favor, on the same; and in his sense it is, at least virtually,
accepted by all, who accept of it, if plain dealing be owned; and I suppose
Ministers, while dealing with the Council, should not walk upon fallacies, or
mental reserves, or on what is equivalent.

Obj. 18. The accepting of the Indulgence did Import no subjecting of the
Ministry to men's arbitrary Disposal, but only a subjecting of the persons, or
rather an acknowledgment, that the persons are already in subjection, which by
our long silence and sufferings is too apparent: But if we have hitherto thus
contentedly acknowledged this, to the restraint of our Ministry, shall we now
be so unhappy, as to wrangle about it, in prejudice of a relaxation? Ans. (1.)
The act of Indulgence did not only mention Ministers repairing to such or such
places; but spoke likewise of the exercise of their Ministry, which it allowed
them, and for which prescribed several Rules and Injunctions, limiting and
regulating them, in the same; and though this did comprehend a subjection of
their persons also; yet it is by virtue of a prior Subjection of their
Ministry, as being made liable to punishment for not-observing the Rules and
Injunctions prescribed. (2.) These sufferings indeed declared a subjection of
their persons; but their silence shall be found (I fear) to have done more;
And their former sin can be no ground to justify their present practice, in
accepting of this Indulgence, which instead of being a relaxation, is a further
wreething of the yoke about our necks.

A Vindication of such, as scruple to hear and own the Indulged.
Considering what is said above, both in the Relation, and in the Reasons
against the accepting of the Indulgence, whereby the manifold iniquity thereof
is manifested, it might seem wholly unnecessary and superfluous to vindicat
such, as, beginning to discover the evil thereof, do scruple to look upon
those, who are set over them by the Council, as their Ministers, set over them
by the Holy Ghost; seeing it may rather seem strange, that any, who adhere to
our former Principles, are of another judgment; and that Conscientious Persons
did not from the beginning withdraw from them Yet for satisfaction to all (so
far as is possible) the grounds of our Vindication of such shall be proposed,
in a few questions.

Only it would be premitted, in what sense we take the question: And therefore.
(1.) I do not make this the question. Whether or not these Indulged Ministers,
are true Ministers of the Gospel, or ought, in any case, to be acknowledged,
and looked upon as such; for in order to our Vindication of such, who withdraw
from them, it is not necessary to assert this; for in order to the Vindication
of such, as withdraw from the Prelates Curates, as we do not, so we use not to
say, That they are not Ministers, knowing that by saying this, we are engaged
consequently to say, that all the Children, whom they have baptized, are yet
unbaptized; and that all their Ministerial Acts are null. Nor (2.) Shall I make
this the question: Is it not simply unlawful to hear them? For in order to
Vindicat the withdrawers from the Curates, we need not assert this, knowing
that much more is required to make an action simply sinful, than to make it
inexpedient, or unlawful; and if it were granted, that the hearing or owning of
the Indulged, as matters now stand, were unlawful, or inexpedient, the
With-drawers would be sufficiently vindicated. Nor (3.) Do I propose this
question, whether or not, they may lawfully be heard, at any time, or in any
circumstances; as for example, if there were no other to be heard, in all
Scotland? For I judge, if no other were to be heard in all Scotland, except the
Prelates Curats, many would not scruple to hear such of them, as were not
openly flagicious and profane, or notoriously ignorant; who, as matters now
stand, do, and that with Approbation. (4.) I do not think, that such, as are
against this withdrawing, will say, that it is necessary, that these Indulged
be heard and countenanced, at all times and occasions; and that never, or in no
case, such, as are under them, may go and hear others; seeing this was always
allowed and permitted, in our best times.

But I shall simply propose the Question thus. Whether may not people lawfully,
as the case now stands, withdraw from those Indulged, whom the Council has
set over them by the Indulgence; or are they to own them, and submit unto
them, as over them in the Lord, and as set over them, to be their Pastors and
Overseers, by the Holy Ghost; even when there are others, against whom such
Exceptions cannot be made, as against them, and whom the Lord does own and
countenance in a remarkable and wonderful manner, to be heard? Or, whether are
such to be condemned, or approven and vindicated, who look upon themselves, as
called of God to bear witness against all the sinful Usurpations, manifest in
the Indulgence; and the many evils, in the accepting of it, and in the now
acting by virtue thereof, by withdrawing from such, that they may hear and
countenance others, who preach upon Christ's Call, and not according to Man's
Order, but contrary thereto?

This being the Question, one might think it strange, that there should be any
necessity to Vindicate such, as now withdraw, considering what is said above:
Yet in Order hereunto, I shall but, in a few words, propose these following
Questions, to the Consideration of any, who are of another judgment, in this
matter, As.

1. Seeing by what is said under our First Head of Arguments, it is manifest,
that the Indulged, in and by the accepting of the Indulgence, have wronged our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is only Head of the Church, and King in Zion; and that
in Nine several Particulars: (every one of which might be made use of, as a
several Argument, to our present purpose.) How can any blame such, as, out of
tenderness to the Royal Prerogatives of Jesus Christ, scruple to own, and hear
them, as formerly?

2. Seeing by the accepting of this Indulgence, the Indulged have receded from
our Presbyterian Principles, and wronged the Interest and Privileges of the
Church, which Christ, her only King, has granted to her; and that in five
several Particulars, (out of which particular Arguments might be framed
severally) as is clear by what is said under our 2 Head of Arguments. How
unreasonable is it to condemn such, as, out of a tender care to adhere to
their Presbyterian Principles, dat not own and hear such, as formerly?

3. Seeing in Ten Particulars, mentioned under our 3. Head of Arguments, it is
made manifest, that the Indulged, by accepting of the Indulgence, have, upon
the matter, homologated the wicked Supreamacy, in Church Affairs, whereby our
Lord is virtually dethroned, and His Church utterly robbed of her Spiritual
Power and Privileges: How can we condemn such, who, in detestation of that
Supreamacy, and Usurped Power, withdraw from them?

4. Seeing by our Principles, the Free Election and Call of the People, gives
ground to the relation, that a Pastor has to a Flock, as his Charge, and is
the way, how the Holy Ghost sets men over Flocks, in ordinary: How can these
be obliged to own such for their Pastors, whom they never called, nor had
freedom freely to Elect and Call? And this is the case of not a few, yea in
reality the case of all, who had others, than such, as had been their Pastors
before, set over them; for as for that image of a call, we have said enough
above, and particularly, under our 4. Head of Arguments, to show that it was of
no force, and imported rather a prostituting of that Ordinance and Institution,
to be subservient to the corrupt Designs of men, than savoured of true
tenderness unto the Ordinance of Christ; which should have led the way, in an
orderly settlement, and not have been trailed at the heels of the Councels
Order, with which in all Common Sense, it was incompatible, except by way of
acknowledging and homologating the Councils Usurpation.

5. Seeing as is clear from the Seven Particulars, mentioned under our 5. Head
of Arguments, the Indulged, in their accepting of the Indulgence, have
fortified and established Erastianisme, and Erastian Tenets; how shall we
condemn such, as withdraw from them, and rather hear and own such, as adhere
by their practice to former Principles?

6. When we consider the Twelve Particulars, mentioned under our 6. Head of
Arguments, (several of which might be here made use of, as Distinct Arguments,
if we designed not brevity) whereby it was made manifest, how the Indulged, in
accepting of the Indulgence, have acted to the great prejudice of the Church;
how can we imagine, that such are to be condemned, who withdraw from them, and
countenance such, as are seeking and promoving its good, in the way,
countenanced and approven of God?

7. If we impartially consider the Twelve Particulars, mentioned under our 7.
Head of Arguments, (several of which also might be adduced here, as distinct
Arguments) whereby it appeared, how these Indulged, in their accepting of the
Indulgence, have wronged our Cause, and departed from the grounds, upon which
our Church is suffering; we will see cause of approving such, as withdraw from
them, as matters now stand.

8. Seeing by what is said, it is manifest, that the Entry of the Indulged unto
their present Places, and Stations, is not consonant, but repugnant to our
Former Doctrine, Principles and Practices, owned since the Reformation, and
confirmed by our Oaths, Vows, Covenants and Solemn Engagments; besides the
Testimonies given thereunto by the Sufferings of our Predecessors, and by our
own Sufferings; can we blame and condemn such, who dar not own them, as
lawfully entered into these places?

9. Seeing the Indulged have, by the accepting of the Indulgence, and acting by
virtue thereof, in so far, departed from Former Principles and Practices; and a
difference ought to be put betwixt them, and other Ministers, who, through
grace, have hithertill been preserved from stepping aside, whether to Prelacy,
or to Erastianisme, in their Practices; who can condemn such, as withdraw from
the one, and adhere to the other?

10. Is there not a great difference betwixt the ground, whereupon the Indulged
do presently exercise their Ministry; and the ground whereupon formerly,
before they embraced the Indulgence, they did, and others to this day do,
exercise it? Or shall we say, that it is all one, whether Ministers have the
Ministerial Potestative Mission unto such or such places, over which they are
set, from Presbyteries, authorized thereunto by Christ, which sometimes they
had; or have it from the Magistrate, no ways thereunto authorized by Christ; as
now they have it only? And if there be a difference, how can any condemn
those, who cannot now own them, as they did formerly?

11. Seeing the difference betwixt these two ways mentioned, is great, and
seeing they cannot be compounded in one, nor lawfully made subordinat, the one
to the other; is it not undeniable, that these Indulged, betaking themselves
now to the Magistrat's Mission, as they have done, have upon the matter,
renounced their former Mission, which they had from Presbyteries, acting
Ministerially under Christ? And if so, can people be condemned, who do not, nor
cannot, own, and countenance them, as formerly they did?

12. It being apparent from what is said above, on several occasions, that, as
the Indulged did deliberatly shun to say, that they had their Ministry only
of Christ, so they do now Act and Exerce the same, as receiving it not alone
from Christ, by the Ministerial Conveyance of the Power and Authority to exerce
it, which Christ has ordained; but either as receiving it from the Magistrate
alone; (and if so, they cannot be looked upon as Christ's Servants, but as the
Magistrat's Servants;) or from Christ and the Magistrate, as Collateral Heads
and Fountains of Church Power; (but thus to speak were blasphemy;) or from the
Magistrate, as directly subordinat to Christ; (which is the ground of all
Arminian-Erastianisme) How can Men be accounted transgressors, who in
Conscience cannot own them, as formerly they did, when they acted and
exercised their Ministry as receiving it alone from Christ, by the Ministerial
conveyance of the Power and Authority thereto, through the hands of his
Servants thereunto appointed?

13. Is there no difference to be put betwixt such, as exercise the Ministry
in subordination unto, and in a dependence upon the Council, as being their
Curats, and as accountable to them; and others, who, as they are subordinat
unto, so they own their dependence only upon Christ, in the way He has
prescribed, receiving Instructions only from Him, in His appointed way, to
regulate them, in the Exercise of their Ministry, and hold themselves
accountable only to Him, in that way? And seeing it is manifest, that there is a
very great difference; Who can condemn such as withdraw from the Indulged, who
have their Instructions, to regulate them in the Exercise of the Ministry,
from the Council, (as was manifested above,) as accountable only to them, and
to such, as they are directly subordinat unto; that is, the King; and not from
Christ Jesus, as only Head of the Kirk?

14. Seeing by receiving the Indulgence, with their Instructions etc. the
Indulged do, upon the matter, recognosce a Supreme Head-Power over the Church,
and Church Affairs, in the Magistrates, to the denying of Christ's sole
Headshipe, and dethroning of Him (as has been, on several occasions, cleared
above;) how can such be condemned, who scruple to own them, in that case, or
to countenance them, while they act so?

15. Seeing the Indulged, being set over the people, specially designed and
appointed them by the Council's order, and not in the way appointed by Christ,
can not be said to be set over these people, as their Overseers, by the Holy
Ghost; (as has been evidenced above;) how can such be blamed, who cannot own
them, as their Overseers, and as made Overseers to them by the Holy Ghost?

16. Seeing we have made it manifest above, that the entry of the Indulged has
a manifold relation unto the Usurped Supremacy, in Church-affaires; and that,
as it flows therefrom, is secured thereby, and depends in its legal being
thereupon, as its Charter; so it contributeth to the strengthening, securing and
encouraging of the Usurpation and seeing this Supremacy and Sacrilegious
Usurpation of the Prerogatives Royal of our Lord Jesus, and Subversion of the
Rights and Privileges of the Church, is the Top-point of all our Defection, and
the Center, into which all the Lines of our Apostasy concur and agree; can
any, who would not join in this defection, and have a proportionable part of
the guilt, charged upon them, give countenance and approbation unto those
Indulged, whose entry is so near a kin unto that Supremacy? Or can any, who
desire to be free of all compliance with this abominable evil, carry toward
those, who are now set over them by virtue of the Supremacy, as formerly?

17. The Supremacy now regnant, and the grand National sin, being such an evil,
as all, that would be kept free of the plagues, that the same will bring upon
the Land, must, in their places and stations, bear witness against the same:
And seeing Common people have no other way Patent or Practicable for them, to
give this plain and honest Testimony against this heinous Usurpation, in any
public manner, but by withdrawing from such, as are set over them by virtue of
this Usurped Power; can those be condemned, who, out of Conscience of their
duty, zeal to Christ's Prerogatives, Care to keep their garments unspotted with
public regnant evils; and out of a desire to mind their duty, in this day of
so general a Defection, do withdraw from the Indulged, in order to the giving
of this public Testimony, in their Place and Station?

18. Seeing by the Particulars, mentioned under our 8. Head of Argu. it is
manifest, that the accepters of this Indulgence have thereby contributed to the
strengthening of the hands of Prelates and Prelacie, which all are obliged by
their Covenants, to endeavor, in their Places and Stations, to exstirpat; how
can such be condemned, who withdraw from them, while standing thus in a
contributing posture?

19. As upon the one hand, the disowning of the Curats is a disowning of the
Prelates and their Power; and a countenancing of them by hearing them, and
submitting to their Ministry is accounted by all (as indeed it is) a
countenancing of Prelacy; is not also, upon the other hand, an owning of the
Indulged, and a Submitting to them and their Ministry, a submitting to the
Supremacy; seeing (as is above cleared and confirmed) the Curats (at least such
as, were ordained Ministers before the re-establishment of Prelacy, and have
submitted thereto) do no more depend upon Prelacy, as to the present exercise
of their Ministry, than the Indulged do depend upon the Supremacy, or on the
Rulers, acting by virtue of the Supremacy?

20. Seeing the Act of Glasgow, banishing Ministers from their own Charges,
cannot dissolve the relation, that was betwixt the Ministers, and their Flocks;
how can such, as stand still related unto their former Pastors, (which is the
case of some) accept of others, set over them by the Council, and not withal
homologat the Councils deed, and declare the former relation utterly dissolved?

21. Seeing the Indulged, in accepting of the Indulgence, have in several
Particulars violated our Covenant-Obligations (as was shown in the 9 Head of
Argu:) Can any be blamed for with drawing from those, who have so entered, in
this day, when God is about to plead with the Land, for a broken Covenant?

22. If all be obliged to resist and withstand Erastianisme, by the Solemn
Engagment to duties; what less can be expected of Common People, in their
private Stations, in order to an answerable walking unto this Engagment, than a
withdrawing from such, as are set over them by a Power, purely Erastian? And
can such be thought to mind their Engagment in this particular, who willingly
comply with the Erastian Command and Injunction, and accept of such, as are set
over them by an Erastian-Order?

23. Seeing the Indulged, in accepting of the Indulgence, have receded from our
Principles, and wronged our Cause as is undeniable by the Twelve Particulars,
mentioned under our 7. Head. of Arg.) can they be justly condemned, who now
withdraw from them?

24. Seeing by accepting of the Indulgence, the Indulged have highly prejudged
the good of our Church (as is manifest from the Twelve Particulars, mentioned
under our 6. Head of Arg.) How can such be condemned, who refuse to countenance
them, while thus stated in and by the Indulgence?

25. Seeing, as was cleared above, the Indulgence, was devised of purpose, to
annul all Field-and House-meetings; and seeing it cannot be denied, that these
Field-and House-meetings, being so eminently countenanced of the Lord, are also
to be countenanced of Men; can any say, that they, over whom the Indulged are
set by the Council, are not obliged to withdraw from them; and not withal say,
that they are not obliged to wait upon these blessed Meetings, though thereby
the Minister and other people, should be much discouraged? And would not this
be a manifest homologating and concurring with the Council, in carrying-on of
this wicked Design? And how can such be condemned, who withdraw from them, who
have, in accepting of the Indulgence, acted so prejudicially unto these blessed
Meetings, as is evidenced in our II. Head of Arguments?

26. Seeing it is undeniable, and daily experience does confirm it, that an
admirably rich blessing attends the labors of such, as preach contrary to
Man's Law, upon Christ's sole Warrant and Allowance; what cruelty to Souls were
it to say, that they, who have none to preach to them, but such as the Council
(none of the best discerners of Ministerial Gifts, nor endued with Power from
Christ for that end, to try the Qualifications of Ministers) has set over
them, must not withdraw from these, to seek their food, where God is giving it
largly, and is thereby encouraging and inviting all to come? We would,
doubtless, think this hard dealing, were we, as to our temporal food, to be
kept at a set sober diet, wherein we found little nourishment, and restrained
from going to fattening and strengthening feasts. If it be said, That it is the
peoples fault, that they grow not more under the preaching of such, as are set
over them. I need not contradict it, for strengthening of my Argument; but only
say, if the blessing be withheld at home, though justly, because of sin; let
the people go where they may find the blessing, of Gods free grace,
notwithstanding of their Provocations, as others have found it: Let them go, I
say, where free grace may prevent them. Nay, I think the Indulged themselves,
upon this very account, if they desire (as I would hope they do) the Spiritual
Edification of the people, should be^eech and obtest all their People, to go
unto these richly blessed Conventiclers; and desire these Conventicles to come
and choice the most convenient place, in all their bounds, for a Field-meeting,
that their people might partake of the good thereof; and this Course (if it had
been taken) would have, I think, endeared them more unto all, that feared God;
and had (no doubt) prevented much of this animosity that is, as I apprehend,
betwixt them, and the Field-Preachers; for it would have defeat the Design of
the Council, and have contributed to the carrying on of the Work of the Lord.

27. Seeing all Persons stand obliged by their Covenants, to maintain the
Prerogatives of Christ's Crown, the Rights of the Church, and Presbyterial
Government; how can they, who would make conscience of the said Covenants,
own such, as are set over them, not according to the Principles of
Presbyterian Government, nor in compliance with the Prerogatives of Christ, nor
so as the Rights of the Church are so much as pretended to be observed, but in
a way rather repugnant unto all these; as has been manifested above?

28. Seeing many of these Indulged have a relation to their own Flocks, from
which they were thrust by violence; and it will not be said, that what the
Rulers did, in that matter, did utterly annul their relation; How can they be
related as Pastors to these Congregations, over which they are set by the
Council? We do not acknowledge or justify Pluralities. And if they have not
the relation of Pastors unto these new Charges, people are not bound to carry,
as their flock; and so may lawfully withdraw, and hear others, as well as them.

29. Seeing It is manifest from what is said, that the Indulged, by accepting of
the Indulgence, have, upon the matter, condemned all the wrestlings of the
Church of Scotland, from the very beginning of our Reformation, against the
Erastian Usurpations and Encroachments of King and Court, in the Days of King
James, who yet, in the height of his Usurpations, and arrogate Supremacy, never
did what the Council did, in the Matter of the Indulgence; He never took upon
him, to plant and transplant Ministers by himself, or by his Council
immediately, and only: yea and have condemned all their sufferings to bonds,
banishment and blood, for the Privileges of the Church, and the Crown-Rights of
Christ, the only King in Zion; how can people, be pressed or urged, to look on
such, as their lawfully settled Ministers, and be condemned for withdrawing?
Must not the compliers with them in this, be guilty of the same sin of spitting
in the faces of all our ancient witnesses; and saying, their Sufferings were
for triffles? Do not they, who do more, than ever these were tempted to do, and
that without the least hesitancy, say, that these suffered as fools?

30. Seeing the entry of the Indulged by the Councils Order is such, as has not
a Parallel, in all the Christian world, for any thing I know; for, no where
shall we find Ministers planted in Particular Charges, and transplanted from
one to another, immediately by the Magistrate: Yea I doubt, if Ministers were
thus placed, in the Palatinate, (now laid waste and desolat, in the righteous
judgment of God,) where the hemlock of Erastianisme first grew up; can any
blame the reformed Professors of the Church of Scotland, where that weed ha^h
been cast over the hedge, with a solemn Vow and Covenant, never to own it
again, in resenting this manner of Entry, by withdrawing from those, that are
set over them, in such a singular and shameful manner?

31. Do we not make use of this Argument against the Prelates, that they are
chosen, named and deputed solely by the King, notwithstanding of that
mock-election, made by the Chapter of the Sea, which must fall upon the person,
nominated by the King, or be null? But where is the strength of it now, when we
admit of lesser Bishops, immediately nominated, deputed, and empowered by the
Council, notwithstanding of that mock-call by the people, and Election of the
same singular person, which was said somewhere to be had?

32. How can any blame such, as withdraw from those, who, by entering in at the
door of the Indulgence, have made way for the wreathing of an yoke upon the
necks of the Ministry of Scotland, in all time coming, to the utter subversion
of all Ministerial liberty, and of the Freedom and Privilege of the Church:
For, if hereafter no man shall be settled in a Church but by the King and his
Council immediately, and every Minister shall be wholly at the disposal of the
King and Council, to be planted, or transplanted, as they please, where were
we? And where should our Church-liberties then be? And whom had we to thank for
breaking the ice?

33. If the Parliament, that carried on the Engagment Anno 1648. had thrust out
a number of the Ministers, and thereafter their Committee had planted them
elsewhere, up and down the Land, as they pleased; I would ask such as were
Ministers, in those days, and were against the Engagment, or were Members of
the Assembly 1649. how such Ministers, as willingly would have obeyed the
Orders of the Committee of Estates, and gone thither, where they were Ordered
to remain, had been looked upon, when the Engagment to duties was drawn up?
And whether or not lesser faults in Ministers, were not punished with simple
Deposition? If then such a fault, as this, had been so abominable then, shall
it be so lovely now, that none may discountenance or withdraw from such
persons, as have carried so, at this time?

34. Is it not strange, that people shall not have liberty to withdraw from
those, who by their way of entry, and carriage before the Council, have given
such open and manifest Scandal unto the Church of God, and unto Strangers, unto
Foes and unto Friends, at home and abroad, to the Rulers, to the Prelates and
their Curat's, to Good and Bad; yea and unto all the Churches of Christ; and
have laid such a stumbling block before all the Posterity; as is manifested
above, in the 12. Head of Argum.?

35. When poor people, who have been hitherto in the dark, as to the evils of
this Indulgence, both as to its Ground, Rise, Conveyance, Tendency, and
designed End, begin now to get their eyes opened, and to see its connection
with, dependence upon, and confirmation of the fearful Usurpation of the
Supremacy ^ what a grief of heart is it to hear persons pleading against their
withdrawing from such, when they see where they are, and how they cannot
countenance such, and be free of all accession to the sinful strengthening and
confirming of the Encroachments already made, and to the encouraging unto a
further progress unto the same evil?

36. When there is such a combination for upholding of this evil of the
Indulgence, and several (as is reported) banding or covenanting together, to
keep the Indulgence, in credit, or at least, not so speak against it; how can
such, as are convinced of the dreadful evil thereof, not think themselves
called of God, to do their best against it? And how can any be urged to hear
and countenance them, who are Indulged, when the controversy is thus stated
and prosecuted, without being also urged to approve of the Indulgence, contrare
to their light:

37. Seeing the Indulged, by their accepting of this Indulgence, did fall from
their former zeal and steadfastness, in choosing suffering rather than sin, and
have, upon the matter, condemned what formerly they approved of, and have
approved that, which formerly they condemned, as we saw above, in the Six
Particulars, mentioned and explained in our 10. Head of Argum. How can those be
now condemned, who cannot own them, as they did formerly?

38. Do we not say, that Countenancing and hearing of the Curats is an
Homologating and a virtual approving of their sinful way of Entry? And shall
not now, the Countenancing and hearing of the Indulged, be an Homologating and
a virtual approving of their sinful way of En^y? How then can such be
condemned, who, out of a desire to be kept free of this sin, dar not
countenance or hear them, as formerly?

39. I would gladly know one Argument, that can be made use of to condemn now,
as matters stand, withdrawing from and refusing to hear the Indulged, that
either has not been; or may not yet be, with equal force, made use of, to
prove it unlawful to withdraw from, and to refuse to hear the Established
Curats? And seeing now none dar condemn such, as withdraw from the Curats; why
shall these be condemned, who withdraw from the Indulged?

40. When the question is now so stated, by and among the people, as that
countenancing and hearing of the Indulged, is looked upon, as an approving of
the Indulgence it self, the people not knowing the use and practice of
Metaphysical distinctions; how can such be urged to hear and countenance them,
who, by so doing, must look upon themselves, as approving what otherwise they
condemn, contrare to Romans 14:22, 23?

Many more Arguments, may be gathered out of the several Particulars, we
mentioned above, under the several Heads of Arguments; but we shall satisfy
our selves with these, at present, leaving the Understanding Reader to make his
own use of the rest, that are not made use of here.

For further satisfaction, in this matter, to such, as would have Formal
Arguments, I shall only say, That by what Arguments, Principally, we vindicat
the People, their withdrawing from the Curates, by the same, mutatis mutandis,
by changing or adding such words, as must be changed or added, we shall be able
to vindicate the people their withdrawing from the Indulged. I saw lately a
Vindication of the persecuted Ministers and Professors in Scotland, written by
a faithful Minister of Christ, now in Glory; and found that the Chief of these
Arguments, whereof he made use, to vindicate the people their withdrawing from
the Curats, were applicable to the question now under debate, concerning the
hearing or withdrawing from the Indulged, as I shall make appear by these
Instances.

His first Argument Page 75. was this. They, who have no just Authority, nor
Right to officiat fixedly, in this Church, as the proper Pastors of it, ought
not to be received, but withdrawn from. But the Prelates and their adherents
the Curats (add, for our case, the Indulged) have no just Authority or Right
to officiat in this Church, as her proper Pastors. Therefore they ought not to
be received, but withdrawn from. All the debate is about the Minor, which he
thus makes good. They, who have entered into, and do officiat fixedly in this
Church without her Authority and Consent, have no just Authority or Right so to
do. But the Prelates and their Curats (add, the Indulged) have entered into
this Church, and do Officiat therein, without her Authority and Consent.
Therefore they have no just Authority. The first Proposition (says he, and we
with him) is clear, and we suppose, will not be gainesaid by our Antagonists;
seeing the power of Mission, of Calling and of Sending of ordinary fixed
Pastors, is only in the Church, and not in any other, as all Divines do
assert. The Second is evident from matters of fact; for there was no
Church-Judicatory called, or convocated, for bringing of Prelates in to the
Church; (add, nor for settling of the Indulged over their respective charges)
all was done immediately by the King and Acts of Parliament (add, Acts of the
Coun^il) without the Church. A practice wanting a precedent in this, and (for
any thing we know) in all other Churches.

He proposes an Objection in behalf of the Curats Page 78. which I know the
Indulged will use for themselves, to wit. They have entered by the Church. And
his answer will serve us, which is this. This we deny, the contrare is clear,
from confiant Practice; for the Curats (add, the Indulged) came in upon
Congregations, only by the Bishop and Patron (add in our case, only by the
Council and Patron) who are not the Church, nor have any power from her, for
what they do, in this: All their right and power is founded upon, and derived
from the Supremacy, and Acts of Parliament, and not from the Church; in which
the Bishop (add the Council) acts as the Kings Delegat and Substitute, only
empowered there^o by his Law (add Letter) So that the Curats (add, the
Indulged) having and deriving all their power from the Prelates (add, the
Council) cannot have the same from the Church; none gives what he has not.
But. 2. The Prelates (add, the Council) not being the lawful Governing Church,
any, that enter Congregations by them, cannot be said to enter by the Church.
Read the rest there.

His second Argument is proposed Page 79.80. thus. Those that receive and
derive their Church power from, and are subordinat, in its exercise* to another
Head, then Christ Jesus, should not be received and subjected to, as the
Ministers of Christ, in his Church. But the Prelates and their Curats (add,
the Indulged) do receive and derive their Church Power from, and are
subordinat, in its exercise, to another Head, than Christ Jesus. Therefore they
ought not to be received etc. The first Proposition will not be denied: He
proves the second thus. Those Officers in the Church, professing themselves
such, that derive their Church Power from, and are subordinate, in its
exercise, to a Power truly Architectonick and Supreme in the Church, beside
Christ, do derive their Power from, and are subordinat, in its exercise, to
another Head, than Christ Jesus. But so it is, that Prelates and their Curats
(add, the Indulged) do derive their Church Power from, and are subordinat, in
its exercise, to a Power truly Architectonick and Supreme in the Church,
beside Christ. Therefore etc. The Major is evident; for whoever has a Supreme
Architectonick Power in and over the Church, must be an Head to the same, and
the Fountain of all Church Power. The Minor is clear from the Act of
Restitution (add, the Act Explicatory of the Supremacy.)

His third Arg. Page 8. is long, I shall cut it short thus, that it may serve
our case. If Churches required by Law ( or, Act of Council) to submit to
Prelates, and to their Curats (or, to the Indulged) thus thrust in upon them,
had their own P^stors set over them, conform to Gods Word; then it is no
sinful Separation, for Churches, in adhering to their Ministers, not to
receive, or submit to the Prelates and their Curats (or, to the Indulged.) But
the former is true. Therefore etc. The truth of the Major is founded on this,
That the obligation betwixt Pastor and People stands, notwithstanding of the
Magistrat's Act. And the Minor is true, (I suppose) as to some Churches, over
which the Indulged were placed by the Council.

His fourth Argument Page 90. will serve us; It is thus. The way of the Curats
( Indulged) entering into Congregations, puts a bar on our subjection to them,
that we dar not own them, for the lawful Pastors of the Church; for as their
entry is without the Church, and the way that Christ has settled in his House
for that end; so they have come in on Congregations, in ways, which we judge
corrupt, and without all warrant from the Word of God, and the practice of the
Primitive times. In search of Scripture and pure Antiquity, we find, that
Ordination (add, and Potestative Mission) by Ministers, the Election and Call
of the people, was the way, by which Ministers entered into Congregations, and
not the Institution and Collation of the Bishop (add, nor the Warrant and
Allowance of the Magistrate) nor the Presentation of Patrons. He adds. 1. This
way of their entry by the Bishops Institution and Collation (add, the Councels
Warrant and Order) does suppone that their Ordination (add, Potestative
Mission) does not sufficiently empower them to the exercise of the Ministry,
(add, in that Particular Charge) without a further license; which is contrare
to the end of Ordination, and the Nature of the Ministerial Power, that by
virtue of its ends, and the command of Christ, does bind the Person, invested
therewith, to its Exercise etc. 2. The Patrons Presentation, as it takes away
the Peoples right of Election, so it suppones Ordination to give no right to
the maintenance, or at least suspends it etc.

His Fifth Arg. is Page 91. thus framed, and may serve us, as to some. Many
Congregations, into which the Curates (add, the Indulged) are entered, are
under a standing Obligation to their former Pastors; not only on the account
of the Pastoral Relation betwixt them, but for the Engagements they came under
to such, in their call and reception of them; which is not dissolved by any
thing, we have yet seen; Sure we are, the Magistrate cannot do it, etc. (I
hope, I need nor, in reference to the Indulged, mention what follows, in
answering of the Objection, taken from Salomons removing of Abiathar.

His Sixth Arg. Page 94. is this. If Congregations have a just Right and Power
of Electing and Calling of their Ministers; than those, that come in upon them
without this, are not to be esteemed their Pastors, nor to be subjected to, as
such, by Congregations, but to be withdrawn from. But here it is so, etc.

His Seventh Arg. Page 95. is this; Hearing of, submitting to and receiving of
Ordinances from the Curats alone (add, the Indulged) and not from others, is
enjoined by Law, and required, as the sign of our compliance with and
subjecting to the Present Laws, bringing in and establishing of Prelacy (add,
Erastianisme and the Supremacy) and other Corruptions, which we dar not own.
Hearing and receiving Ordinances from such, has a twofold bar put upon it to
us; an unqualified Instrument or Object; and the respect that by the Law it is
made to have to the corruptions obtruded upon this Church, as the sign of our
compliance with and subjection to these. The Command of God about hearing does
constitute the Object and Instrument (what and whom) we should hear: As we are
not to hear all Doctrines, but these that are sound, so we are not to hear and
receive all, that pretend to come in Christ's Name, but those of whose Mission
we have some rational evidence, at least, against which we have no just
exceptions. This, as to to the Curats, (add, the Indulged) is made out by the
former Arguments. But beside this. the sign appointed and determined by Law,
and required of all in this Church, is, that they not only withdraw from, and
do not hear the Ejected and Non-conforme Ministers; but that they hear and
submit to Ministers, that comply with and enter into this Church, by Prelates
(add, or by the Council) which to us makes ^earing, and receiving of
Ordinances from them, a practical approbation of, and compliance with Prelacy
(add, Erastianisme and the Supremacy) and other corruptions contained in the
Law, for such is the connection betwixt the sign and the thing signified, that
he that yields to give the sign, does, in all rational construction, approve
the thing signified.

These are his Principal Arguments, used in defense of such, as cannot, go to
hear and subject to the Curats; and whether they will not as forcibly conclude
against hearing of and subjecting to the Indulged, the Reader is free to judge.

Objections Answered.
If any should Object, whether in behalf of the Curats, or in behalf of the
Indulged. That they are Ministers of the Gospel, and therefore are to be heard,
and Ordinances should be received from them; for the Ministerial power gives
to the Persons, invested therewith, not only a right to preach the word, and
dispense Ordinances, and makes their Acts valide; but it binds them to the
doing of those, and all others to submit to them, in the exercise of their
Power; as is apparent in all relations, and the mutual duties, that the Persons
under them owe to one another; So that if Ministers be bound to preach the
Gospel, and dispense its Ordinances^, the people must likewise be obliged to
hear, and receive Ordinances from them. To this objection he answers (and we
with him, as to the case now in question) denying the Consequence: For (1.) The
true state of the question is, whether we should receive and submit to them, as
the lawfully Called and Appropriat Pastors of this Church; which for the former
Reasons we deny; for although Intruders upon the Church be Ministers; yet their
Intrusion puts a sufficient bar on Peoples reception of and submission to them:
wherefore in so far as hearing, and receiving of Ordinances from Prelatical
Ministers (add, Indulged) is, in our case, an acknowledgment of this, we
refuse it. (2.) Peoples obligation to submission to Ministers, does not
immediately flow from the being of the Ministerial Power and Authority, in those
clothed therewith, there are beside this, other things that must concur, to
the causing of this Obligation, which, if they be wanting, will make it void,
or, at least, suspend it etc.

If it be further Objected, in favors of the Indulged, That Eminent and
worthy Mr Livingstoun, though he says much against the Indulgence, in his
Letter to his Parishoners; yet he advises them sometime to hear Mr John Scot,
who was Indulged. I Ans I shall readily grant, that several were in the dark,
at the first, in the matter, either through want of full information concerning
many circumstances, which, if known, would have given greater light in the
matter; or through ignorance of the real Design and Intendment of the Rulers,
which afterward came more and more to light; or through a fear, that
Field-meetings should either cease, or be utterly suppressed; and therefore
judged it more safe for people to hear the Indulged, than either to hear none,
or none, but the Curats. And though I do not certainly know, which of these
grounds moved that Eminent Seer and Servant of Christ, to advise so; yet,
considering that in all that Letter (to my remembrance) he does not speak of
their going to the Field Meetings (which I suppose none, that knew him, will
think, that he was an enemy unto,) I am apt to think, that the Apprehension he
had of the ceasing of the Field-Meetings, at least, in that part of the
Country (in which, I doubt, there had been any, or many, at least, before his
writing of that Letter) did move him, to advise them sometimes to hear that
Indulged Person, as judging that better, than that they should hear none, or
none but that wretch, who was obtruded upon them; and as supposing, he would
not pervert them by his Doctrine, but would give free and faithful Testimonies
unto the Truth, and aga^^st all public Corruptions. Further, I suppose, it is
well enough known, tha^ (...) the first, not a few Ministers were in the dark,
as to the question of hearing of the Curats, and upon one ground or other, did
not perceive, that people were called of God; to withdraw from the obtruded
Hirelings, and so durst-not positi^ely advise thereunto; who now, I hope, will
be as loath to advise people to forsake other occasions, and go hear the
Curats, And what wonder if the matter was so, as to the Indulged, Seven or
Eight years ago?

Obj. 3. But, till of late, that some few inconsiderat Persons, took this in
their head, to preach against the Indulgence, and to cry-out against the
unlawfulness of hearing of the Indulged, as if that had been the only thing
necessary; for which many even of the Non-Indulged are offended with them,
there was not so much as a murter heard, but people heard the Indulged without
scruple, and were edified by their Ministry. Ans. The Curats might allege
the same, as well as the Indulged; But, as it would not help them, so I
suppose, It can not well help the Indulged. Whether these Persons be considerat
or inconsiderat, I am not fit to judge; to their own Master they stand, or
fall; only I wish, that such, who call them Inconsiderat, would examine their
grounds, and remember that, judge not lest ye be judged etc. If this be founded
upon some expressions of theirs (whether true or false, I know not) I wish that
the Expressions of others gave not ground for the same judgment. I know, not a
few are offended with them; but considering what is said above, concerning the
sinfulness of the Indulgence, etc. I dar not be offended with them; (and I
would feign hope, that second thoughts of the matter shall work a change on
these Brethren) But must rather bless the Lord on their behalf, and judge
them worthy of praise, who, over the belly of so many discouragments, did set
the trumpet to their mouth, to show Scotland, and the Ministry, and People
thereof, that great sin: and this, I know, is con^istent with their insisting
upon the one thing necessary; which I hope also their practice declares, and
the fruits of their labor proclaim. But as to the long silence, that has
been, I shall say little; yet it is known, that at the very beginning, people
were calling the Indulged the Councils Curats and how it came, that this spark
did not break forth into a general flame, I shall not enquire; acquiescing in
this, That the Lord had a further discovery to make: For, had the first Ten,
who were Indulged, been thus discountenanced, we had seen no more accepting of
that supposed favor; yea the first accepters had quickly shaken that onerous
favor off their shoulders. It may be also, that some suppressed their
judgment, concerning the not-hearing of these Indulged, or did not countenance
any such motion, when made, either out of a preposterous affection and
tenderness to the Brethren, whom they honored and much esteemed, and that
deservedly, for their eminent Enduements, and sometimes Usefulness unto the
Church; or out of a tender care of keeping up of Union, and guarding against
all motions apparently tending to troublesome Distractions and Divisions, or
upon some other account, best known to themselves. Neither is it unlike, that
many were really in the dark, as to the thing: But however, light is light,
whoever they be that bring it to us; and as God may Employ whom He will, to
this en^, so; how inconsiderable so ever the Instruments be, who are employed;
and whether they come sooner or latter, the light, when it is come, should be
welcomed, because of Him, that sent it; yea and embraced with thankfulness, and
with humble submission.

Obj. 4. All or most of the Non-Indulged, Faithful, and Zealous Ministers in
the Land are for hearing of the Indulged; and only a few, and these of the
younger sort, with the ignorant people, are against it. Answ. Though I would
hope, few should lay any weight on this Objection: and it were enough to desire
such, who did lay any weight thereon, to consider Job. 7: v. 47, 38, 49. with
Mr. Hutcheson's Notes thereupon, specially the 7. and 9. Yet I shall only say,
That an Impartial Observer will find, that for the most part, in all the steps
of our trial, since this last overthrow came, God has made use of the nothings
to break the ice to others. Holy is our Sovereign, who does what He will. This
might be made out by Instances; but I suppose, the matter is so manifest, that
I need not insist thereupon, the matter about hearing of the Curats* being a
sufficient evidence of what I have said.

Obj. 5. Now when we are in hazard to be overrun with Popery, is it
seasonnable, that such questions should be started, to break the remnant in
pieces; and thereby to make all a prey for the man of sin? Were it not better
that we were all united as one, to withstand that Inundation? Answ. I grant,
the apprehensions of the Man of sins's stretching out his wings, and filling
the breadth of Immanuel's land, seems to me not altogether groundless; yea it
is much to be feared, that by Popery and Blood, the Lord shall avenge the
quarrel of His Covenant, and the contempt of His Gospel: And therefore I judge,
it were our duty this day, to be preparing ourselves to meet the Lord, thus
coming to be avenged on a generation of His wrath, with ropes about our necks,
giving Him the glory of His Righteousness, and acknowledging ourselves the
basest of sinners; that so we may be in case, to say, in the day, when the
small remnant of the glory, that is yet to be seen on the mountains, shall
depart out of sight, Blessed be the Glory of the Lord from his place. Our
Union, while the accursed thing is among us, will be but a conspiracy, and will
really weaken us before the Lord. If we be not tender of Christ's Headship, and
of what depends thereupon, and of the least pin of his Tabernacle, pitched
among us; how can we expect His help, when we are to run with the horsemen?
Will they not have most peace in that day, who have been Jealous for the Lord
of hosts, and for his Crown Interest - And who knows, but they shall find a
shelter and a chamber of Protection in the day, when he overflowing scourge
shall come, who are now following the Lord, and his Glory, through Mountains
and Valleys, and are, upon that account, suffering Tossings, Hardships and
Harrassings? How little security, I pray, shall the wings of the Supremacy be
able to give, in that day? our Union in Duty, and upon the old grounds of our
received and sworn Principles and Maxims, would prove our strength, But if
this shall not be had, as then every one may certainly conclude, that there is
a dreadful stroke at the doors, and that this division, upon such an account,
is a certain forerunner of a dark and dismal Dispensation; so, it will be
every man's du^y, who would have peace, in the day of God's contending against a
generation of Backsliders and Revolters, to be mourning for the abominations of
the Land and for this of the Indulgence, among the rest, and to be adhereing to
the Lord, and unto our Principles* which the Lord has owned and countenanced,
though he should, in a manner, be left al^^e. Will not, I pray, many of these,
who have complied with Prelacie, and with the courses, that have been carried
on, profess an abhorrence at Popery? And is this ground sufficient for us to
think of uniting with them, notwithstanding of all they have done, that we may
be the more fortified to withstand that torrent? Alas! this our strength will
prove our weakness, Let us remember that Esai. 8: ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. For the
Lord spoke thus to me, with a strong hand, and instructed me, that I should not
walk in the way of this people, saying, Say not a confederacy to all them, to
whom this people shall say, a confederacy: Neither fear ye their fear, nor be
afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear* and let
him be your dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary, etc. It were more suitable
for us, to be considering that word Amos 4. v. 12.13. Therefore, thus will I do
unto thee; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel: for lo, he that forms the Mountains, and creates the wind, and
declares unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning darkness, and
^readeth upon the high places of the earth: The Lord, the God of hosts is his
Name: And in order to a Christian compliance therewith, to be separating our
selves from every sinful course, mourning for our former miscarriages, and
utterly forsaking such ways, whereby we have provoked the Lord to wrath. I
shall close with that Zeph. 2: verse. 1, 2, 3. Gather yourselves together, yea,
gather together, O Nation not desired. Before the decree bring forth, before
the day pass, as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you,
before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek
of the earth, which have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek
meekness; it may be, ye shall be hid, in the day of the Lord's anger: And let
us all pray, Thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be done, AMEN.

FINIS.
Among the persons Indulged, Mr Anthony Shaw indulged to Loudown o^ Newmile,
and Mr Anthony Murray Indulged to Carmichall are omitted; and possibly some
others, through want of full Information, or through the neglect of
Transcribers.


