NATURE'S CABINET UNLOCKED. Wherein is Discovered The natural Causes of Metals,
Stones, Precious Earths, Juyces, Humors, and Spirits, The nature of PLANTS in
general; their Affections, Parts, and Kinds in Particular. Together with A
Description of the Individual Parts and Species of all Animate Bodies, Similar
and Dissimilar, Median and Organical, Perfect and Imperfect. With a compendious
Anatomy of the Body of Man, As also the Manner of his Formation in the Womb.

All things are Artificial, for Nature is the Art of God. By Tho. Brown D. of
Physic.

London, Printed for Edw. Farnham in Popeshead alley near Cornhil. 1657

OF PHYSIOLOGY, Treating of BODIES Perfectly mixed: With Comments thereupon.
CHAP. 1. Of Metalls.
1. WE shall here Treat of those Bodies which are perfectly mixed, and
substantial.

2. That Body is perfectly mixed, which is made solid by the Concretion of the
Elements, and therefore daily grows harder and harder.

3. All the Elements do abide and are concentricated in a mixed Body, because
all mixed Bodies are carried to a place of the Earth; and therefore much of
earth must needs be in them: And if earth be in them, then water, without which
earth cannot consist; for all Generation happens from their contraries; so that
if there be one contrary, it is necessary that there should be an opposite
contrary to that: Arist. lib. 2. De genesis and corrupt. c. 8.

4. And these Bodies are either Inanimate or Animate.

5. Inanimate bodies are such as are void of life; As Metalls, Stones, precious
Earths.

6. Metal is a body perfectly mixed, and Inanimate, of Sulphur and
Quicksilver, gotten in the veins of the earth.

7. Sulphur and Quicksilver is often found in the veins of Metalls: and of
these, for the variety of the temperament, and mutual permission, the
Professors of the Rosy Cross do adjudge Metalls to have their original.

8. They define Sulphur to be a Metallic matter, consisting of a subtle
exhalation, fat, and unctuous, included in the earth.

9. Quicksilver, (B) is a Metallic matter, consisting of a vapor more subtle
then water; which is conglutinated with the earth, and cocted by the heat of
Sulphur.

10 The Peripateticks will have a double vapor to lie hid in the bowels of the
earth: the one dry, that is, more terrene then water; the other moist and
glutinous, that is, more watery then terrene; and from these do Stones and
Fossiles grow; and these do produce proper Metal, Arist. 3. Met. c. 7.

11. The Chemists do not dissen^ from this opinion of Aristole: for he makes
the matter of Metalls to be a remote vapor; They, a nearer matter, Sulphur
and Quicksilver, which do grow from the aforesaid vapor, as the remote matter
of Metalls.

12. The efficient Cause of Metal, is heat and cold; for heat, whether
Elementary or Celestial, does animate, digest, and exactly mingle all portions
of matter: which mass so temperated, and prepared for this or that kind of
metal, does grow by cold, and is condensated.

13. The place in which Metals are ingendered, is the bosom of the earth,
Arist. 3. met. c. 7.

14. Many are made amongst Stones; and that oftener in mountains then in plains;
for according to their solid^ty, they do retain their color better; which is
easily decayed and dispersed in plains, because of the softness of the earth.

15. If it be demanded, whether their form be one or more, ( C) that is to say,
whether they can be distinguished amongst themselves in specifical differences,
which do effect diverse and incommunicable forms amongst themselves:

16. To the latter, it is agreed, First, Because every Species has its
Essence, and that perfect: Secondly, Its Definition: Thirdly, Its Heats:
Fourthly, It Strength and Use, Scal. Exer. 106. sect. 2.

17. But it is a great dispute amongst late writers, whether Metalls are Bodies
Inanimate, or whether they Live? It is most certain they perform no vital
action, as other bodies that are endowed with a vegetive soul; therefore they
are not Animated, Scal. Exer. 102.

18. But Metalls are either pure or impure.

19. Pure Metal is, when there is a perfect decoction exquisitely made; as in
Gold and Silver.

20. Gold (E) is a pure Metal, begotten of pure Quicksilver, fixed, red, and
clear, and of pure red Sulphur; not too hot, but well qualified.

21. This of all Metalls is the softest and tenderest, wanting fatness; It is
heavy, having a sweet, pleasant, and excellent sapor and odor.

22. But whether the Chemists, by the industry of art, can make true and
approved Gold, it is a question much disputed of late; yet in my opinion it is
clear, that though it be very difficult, experience witnessing it, yet it is
^ot altogether impossible: for if Art be a follower and imitator of Nature, I
see not why* Nature may not be imitated in framing of true Gold.

23. And whether it may be made potable, that is, so prepared, that it may be
taken into the body without danger, is a great controversy between the
Chemists and Galenists.

24. The favorers of Galen defend the Negative; to which Scaliger does
subscribe, being persuaded with these two reasons.

I. There is no similitude to be discerned between Gold and our Body, as there
is between Aliment and Body to be nourished, II. Because Gold is more solid,
then that it can be overcome by our heat, or changed from its substance. Scal.
Exer. 272.
25. Silver is a pure Metal (G) begotten of clear Quicksilver, shining white;
and of pure Sulphur almost fixed.

26. Such Metalls are impure, which do consist of impure Sulphur and Mercury.

27. Of these, some have more of the Humor or Mercury, and some more of the
Earth or Sulphur.

28. Lead and Tinn do participate more of the Humor.

29. Lead (H) is a Metal procreated of much crass, and lesspure Quicksilver,
and burning Sulphur.

30. Its Species are various, according to the matter of which it consists, and
the heat by which it is cocted.

31. And hence it is black or clear.

32. Black-lead does consist of impure Quicksilver; and it is less elaborate,
therefore of a baser value.

33. Clear or White-lead, is fully cocted, and does co^ somewhat of a more
purer matter.

34. Tin (I) is a White-metal, begotten of much (yet not so pure) Quicksilver,
outwardly white, but inwardly red; and of impure Sulphur not well digested.

35. Brass and Iron, have more of Earth; to which is added Copper.

36. Brass (K) is an impure Metal, begotten of much Sulphur, red and gross,
and a little impure Quicksilver.

37. Cyprian Brass, is a Species of it, which does grow copiously in the Island
Cyprus; whence it is called Cuprum.

38. Iron is (L) a Metal impure, begotten of much Sulphur, Crude, Terrestrial
and burning; and a little impure Quicksilver.

39. And although it (...) hard, yet it is bruised with daily labor, because
there goes to its generation less Quicksilver, or Humor, but more Sulphur or
Terrene.

40. Copper is factitious Brass clarified, of the color of Gold, or rather
more yellow.

41. The Native is now of no use, and therefore by some rejected from the value
of Metalls.

42. Though in times past, the Native was in much use, and more nobler by far
then Brass: As Pliny witnesses, L. 34. c. 2.

The Commentary.
( A) THe name Metal, is derived from the Greek word (...), which is to
search, because it is sought for with much pains and cost, in the Veins and
Caverns of the Earth.

Pliny adjudges it to be derived from (...), which signifies near another;
because where one Vein is found of Metal, not far from thence another is
found: For they have a kind of sympathy with them, as Gold and Silver, Brass
and Iron.

Others are called Minerals, which are generated in the Veins, Pores, and
Bowels of the Earth; those are called Fossiles, which are dug out of the
Earth.

Fossiles are separated and distinguished from Metalls, by Aristotle 3. Met.
chapter 7. because Fossiles are cast up out of the Earth, only by digging, needing
no other art, or further labor, for their discovery: But Metalls are much
boiled, and separated by the fire, and purged several ways, as need requires.

Now the definition of Metal delivered, does consist of a genus and
difference: The Genus is a Body, because a Metal does receive three
Dimensions; the Difference contains four.

In the first place, it is called a Body perfectly mixed, to the difference of
Meteors; for there is not so light a concourse of Elements in Metalls, as in
Meteors.

In the second place, it is called Inanimate, to difference it from Animate, as
are Plants and Animalls; whence Brighthus did right Comment in Scribonius, who
defines Metallick-bodies, imperfectly to be called Animates: If they have a
soul, they must have it perfectly, because the soul does not receive more or
less of quantity, but is the very perfection and absolution of a thing.

The opinion therefore of Cardan is to be reproved, who asserts all Metalls to
be perfect Animates; but seeing they produce no vital action, they cannot have
a soul attributed unto them.

In the third place, the matter of Metal is credited to be Sulphur and
Quicksilver, which are as it were the Father and Mother of Metalls; which two
are mingled variously; and from the mixtion of these two, are all Metalls
imediately procreated. But Cardan resists this opinion, who denies that Metalls
do consist of Sulphur and Quicksilver; and that upon this account, because by
the act of two Existents, a third cannot be made. Scaliger answers, Exer. 106.
sect. 6. that it is the property of things mingled, that by the act of many
Existents, a third to be made: And Cardan himself does affirm, that Copper does
consist of Tinn and Brass, which are two, in one existent act.

Aristotle following Plato in Timaeus, does demonstrate of a double vapor does
lie hid in the bowels of the earth; The one dry, that is more terrene then
watery; The other Humid and Glutinous, that is, more watery then terrene: From
the former, he thinks hard Fossiles, as stones, to grow; and from the latter,
that which is properly called Metal.

But this Controversy may easily be reconciled, if we say that these vapors
or habits, are the more remote matter of Metalls; but the proximate and proper,
to to be Sulphur and Quicksilver: But let it seem strange to none, why such
hard bodies, as Metalls are, should be generated of vapor; for this vapor is
Crass and Fumid: whence it happens, that in those Pits and Mines, where Metalls
are dug, that many are suffocated and killed by those vapors; and hence it
is that those who are daily laborer^ therein, are ^oxious to various Diseases
and Catarrhs: But I say, that the matter of Metalls is not simply a vapor or
watrish humor, but that which is more watery then earthy; for the watery vapor,
simply, cannot be the matter of Metalls: For how should they then cohere, or
how come Metalls so solid? Hence it is that they have certain mixed parts of
that and slimy earth; yet notwithstanding, they obtain more of water then of
earth, because they may be powered out and melted; which can never be done,
without there be some inward moisture; for it is the faculty of an humor to
soften: and therefore those of them that have most humidity as Gold, Silver,
etc. are the soonest powered out and melted; but such as have but little humor,
as Iron and Brass, are hard to be melted.

But it is said in the definition, that Metalls are begot (as by sperme) of
Sulphur and Quicksilver, mixed and tempered. In which words the efficient
Causes are included, which are two, Heat and Cold; Heat indeed does precede,
Cold follows the generation of Metalls: for Heat, whether Celestial or
Elementary, does mingle, digest, temper, and concoct, all the portions of the
matter; which mass so tempered, is rudely prepared for this or that kind of
Metal, and so grows and condenses with cold; for because all Metalls are
dissolved by the force of heat, then it remains, that they must be concreted by
cold; so that it is needful, that one contrary be the cause of another: What is
more clearer to sense, then that which is soluble by heat, must needs condense
by cold? For if Gold, Silver, or Lead, be melted, and removed from the fire,
they presently come into their pristine form; for cold is the privation of
heat; and according to the various preparations of that mixtion, diverse kinds
of Metalls are gotten of the same Mass: for by how much more subtle and
defaecate the matter is, by so much the more nobler and purer the Metal will
be. In brief, all Heat and Splendour, and all the Excellency of Metalls, does
depend upon a decent and legitimate mixtion and temperation of the matter; unto
which the temperature of the Air, the soil of the place, does much profit; for
the various Influence and Efficacy of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as in other
things, so in the procreation of Metals, is of great moment: And hence it
happens, that all sorts of Earth will not bear Metalls, although the matter of
it be contained within it: So we see also in such Regions as are too dry, as
Africa, that Metalls will not easily be generated, because the matter, to wit,
the moist vapor, does not abound there; nor in Regions too cold, will Gold or
silver be found, but in places only moist.

Fourthly, In the definition, the Veins of the earth are the subject of
Metalls; for these are as it were the mothers of these Bodies: but sometimes
they are found in stones, and that rather upon Mountains, then Plains; in
higher Places, rather then Groves: for according to their solidity, they do
retain their color better; which in Plains is sooner dissipated, by reason of
the softness of the earth.

And this shall suffice for the explication of the Definition.

( B) It is called quick, metaphorically, because it always moves. And it is
called Mercury, because as Mercury is joined to all the Planets, so this to all
Metals; or as Mercury turns round, so is this moveable: But why does
Quicksilver, like a drop of water, in powder, or dust, and also upon a dry
substance, be globular and round? The question is subtle and difficult.

Cardan renders this reason: What things are dry, do fly from touching or
mixing with their contrary; and therefore in hatred thereof, is compelled into
a globular form. This opinion is refuted by Scaliger, Exer. 105.

1. This happens not in a dry substance only, but in water, which is moist.

2. That it will gather it self in the dust of Lead, and not fly from it,
because Lead is like to the nature of Quicksilver; and therefore it does not
fly from its nature, but rather desire it.

3. A drop of water, when it falls in the air, is globular and round, but does
not refuse the air which is moist; therefore the flight from dryness, will not
be the cause of its globular form, if it be the same in moistness: But the
truest reason is taken from the material cause, to wit, Quicksilver, for its
exquisite mixture of moist and dry, to be forced into one, and conglobulated:
for pure water alone cannot be convolved into a globular form; but if there be
any thing of earth exquisitely mixed with water, then indeed it will be
globular; as we see in drops falling upon dust, with which as soon as any dust
is mingled, it becomes round; for from dryness it received a certain firmness
to cause that roundness: From which Example, the substan^e of Quicksilver may
be easily understood, because it has the same form, way, or station, in
nature, as water gathered in dust; therefore Quicksilver, according to the
definition of Scaliger, is nothing else then a watery earth, or earthly water,
not without much air: and I shall add to these, another cause of
conglobulation, both from the form and the end desumed: For whatsoever they be,
they are always one; but unity in its kind, is excellently preserved in a
globular form, because there is nothing different, nothing absent, no
inequality; and therefore Quicksilver, that it might better conserve its unity,
it goes into a globular form.

( C) It is a Controversy to this day agitated, whether Metalls are
distinguished amongst themselves, in specificall differences, which do effect
diverse and incommunicable forms amongst themselves; so that one kind of metal
cannot be changed or converted, into another: or rather, do they differ in the
manner of perfection, and imperfection? This last Tenent is defended by the
Chemists; to which, Cardan and Danaeus subscribe: The first the followers of
Galen and Julius Scaliger defend.

Reas. 1. Metals have their diverse Definitions, diverse Colors, Strength,
Seats, Weights, and many such like differences between them.

2. In Species, what is imperfect cannot be reposed, or exist in any Species;
for the Essence of every thing, is indivisible; but the Essence alone, is
perfection, As Scaliger says, Exer. 106. sect. 2.

3. Metalls, between themselves, are not changed; therefore they have a proper
and complete Essence, and do differ in specificall forms. I confirm the
proposition; for either its nature must change, or art: But it does not change
its nature, because its place is not outward, as to operation; then much less
art, which is an imitator of nature.

4. Says Scaliger, there are both other Metalls appointed by nature, that of
them Gold should be made, and other Animates, that of them man may be made:
Therefore it is not true, that Gold is the perfection of Metalls. So Thomas
Erastus his second Part of dispute against Paracelsus, and Iacobus Albertus,
and Thomas More.

( D) In this place, that long controversed Point, whether Metalls live, or
produce vital action, as other Bodies do, that are endowed with a vegetable
soul? Cardan De subtle. lib. 5. page 150. does affirm it; and these are his
reasons.

1. Every thing that is nourished, or generated, does live: Every mingled Body
is nourished, or at least generated; therefore it lives.

To this Scaliger answers, by denying the Proposition: The Tophus or
Gravel-stone is generated, yet it does not live, because it wants a soul;
therefore the name Generation is common to all things, generable and
corruptible, as also to Inanimate and corporal Simples; for this water is
generated of the air, without a living soul.

The second reason, which is judged the most valid, is this: Where there is
heat, there is a soul; where a soul, there is life. In a Stone there is heat,
therefore also life and soul. The major is deniable; for in fire there is heat,
which notwithstanding wants a soul: the minor also is false; for a stone is
rather cold then hot.

3. Attraction comes from the soul; the Loadstone attracts Iron, therefore it
has a soul, or is animated. Scaliger answers, That all attraction not to be
from the soul, as is plain from fire, which does gather and attract its kind,
neither is it animated.

4. Metalls have Veins and Pores, therefore the office and end of Veins; the
end is the passage of Aliment, but Aliment is only of the soul. Scaliger
answers, and denies the first, That there is no true Veins in Metalls, but
rather certain Internalls, by which the parts are distinguished: and grant they
were true Veins, and necessary, then they would be found in all Metalls, which
are not in the most precious Metalls, as in Gold, the Adamant, and others;
therefore they are not true.

5. Metalls do grow, therefore they have a vegetable soul. I answer, Metalls do
grow and increase, not by the benefit of a soul, but rather by accretion or
apposition of parts extrinsecally adhering, no otherwise then as a stone in the
bladder; therefore a soul cannot rightly be attributed unto them.

6. Metalls do suffer Diseases and old Age, as Albertus does attest; which must
necessarily proceed from life.

We answer, That old Age and Diseases are metaphorically given to them, when by
much preservation, we say they have lost their first goodness and virtue; as
Scaliger does instance in the Adamant, which never can be said to wax old.

( E) These properties are denoted of Gold; First, that it is of all Metalls,
the most softest and tenderest, and therefore it may be dilated into a thin
leaf, insomuch that one ounce of Gold will cover eight of Silver.

2. It wants fatness, and therefore it does not tincture, not defile, neither
is it con^umed with fire; for Gold, according to Aristotle, of all Metalls,
loses nothing in the fire; the oftener it is burnt, the better it is.

3. It is heavy, considering the thickness of its substance, because it is
compacted well with heat.

4. It has a pleasant and excellent Sapour, and Odor; for it is temperately
hot and dry, whence it is said to exhilarate the heart of man, and to
corroborate the vital Spirits: Native Gold is found in the mountains about
Arabia; in Caverns and Ponds in Germany; in Rivers at Tago, and sometimes in
the heads of Fishes: it is also generated and mingled with other metalls.

( F) There is a great Controversy amongst latter Chemists, and followers of
Galen, whether Gold may be made potable, or no; that is to say, so prepared,
that without any danger it may be received into the body? the Chemists stiffly
maintain it, and by this very golden Potion, have miraculously preserved,
restored, increased, repaired, the strengh of the heart, and principal
members, lengthned out age, and revoked youth. The Galenists deny it: To which
Scaliger subscribes, who confutes them with these two Reasons especially:

1. Between Aliment and the Body nourished, there is a certain necessary
similitude: but between Gold and our Body, there is no apparent similitude, but
far different from our nature; therefore Gold cannot nourish our Bodies, nor
restore strength. I prove the minor: our bodies are concreted especially of
mixed elements; for the elements by the various and almost infinite mixtures,
are infinitely altered and changed, before they become fit matter for Animalls;
but there are but few mixtions, that do precede the concretion of Metalls, and
therefore elements that are but lightly altered and changed, do exist in them:
and what similitude is there between Inanimate and Animate?

2. Whatsoever cannot be overcome and changed by our native heat, that cannot
possibly recreate our native bodies: Gold is suchlike, therefore does not
nourish. The minor is proved, because Gold is of a solid and hard substance,
insomuch that it is impossible for it to be melted by coction, like to Aliment.

( G) The nature of Silver is cold and moist, and it is found in deep Mines;
sometimes it is entangled with stones, hairs, trees, fishes, whole serpents,
scorpions, with the Species of many other things which it brings with it: Now
for the generation of Silver, there goes more Quicksilver then Sulphur,
because it represents its color; and whilst it melts, it contains almost all
its accidents in it self; for it does not melt, nor is it diffunded, as water
and oil, nor does it adhere to the Tangent, which are the faculties of
Quicksilver; and hence it is that it is not so ponderous as Gold. Now that a
certain portion of Sulphur does concur to the procreation of Silver, is clear
by this, because a sulphurous odor does offend the nostrils, when it is
melted; the natural mixture of this metal is not so absolute and perfect, as
Gold: and hence it is that it does not resist the fire, like to Gold, but every
time that it is melted, something is lost of it: and it is more easy to
engrave, then Gold; neither are the liquors which remain in Silver vessels for
several days together, so sincere and clear, as those in Gold, but become after
a certain manner venenate, both in odor and sapor; especically if the liquor be
sour or sharp.

( H) That there is much crudity and imperfect concoction in Lead, the faecies
demonstrate, which is left when it is melted; and hence it is, that it does not
sustain the fire as Gold, but does easily melt and consume by fire; if it long
remain therein, it will be brought to ashes: yet it is thought to increase of
its own accord, when it is laid upon the roofs of houses, both in weight and
quantity. Galen rehearses a story of Lead, buried in a humid place under the
earth, to have increased both in magnitude and weight: It is of a cold and
astrictive nature; hence it is that many leaden vessels are hurtful, especially
that Lead which is white.

( I) Tinn does differ from white Lead, because this does arise by it self, the
other always with Silver: And although Tinn does emulate the splendour of
Silver, yet it is far better, and does excede more from the fire: whence it is
judged of many to be a Species of candid Lead; but in the excellency of its
nature does far exceed Lead; its substance is thin, and less excocted.

( K) Brass having more mixtion of earth then humor, does melt more
difficultly, because all its humor is almost dried away; for which cause it is
of greater price and esteem then Iron: and therefore in ancient time, Armor
and Weapons were made of Brass, Bucklers and Launcets also; so highly was this
Metal esteemed.

( L) Iron is found in deep Mines, a powdry Mass, red and ponderous. Now to the
generation of Iron, there is less Quicksilver, but more of Sulphur; hence it
is that it is so hard and obscure; and the hardest of all is steel, which is
only a species of Iron, or Iron purged, and so hardened by many quenchings in
water; and hence it is* that it is more frangible then Iron. Native Steel, in
times past, was found about Thrace, where the people Chalibes do inhabit.

CHAP. I. Of Stones.
1. MEtals being explicated, Stones do follow; which neither the heat of the
sun, or the blows of the hammer, can extend.

2. Stones are (A) Bodies perfectly mixed, inanimate, hard, of a dry
exhalation, mingled with a certain watery unctuosity, by the continuance of
time, the strength of heat and cold, and so conglutinated by a mineral virtue.

3. These like as other friable Bodies, of which a little after, because they
have in them Sulphur and Quicksilver, of a weak nature, are not accounted by
some for Metals.

4. Stones (B) are both vulgar and precious.

5. The Vulgar do congeal of a gross and impure matter.

6. And they are either Porous, or solid.

7. They are porous, which do consist of a matter not well compacted; and
therefore they have rare or thin parts, as the Tophas and Pumice.

8. The Tophas is a stone thin, easily to be crummed, or friable, rough, and
not equal.

9. Here it is disputed, whether it be cold or hot: This Cardan affirms; which
Scaliger re^, saying, Who told thee that the Tophas must be hot? It cannot be
discovered, by the touch, or the taste; or medicinal experience, such a quality
was never found out, or experimented, Exer. 57.

10. The Pumice (C) is a Stone rare and cavernous, or spungie, very fit to be
rubbed to powder; of which there are three sorts, according to Scaliger, Exer.
133.

11. Solid stones are those, which have continuated parts, and strongly coacted.

12. And these either do want Nitre, or endeavor it: those that want Nitre, are
these; the Flint, the Whetstone, a Rock, the Emrod, the Marchasite.

13. The Flint is a solid and hard stone; whence if it be smitten upon with
Steel, fire will appear, Scal. Exer. 108.

14. The Whetstone is a solid stone, wanting Nitre, consisting of little
grains; whose use is to sharpen iron.

15. The Lydian stone is a Species of the same, which if any metal be rubbed
thereupon, it will discover the true from the counterfeit.

16. The Rock is a stone large and hard, consisting of a great quantity of
matter strongly concreted.

17. Khe Emrod is a hard stone, which does cut glass.

18. The Marchasite is a stone, upon which if any hard body, as Steel, be
struck, sparks of fire will erupt.

19. Solid stones, which incline to Nitre, are these:

20. Marble is a solid stone, precious and clear, bespangled with various
colors and spots.

21. And according to the color of it, various species and differences do
arise; but especially the Alabaster, the Ophite, and Porphirite.

22. The Alabaster is clear Marble, and white; of which boxes for odoriferous
spices are made.

23. The Ophite, is a Marble with spots like to serpents.

24. The Porphirite is a Marble, distinguished with reddish spots, garnished
therewith like stars.

25. Precious stones are congealed of a subtle and tenuious matter, by the
only influx of heaven; and they are called (D) gemms.

26. Yet in other places, for the diversity of the suns beams, other precious
stones are produced.

27. Hence Precious stones are generated in Ethiopia, and India, by reason of
the vicinity of the oriental and meridional Sun; because there the matter is
better cocted. See Scal. Exer. 99.

28. A Gem therefore is a precious stone, of famous and noble virtues,
engendered of a most subtle and elegant matter.

29. Pliny reckons up many occult virtues, that it is endowed withal, lib. 37.
c. 10.

30. The Adamant is (E) a translucid Gem, of a shining color, not unlike to
iron; of a great hardness, and greater price.

31. And it is either begotten without Gold or in Gold.

32. That which is gotten without Gold, is in bigness of the Indian hazle nut,
but that of Arabia is lesser.

33. That which is gotten in Gold, is, First the Adamant, called Cenchros,
answering the grains of Gromwel-seed; Secondly, the Macedonian, proportionable
to the seed of Cucumber; Thirdly the Cyprian, which is of the color of Brass;
Fourthly, the starry Adamant, called Syderites, shining in color like Iron:
and of this latter, there are two kinds to be had.

34. But so great is their hardness, that they will resist the blows of Iron
hammers; neither will they give place to the furious flames of the fire, but
are only broken with the blood of a Goat; especially, if the Goat before his
blood be shed, eat Parsley, and Silermountain, with a little wine: and the
reason why it should do thus, Scaliger professes he knows not, Exer. 344.

35. The Sapphire is a (F) transparent Gem, of great hardness, endowed with a
blue and celestial color; preserving chastity, and corroborating the heart.

36. The Smaragd is a transparent Gem, fragil, though hard; of a green color,
but clear, and sometimes of an earthly color.

37. They call this the chafte Stone, because it is believed to break in the
act of copulation, and resists venery, Scal. Exer. 33. sect. 2.

38. The Hyacinth is a Gemm of a small magnitude, shining like unto a
violet-colour; comforting the heart, and exciting cheerfulness.

39 The Amethyst is a Gem, obtaining the same color with the Hyacinth; only,
that it glisters more with purpureous fulgor.

40. According to the opinion of Aristotle, if it be applied to the Navel, it
draws to it the vapor of wind, and so discusses it.

41. The Carbuncle or Pyropus, is a Gem, representing the flame of clear fire;
it is a great enemy to poison.

42. The Chalcedony is a Gem also clear and beautiful, shining like unto stars;
whose virtue is to resist fear and sadness.

43. The Ruby is a red Gemm, shining in the dark, like a Species of a spark.

44. The Chrysolite is a shining Gem, of a golden color, glistering with
variety of light; and resists melancholy.

45. The Asterite is a hard Gemm, and splended; which if it be turned, will
show the sun and moon shining within it.

46. The Achates is a Gemm (H) excellent in the variety of colors; which one,
may be opposed to all the colors in other Gems; and it is a great preservative
against pestilent poisons, and it is believed to help the memory much, and
increase prudence, Scal. Exer. 117.

47. The Sardis is of a deep yellow color, making men joyful, sharpning wit,
and stenches blood flowing from the nostrils.

48. The Jasper is a green Gem, bespangled as it were with spots, representing
drops of blood; which if hung upon the ventricle, does strengthen it.

49. The Onix (I) is a pellucid Gem, like unto the nail of a man's finger in
color.

50. The Turcois is an obscure Gem, of bluish color, yet somewhat inclining to
a green; it recreats the heart and sight.

51. And these are the noblest of Gems; those that are less noble, are the
Crystal, Coral, Boodstone, and Lodestone.

52. The Crystal (K) is a pellucid stone, clear, and concreted of Ice
vehemently congealed; as much of it is found to be generated under the earth,
where winter-storms and snow is frequent, as about the Alps.

53. The Coral ( L) is a Ramoustone, begotten of a plant of the sea, hardened by
the air.

54. And it is white, black, and red; the last whereof, is the noblest and best.

55. Gagates or Amber, is a stone, begotten of liquid Bituis men, flowing on
the seashore, and condensated with cold.

56. And there are three sorts reckoned up; the yellow, which is of the color
of Honey; the second is of the color of Muskadine; the third is candid, which
is judged the best.

57. The stone Hematites, is externally of the color of blood, inwardly like
to iron; and of so great hardness, that it can scarce be pierced: it stenches
blood.

58. The Loadstone (M) is endowed with bluish green color, attracting iron by
a natural faculty. Aristot. lib. 7. Phys.

57. Those Stones are reckoned amongst Gems, which are generated in the Bodies
of Animals, by a peculiar glutinous seed, and is concocted by native heat in a
little progress, and so by cold congealed.

60. The most noble of them, are those which are found in terrestrial Animals;
the Chelidony, which is a slender stone, found in the ventricle of young
swallows, mingled with a black but reddish color.

61. The Alectory is a Stone, more obscure then crystal, generated in the
ventricle of a goat, about the ninth year of its age, and about the bigness of
a bean.

62. Aetites is a Stone with a hard cortex, scabrous and light, found in the
nest of an Eagle.

63. Borax, otherwise Cheloutites, is a Stone found in the head of an old and
great Toad.

64. Quadrus is a Stone found in the brain of a vulture; Quiris, in the nest of
the bird Upupa; Saurites, in the belly of a Lizard; Limarius, in the head of a
Snail not covered with a house.

65. These Stones are found in water-Animals; Gem^ percarum, found in the head
of a little fish, called a Perch; Lapis Carpious, found in the jaws of a Carp;
Oculi Cancrorum, are stones clear and white, found in the eyes of Crabs,
especially in the females.

66. The Margarite is (N) a Stone, begotten of sea-shell-fishes, being of a
globular form.

The Commentary.
( A) THe matter of Stones is a watrish humor, and an unctuous and gross earth:
Stones are not procreated of the earth alone, because its parts are dry, and
easily dissipable into powder, but also of a certain humid unctuosity, which as
glue does connect the earthy parts together* nor can this simple humor alone,
flowing by it self, and of its own nature, constitute stones, but earth is
necessary to the composition, which does afford matter for the unctuosity to
astringe; therefore stones are gotten of gross earth, by the coalition of this
humor: which must be so understood, not that the two other elements, to wit,
the fire and the air must be separated from their mixtion, if so be the
opinion of Philosophers be true, that every mixed thing does consist of four
Elements.

The efficient causes of Metals or Minerals, are two; heat and cold: heat
persisting in the matter, does diduce moisture, and unctuosity of ^errene
substance, by certain tender parts, and so does coct and digest, and perfectly
mingle the portions of the several elements, but especicially of water and
earth, and so purge them from all the excrementitious parts, and at last does
prepare that matter rightly to produce the form of a stone; and so cold at
length does condensate it with its astrictiveness, and expel all its
superabundant humor, and so indurate it into a stone.

But some may say, that cold rather is the cause of corruption, then
generation: I answer, it is true in Animate bodies, but in Inanimates, to wit,
in meteors and metals, coldness is the cause of generation. Yet it may further
be objected, If stones do coalesce from coldness; it follows by the same rule,
that they must melt by heat, and so be resolved; but that cannot be, a^
^erefore nor the former. I an^wer, Stones cannot be melted by heat alone,
without the affusion of some other humor, because there is in them such an
exquisite and natural commixture of moisture and dryness, that they refuse
liquation by their contraries; neither are they to be reduced to the action of
their external faculty, without the sympathy of some familiar quality.

( B) According to the diverse and various subtilty of the matter, whether pure
or impure, crass, viscous, or the like; Stones, both pure and impure, noble and
ignoble, are engendered; whence it is that there is so great variety of Stones
and Gemms: and here an objection will arise, whether precious Stones may change
the matter of the earths generation? Gems, because of their noble fulgor and
transparency, do not seem to persist of earth, which is dusky and blackish, an
enemy to such pulchritude; whence many are of this opinion, that Gems are
partakers equally of celestial fire and water, and from them to receive their
fulgor and christalline clearness. But we must know that Gems, also, do consist
of certain earthly matter; but not obscure, but subtle, mixed with a watrish
humidity, well cocted and tempered: for the matter, according to Logicians,
does vary the dignity of things; but the propinquity of the sun, cocts better
and stronger the matter of stone in Oriental regions, makes the Gems and
Stones, both more excellent, and precious. Another question will here arise,
whether Stones do differ in forms and species? We maintain the affirmative,
with this one undeniable reason; diverse actions and virtues do arise from
diverse Forms; but there are diverse actions in diverse Stones; therefore, etc.
The assumption is proved, because one stone resists poison; another discusses
swellings, another draws iron; which are indeed diverse effects.

(C) Pliny relates of the generation of the Pumice, that it is gotten of
Fruits, some of Bays, some of Thyme, beyond the Columns of Hereules, which are
transformed into the Pumice: which if it be true, it is not strang^, why the
Pumice, cast into the water, does swim, when it is made of porous and rare
matter, and therefore it has its levity from its matter, and will not sink to
the bottom of water: but that for use is accounted the best, which is candid,
light and very spungious. The flower of it, according to Theophrastus, does
take away drunkenne^s.

( D) A Gemm properly is the sprouting or bud of a Tree, fair, and round,
bunching out at the first out of bun^s, and chiefly of Vines; and so those
precious Stones which re^mble this form, are wont to be called Gems, because
they respond thereunto in figure and form. But the virtues and the effects of
Gems are wonderful, if we may believe Cardan. Some, says he, are effectual in
prolonging life; others available in love, in obtaining riches; some for
divination, others for consolation; some for wisdom, others for good fortune:
some work effects to make men dull, others joyful; some sad, others fearful:
some do resist poison, others help the concoction of the ventricle and liver.
But concerning the virtues of Gems, read Scaliger, Exer. 106.

But Heaven no doubt has infused into Gems, many admirable properties and
virtues; concerning which, Hermes Trismegistus has sufficiently treated.

( E) But why does the Adamant preserve its substance whole against the weighty
strokes of the hammer, and furious flames of of the fire, yet suffer it self to
be dissolved with the blood of a goat? There are some of our later writers, who
will admit of no occult property at all, but go about to manifest every thing
by plain reason; therefore they judge goats blood, by reason of its analogy,
which is in the beginning common, to pierce the Adamant. But says Scaliger,
what other thing is that anology of its common principle, then an occult
property? No doubt but it is a great miracle of nature; and why it should
pierce so hard a body, no man well can demonstrate.

( F) The Carbuncle comes from the Eastern regions, shining like to white
clouds; but because it has golden spots, it is reckoned by some amongst Gems.

( G) Of which there are three sorts: First, that which shines in the dark,
they call Pyropus; secondly, that which is put in a black vessel, shining,
water being powered upon it: thirdly, that is the basest, which glisters only
when the light shines.

( H) Achates is of so many various kinds, that it will scarce be credited to
be one stone; for it is clear, red, yellowish, cineritious, green, dark, blue;
insomuch, that this one answers to all the colors of other Gems.

(I) Albertus Magnus relates, that he has tried this, that if this stone be
hung about the neck, it roborates the strength of the whole body: which is
incredible; for by its frigidity it constringes the spirits: By the same reason
it is related, that if it be hung about the belly, it hinders venery; whereupon
the Indians everywhere preserve themselves.

( K) Whether crystal be glass, is a subtle controversy, between Cardan and
Scaliger. He denies it, upon this reason, because glass is dissolved by the
fire, but crystal not, unless for several days it lie in the midst of a
vehement fire, and be continually blown: therefore Crystal can never be glass.
Scaliger answers, glass that has never obtained the hardness of a stone, is as
yet water; and therefore easily dissolvable by fire, because it is but
congealed with a little cold: but when it is concreted and congealed by a
diuturnal cold, -insomuch that it has obtained the perfect form and hardness
of a stone; it will not easily melt, or not at all: but it is generated
oftentimes under the earth, and sometimes upon the tops of high mountains,
where there is perpetual snow; therefore it must needs be congealed into a hard
substance, for much of it is brought from the Alps, Helvetia, and Italy.

( L) Coral is called by the Greeks (...), as it were a shrubby stone; for it
is called frutex marinus, because being extracted from the sea by the air, it
is hardened into a stone, under the water: the Coral is green and soft; but
as soon as it is taken out and reposed to the air, it grows hard and red,
because of the tenuity and subtilty of the air, which compels and hardens its
parts.

( M) The Loadstone is called Magnes, as is supposed, from its first finder
out: by some it is called the Herculean stone: it has a wonderful virtue in
attraction; it does not only strongly draw iron to it self, but also infuse an
attractive virtue into the iron drawn; insomuch that it will attract other iron
to it: which thing can hardly be demonstrated with reason. If any say that iron
is drawn by the similitude of substance, he errs not; for similitude and the
flight of the vacuum are the two causes of attraction: heat draws by the flight
of the vacuum; every part does draw its proper aliment, according to the
similitude of the substance: whence iron is as it were the aliment of the
Loadstone, and therefore it is drawn by it; for in the flakes of iron, the
Loadstone is preserved; although Scaliger by no means will assent to this: But
we say that iron is the proper aliment of the Loadstone, not so as to say that
it lives, as Scaliger well infers, but as it were nourished by it: But as the
Elements move spontaneously to their places, as to their end and perfection; so
the Loadstone, because it is kept in the filings of iron, and as it were
nourished by them, moves to the iron; therefore we may well rest in the opinion
of the ancient, that iron is drawn by the Loadstone, by the similitude of
substance; and therefore it is that this stone is of the color of iron. Yet
some say, that the Loadstone does not always draw iron: I answer, That happens
by accident; for when the Adamant is near, it hinders and impedes its
attraction. Cardan yet denies that the Adamant can hinder the attraction of
iron, or can be hindered by Leeks and Onyons; but maintains, that it will always
attract iron; as he has proved by experience.

( N) The manner of the generation of Pearl, is this; Shell-fishes in the
spring time, being incited to the desire of copulation, or conception,
whereupon they come out to the shore, and dilate themselves, attracting the
heavenly dew; return, as it were, burdened, and so bring forth Margaries: Hence
it is that there is so much difference in the goodness of the Pearl; which
happens according to their age or magnitude, and also the quality of the dew
received: of round shell-fishes, the best Pearls are gotten. Those are the best
Pearls, which are found in the bottom of the sea; and sometimes found floating
upon the shore.

CHAP. 3. Of Juices or precious Earths.
1. WE having explained the Nature of hard metallic Bodies, we shall now
treat of such as are so^t; which precious Earth^ are of a mild Nature, between
Metals and Stones.

2. And many of these Bodies are fricable, that is to say, rubbed small, or
brought into fine powder.

3 Some of these may be melted, others not; those that are soft may, that may
be hardened into the body of a stone.

4. Of the first kind of these, are those that are dry and concreted* as Salt,
Alom, Bitumen, Vitriol.

5. Salt is ( A) a metallic Body, friable, begotten of a humid and watery Juice
and gross earth, mixed and boiled together.

6. It has force to absterge, expurge, astringe, dissipate, and attenuate.

7. And it is either Natural or Artificial: that which is Natural, is called
Fossile; that which is Artificial, Factitious.

8. The Fossile is found either in the Earth, or out of the Earth.

9. That which is found in the Earth, is either dug out of mountains, or
effoded out of the fields or sandy places.

10. Of these there are various differences, according to the diversity of
places where they are found; but four especially are most known to us: Sal
Ammoniack, Sal gemm, Sal Nitre, Indian salt.

11. Ammoniack is a bitter salt, found in or about the sand of Cyrene; whence
it is called Cyrenaicus.

12. Salt Gem is a Fossile salt, found in Mines or Pits, shining, and
resembling the form of Crystal.

13. Salt Nitre, or Saltpeter, consists of a coagulated humor, in
moistsubterraneous places, shining like to congealed snow upon walls: to this
day by art it is made.

14. The Indian is a salt, blackish, cut out of the mountain Oromontus in the
Indies.

15. Those Salts that are found out of the Earth, are such as are dug or
effoded out of waters; and they are called either fontal, when fountains or
rivers by the heart of the sun are dried, and converted to salt; or fluvial,
when the arm of some river is condensated into salt; or stagnal, when ponds in
the summer are dried, and a salt remains; or marine, when in the shore a
certain tender salt is gotten, which Dioscorides calls (...): Pliny interprets
it the spume of the sea; we call it the dry spume of the sea; or more rightly,
a salt made by heat of the sea-spume.

16. Factitious (...) cocted salt is made of water, and that either Marine,
Fluvial, Fenny, Fountain, or of the water of Ponds.

17. Alome, by the definition of Pliny, is a certain salsugo, or the salt sweat
of the Earth, concreted of a muddy and slimy water.

18. And it is either clear, or black.

19. That which is clear, is judged the best; and it is either thick or liquid.

20. The liquid is soft, fat and clear.

21. The thick is either round or scissile, and it has the form of of Sugar.

22. The black is found in Cyprus, which purges Gold.

23. Bitumen is the juice of the Earth, gentle and tender, like to Pitch easily
taking fire.

24. And it is either hard (...) soft.

25. The hard is strongly concreted, not unlike to the clods of the earth.

29. Of this sort are Asphaltus, Pissaphaltus and Amber.

27. Asphaltus is a blackish Bitumen, like to Pitch, but harder and more
inspissated, splended, and less olcous; and this sort is gotten all over
Babylon.

28. Pissaphaltus is a certain Bitumen, in a manner black, but of a more
Terrene concretion.

29. Amber also is a Bitumen, and fat of the Earth, proceeding from the heat of
the sea; and the color is sometimes white, yellow or obscure.

30. The liquid Bitumen, is that, which flows like an oleous liquor; of whose
species are, Naptha and the Arabian Amber.

31. Naptha is liquid Bitumen, of an oleous crassitude: the fire has such
force over it, that it will leap into it, wherever it is; neither can it be
quenched by water, but the rather more inflamed by it.

32. That is called Petreolum, which flows from Rocks; and sometimes Naptha
Petra.

33. Amber is fragrant Bitumen, and kept amongst the richest merchandise, and
it is gotten about Arabia.

34. Vitriol is a concreted Juice, looking like the clearness of glass; it is
called by the Latins Atramentum sutorium, and sometimes Chalchanthum.

35. The native is found concreted in the Veins of the Earth, or clefts of the
Rock; and from thence does distill by drops, part thereof hanging like frozen
Ice, and part found in the bottom of Channels.

36. Furthermore, Juices which cannot be melted, yet not indurated into stones,
are Auripigmentum, Sandarach, Chalk, Gypsum, Lime, Oker, Argil, Sealed earth,
Armenian earth.

37. Auripigmentum, or Arsnick, is (B) a concreted Juice, of a yellowish
color, flourishing Pictures with a golden color; is hot and dry, in the
fourth degree, and a present poison.

38. Sandarach is a reddish earth, of the color of Cinabaris, yet something
inclining to a yellow: much of it is gotten in the veins of Metals with
Auripigmentum, smelling strong of Sulphur.

39. Lime is a dry earth, cocted to a stone; which after it is burnt, is
inflamed with water, and extinguished with oil; it is called Viva or Living,
because it contains fire hidden within it.

40. Gypsum is a shining earth, gentle and light, akin to Lime, but not so dry
nor hot; which is dug out of the bottom of the earth: the Factitious is made
of a certain stone, and so placed in walls, for the ornament of houses.

41. Chalk is a tender earth, and white, plentiful in the Island of Crete.

42. Ocher, is a light and yellowish earth, which when it is burnt is red.

43. Argil is a fat and soft earth, of which figuline vessels are made.

44. Sealed and Lemnian earth, is a portion of earth that is very red, dug
out of the Island Lemnos, and sealed with the seal of Diana's high Priest; it
is also dug daily in Silesia and Hassia, it resists poison.

45. The Armenian is a portion of earth, dug out in Armenia; drying by
nature, and of a pale color.

The Commentary.
( A) SAlt is derived a saliendo, from leaping, because it leaps in the fire.
Some judge it to be called salt from the sun, because it is gotten of its own
accord of seawater: the spume thereof, left upon the shore, by the sun, is
concreted into salt. The efficient cause of salt, is the heat of the sun, and
the rest of the stars; which drawing the sweeter and tender parts, out of the
saltish matter, leaves the Terrene; which being boiled, makes a saltish
substance. Two things are required to a salt sapour; the dry and Terrene parts,
and their adustion: of the first is made a sapour, of the latter a salt sapour.
Erroneous therefore is that opinion which judged salt to concrete, as Ice, of
cold: For if salt does concrete of ^old, it is dissolved with heat, because it
is a general rule with Naturalists, every thing to be dissolved by the
contrary, wherewith it was congealed; but salt is dissolved with nothing less
then with heat, for that hardens it, and dryes it more; but it is quickly
dissolved with water: therefore it is not constringed of cold. The matter is a
Terrene Juice, adust, and dried with heat: the form is dried vapors, with
concocted water: the end and use of salt, is various in the whole course of
life; whence it is rightly said, that nothing is more profitable, then salt and
the sun. And old Homer called salt, Divine, because ^t is accommodated to
various ^ses.

Salt hinders putrefaction, and ^akes away superfluous humidity ^n our Bodies:
without salt, a perfect concoction cannot be made: besides, it is of frequent
use in the cure of wounds.

( B) Auripigmentum is double; native and factitious: that which is like to
Ackorns, erupts of its own accord from Metals: this again is double; the one is
made of Arsnick and natural salt, of equal parts mixed, and burned in a
crucible till the vapor appear like Crystal; hence it is called, Christalline
Arsnick: the other is made of natural Arsnick and Sulphur mixed together, and
combustible: both of them are dry and hot in the fourth degree, and a present
poison.

CHAP. 4. Of the Nature of Plants in general* and of their corruptions.
1. HItherto we have spoken of an inanimate Body, perfectly mixed. Now we
proceed to Animate Bodies, which are perfectly mixed, endowed with soul and
life.

2. There are two parts in the life of a furnished Body: the external Body, and
the soul, which subministers life; of the former we have spoken before, of the
latter we shall now.

3. An animate Body is expert of sense, or sensitive.

4. A Plant is a Body expert in sense, which is also called stirps (A) which is
a body perfectly mixed, endowed with a vigent soul, which does grow, live, wax
green, is nourished and increased from the earth.

5. For when Plants are nourished and increased, and bear flowers and fruits;
it proceeds from the soul, and they are the works of animated Bodies; neither
can they be without this soul

6. Therefore rejected is that opinon of the Philosophers, which call that the
form, which vivificates Plants; and that their nature, which indeed is the soul.

7. And also Erroneous is that opinion, which maintans Plants to be Animals
endowed with sense; which Scaliger refutes, Exer. 138.

8. For they are not accommodated with Organs, which are requisite to sensitive
faculties; neither can the actions of any such faculties be apprehended in
Plants: for which of them can see, hear, smell, taste, or feel? Arist. lib. 1.
de planc. C. 1.

9. We do not deny, but some sense is resident in Plants, in attracting to them
what is profitable, and shunning what is unprofitable; but then the question
will be, how can Plants which are always fixed in a place, properly be said to
draw what is profitable, and shun what is incommodious?

10. The vegetable soul alon^ that is within the Plant, is used as an
instrument to the preservation of life, by heat, both native and adventitious,
lawfully temperated; which the Plants draw out of the earth, where they are
fixed by the roots.

11. That heat adhering in the moist matter, it attracts as convenient to its
nature, and so alters and converts it into the substance of the Plant.

12. Hence there are two vital principles in every Plant; heat, and humor: the
want whereof, as it is death to Animals, so it is a corruption and decaying to
Plants.

13. Corruption does either infest part of the Plant, or the whole.

14. A total corruption is either natural or preternatural.

15. The natural is made, when Plants are rendered more dryer; for their
internal heat, and their moisture, decayed by progress of time.

16. Some are corrupted sooner, others later; and so accordingly they live long
or short.

17. The cause of which variety is especially the form, yet sometimes it
happens from the gluish^ess of the humor, and the plenty thereof; whereby the
(...) heat, the instrument of form, is nourished, together with the firmness
and solidity of the whole Plant.

18. For such grow a long time, As first, have much soft and gentle humidity in
them; Secondly* a solid substance; Thirdly; their roots long and thick;
Fourthly* those that are barren and fruitless; Fifthly, such as grow in a dry
place.

19. On the contrary part, those Plants are short lived, and sooner perish by
natural corruption, as have not the contraries to the former.

20. Preternatural or violent ^ruption, happens either by ^tinction, or ^nt of
nourish^

21. Corruption happening (...) extinction, is when the Plant perishes by too
much cold.

22. When cold (...) go^ to the bottom, it hinders (...) warm vapor, or heat,
from coming to the roots, and at length causes the whole to perish.

23. This corruption does not happen, but when an extreme cold comes and
invades the roots, denuded of earth.

24. Corruption happening from want of nourishment, and that by heat, by which
the Plant is as it were scorched, the humidity thereof being (C) exhausted by
the vehemence of heat.

25. And there are two seasons especially, wherein Plants are exposed to this
injury; the one when they begin to bud, because then they are more laxi the
other when they bear fruit, when their juice is exhausted* and made weak.

26. That is called partial corruption, or sideration, when the native heat of
any part is extinguished, either by cold, or heat, or with a wound,
mortification of that part following.

27. Furthermore, some kind of Plants grow of their own accord, and some are
propagated by the art and industry of man.

28. Such arise of their own accord, of seed, as are either manifest or obscure.

29. Those that grow of manifest seed, have but one manner of rising; as in all
Herbareous Plants, that are sown of seed; and others are propagated diverse
manner of ways.

30. From manifest seed, after this manner: seed falling into the moist earth
is thereby softened, and is cherished both with natural and celestial heat; and
so swelling, by reason of the plenty of humor flowing into them from the
earth, it breaks; and out of that part which is broken, a certain soft and
tender sprout does grow, and by so little becomes more firm and crass; one part
whereof, being partaker of the airy nature, ascends up; the other, which is
terrestrial and crass, resides in the earth, and there coa^esces.

31. So then, Plants arising from seed, are cherished by the humor of the
earth, decocted ^y heat, and attracted by their ^nternal nature.

32. But the time of sprouting of Plants, is not one and the same, (D) for some
do begin to grow within three days, as the Bafil and Rape; some on the fourth
day, as Lettice; some on the fifth, as the Gourd; some on the sixth, as Beet;
some on the eighth, as Arach; some on the tenth, as Colwort: Leeks in twenty
days; Smallidg forty or fifty: Last of all, Pyony and Mandrake, ^rce in the
space of a whole year.

33. The causes of this diversity of sproutings, are these: First, (...)
strength of Form; Secondly, the strength or weakness of their inward heat;
Thirdly, the variety or density, fatness or hardness of the seeds; for in hard
and dense Bodies, the humor cannot be illicited out of the earth so readily,
whereby seed must swell before it erupts.

34. Certain Plants, (E) according to the opinion of Theophrastus, are said to
grow without evident or manifest seed: and he declares the cause to be, a
certain permistion of earth and putrefied water; which being, as it were,
preserved both by the heat of the sun, and the propriety of the matter, renders
a fit generation of spontaneous Plants.

35. This opinion is probable enough; for as a strange heat is the cause of
putretude, so also into things of new forms, which are putrefied; and he makes
the heat of the sun and stars, to be a beneficial induction ther^.

36. But besides these, the air and the earth may be the cause of sproutings of
such Plants as grow spontaneously; If it be true, that according to the various
station of first and second qualities in substance, various mutations and
generations of things may be made.

37. Moreover, a Plant sometimes is produced out of a hard stone; which
happens, when air is included therein, and endeavors to as^end; but when it
cannot find a passage, it is reflected, and so waxes hot by its agitation,
whereby it draws the humor of the stone to it self. That vapor with the
humor, breaks out, and of that vapor and humor brought out of the stone, a
Plant is ingendered by the concurrent heat of the sun, Arist. lib. 2. de
Plantis, c. 5.

38. Furthermore, Plant are variously propagated by the art and industry of
men, by setting of roots, or ingrafting young slips.

39. By setting of roots, as Liquorice, Lilly: for these do easily attract
aliment, and so live.

40. By ingrafting or planting, and that either by fastening them in the earth,
or upon the stock of a tree.

41. Planted or fixed in the earth, as the Rose, Willow, Vine, Mulberry; which
is called a propagation.

42. Engrafted upon the stock of a tree, by thrusting a slip into the wood of
another; which properly indeed is called insition; as an Apple Tree into a
Peartree.

43. Indeed most Plants may be propagated all these ways; as Olives, Figgs, and
Cherry-trees.

44. But there are invented other manner of propagations, more artificially,
whereby a leaf dug out of the earth to bud in a new stock.

45. But it is a question not to be contemned, (F) why the dissected parts of
Plants, do live, and thereby propaga ed, when it is the cause of death in
Animals? This is said to happen, because Plants have the strength and force of
the soul engrafted within them, and so diffused over all their parts. Heat
also, which is an individual companion of the soul, and moisture gentle and
thin, and therefore not dissipable; but it is not so with Animals, for they
stand in need of that faculty, which flows from the heart.

46. Therefore part of a bough, which is planted in the earth, does preserve in
it self heat, humor, and strength of the soul; and by that attracted humor,
begins to swell and receive spirit, and by the strength of the soul, it
detaines, and by the help of its innate heat, it distributes the grossest parts
of the humor, from whence the roots are framed; and the thinnest part it
preserves, which causes it to grow higher.

47. The same manner is observed in engrafting: for as Plants out of the earth,
as out of a womb; so Grafts from those where they are grafted, do preserve,
keep, and attract the nutriment of the Plant, by the force of the soul and
heat; and by a continued action, a generation of parts is made.

48. But Aliment, which the Graft draws, is by far more elaborate: First, in
that was concocted before in the mother; Secondly, in that is made more exact,
in its new guest.

39. Hence it is that wild Plants, if they be engrafted, do remain firm,
because they are nourished by a more sincere Aliment; so that a Domestic or
Garden Plant, engrafted into a wild Plant, w^ grow better, and yield more
pleasanter fruit.

50. The Fruits of these respond in sapour, color, and odor: the nature of
the Plant, whence the Graft was taken, because the juice whereby the fruit is
nourished, is of great moment in this matter.

The Commentary.
( A) NAture does proceed always from the less perfect, to the more perfect;
therefore it is in the first place disputed, seeing that Plants, by reason of
forms, do want of the perfection of Animals, whether it be a body perfectly
mixed? First, it is defined to be a Body perfectly mixed, to difference it from
Meteors, in which there is an alteration of Elements made; whereas in Plants,
and also in Metals, there is a notable mutation of elementary parts; therefore
there is added in the definition, endowed with (...) vegetive soul. Therefore
in the first place, that I may take away the opinion, both of Philosophers and
Physicians, who call that the form which governs the Plant, and that the nature
which is the soul; for when Plants are nourished and increase, they bear fruits
and flowers, which are the works of animate Bodies; and they cannot want that
soul: Secondly, to take away their opinion, who declare, that Plants are
endowed with sense, as Animals are; concerning which, Plato, Anaxagoras,
Empedocles, and many others maintain, to which many later writers assent, but
especially Cardan.

First, Flight, Hatred, Aversion, Appetite, cannot be attributed to any Bodies,
but such as are endowed with a sensitive soul; but Plants refuse and fly too
much: Heat (as the Vine has no propinquity with the Cabbadge) and many other
Plants also (the Vine desires the Elm, and almost all other Plants do gather
what is familiar unto them, and fly from what is unprofitable) therefore by
these actions, it is not obscure that Plants are endowed with sense.

Secondly, they are distinguished in the sex; the Feminine Plant cannot consist
with the Masculine, each other desiring their congress; neither can they come
to ripeness, or bear fruit, without their mutual society.

But to the first we Answer, That the Hatred, Flight, and Appetite of Plants,
is not proper, but translated, as Danaeus speaks: indeed they contract and
extend themselves by the benefit of their Fibers, and so receive what is
familiar and profitable, by a certain natural faculty; yet not with any sense,
only endowed with the strength of a vegetive soul, and led by the impulse of
nature, which Cicero calls an instinct; for what things love or hate by sense,
those cannot hate or love, as Scaliger says, Exer. 138.

But for example, the Cabbadge always refuses the Vine, and has a continual
enmity against it; and hence does manifestly evade it: But this Flight and
Appetite of Plants, is altogether without sense; yet some attribute this to the
Sex of the Plants, which is to be understood metaphorically, as a certain
similitude taken from strength and weakness: for the Masculine is more stronger
then the Feminine, the Feminine more weaker then the Masculine; therefore we
are to understand, that masculine Plants are always strong, and robust, the
feminine weak and fecundine.

But it is said in the Definition, which do grow out of the earth, for this is,
as it were, the belly of Plants, as Anaxagoras says; and out of this the
Fibers of the roots, whatsoever is profitable to them and agreeable to their
nature, they attract, and convert into their substance. Further, it is said to
grow, live, nourish, and increase; in which vital actions, the Plant differs
from other Inanimate things; which as they are destitute of a soul, so they
want these actions: Hence it is, that a Plant is said to be dissolved, not that
it has only an animate Body, but organical also; and so of it self alone, and
not of the earth, as the Soicks would have it, to have the beginning of its
actions: but although these strengths and actions are common to Animals; yet
notwithstanding they are insited in Plants, the soul is used to the life and
preservation of the Plants, instrumentally, with heat well tempered, which
Plants do draw out of the earth, where they are placed by the roots; and that
heat which cleaves to the humid tressel and subject, the defect whereof as it
is death to Animals, so it is dryness and corruption to Plants.

( B) The plenty of the inward humor, causes the longevity of Plants; for
thereby the innate heat, which is the instrument of form, is thereby made:
First therefore, when plenty of heat is discerned, it suggests the aliment not
easily to be dissipated: but that the Plant will live long, and yield much
oleous and resinous juice: Secondly, when they are dense and compact, they
faithfully preserve their vital heat and moisture, neither can they suffer
external injuries; and for this cause, trees are more diuturnal then Fruits,
and Fruits then Herbs. Thirdly, the Longitude and crassitude of roots is of
great moment, by reason of their hardness, for lengthening of life: First,
because by how much the roots are deeper, by so much they stick more firm, and
the more do resist the external injury of wind and heat: Secondly, the roots
are, as it were, the beginning of Plants, in which the hot moisture does
chiefly flourish, and the subterranean heat and humor daily cherished: for it
is consonant to reason, where there is much humidity and calidity, there the
roots must needs be ample and profound; and therefore a small and simple root,
is defective of calidity and humidity, and thereupon cannot grow long.
Fourthly, fecundity also is the cause of shortning its life, because of the too
little dissipation of Juice, whereby the inward humor is nourished; which
juice should go into the seed and fruit.

( C) Heat hurts Plants less then cold, unless arridity accede, which is called
squalor; and those are easily hurt by cold, whose roots are not deep, for there
the sun does the sooner pierce unto them; and the proximate parts of the roots,
are affected strongly by the beams of the sun, because the earth is wanting to
nourish them.

( D) But why certain Plants do arise quickly after sowing the seed, and others
a long time after; The first and chiefest cause, is the force of form; The
second is the strength and imbecility of the insited heat; The third is the
rarity and density, the softness and hardness of the seeds: for in hard and
dense Bodies, the humor is elicited, not so readily by the force of heat out
of the earth, whereby the seed does swell: and for this cause it is, that the
seed of Pyony does bud so long after Sation, and Mandrake longer: which is more
hard and dense, which certain space of days of budding, or sprouting happens
according to the variety of the suns influence, and heavens concurrence: and
hence it is, that if dung be commixed with the earth where seed is to be sown,
the seed will sooner erupt, not only excited thereunto by the innate heat of
the seed, as the extreme calidity of the earth; so the seeds of Palms, if
infused and macerated in water, before its sation, it sooner sprouts.

(E) Theophrastus says, that experience teaches, that certain Plants do grow
without seed, and that some have been seen to grow in the earth, where none was
sown or planted before: he instances in Laserpitium, which sometimes has been
seen in Africa, and never found before, in the same place. Some of the
Philosophers do inquire out the seminal cause of these Plants. Anaxagoras
judges the air to convey the seed from some other place, and there to fix
according to the course of nature; others judge it to happen by the inundation
and conflux of waters, whereby seeds are conveyed from some places to other
parts of the earth more remote. And although these things are not spoken
altogether foolishly, as without reason, yet the truth thereof is to be
questioned; but it is certain that many Plants, however, have been found to
grow of their own accord, without any seed; As Polypody of the Oak: as we see
certain little Animals to have their original by accidents, as lice, worms, and
other insects that are generated by accidents.

( F) It is a question deserves solution, whence it is that the insected parts
of Plants do live longer, then if they had remained whole, nay and are thereby
propogated; whereas it is not so with Animals; for if their parts be cut, they
perish: For we see that boughs plucked from their stock, and plants plucked up
by the roots, to grow and are thereby propagated; but with Animals, after the
division of a foot, ear, arm, leg, or there parts, forthwith they die. I answer,
that Plants do longer survive after their section, if again planted or
engrafted, because they have the force of the soul insited, and that diffused
through all and every part: And besides, they have scattered abroad their
native heat, the individual companion of the soul; and their humidity, which is
lent and crass: and therefore less dissipable through all the parts; by which
two principles they live, and undergo all the functions of nature: and hence it
is, that part of a Plant sejoyned from its stock, is said to live in the earth
(the matrix as it were of Plants) by the benefit of the soul, which is
correllative in the whole, and every part; and to beget a root, or take rooting
(which is a new principle) from the humidity resident and attracted out of the
earth; or sprout and grow out of another trunk planted therein by insition, and
so coalesce after the same manner even now declared.

For as long as Plants preserve that humidity of theirs, steadfast and dense, so
long are they capable of life and soul: but such as are perfect Animals, and
are consequently of a stronger and better nature, do not only stand in need of
an insited, but an influent faculty, which is drawn from the heart: and hence
it is, that their humidity is not so steadfast, viz. substantial, but more thin
and tenderer, and therefore does the sooner expire. Hence it is, that if a hand
be separared from the body, all the life therein is extinguished, because it is
destitute of an influent faculty from the heart; for that thing cannot have a
soul, unless it have a continued derivation from the heart; which if it once be
destitute of, it loses to be an animated being.

CHAP. 5. Of certain affections of Plants.
1. HItherto we have Treated of the rise of Plants, both Natural and
Artificial. Now we shall proceed to their Affections or Corruptions, wherewith
they are infested: their Affections may proceed, either from their native soil,
or rather the ground where planted: from the variety of their germination,
fecundity, and propriety of substance; or from their qualities.

2. The soil or rather matter of the rise of Plants, is either Terrestrial or
Aquatical.

3. Terrestrial, viz. their native place in the earth, and that either in
gardens or fields, sative or wild.

4. The Sative are Domestic Plants, such as grow in Gardens.

5. The Wild, are such as grow in the Woods, Mountains, Valleys, and the like.

6. Aquatical, such as grow in waters, and that either in the ocean or lesser
waters, as in Fountains, Rivers, Ponds, etc. Arist.

7. Again, some Plants are delighted in a hot place, some in a cold place; some
in the open field, some in the shade; some upon rocks, and some upon
sandyground.

8. But why (A) Plants should delight to grow in such variety of soyls, is not
easily determined; yet notwithstanding the place where the thing is sited, is
the conservation of that thing, and indeed of all things sublunar: therefore
diverse Plants are of diverse natures, and accordingly do attract convenient
Aliment out of that soil, for the preservation of life; and do therefore
rejoice, as it were, in a fit and convenient soil.

9. Furthermore, notice must be taken in the germination of Plants, the time
when they germinate, their Celerity and Tardity.

10. The time of germination is the Spring, when there is plenty of humor
abounding, which was gathered in the winter-season; and then their innate heat
is excited by the extremity of external heat, insomuch that the cutis of
Plants, and the meatus of the universal Body, begins to be opened, which causes
the juice to be educed abroad, and a budding or germination to be made.

11. Others put forth their summer-fruit sooner or later, according to their
naure; which happens according to the greater or lesser force of the innate
heat and humor, and also the rarity or density of the Plants body.

12. Sometimes, notwithstanding, tilled or pruned Plants do bud later then the
untilled: First, by reason of the less revocation of the inward heat to the
outward parts, and by reason of the wounds made by pruning: Secondly, either
from the debilitation or weakness of the same heat, or the denudation of the
root, or from the incrassitude of the humor: Thirdly, from the density and
thickness of the Plant, induced or brought into the root by the force of
nocturnal frigidity, and by the root into the whole Plant.

17. And they do not generate forthwith, in their first age (neither do
Animals, whilst young and tender, bear young) because all their aliment at that
time, is diverted into their increment: Secondly, their force is more weak,
whereby it cannot concoct it, nor condensate it into fruit.

14 Neither do all Plants generate; for so some are fruitful, others not
fruitful.

15. The cause of fruitfulness, is referred by some only to heat; but when
there is heat without matter, that is, copious aliment, it can effect or frame
nothing. Hot and succulent Plants are only fruitful.

16. Of fruitful or fecundine Plants, some do bear fruit once in all their
life, others oftener.

17. Those that bear fruit oftener, are such as fructicate annally once a year,
some twice, and some three times a year: the proximate cause of which, is no
other then the proximate form of every species.

18. Of fecundine Plants, some are fertile continently, and that by the reason
of the abundance of their heat, and fatness of their humor: as the Fig Tree,
which fructicates sometimes but every year; the same is observed in Pear Trees
and Apple Trees.

19. These Trees are very profuse, for they require so much aliment for the
generation of fruit, that if they receive not annually so much, by reason of
the season of the year, they become barren for that year.

20. The property of the substance of Plants may be discerned, by their various
affections, whereby they exercise and act.

21. Plants exercise their strength in things that are either Animate, or
Inanimate.

22. Inanimate things; as upon other Plants, or Animals.

23. Upon Plants, they either exercise a sympathy or antipathy, friendship or
enmity; so that the Olive Tree will be averse to the Oak, the Cabadge to the
Vine, the Reed to the Fearn: but on the contrary, there is a friendship and
sympathy between Rue and the Fig Tree; that each other profits much by their
vicinity.

24. The inquisition of these things is so obscure, insomuch that some have
referred their original to an occult cause, and others have gone about to
demonstrate it by reason.

25. But however, this is most likely the true meaning why they prosecute such
a sympathy and antipathy, by reason of the substraction of aliment and
corruption: for this cause it is, that where the Oak is, the Olive will not
live, because the aliment is corrupted by the dryness of the Oak, and therefore
is made more arrid then the nature of Olive is. So the Cabbage and the Vine
cannot grow together: First, because the roots of the Vine do draw abundance of
aliment from all the parts of the ground where it is planted: Secondly, because
the bushiness of the Vine obstructs the reflection of the sun upon the Cabbage.

26. So in like manner do they exercise sympathy and friendship: the Rue seems
to have nutriment with the Fig Tree, which is the cause of this loving
correspondence; for if the nature of the Fig Tree be hot, it must needs attract
hot nutriment, which corresponds with the nature of Rue.

27. Plants also have a sympathy and antipathy to Animals, and that either to
man alone, or other Animals.

28. Some Plants are friendly to mankind, others are adverse to humane nature,
and others do partake of a certain medium between both.

29. Those that are friendly, do repair and defend the universal Body, or
determinated parts.

30. Those which are said to preserve the life of the universal Body, are such
as have a strong faculty in nourishing, whose is the consent of principles, if
so be all things be nourished with its like.

31. But whether this consent happens from the form, or rather matter, is an
intricate doubt. Indeed the hability of the matter is altogether necessary, but
the consent of the form ought to accede.

32. And these Plants do nourish either in the whole, or in part.

33. Whole Plants that do nourish, are such as these: potherbs, Lettice,
Cabbage, Watercresses, Brooklime.

34. Part of Plants; as the roots of Rape, Parsnip, Radish: fruits; as of
Mellons, Cucumbers: seeeds; as of Beans and Pease: corn; as of Barley, Wheat,
Rye, etc.

35. What things do defend a certain part of the body, are various: as Pyony
the head, Saffron the heart, Mint the stomach, Egrimony the liver, Capers the
spleen, Hermodactyls the arteries; the cause of which is a certain similitude
and consent of that Plant, with the form of that part to which ordained.

36. Some Plants are enemies, pernicious and hurtful, and that either to the
whole body, or part: to the whole they prove fatal, by everting the continuity
of union, and depraving of life, or stupefie or benum part of the body: as
Henbane to the head, Pepper of the Mount to the liver, Ervus to the reins and
bladder, Aloes to the hemorrhoids; the cause of which antipathy or corruption,
is the controversy of the form.

37. One and the same Plant, is sometimes salutary to one man, but noxious and
death to another, by reason of the peculiar constitution of the individuum.

38. Some Plants there are, partly friends, and partly enemies to our bodies,
partaking of a middle nature between sympathy and antipathy.

39. They are enemies indeed, which are infested with a bad sapour or odor;
they are friends that are correspondent to our constitution, which do bring out
unprofitable juices out of our Bodies; as Coloquintida and other purging Plants.

40. But as far as Medicaments act by purgation, so far they operate upon
nature, by a ^ertain force, which may be accounted under the name of being an
enemy to nature: and those which draw corruption with humors, are enemies,
though they be judged to draw them by a certain similitude and congruity.

41. The strength of Plants have also a certain friendship and enmity with
other Animals: for Fennel is a friend to the Serpent, but Rue an enemy; the Ash
to the Scorpion, but Wolfsbane infests him, and white Hellebore is a friend to
him; for if he be laid thereto, he revives: so Basil, in which he has been
seen to engender: so the herbs Oenothara, Crateva, Lysimachus, hung about the
necks of mad Animals, or untamed Bulls, they will cause them (as Antiquity has
observed) to turn round: all which do express necessarily a certain tacit
consent of forms.

42. Plants also do produce various effects in inanimite things; for the
ancients have left upon record, that by the force and touch of Missletoe, and
the herb Aethiopis, all Locks and Bolts do fly open: The Spina of Theophrastus
does congeal water: Radix, Hybisci, and the juice of Purslain and Mercury, does
abate the force of fire (this has often been experimented in our time) all
which in reason we ought to believe to be acted no other ways, then by the
power of proper forms.

43. Lastly, for the nourishment and contemperation of the elementary qualities
in Plants, four degrees are constituted in Plants, to wit, that some be hot or
cold, moist or dry, in the first or second, third or fourth degree.

44. And these degrees respectively taken, are either remiss or intense: those
that are remiss, are such as are placed in the first degree; the rest are
intense, so that the fourth be the chief, and exceed altogether mediocrity.

The Commentary.
( A)Why Plants are delighted to grow in various places, is a thing not easily
unfolded; yet it is a thing worth inquiring.

Therefore according to the opinion of the Philosophers, the place is the
conservator of all things; that as the nature of Plants is various, so they
have need of diverse places to preserve life: therefore that place alone, or
soil, is proper and profitable to the life of Plants, which does suggest
convenient aliment unto them, and in which the roots of the Plant may have
foundation commodious for its nature: on the contrary, that place is altogether
unprofitable for Plants, where moderate aliment is not afforded in plenty,
according to the nature of the Plant and its substance, in the first and second
qualities; or where the soil is such, that the roots can neither go lower, nor
rise higher, as occasion serves and need requires: therefore these Plants,
which stand in need of pure aliment, much and sweet, can never profit or
thrive, where the place suggests nothing but impure, little, hot, and saltish
aliment: so such as have robust and long roots, will not live in a dense soil;
and those that have small and tender roots, cannot thrive in a thin soil,
because they cannot draw aliment from the bottom. Some are bettered with a
dense air; which happens, because of their dissipation by the airs tenuity:
some thrive gallantly in a sunny place, because they stand in need of the heat
of the sun, to excite their denser substance: and here also is a certain tacit
consent proceeding from the peculiar form of Plants: for in cold places hot
juice does grow; and in a cold and moist place, sometimes hot and dry Plants do
live.

CHAP. 6. Of the parts of Plants, and their kinds.
1. HItherto of Plants which have a body both organical and animate. Now of
their parts.

2. Whatsoever that is from which the body of Plants is constituted, is either
within the ground, and then it is called a root; or above the ground, then
superficies.

3. And this whole body is distributed into parts; or principals, or less
principal.

4. Those which are called the true principals, are those parts in which the
vegetable soul does perfect nutrition, and conserve life.

5. And they are either similar, or dissimilar.

6. Similar parts, which have one and the same substance altogether: and
because many of them want proper words, they change the appellation of parts of
Animals, by a certain Analogy.

7. And these are either liquid, or solid.

8. The liquid are Juices and Tears.

9. Juice is that liquid part, diffused in the substances of Plants; by which,
as with blood, their life is preserved, Arist. 1. de Plant. c. 2.

10. Lachryma, or Tears, are humors which drop from Plants spontaneously;
either induced thereunto by the heat of the sun, or the plenty of humor
dehiscing upon any occasion.

11. And they are either watery, as such as do concrete into Gums; or pitchy,
such as are converted to Rosin.

12. The solid parts are the substance, called flesh and the fibers.

13. The Flesh is the gross substance of the Plant, consisting of a concreted
humor, responding to the muscles of Animals.

14. The Fibers are long parts, continued and fissile, carried in the same
manner over the whole Plant, as Veins and Nerves in Animals; and accordingly in
Plants, they are called Veins and Nerves: the succulent Fibers, are the greater
Veins; the dry, the lesser.

15. The dissimilar parts do consist of the similar.

16 And these are either universal or anniversary.

17. The Universal, or parts during for a long time, are the root, the caul,
matrix, and bough.

18. The root is the lowest part of the Plant, which is as it were the mouth of
the Plant, fixed in the earth; thereby attracting nutriment for the enlivening
of the whole, and the supplying of every part.

19. The caul is the Trunk, Stock, or Body of the Plant, which does arise next
from the root above the earth; into which, as it were into the vena cava, the
aliment does first ascend from the root, and after a full concoction, is
carried to the other parts.

20. The matrix, or medulla, or sap, is the internal part of the Plant; lying
hid in the middle of the Plant, consisting of flesh and humor.

21. The boughs are parts of the Plant which do stretch out and dilate
themselves from the caul or trunk, as the arms of the body from the shoulders.

22. Anniversary, that is, those parts that grow afresh yearly, young twigs,
flowers and fruit.

23. A twig is part of the Plant which arises new from the boughs yearly; and
upon these twigs, do the fruit and flowers hang.

24. The less principal parts are the Barks and Leaves.

25. The Bark is, as it were, a certain tunicle made of Fibers, wherewith the
body is involved; and is called the rind.

26. Leaves are, as it were, the excrements of Plants; and they do consist of
humor and fibers.

27. But Plants are either perfect or imperfect.

28. I call those perfect, which evidently have the first and principal parts
of Plants, to wit, the superficies and the root.

29. And these have by nature, for their superficies, a caul, or none.

30. Those that have a caul, have it either perpetual, that is to say, for a
long time, or not perpetual.

31. Those whose caules are not perpetual, they have no liqueous substance, as
all kinds of herbs; and these amongst all Plants, are the least.

32. An herb (A) therefore is a little Plant, whose superficies consists of a
caul or stem, void of wood, continuing for a year.

33. Under this we comprehend all fruits and pot herbs, which are no other then
such as are fit to be eaten.

34. Those which have a caul perpetual, that is, for a long time, have it
either by nature simple or compound, one or more.

35. Those which have it simple, are Plants of the greatest crassitude, as
trees.

36. A tree therefore is a liqueous Plant, hard to be dissolved; amongst all
Plants, the firmest and highest, whose candex is perpetual, and by nature
simple.

37. And this has either a firm caul, or not firm.

38. Firm, as the Oak, the Apple Tree, Pear, and Cherry-tree, etc.

39. Infirm, as the Vine and others, which are fain to be supported.

40. Which have many caules, and the same either thin or crass.

41. Those which have a thin caul, are reckoned amongst less liqueous Plants,
as Broom and Bavine.

42. Brush or Bavine is a Plant accounted the least amongst liqueous Plants,
both in altitude and crassitude, not unlike to the Rose-tree, Sage, and
Marshmallow.

43. Those which, have crass caules, are reckoned amongst middle Plants, easily
passing into the nature of trees, by the abscission of the unprofitable
branches, as shrubs.

44. A shrub is a liqueous Plant, of a middle altitude and crassitude, who has
for its superficies a perpetual caul, by nature multifarious and crass; as the
Hazle and Elder.

45. Imperfect Plants are those which want a superficies and root, or that is
obscurely in them, or not in them.

46. Of this sort are Mushrooms and Toadstools, whose substance is spungy, in
which but one superficies can be discerned; so also Missletoe, Dodder, and
Epithimus, in which no root can be seen.

47. There are so many varieties of Plants in the universe, that they cannot be
comprehended within our brevity; their species and several natures may be
known, by reading of Pliny, Theophrastus, and other writers of Herbs.

The Commentary.
( A) AN Herb may be distinguished several ways by diverse Arguments: we shall
only distinguish of those which are idoneous to be eaten; of which sort are
edible Fruits and Herbs: Fruits; as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, etc. all manner
of pulse; as Pease, etc. Pot Herbs; as Radish, Fennel, etc. and all other Herbs
that are eaten or mingled with meats; as the Cabbadge, Lettice, etc. Those
which are not fit for esure, are healthful or exitial; the use whereof is in
medicine, either to absterge, calefie, or refrigerate; with many other
properties, which medicine requires: exitial are those that have an excedent
quality, as Hemlock.

But why have Plants and Animals such a familiarity or hatred amongst
themselves, is a question worth resolving.

There are certain Herbs which are edible, which preserve the life of Animals:
now the consent must be in principles; for all things are nourished by their
simile, and corrupted by their contrary: but whether this consent be from the
form or matter, is a question not yet resolved. That it does proceed from the
matter, is a thing seemingly to be proved, because the aliment does not come
from the naked form, but body of the Plants; and when it begins to nourish (for
those aliments which nourish, must be concocted by the innate heat of the
Animal, and so be changed diverse manner of ways) it seems rather to belong to
the matter, then the form: but we must know that matter cannot be idoneous for
the nourishment of any body, unless also the consent of form does concur; for
neither without the help of other, can be the cause of any action. For
whatsoever is made from a body that does consist of matter and form, is so
made, that the actions may be given rather to the form then matter, and the
passions rather to the matter then form: and therefore the familiarity of
nutriment, is chiefly to be referred to the form, although that the concurrence
of the hability of the matter, be necessary. From these may be gathered, why
certain herbs are so averse from putrefaction; but on the contrary, apt and
ready to the breaking of the whole body, and everting of life: for the cause of
corruption is the contrariety of form; and the matter makes repugnancy, lest
that any nutriment happen to the other: for so the seeds of Grapes have of the
matter, and yet not nourish men; and the wolf Those has of form and matter, and
yet averse from the life of men.

CHAP. 7. Of parts contained in animate Bodies; and first of all, of Humors.
1. HItherto we have spoken of the first kind of natural Animates, to wit, of
Plants: We shall now prosecute the other kind, aistheton, or such as have
sense.

2. Aisthetice is a nature which is endowed with sense.

3. And it is Zoophyton, or an Animal.

4. An Animal is a (A) sensible and animated body, moving it self to a place.

5. For Sense belongs only to Animals, and they are constituted for them; and
herein they differ from Plants.

6. This animated Body (B) is one, and simple harmony of many parts, by
continuation and union of form; and it is dividual and variable into almost
infinite parts.

7. Therefore all that is part of an animate Body, into which the same body
cannot be divided, or remain well whole, Arist. 7. Polit. c. 8.

8. And some things are contained in these parts.

9. They are contained, which when they have a fluent and coherent nature, are
yet sustained by help of others.

10. Of which sort (C) are both humors and spirits.

11. An humor is the liquid and fluent part of a body, contained in the spaces
of an animate body, and so placed therefore for the preservation of the same.

12. Therefore whatsoever does flow in and from the body, insomuch that a
vessel is required to be subjected, in which the thing may be contained, is
called an humor.

13. And humor is either insite or acquisite: the insite is engendered of the
whole mass of the body, having its rise from the seed and menstruous blood, for
the conformation of the body; and it is also called radical, or primogenial.

14. And it is either airy, or oleous, in which the native heat is preserved,
even as a flame by the candle.

15. It is daily made of aliment: for whatsoever suffices in its place, it is
needful to be changed by the help of heat; but heat in product of time begins
to fade, and therefore what happens of aliment, is impure; and if it be
destitute of fit aliment, then heat at length quite dissipates.

16. The acquisite does come out for reparation sake, for the more profitable
parts of aliments.

17. And it is either primary or secondary.

18. The primary is gotten immediately of aliments concocted in the liver.

19. Chylus therefore is not to be accounted the first humor, both for that it
is unapt of it self to nourish the body or any part thereof, and also that it
is not as yet truly fluid, and not cocted in the liver.

20. Primary humors are either profitable or excrementitious.

21. Those that are profitable, and make much to nutrition, are blood and
phlegm.

22. Blood (D) is a hot humor, temperate, sweet, rubicund, prepared in the
Miseraick veins, and confected in the liver, of the most temperate, oleous and
airy parts of chyle.

23. With this alone, are all the parts of animals nourished. First, when it is
certain, that we are nourished of those things of which we consist; but we are
made of pure blood in the womb. Secondly, because this humor alone is
distributed by vessels, over the whole body, and so does accede to every part.
Thirdly, this alone also is sweet, and apt to nourish: other humors are either
bitter or acid. Fourthly, this alone can concrete by the benefit of the fibers,
and be assimilated to the body, Arist. l. 2. de part. anim. c. 23.

24. Therefore this alone is contained in the veins, not mingled with any other
humor, although it be conflated of four diverse parts, which do so constitute
the sanguineous Mass, as Cheese and Whay belongs to the substance of milk.

25. Therefore, because nature is not one and the same in all parts, therefore
from this Mass several stocks of juices may be drawn.

26. Those parts are various, of which blood does consist: some improperly
entitle them by the name of excrementitious humors.

27. For those humors are not carried with blood into the body, if it injoys
fully its native health; but if infested with any preternatural affection, then
it is not blood, but an excrement, as Aristotle calls it; and the Philosophers,
Nosodes haima, diseased blood.

28. Phlegm (E) is a cold humor, moist, white, and insipid; gotten of a cold
portion of chyle in the liver, that by the progress of time and greater
concoction, it may divert to blood, and so nourish the body.

29. Therefore, nature prudently has hid no receptacle, which might expurge
it: therefore, seeing it cannot be evacuated, it requires to be altered.

30. Furthermore, there are excrementitious humors, which are unprofitable to
nourish the body; therefore they are purged by nature.

31. And these are made either by the second concoction, together with the
blood in the liver, and may be discerned; or of the third, of what is left of
every part.

32. Two excrementitious humors, are generated in the second concoction in the
liver: the one representing the flower, the other the fecies of wine, to wit,
yellow and black, choler and whey.

33. Yellow bile or choler (F) is an excrementitious humor, hot and dry,
bitter also, being procreated of the tender and hotter parts of chyle; and so
gathered into the bladder of the gall.

34. This humor does flow from the bladder of the gall, by the passage of the
Choledochum (from (...), that is, choler, and (...), that is to receive) to the
end of the intestines, that it may stimulate the dull intestines by its
acrimony to excretion; and so bring down the slow phlegm adhering to the
interior membranes.

35. Black choler (G) or melancholy is a cold and dry humor, crass, and black,
acerb, acid, arising from the gross^r and feculent part of aliment, and
expurged from the spleen.

36. Serum or whey, is an excrementitious humor, begotten of drink or any other
liquor, wherewith meat is digested in the stomach by the action of heat in the
liver.

37. Part of it is mild, and distributed together with blood into the veins,
and so the same made gross by the coction, and plenty of fibers; and as it were
deduced in a chariot, to the extremities of the body: the other part which is
unprofitable, is forthwith expelled to the ^ins; and hence by the Uretra's to
the bladder.

38. This Serum, therefore, is matter of urine; for this is no other thing then
serum, altered in the liver and vessels, attracted from the reins, and expulsed
into the bladder: and at last excreted by the passage of the vein, that purer
blood may be made.

39. But the excrementitious humors, which are discerned in the third
concoction, do either break out of the whole body, or by some determinate part.

40. Of which sort are sweats, and tears, which we put amongst the excrements
of the third concoction: not that they are then generated (for their matter is
the same with serum) but after that the concoction is made, they are discerned.

41. Sweat therefore is serum altered in the liver, and by the conveyance of
the blood, is transmitted by the veins; and at length out of these veins, by
the insensible passages of the body, expulsed into the species of water.

42. The usual and natural sweat of our body is of a watery color; but
sometimes it is yellowish, and reddish, by reason of the tenuity of the blood,
which Aristotle mentions.

43. A Tear is a drop, contained in the head and angles of the veins which are
in the eyes, and does break out by the watery holes, to the internal angle of
the eye; and by compression and dilatation, by the scissure of the conjunctive
tunicle.

44. Hence it is, that the coming of tears, does not proceed from the eyes; for
they are, as it were, but the emissaries of the drops.

45. It behooves also that nature should have given to every man tears, properly
so called, because sometimes he is sad, and sometimes rejoices; whence his
veins are dilated and compressed.

46. They are most prone to tears, whose bodies are endowed with a cold and
moist, tender, soft, and effeminate constitution, and with a moist and languid
brain: hence it is, that children and women, more then men, are addicted more
to pour out tears in such a plentiful manner.

47. Great plenty and abundance of tears do flow from them also, who have the
carnucles and angles of the eyes great and lax.

48. And on the contrary, some by no force, nor means, can be made to weep,
because in them the Lachrymal flesh does obduce the veins, and so hinder the
flux of tears.

49. Let these suffice to have been spoken of the primary humors, both
excrementitious and profitable: the secondary humors, are those which are made
new, of insited or radical moisture, or of blood much concocted.

50. Of which sort are these two, (H) Ros and Gluten.

51. Ros is an humor, which does distill like a dew, generated of blood
resolved into vapor, and does resude by the tunicles of the veins; and partly
flows from or by the pores thereof.

52. Gluten is an humor begotten of Ros: applied first to the substance of the
part, and there adhering; and then changed by the heat of the parts: and it is
called Gluten, because it agglutinates the parts.

53. Therefore we shall exclude the rest; either because they are or may be
referred to what has been said; or that they are improper, wanting names,
whereby they cannot be appropriated to any class.

The Commentary.
( A) IT is delivered in the definition, that an Animal does consist of Matter
and Form. Matter is an Animate, or Organical body: Form is endowed with sense;
for sense ought to belong, and is necessary to such an Animal; and of that
alone are Animals constituted: and therein do they differ from Plants, which
indeed are animates, but destitute of sense.

Now in animals, motion does always accompany sense, as a thing necessary to
the conservation of the animal: for because it is preserved by nutriment, it
stands in need of motion to procure that nutriment: but every animal by divine
ordination, does generate the whole and perfect simile to it self; in which
generation, matter is the seed of both sexes, masculine and feminine; or a
certain simile, that is in stead of seed: although sometimes certain animates
are produced out of putrefaction, yet there must be some certain seminal force
therein, or else it could not be the efficient cause of any such generation.

( B) Because these* sublunaries do consist of dissimilar natures, therefore
they are mortal and corruptible: therefore lest that God should seem to be
wanting to them, he has or dained that they that cannot remain in the same
number, or at least in the same species, be revived by annual succession; and
therefore by the benefit of procreation, that one species should proceed out of
another; whence the life of the dead (as we may say) is placed in the memory of
the living; and the father does live in the son, as the artificer in his work.
But as God is always the first cause of all natures, so is he the true, proper
and first efficient cause in the rise of all animals: The secondary or
instrumentary, are the animals themselves, whether masculine or feminine of the
same species, that they may make one when they are united, and distinctly
ordered to the obscene parts and instruments of generation: for the masculine
is generated in another, and not in it self; the feminine does generate in it
self, and not in another: Where observe, that perfect animals only can be said
to proceed from the congress of the masculine and the feminine; yet some may be
excepted: for of little animals, as insects, which are produced of putrid
matter alone, without seed; so the fly Cantharis, has neither masculine nor
feminine: nor is it a P^enix in nature: so an Eel is of neither sex; and many
other.

( C) It is disputed by some, whether humors or spirits may be rightly
reckoned amongst animal parts; because they obtain no figure, nor certain mode
of increment, like solid and dimense parts: but know, that we take the word
part largely in this place, for all that which is necessary to the constitution
of an animate body: for whatsoever may not be taken from the whole, without a
dissolution of that whole, that may properly be called part of that whole:
therefore humors and spirits, because if they be taken away, the animal whole
cannot consist; therefore they are adjudged to pass under the name of parts.

But here it will be demanded, whence does the dissimilitude of the four
humors depend, from the efficient or from the matter? Galen and Avicen do
assert, that blood does arise from a moderate and temperate, choler from an
intense, and phlegm from a remiss heat. But Fernelius more rightly refers the
cause of so great variety to the aliment, that is, ^o the material cause,
because it ^s not consentaneous, the same ^eat, in the same time and part, ^o
produce contrary effects: therefore the cause of this dissi^ilitude is referred
to the mat^er. For whereas aliment (which ^s the matter) taken into our bo^ies,
does consist of diverse parts, ^t is altogether consentaneous to ^uth, that
those humors which ^o arise from it, cannot be alto^ther of one and the same
genus, ^ut diverse; for what part of the ^yle is more temperate, is converted by
the liver into blood; and what more hotter, is changed into* yellow choler; and
what is crude, into phlegm; and what is terrene, into melancholy. And these are
familiar to the body, four manner of ways, as Hippocrates says, by which we
are constituted and nourished: for because the bodies of animals do disperse
those things which are excrementitious, by certain occult foramens, and that by
diflation; therefore they need aliment.

( D) Blood may be understood two manner of ways: First, for all the four
humors, which are contained in the veins, which when opened, blood does flow
out, endowed with the four humors; for blood is not similar, but a mass
conflated of different humors: Secondly, blood may be taken peculiarly and
properly, for a pure sejoyned humor, which is known by this sign, that as soon
as it is let out into a vessel, it concretes, and turns into clots, by reason
of its fibers: this humor is called by Hippocrates, hot and moist, because it
conserves the life of the animal, which consists of a humid, as though
material, and a calid principle as formal; and it is also called temperate by
Galen, because a hot and moist temperament, does next accede to the
temperature, because it is the fittestto produce animal-operations; and it is
called sweet, because it arises from a moderate heat, and of a temperate and
best part of chyle: it is called Red or Rubicund, because it acquires a color
from the liver, that is red: for every part propounds this as its end, to
assimilate that to itself, which it altered; therefore chyle is taken from the
ventricle, and transmuted by little and little to the liver; and so by degrees,
does pass, and is converted into its nature: and hence it is, that it receives
its color; from this does every part attract aliment; whence blood is called
by some, the treasure of life, which nature so keeps in such safe custody, that
all the other humors may receive loss, before blood: nay some have gone so far,
as to go about to demonstrate, that the soul resides in blood; others do
affirm, that blood is essentially the very soul.

( E) Phlegm, is gotten of the gross and watrish part of chyle: sometimes it is
called sweet; not that any dulcitude or sweetness does possess it, as it is
with honey or sugar: but so to be understood, as when we say sweet water, or
water is sweet: and when we ascribe frigidity to it, we do mean, that it is not
partaker of the contrary, viz. heat; but because that coldness is predominant
in it: for if phlegm were only cold exactly, then it would be coacted like
unto ice; and if it were exactly humid, it were void of all crassitude and
lentor: the effect of it is to nourish the phlegmatic members, together with
blood; and it is alimen^ half cocted, and in progress of time may easily make
blood, and nourish the whole body.

( F) The matter of black choler or melancholy is the more gross and feculent
part of aliment, not unlike to the fecies of wine, or the setlings of oil. This
humor is cold and dry, because terrene: neither yet so cold, but that it is a
partaker of some heat, otherwise it would concrete like ice; nor void of all
humidity, otherwise it would not be an humor, but a hard body like to an
Adamant: its proper color is black, or rather oleaceous, which in a temperate
man, is called black: if compared with the color of other humors, it is
crass, by reason of its terrene nature; and it has sometimes a sour sapour,
when much heat cocts the humidity; and sometimes sharp, when less heat, etc.
its use is to nourish the gross, hard, and terrene members.

But here a question may be handled: whereas it is said, that melancholy is
terrene, cold and dry, therefore unapt to all the motions, both of body and
mind; its strange why Aristotle will have all melancholy persons to be
ingenious, either in the study of Philosophy, or moral Policy, in Poetry, and
many other Arts and Sciences. It is answered, that the strength of wit is
discerned and discovered, either by quickly learning, or strongly retaining. In
this latter, melancholy persons do excel, because siccity is necessary and
appropriated to the retentive faculty: therefore the brain is made firm and
contemperated from this humor, by the heat of blood and spirit; and indeed,
those that are without this humor, are very forgetful: and though they may be
ingenious, yet they are always found to be light and unstable, seldom
persevering in the thing proposed, by reason of the levity of spirits; for
judgment and prudence, is no^ perfected in motion, but in rest: whence
Aristotle could affirm, that the soul is rendered more intelligible, by rest and
quietness, then commotion and trouble.

(H) Avicen, besides those two before named, does make other two adventitious
humors, amongst which those spoken of do possess a medium: the first is called
innominatus, because it never flows out of the veins; but the second, the
Barbarians call Cambium, because it desires to flow out, and would be changed
into the substance of flesh: but both of them are rejected: yet Fuchsius would
have this humor to be the same with the radical, but without reason.

Here it may be demanded, whether it may perpetuate life? because the oleous or
radical is preserved and nourished with humidity, and new always substituted in
the place of that which is absumed; for I do not see why, if radical humidity
be wanting, that death should follow: but answer may be made, that the
privation or defect of the radical humor, depends upon the impotency of heat:
for whatsoever suffices in the place of its native humor, that is necessary to
be changed by the help of heat; which as Scaliger thinks, is altered and grows
feeble, by use and diuturnity of time: therefore what accedes of aliment is
more worse and impure, then that which decedes; therefore heat destitute of
idoneous aliment, is dissipated. And hence it is that man necessarily must dye.

CHAP. 8. Of Spirits.
1. HItherto of humors so called: Now we shall handle the doctrine of spirits:
they are called (A) spirits, because they fly away by their subtle and aereal
tenuity, which after a certain manner responds to the Nature of Spirits indeed.

2. But here the word spirit is taken (B) for a very small or thin substance,
aereal and vaporous; the first instrument of life, as to the performance of
action.

3. Here its essence is not to be understood ethereal and celestial, but in a
manner elementary: First, because such like spirits are what like their matter
is; but their matter is elementary: Secondly, they can accend, refrigerate,
increase, diminish, and extinguish: but the celestial, on the contrary, want
these; neither can they be changed by natural cause: Thirdly, because to their
preservation, the inspiration of the air is necessary: Fourthly and lastly, the
spirits do restore again an elementary body, in a swounding fit.

4. A spirit is either insited, or fixed, or influent.

5. Insited, which is ordinarily (C) complanatus, is an aereal and tender
substance, lying within several solid members, and procreated of the genital
seed, from the governess faculty of the principal parts, the first and
proximate seat of native heat, and a certain faculty, as it were, the band of
unition of the soul with the body.

6. Of this there seems to be so many differences, as there are natures and
temperaments of parts, if it may be accommodated to these, and attemperated to
the nature of every part.

7. The influent is that which is implanted; and lest it should dissolve and
vanish, it remains fixed.

8. And here it is threefold; natural, vital, and animal.

9. And as in man's body, First, there are three Virtues, Natural, Vital, and
Animal: Secondly, so also there are three principal bowels, if I may so call
them, the Liver, Heart, and Brain: Thirdly, three Organs also administering to
these, the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves: so there are so many spirits, distinct
in species and form, which are, as it were, the chariots of strength.

10. The natural is (D) a thin vapor, procreated in the liver, of the purer
part of blood; and thence diffused by the veins into the habit of the body, to
absolve all natural actions.

11. Concerning this, many great questions are made: some do expunge it from
the catalogue of spirits: First, because it takes its natural faculty from the
Liver: Secondly, that it does renew the same faculty insited from every part:
Thirdly, and by this Spirit or Captain, the gross blood is carried to distant
parts.

12. The vital spirit (E) is a thin halite vapor, or breath, begotten of
inspirated air, and natural spirit; carried to the left side of the heart, and
so runs by the artery over the whole body, and so supplies the vivifical
strength unto them.

13. All the ancient Neotericks do conclude this to be coacted, when it is
chiefly necessary to life: for as Plato does affirm, if the sun should quiesce
one moment, the whole world would perish, because it excites spirit and heat,
by its motion: so here, if the spirits be prohibited, forthwith the Animal
perishes.

14. The animal spirit is (F) a pure halite, begotten of a portion of vital
spirit, carried to the brain and insited in its faculty, diffused by the nerves
into the body, that it may incite it to motion, sense, and all animal actions.

15. This, as it pleases some, does not differ from the vital, in kind and
nature; because they maintain, that there is but one universal spirit: but as
aliment does take a new form, by a new coction, and thence a new denomination:
So that first, there are diverse Organs: Secondly, diverse faculties: Thirdly,
diverse manner of generations; so also this spirit is diverse from the rest in
species.

The Commentary.
( A) BY spirit here we understand not an incorporeal substance, or the
intellect of man, which is rightly called by the Philosophers, a spirit; which
Scaliger, otherwise a man very learned dothseem to dissent from; for he speaks
Theologically, and is to be understood, as speaking of an incorporate
substance: but by spirit we mean a thin and subtle body.

(B) Because nature is not wont to copulate one contrary to another, unless it
be with some medium, not unlike a band: for mortal and immortal, do differ more
then in kind; and therefore an incorporate being, is not consentaneous to a
brittle body, and immortality cannot be united to the intellect of man without
the concurrence of a medium: and this is no other then a spirit, which does
bring mortality to the body; having a thin and tender substance, as it were,
acceding to the intellect. The medium between both, is nature: and this spirit
is not void of a body, but begotten of the elements which were in the seed: and
it is most elaborate, nearly acceding to the nature of celestial spirits; and
most thin, that it may fly all sense; very apt to pass, by an incredible
celerity: for it passes over the whole body with a great celerity, that it may
give motion, sense, and strength to its parts, and perform other functions of
the soul.

(D) Concerning this spirit, many great questions are agitated: some do-banish
it from the catalogue of spirits, moved thereto by these Arguments: First,
because there is no use nor necessity for it. We answer, Its use is great: for
first of all, it is the chariot of aliment; for the humors gotten in the
liver, can scarce penetrate of themselves, through the narrow passages, by
reason of their crassitude; nor can they well be carried to the other parts of
the body, by reason of the slowness of their motion. Furthermore, this spirit
takes its natural faculty from the liver; whose work is to attract, retain, and
concoct familiar aliment to all the parts of the body; and by a certain force,
does expel the excrements. Secondly, they will have no place to be given by
nature proper for this spirit. We answer, the liver is its fountain and
principle; as the heart of life, and the brain of the soul. Thirdly, they
allege, that this spirit does not lead any thing to any part, or carry any
thing thereunto. But we say, that as the animal spirit is carried by the
Nerves, the Vital by the Arteries: so the natural spirit is carried by the
veins, together with the aliment blood, into the general mass of the body. But
here another question will arise, how can the spirits flow into the inward and
most remote parts, but by penetration, and dimension. Answer, Some bodies are
crass and solid, and some thin and tender: through those that are hard, they
cannot penetrate; but the spirits, because they are thin, do fly all manner of
sense, and are diffused without impediment in a moment, this way and that way,
with a certain kind of celerity, and do pervade the members; neither by their
presence filling them, nor by their absence emptying them.

(E) And in this spirit all the causes come to be considered: the matter is the
natural spirit, procreated in the liver, thence carried by the vena cava, with
the arterious blood (that is, the purest of blood) upwards, going into the
right side of the heart, where it is attenuated most accurately, by the
passages, not altogether occult; but if a dog be dissected, it will be found in
the left side: the efficient cause is the strong heat of the heart, attenuating
and making thin the vital spirit: it is form its rarefaction, not unlike to the
tenuity of a little flame: its end is to conserve life diffused from the heart,
by the arteries, into the universal body.

(F) The matter of this spirit is that vital, which is carried by the crevices
of the arteries, to the basis of the brain; and it does slide thereinto as into
a net; which is placed there by nature, as a labyrinth: for when any matter
would exactly elaborate, it does devise a longer stay in the instruments of
coction, and afterward by another context is intromitted into ventricles of
the brain: the efficient cause is motion, but chiefly the proper force of the
solid substance of the brain, whereby this spirit does exactly elaborate, and
so become animal: the form of it is rarefaction, made perfect by the
degeneration of the vital spirit into the animal: its end is to show a
sensitive and moving faculty, with great celerity, from the middle ventricle of
the brain, by the nerves, into the whole body; by which spirit the animal
faculty is apprehended in man of reason and memory, if its force or motion be
not hindered.

CHAP. 9. Of the similar parts of an Animate body.
1. HAving expounded the contained parts, the continent do follow, which
consist of substance, by reason of that firmness and solidity they have.

2. And they are either homogeneous or heterogeneous, similar or dissimilar.

3. A similar (A) part is that which may be divided into similes, according to
the particles of sense, and into the same species.

4. Of similar parts, some are spermatical, others carnous.

5. The spermatick parts are those, which are generated immediately of the
crassament of seed, and so coalesced into hard substances.

6. Of which sort are Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Membranes, Nerves,
Arteries, Veins, Fibers, Fats, Skin.

7. Bones are the hardest parts (B) of animates, dry and cold, begotten of the
crassament of seed by exustion, to the stability of the whole.

8. These are endowed with no sense: because first, no Nerves are disseminated
by their substance: Secondly, if they were sensible, they could not endure
daily labors without great pain; and that sensation would either take away the
greatest part of action, or render it frustraneous.

9. A Cartilage (C) is a kin to these, which is a substance or part a little
softer then bones, and harder then any other member; and flexible after a
certain manner, made to the keeping of motion in its destinated parts.

10. A Ligament (D) is a simple part of the body, hard, and begotten of seed,
yet softer then a Cartilage; and yielding to the touch, knitting the bones
together.

11. A certain portion of these is called tendous, which is a similar part,
begotten of Fibers, Nerves, and Ligaments, mixed in a muscle; all which are
called articles.

12. A Membrane is a similar part, begotten of seed, tender, covering several
other parts.

13. The Nerves are spermatick parts, arising from the brain, or backbone, the
interior part of the marrow, the exterior of the membrane, carrying the animal
spirit to sense and motion.

14. They are distinguished into softer or harder.

15. They are soft which do arise from the former part of the brain.

16. And they are seven conjugations: for none of all the Nerves are simple,
but all conjugated; whence they are called paria nervorum.

17. The chiefest of these are inserted in the center of the eye, and are
called the visive or optic nerves, carrying the faculty of seeing unto them.

18. The second propagation of moving of the nerves, is the eyes.

19. The third society is partly scattered into the tunicle of the tongue, to
propogate to the taste; and part dispersed in other parts of the face.

20. The fourth conjugation is a certain proportion dispersed in the palate.

21. The fifth is carried by the auditory passage, to the drum of the ears; and
they are called the auditory nerves.

22. The sixth is a large portion of nerves, wandering and running almost
through all the bowels.

23. The seventh arises from the hinder part of the head, and the marrow of the
backbone, and inserted into the muscles of the tongue, and is said to move the
tongue.

24. The crasser nerves, in which there is a more obtuser faculty, and they do
come out of the marrow of the backbone, carrying sense and motion to the
internal parts.

25. And thirty of these are alike, and combined, seven to the hinder part of
the neck; twelve to the Thorax; five to the Lungs; six to the sacred bones: all
which do disperse themselves like boughs into the other parts of the body.

26. The Arteries (F) are hollow vessels, long, having two tunicles, and those
crass and substantial, ordained for the deducing of the vital spirit; and for
temperating and expurging of the heart and other parts to heat.

27. And they do arise out of the heart; of which two principal Arteries do
spring out of the left side thereof: from which two, all the other take their
original, Arteria Aorta, et Arteria venosa.

28. The great Artery Aorta is the foundation of all other Arteries, and does
carry the vital spirit to all the other parts of the body.

29. The venous artery is stretched out, like a quill, from the same side of
the heart, into the liver, from whence it brings air to cool the heart.

30. A vein (G) is a similar part, and round and hollow, like to a reed,
arising from the liver, consisting of one tunicle contexted of three Fibers,
carrying blood for nutriment, together with the natural spirit, to the several
parts of the body.

31. Veins are distinguished into principal, and less principal.

32. The Principal are those out of which, as out of a trunk or stock, others
do arise; and they are two; vena porta, and vena cava.

33 Vena porta is a great vein, coming out of the hollow part of the liver, and
excepting all the Mesenterian veins; by which it takes chyle out of the
ventricle and intestines, and so does carry it to the concavity of the liver.

34. Vena cava, which is also called the great vein, does arise from the bunchy
part of the liver; and running over the whole longitude of the animal, carries
the blood to all the parts for nutriment.

35. The less principal veins are branches of the former; and either they have
peculiar names allotted, or not.

36. The branched veins are partly Mesenterial, and partly Hemorrhoidal.

37. The causes of these are either external or internal.

38. The internal are the emulgent or seminal veins.

39. The exterior are the jugular veins in the head, the intercostal in the
trunk, and the auxiliary in the arms: of these, and all the branches dispersed
from them, into both the exterior and interior parts of the body, no particular
names are allotted them.

40. The fibers are (H) similar parts, begotten white and solid, of seed, and
dispersed every where over the whole membrane.

41. And they are either right, oblique, or transverse.

42. They are right, which are carried according to the longitude of the
membrane, and do serve to attract aliment.

43. Those that are transverse, are such as are placed cross the body, and they
retain the attracted aliment.

44. Oblique are those that are obduced with an organ crooked, and do crosswise
cut the two former, and have an expelling force.

45. Fat is a similar part (I) of the body, moist, without blood, concreted of
the aereal and fatty part of blood, erupting by sweat, through the tunicles of
the vessels, and congealed by the frigidity of the nervous parts.

46. The skin (K) is a similar part, ample and spermatick; and it is the
covering of all the parts of the body.

47. To this may be added that which is no other then a thin and tender skin,
not unlike to the peeling of an onyon.

48. Hitherto of similar parts, which are spermatick: they are carnous which
are generated of blood, and they are the flesh of the muscles.

49. Flesh (L) is a tender part soft and rubicund, and concreted of coagulated
blood.

The Commentary.
( A) MAny definitions of similar parts are delivered, both by ancient and late
writers. Aristotle does call that a similar part, which is divided into like
parts; which definition almost all have kept; which notwithstanding seems to be
imperfect; for it must be understood of those things that may be divided into
similar parts, both according to sense and reason. As for example, flesh in the
judgment of sense may be divided into parts, which are similar mutually to it
self, and to the whole: but in reason or imagination, it is divided both into
the four humors of which it consists, and also into the four elements; which
neither are similar mutually to it self, or by being compound to the whole:
therefore this particle is rightly added in the definition, according to sense;
whence also Galen makes mention of sense, saying, That these are similar parts,
which are like in sense; and therefore those parts are called rightly similar,
which do admit of no division altogether sensible, into diversities; and
therefore they are called simple as to sense: For although the elements alone
are truly simple, because they acknowledge no composition only of matter and
form, notwithstanding they are called simple and similar parts of animals, by a
certain similitude and analogy: for those things which are truly similar cannot
be divided into the parts of a diverse species, neither in sense nor reason; so
that what things are only similar in sense, are not to be divided into
diversities, sense being judge.

(B) Bones are called by the Greeks (...), because their substance is hard and
dry; whence it follows, that the same is chiefly terrene, that is, partaking
more of earth, then of any other element: they are void of sense, because much
portion of the nerves is disseminated by their substance, by the benefit
whereof all the parts are sensitive.

But because some do assert that there is a notable sense in bones: We answer,
that this sense does not arise from the bones, but from that membrane, which
does cover the bone; for that being abrased, the bone may not only be cut
without any pain, but without sense. But it may be objected, that the teeth are
bones, which experience does teach to be most exquisite in sense: I answer,
That happens by accident, and not of it self; for certain soft and tender
nerves do appear to be derived from the teeth; which because they are
disseminated to the inward parts of the teeth, do so affect the substance
thereof, that it causes great pain.

Furthermore, in hollow bones, marrow is contained, which is a simple
substance, moist, fat, and white, and the aliment of those bones: this marrow
is without blood, yet has its original of blood, which does distill out of the
orifices of the vessels, to the Periostium, and so does pierce into the
cavities of the bones: the efficient cause is the frigidity of the bones;
whence it is, that cold, and moist bodies do abound with much more fatness and
marrow, then the hot and dry: and for this reason, the bones of a Lion do want
marrow, which of all creatures is the dryest and hottest, because they have
bones hard and dense. Its use is to nourish the bones, and to bind with i^
incalescency, with motions, and other causes.

(C) A Cartilage is called by the Greeks, Condros: its substance is terrene and
solid, but not so much as the bone; whence Aristotle does rightly write, that
the matter of a Cartilage and Bone, to be one and the same matter, only
differing in dryness: for a Cartilage is softer then a Bone, and somewhat
flexible; whence it gives place with its softness; neither does it so resist,
as the bone.

Its use is multifarious: for first, it is a certain stay and prop, and makes
the proximate parts more stable: Secondly, it admirably defends the bones from
knocking or grinding together; but being annexed by the same, they may be more
firm and stable: Thirdly, they promote and cause certain light parts to a
promptness of motion, in the arteries: Fourthly, they defend them against many
accidents; for their substance is idoneous to cover them, and defend them,
because they being hard cannot easily be broken, or cut: hence we conclude with
good reason, that a Cartilage is void of sense.

(D) The most noted ligaments are in the trunk, or artubus: the ligaments of
the trunk, are either in the head or thorax: in the head, either in the whole
or in part: for a ligament does convert the whole head with the spina, so the
tongue with the jaws. In the trunk of the joints, there are ligaments knitting
the bodies intrinsecally, and clothing of them, as it were, extrinsecally: the
ligaments of the joints do connect other bones, os ilii with os sacrum.

But there is a certain portion of a ligament, called a tendon; consisting of
the fibers of the nerves, and compelling them into one of the ligaments,
serving the arteries to a voluntary motion: the fibers of the tendons growing
of the junctures, are joined amongst themselves.

(E) They are called spermatick parts, because they are generated of seed, and
not of blood; which argues that their color must be white and cold in
substance: All nerves do arise from the brain, and not from the heart, as
Aristotle imagined: their use is to carry that animal spirit gotten in the
brain, and the motive and sensitive faculty, and to communicate it to the body.

(F) The veins and arteries are joined with a friendly intercourse, that the
veins may supply them with matter of spirit; for the spirit does cherish the
blood with its heat in the arteries; and there are mutual orifices, that the
spirit may take nutriment out of the veins; and the veins, spirit, and heat,
out of the arteries. But the arteries and veins, do differ, First, in their
original, because they come out of the sinister ventricle of the heart:
Secondly, in their function, because they subminister vital spirits to the
whole body: Third^y, in their substance; for the ar^eries, so likewise the
veins, do ^onsist of a membranous body, ^et more solid, harder, and con^rmed by
more crasser tunicles. Now a tunicle is twofold, exterior, interior: that
fiber, which is knit with many strait and crooked windings, has the like
crassitude and firmness with the tunicle of the veins; but this has five times
a more harder and grosser substance, lest the subtle spirit should exhale, and
the artery it self be broken with the perpetual motion of the heart: Fourthly,
in motion; for the arteries are moved without intermission, by dilatation and
contraction; when dilated, they draw the cold air; and when contracted, cast
out hot fumes.

(G) This question is moved by Physicians and Philosophers, about the veins,
Whether they have a force or faculty to generate blood? Some maintain it, that
the blood which the veins contain within themselves, to elaborate more
exquisitely, and to be made by an insited force and faculty; and therefore in
that blood, that the chiefest degree of perfection is gotten. But the falsity
of this opinion is easily known by those who diligently mark the thin tunicle
of the veins, and its white substance. Now it is provided by nature, that every
part of the body should be converted to the other, and transmuted into its
color: then how can the veins with their thinness and whiteness, change white
chyle and gross, into red and pure blood? Therefore more truer is that opinion,
that the generation of blood is only the work of the liver, which does make
blood, by a certain force and faculty, within it self seated: all the
sanguifick force is given to the veins, yet they receive it from the liver, as
Avicen demonstrates.

(H) Aristotle and Hippocrates do prove, that fibers do concrete the blood by
their frigidity, because that blood out of which fibers are taken, can never be
concreted by any cold: for when blood is let out of the veins, if it does not
concrete, it is a sign of death.

( I) Fat is the matter of blood: and although it be made of the cream of
blood, yet notwithstanding it is cold, and without blood, degenerating into fat
by the want of heat, and frigidity of the membrane: it consists of coldness and
dryness, because by heat it is melted, and by the humidity of other parts
coagulated by cold. The efficient cause is the want of heat; which is thus
proved, because you shall find no fat, as to any quantity, about the liver or
the heart, or any other hot part, by reason of the heat of those parts.

( K) Take this as another definition of the cutis: the skin is a thin part,
membranous, porous, endowed with blood; the tegument or cover of all the parts
of the body; which as it is easily taken away by accident, so it does easily
grow again; which denotes thus much, that the skin is not altogether endowed
with a sensitive faculty, but only so far as it has the nerves, and of the
faculty of blood in it: and whereas it is defined to be membranous, that is,
smooth, simple, thin and white, and that it has a middle nature between flesh
and nerves; for neither is it altogether without blood, as the nerves are, so
neither does it abound with blood, as the flesh does; whence it is adjudged to
be the rule of temperaments: and indeed the skin about the hands, in it there
is the most exquisite and perfect faculty of sense, but not so in other parts
of the body: and the skin is porous, that it may thereby attract the coldness
of the air, and expulse the excrementitious vapors of the body. Now the
excrement which comes out of the pores, is sweat: sweat is an excrementitious
humidity of the third coction, breaking out by the skin, in the species or form
of water: the matter of sweat, is the whole humidity which is gotten in meat
and drink; which thing is necessary to all animals, because it might make way
for other aliment, and not longer lie in the vessels: it is of the same genus
with urine, only differing in this, that the urine is carried to the bladder,
this with blood, a longer passage through the body: its efficient cause is
heat, but not so vehement as to have a drying faculty, but moist; so calefying
the nature of sweat by the habit of the body, that it becomes thin, and so
softens the skin by relaxation, that it may the better pass through: those
whose skins are hard and thick, are very unapt to sweat.

( L) Flesh may be taken either properly or improperly: when properly taken,
then absolutely that which is described by us, and it is the chiefest part of
the muscles; for the substance of them does truly and properly deserve the name
of flesh; that which is taken improperly, is the flesh of the bowels, generated
of blood poured out, as the liver, heart, and lungs.

CHAP. 10. Of External dissimilar Parts.
1. HItherto we have spoken of similar parts. Now of dissimilar or organical,
which are diversely compounded of the similar.

2. And they are either external or internal.

3. The external parts are, first, the head; secondly, the trunk of the body;
thirdly, the artus, under which we comprehend the arms and feet.

4. The head is the highest part of the body, globular, set upon the neck, the
seat of the animal faculty.

5. Its parts that are external, are chiefly the skull and the face.

6. The skull is a crafs bone of the head, round, distinguished into twenty
bones, and certain futures, covering the brain, environing it on every side.

7. Its bones are thus distinguished: there are two in the crown, one in the
front, two in the temples, one in the form of a wedge, another in the form of a
sieve, twelve in the superior jaw, and one in the hinder part of the head.

8. There are three sutures: The first is transverse the crown, going from
toward one ear to the other, and does knit the bone of the forehead to the
rest of the body.

9. The second is called Sagittalis, which goes along the head, and does knit
the two bones of the crown.

10. The third does ascend from the posterior part of one ear, to the end of
the sagittal suture, and again deflects to the other ear, in the form of the
letter A, and does knit the bone of the hinder part of the head with the rest
of the body.

11. Thus much for the skull. Now for the face, which is called that whole in a
man, which is under the forehead; or, as Aristotle says, That interior part
which is under the skull.

12. This does comprehend the eyes, ears, nose, cheeks, and mouth.

13. The eye is no other thing, then the organ of sight, consisting of tunicles
and humors.

14. And because it ought to receive the several species of light and colors,
therefore it is formed of pellucid matter.

15. The tunicles of the eyes (besides the white, which arising from the
Peritoneum, does join the eye to the head; whence it is called conjunctiva and
adnata) are four: First, the horny tunicle, which is clear, shining like to a
horn: Secondly, the Uvea, which is like to the husk of a grape, and it adheres
to the horny tunicle, embracing the apple of the eye: Thirdly, the Retina, or
tunicle resembling a net, which is of the substance it self of the visive
nerves, bringing an animal spirit to the eye, and again the Idea of the object
to the brain: Fourthly, the Aranea, or like to sand, containing the
chrystalline humor, and separating it from the white.

16. The humors of the eyes are three: First, the watery humor, which serves
for the gathering of resemblances: Secondly, the glassy humor, for the forming
of those idea's.

17. The ear is an organical part of the body, and the instrument of hearing.

18. Its nature is compounded of diverse parts, very artificiously; of nerves,
membranes, bones, cartilage, which gathers sounds and so accordingly alters
them.

19. Its bones are first Malleus: Secondly, Incus: Thirdly, Stapes; of whose
colision sound is said to be made.

20. The nose is an organical part, placed in the middle of the face; the
instrument of respiration and smelling.

21. Its part is either superior or inferior.

22. The superior is the bony part, which is immovable; and this the inferior
part: the exteor is the back of the nose.

23. The inferior part is moveable, which is the end, being round, divided into
parts consisting of muscles.

24. A cheek is nothing else then the superior part of the jaw, and the
inferior.

25. The superior cheek is that part of the face next to the front, from both
the ears to the lowest part of the jaws.

26. The inferior is the moveable part of the face, containing the teeth.

27. The whole mouth is called that space which is between the lips and the
jaws; in which is contained the teeth, the tongue, the palate, and throat-pipe.

28. The teeth are (A) the hardest of all bones, hollow within, endowed with
veins, arteries, and nerves, ordained for to soften and prepare meat for the
stomach.

29. Those are in number thirty; twenty whereof are accounted cheek-teeth,
eight cutting, which are the foremost; and four eye-teeth, in either jaw two.

30. The tongue is (B) a carneous part, rare, and lax, the organ of taste and
speech.

31. The palate is the superior part of the mouth, a little concavated, bored
through with many holes, by which phlegm does ascend from the brain into the
mouth.

32. The throat-pipe (C) is fungous flesh, long, hanging from the palate to the
mouth, conducing to the moduling of voice in a man.

33. Truncus is the whole body, with head, arms, or legs.

34. Some part of it is anterior, and some posterior.

35. The anterior again is either superior, and that is called the thorax; or
inferior, that is, the belly.

36. The thorax (D) or breast, is the anterior part of the trunk, which is
subject to the neck; and it is the seat of the vital members.

37. Its proper parts are either soft and fleshy, or bony and cartilaginous.

38. The carnous parts are those many muscles placed in the thorax, of which
sort are all the muscles of aspiration, and scapulation; some of them moving
the arms.

39. To these carnous parts, belong the paps, which are parts sited or placed
on each side, in the middle region of the breast; glandulous, and woven with
veins and arteries, serving for the generation of milk in women.

40. For these parts, for their rare and cavernous substance, which they have,
do receive into them menstruous blood, which is the matter of milk, which
afterward is levigated, cocted, and converted into a white liquor, both by a
specifical virtue of the flesh of the paps, as also from the heat of the heart,
whereunto it is near.

41. Hence Aristotle rightly concluded, that milk was nothing else then
superfluous blood, changed and made white.

42. The bony parts thereof are threefold; the first bone is called Sternon,
and Sethos; and it is on the anterior part, in which the ribs do meet, and
under which the mouth of the ventricle does lie hid.

43. The cartilaginous extremity of this, is after the form of a spear, or
buckler, and it is called malum granatum.

44. Secondly, the two neckbones, which are called cleides, and these bones are
twins, subject to the neck, declining to the tops of the shoulders.

45. The thorax (F) consists of twenty four ribs, twelve on either side; and
they are either true, or counterfeit.

46. They are true which are coarticulated, and they are the seven superior.

47. The spurious or imperfect, are those that are not coarticulated; and they
are the five inferior.

48. The inferior part of the thorax is portended from the breast, where the
true ribs end, backwards to the hips or pubes.

49. The exterior part of this, above the belly, is portended to the going down
of the spurious ribs, and is called Spigastrion: the inferior proceeds from the
belly, even to the hairy parts of the genitals, and it is called Hypogastrion.

50. The posterior part of the trunk is called the back, and it is all that
part which descends from the neck to the buttocks.

51. Its substance is constituted 1. of the shoulderblade, 2. Spina dorsi, 3.
hip*bones.

52. The shoulderblades, are two bones, placed after the thorax in the back,
inarticulated in the arms, to strengthen the ribs, and for the implantation of
the muscles.

53. Spina dorsi is no other thing, then that series or structure of joints,
extended even from the first joints of the hinder part of the neck, to the
lowest, called ^cygs.

34. There are in number of these joints thirty four; seven whereof are of the
neck, twelve of the thorax, five of the loins, six of the sacred bone, four of
the ossis Coccygos: twenty four of the foremost are rightly named joints,
because by them the body is turned diverse ways; the rest are called rather by
similitude, then reality.

55. The hip-bones are two strong bones, placed within the os sacrum, and
ending in the buttocks.

56. But os sacrum (H) is conflated of many bones, to wit, five or six, sited
almost in the middle of the body: other bones, both superior and inferior,
resting upon them, are moved thereby.

57. The Artus are two, the hands and feet.

58. The whole hand (I) is that which is portended from the shoulderblade to
the end of the fingers.

59. It is divided by Hippocrates, into three parts; into the arm, the wrist,
and the hand it self.

60. That is named the arm, which extends from the shoulder to the elbow, and
does consist of one great bone, and many muscles; seven whereof do govern the
motion of the arm, and four govern the motion of the wrists: and it does
consist also of three chief veins; the humerary, axillary, and median.

61. The wrist is that part from the elbow to the hand, and consists of two
bones, the greater and lesser whereof are both called Ulna; which consists also
of thirty three muscles, prepared for the motion of the arms and hands.

62. The hand reaches from the wrist to the end of the fingers; the organ of
apprehension.

63. The parts of this again, are brachial, postbrachial, and the fingers.

64. The brachial, or wrist, is part of the hand; it consists of eight bones,
the ligament being ^ransverse.

65. Postbrachial is that part of the hand, placed between the wrist and the
fingers; whose posterior is articulated with the wrist, the anterior with the
fingers.

66. The fingers are in number five, every one consisting of three little
bones: the first is that which is the greatest in strength and magnitude, and
is called Pollex; the second is called the Index and Demonstrator; the third
the middle; fourthly, the Ringfinger; fifthly, the least.

67. The foot (K) is part of the body, which is inserted into the hip, the
organ of walking and standing.

68. Its parts are three; the thigh, the shank, and the foot.

69. The thigh does reach from the hip, even to the knee, consisting of a bone
the greatest of all, with muscles, and glandulous flesh.

70. The knee is a knitting or dearticulation of the thigh and leg, whose
anterior part is called Patella, and Posterior, Poples.

71. The shank is a part, reaching from the knee to the foot; the anterior part
is called Anticnemion, and the posterior Gastrocnemion.

72. The shank does consist of two long bones: the interior and greater, is
called Tibia; the exterior, or less, Fibula.

73. The foot does begin at the end thereof, and reach to the extremity of the
toe; and does consist of thirty eight bones, and two musces, whereby the toes
are moved, bended and extended.

The Commentary.
( A) TEeth are said to have sense, by the communication of those soft little
nerves proceeding from the third rank of nerves; because those teeth that are
^ormost, or extant without the jaws, are not capable of sense; but those that
are covered as it were, with flesh in the jaws, are very sensitive, because the
nerves and their virtues are extended to their region. But now that part of the
tooth, which appears naked is insensible: This I prove: if it be cut, filed,
broken, or burned with a hot iron, it is not sensible of any of these:
Therefore in this very thing do teeth differ from other bones, because the
teeth are perpetually nourished and increased; which cannot be, except there
were instruments to convey this unto them. But other bones only take their
determined increment.

(B) The substance of the tongue is laxe, and therefore fit to be moved in
every part: and because it ought to judge of sapors, therefore it ought to be
rare, that it may be easily imbued with the humor of sapours; and that it may
perfectly feel and distinguish of all kind of sapours, it has certain nerves
implanted in it from the fourth rank.

(C) This Particle alone is proper to man: for it avails much to the tuning of
the voice; and therefore it is called by some Plectron.

(D) By ancient writers, that part of the body which reaches from the neck to
the Genitals, is called the Thorax; so that according thereunto, the belly is
contained under the name of Thorax. But Later Medicks, with Galen, do account
that part only the Thorax, which is included between the sides or the region
of the paps: It is called Thorax, apo to thoro, for the continued motion of the
heart: its use is to be dilated and compressed, to the motion of the vital
members, which contains in it self the benefit of respiration: the substance of
the Thorax does consist of muscles, paps, and grisles, or bones.

(E) They are called Cleides, because they shut up the coarticulated humor,
with the shoulderblade, lest it should slip into the breast, thorax, or arm.

(F) The ribs are numbered to be twenty four, each side containing twelve; where
observe, that this number is not always found: for in some are found thirteen,
and in some but eleven; which happens by reason of the matter either abounding
or deficient. Therefore Aristotle does err, in asserting that there are but
only eight bones in the side of a man, and in some nations only seven* And as
many ribs as there are in a man, so many there are in a woman: and therefore
altogether ridiculous is that Comment, that there is one less in a man, then in
a woman; or one abounding more in a woman, then in a man.

(G) The belly is a part of the body, which reaches from the breast, where the
ribs end, even to the privities: and it is divided into three regions; the
first above, about, and below the navel: above the navel, from the midriff to
the navel, Epigastrion, and Hypochondrion; the middle which is, as it were the
center of the navel, which is formed of two veins, and so many arteries, which
carries blood and spirit for the nutriment of the young, and conveys back again
the excrements: about this are the (...), both vi^ine parts to the navel; so
called, because they are empty: below the belly is containted the Hypogastrion,
which is that part of the belly, which reaches from the navel, even to the
genitals.

(H) This bone is called Sacred, because it is great, broad, and ample: Hieron
with the ancient is great: this does consist of many bones, coagmented
together; which notwithstanding in tender age may be separated; yet in old age,
with much coction, so much coalesced, that it is almost incredible to believe:
it con^ts of many bones.

(I) Galen and Hipp^ates do call that the hand which is from the shoulder to
the fingers; that which Aristotle calls brachium, we call manus; and the
Germans, Ein hand.

(K) It consists of a superficies and substance: t^ superficies is
distinguished into five regions, which are these; Calcaneus, and that is the
posterior part, the mount of the foot; by the Greeks called Tharsos; and by the
Arabians, Rascheta: and it is the first part of the foot, along to the toes,
Planities, or Planta pedis, which is called the interior part of the foot.
Vola, which is the concavity between the two mounts of the sole; the toes
called Digiti, in number equal to the fingers of the hand; its substance does
consist of thirty eight bones, and two vicine muscles, by which they are
extended, bended, moved, and adduced.

CHAP. 11. Of the inward Organical parts of the belly.
1. HItherto we have illustrated the External dissimilar parts. The internal
compounded members do follow, which are not exposed to the eye, but contained
inwardly in the belly, being covered by externals.

2. And they are contained in the belly, either in the bottom, middle, or top
thereof.

3. Those members (A) that are contained in the lower region of the belly, are
called natural organs, because they serve the natural faculty, or vegetive soul.

4. And they serve either for nutrition, or generation.

5. Those that are ordained to serve for nutrition, are either of the first
concoction or second.

6. Those that serve for the first concoction, are the mouth of the stomach,
the stomach and intestines.

7. Oesophagus or mouth of the stomach is a part membranous and nervous,
consisting of two tunicles, coming from the jaws to the superior mouth of the
ventricle, carrying meat and drink into the stomach.

8. The stomach (B) succeeding the Oesophagus, is a membranous, hollow, and
spherical part, consisting of two proper tunicles, placed under the Diaphragma,
almost in the middle of the body; and it is the shop of the first coction,
converting the ingested nutri^ into chyle; whence it is properly called culosis.

9. It has two orifices, whereof the one is frequently called the stomach; and
by ancient Medicks Cardian, because it is endowed with a most exquisite sense:
the other which is inferior called Puloros, is, as it were, the port or
entrance.

10. The ventricle is enrolled in a little skin, which is called omentum; and
it is a membrane con^ed of two tunicles, arising from the peritoneum,
interwoven with many nerves, veins, and arteries, covering the ventricle, and
cherishing its heat.

11. There are certain continued intestines to the ventricle, which are long,
round, and hollow bodies, reaching even to the fundament; appointed,
constituted, and ordained*, for the alterating of meats, distributing of chyle
into the liver, and for the carrying away superfluities.

12. And although the intestines are one continued body, yet by reason of their
substance and situation, are distinguished into gracila and crassa.

13. Those intestines that* are called Gracila, are those whose substance is
thin and rare; and the superior are these three, duodenum, jejunum, and ileos.

14. And these are ordained for the receiving and distributing of chyle.

15. Duodenum (D) is a slender intestine, or gut, adhering next to the
ventricle, twelve fingers in length.

16. To this does belong a certain passage, coming from the vessel of the gall,
which conveys yellow choler; and by its acrimony the intestines are stimulated
to excretion, and disturbed by thin phlegm adhering to the membranes.

17. Jejunium is (E) a hungry gut, having many mesaraical veins, which snatch
the best part of chyle out of the whole concoction; so that the rest of the
intestines seem empty.

18. Ileos (F) is a gut more slender then the rest, having many anfracts; and
therefore does retain chyle longer, that it may eliciate its juice better.

19. Those intestines that are called Crassa, are those which have a thick
tunicle; and they are three inferior, Caecum, Colon, Rectum; and these are the
receptacle of excrements.

20. The matter of these excrements, is the terrestrial and dryer part of
chyle, accommodated to no use of the body, daily swallowed up into the
intestines with part of choler.

21. Caecum is (G) a gross intestine, broad and short, having one orifice, into
which comes the Ileos and Colon, receiving excrements, and elicitating the
other juice, and so transmitting the rest of the fecies into Colon.

22. Colon (H) is an intestine grosser then the rest, having many great
anfracts, like unto cells, receiving the fecies: and lest they should flow with
an involuntary flux, it makes the passages more narrower.

23. Rectum is (I) a gross intestine, lower then the rest, crooked with many
windings and turnings; it reaches to the very fundament, and carries out the
excrements.

24. The inferior part of this intestine, is constringed with many muscles into
a globular form.

25. In the middle of the intestines, is placed a certain pannicle, and it is
called the mesentery, which is a membrane consisting of two tunicles, and an
innumerable veins and arteries, full of fat, connecting it self, and gathering,
as it were, into folds.

26. Thus much of the members of the first concoction: the second serve either
to elaborate profitable aliment, or to convey away inprofitable excrement.

27. The liver is occupied in the making of good nutriment.

28. The liver is (K) an organical part of the lower belly, consisting of red
flesh like to blood newly coagulated; it is placed near to the Diaphragma, and
in the right side of the Hypochondria; and it is the shop of blood; its action
is called, (...).

29. It has two parts (L) or superficies, the exterior and interior: the
exterior is called Gibba; and it is light; the interior is named Cava, and it
is rough.

30. Members (M) which are of the second concoction, serve to carry away
excrements; and they either evacuate choler, or serose humors.

31. Choler is either black or yellow; the gall receiving the former, the
spleen the latter.

32. The little vessel of the gall is a membrane, having one simple tunicle,
but woven strong after the manner of a hair bag, long and round, connexed to
the hollow part of the liver; drawing choler from it, and driving it into the
intestines.

33. It has two conduits, as it were, or channels; the one is carried into the
liver, alliciating choler into it; the other into the Duodenum, detruding the
same into the intestine.

34. But it is not carried into the bladder of the gall, by the proper and
alone motion of an elementary form; but partly derived from the liver, because
it is an excrement, and partly drawn from the vessel.

35. But it does not attract for nutritions sake: First, if choler be an
excrement, then it is an enemy to the body, not in quality alone, but in
quantity also, because the humor is bitter and mordacious: Secondly, neither
does it concrete like blood, therefore it cannot be assimilated to the body,
but does draw it for occult conveniences.

36. The spleen (N) is a thin member, spungy, consisting of obscure flesh,
placed in the rightside of the Hypochondria, adverse to the liver, attracting
from it black choler.

37. The spleen does allure to it self this juice, by a strange providence and
occult familiarity, embrued not with pure and unmixed, but with better and more
nourishing blood, whereby it is cherished with profitable juice.

38. But a portion of this noxious humor, is gathered into the bottom of the
ventricle, to excite appetite; the rest slides into the intestines, and so is
thrust out of doors.

39. The reins and bladder purge out a wheyish or serose humidity.

40. The reins (O) which are in number two, are carnous parts, thick and solid,
purging out blood with a s^rose humor.

41. Both the emulgent veins and ureteres, serve to evacuate serose humidity.

42. The emulgent veins do arise from the vena cava, and are inserted into the
reins, dispersing abroad an aguous humidity with blood, and carried to the
reins.

43. The ureteres are two urinary channels, arising from the cavity of the
reins, white, consisting of one simple tunicle, deducing the urine by the force
of the reins, into the bladder.

44. The bladder (P) is a nervous part, consisting of two tunicles, interwoven
with a treble kind of fibers, round, and somewhat long, placed in the
Hypogastria, taking the urine brought from the ureteres, and conveys it out of
the body.

45. There are two parts of it, the bottom and the neck.

46. In the bottom is contained the urine; and this passes by degrees through
the neck: a muscle there, as a porte^r, obstructing its fluor, lest it come at
unawares upon us.

47. And thus much of the members of the nutritive faculty. Lastly, there are
organs of generation, which are accommodated to continue and propogate their
kind.

48. And these are either common to both sexes, or peculiar to one.

49. The common are the seminary vessels, cods and stone^.

50. The seminary vessels do ascend from the stones, upwards, inserted in the
cods ( Parastaten adunoeide) and the seed is the profitable superfluity of the
mass of blood, which is the matter of the seed and vital spirit, producing heat
into the act of the seed, and carries it to the stones.

51. And they are two, the right and left; the former arises immediately from
the trunk of the cava, the latter from a branch of the emulgent veins.

52. The testicles (Q) are soft parts, glandulous and white, rare, and
cavernous, in which the seed is perfected and cocted.

53. In men they hang without the body, but in women they grow on the back; one
on each side.

54. (...) (R) are two vessels, candid, cavernous, and glandulous; arising from
the testicles, carrying feed into the testicles. In men they are placed at the
root of the yard; in women, at the bottom of the matrix.

55. To conclude, there are members peculiar to one sex, either to man or woman.

56. Competent to man (S) is the yard, which hangs on the forepart of a man, of
a good length, fistulous on every side; a fit instrument for the conveyance of
seed.

57. And it does consist of two hollow neres; one passage common both to the
seed and urine; four muscles, and as many veins and nerves: and lastly, of a
nervous membrane, and skin.

58. The end of it is called glans, consisting of a fleshly substance; which is
covered by a loose skin growing over it, which is called Preputium.

58. Proper only to a woman is the matrix, or womb; and it is the membranous
part of a woman, consisting of a tunicle coagmented, as it were, of two things
divided, round, and placed in the bottom of the belly; forming the young of
prolifick seed; and by a proper faculty, cherishing the same; and when it comes
to maturity, it excludes it.

The Commentary.
( A) THe aforesaid natural members are involved in three pannicles; the
Peritoneum, Omentum, and Mesenterium. The Peritoneum is a thin membrane, broad,
and continued, like to a Weavers Loom, or Spiders Web; involving and containing
all the bowels of the inferior belly; binding them to the back, lest they
should fall down: it helps also the putting forth of the excrements; which when
it is too little, it is broken. The Omentum is a double membrane, arising from
the Peritoneum, interwoven with many nerves and arteries, and covers the
ventricle and intestines: Its use is, that it may cherish the ventricle, in
whose bottom it lies, and holds the heat of the intestines which is shut up,
and so to increase with its own heat: it is called with the Greeks, Epiploon,
because of its fatness with which it overspreads the belly. This tunicle is the
first that appears after the incision of the belly. The Mesenterium is a double
member, consisting of two firm tunicles of the Peritoneum, and of many veins,
arteries, and nerves, placed in the middle of the intestines, as its center:
its use is to contain the intestines, that they may not lose their proper
foldings; and that it may contain them more strongly, it consists of a hard and
double tunicle, which arises from the Peritoneum: the veins which are in the
Mesentery, do arise from vena porta, and from thence do run between two of
their membranes to the intestines, that they may (...) take chyle: and they are
called mesaraicae venae.

( B) There is only in man one ventricle, but in other animals more; sometimes
two, sometimes three; as in sheep, goats, oxen, and hearts; that those hard
meats, wherewith they are fed, may pa^s through diverse ventricles, for their
better preparation and coction. The ventricle is called by the Greeks Gastor
and Colia; its substance ought to be membranous, that it may be extended and
again corrugated, according to the plenty or scarcity of nutriment: its figure
is spherical, or round, like the form of a long gourd, for the capacity of
aliments; for if it were square, a portion of the food would remain in the
angles; which if it should happen, man would continually be in a fever: it is
long also, by reason of its situation^; and has two orifices; the one whereof
is at the top, for the receiving of aliment; the other at the bottom, to convey
it to other parts of the body, when it is made and converted into chyle: it
has two tunicles constituted of its proper substance, one whereof is internal,
the other external: the internal is wholly nervous, gross, and woven with
straight fibers, running down the back, that it may better contain humid
bodies, lest they pass, as it were, through a strainer; and also that it may be
extended to all positions: the External is wholly carnous and soft, consisting
of many fibers, and those transverse; that after the meat is cocted, it may the
better be driven out: it has also a third tunicle arising from the Peritoneum,
and does involve the ventricle to the duodenum intestinum, of which the
temperament of the ventricle does appear, which is cold and dry, and therefore
convenient to the nature of nerves: it has also a native heat, without which
it cannot make a perfect concoction; which is increased from the liver and
spleen, and other vicine members: its seat is thus; the superior part of it
does touch the Diaphragma in the left side, and so falls into the the right
side of the liver, where it rests; its bottom reaches from the left side into
the right, and shows the place of the spleen: its utility is famous; for it
serves the nutritive faculty, and that diverse manner of ways: in its orifice
the animal appetite does reside; for when all the parts of the body desire the
aliment, which succeeds into the place of a vacuated substance, they endeavor
to draw it from the veins, the veins from the liver, the liver from the vena
porta, the vena porta from the intestines, and the intestines derive it from
the stomach, in which forthwith there is a desire of more aliment, which is
called hunger, or thirst; it alters the aliment; it receiving concocts it, and
changes it into chyle, and that in the space of five or six hours.

(C) The intestines are called by the Greeks Entra, whence does arise that
word, to Exenterate, that is, to embowel: their substance is not much different
from the ventricle, yet a little thinner; they have double tuni^es, partly that
by a greater sorce they may drive out the excrements, and partly from a certain
providence of nature, that if the interior be putrefied and ex^rated, the
exterior may be safe, that the chyle may not flow out: and the interior tunicle
is more carnous, the exterior membranous: it is endowed with crooked fibers,
the better to be enabled to propel matter. The intestines are folded with many
windings and turnings, that the chyle may tarry longer in them, and the aliment
may not so soon slide out: for those animals whose entrals have but few
windings are voracious; concerning which, Pliny writes very gallantly.

(D) Intestina Gracila, the first is the duodenum; it has no windings, but is
strait, and that because it has many cells, which do easily retain the fecies,
and may thereby, at will, hinder the distribution of chyle: the passage also of
this does touch the vessel of the gall, which carries yellow choler; and so by
its acrimony, helps the propulsion of the chyle, and that it may cast out the
flegmy excrements of the intestines.

(E) It is called by the Greeks, Nesis, because it does quickly transmit the
chyle, both for the greater number of Mesaraical veins, which are engrafted
into this intestine; and also because the more sincerer part of choler does
flow into it.

(F) This last intestine, because it is more tender then the rest, is called
Lepton, because in it there is much chyle; and that for this use, that it may
draw a certain moderate quantity of meat into them, lest that it flow forthwith
gross into the intestines: in this there is sometime an obstruction that
happens; and it is called Iliacus morbus.

(G) In some brutes, to wit, Dogs and Hogs, and other crude animals, this
intestine is like to a thick broad bag: but in man it is a certain small
appendix of the Ileos, convolved in the manner of a worm, scarce exceeding the
latitude of two singers, and longitude of one; it is called by the Greeks
Tuphlon, because it has but one hole.

(H) It is called Colon, as though (...), that is, a sheath or a case; or (...)
that is, mutilate, or cut short, because it has diverse turnings cut as it were
into cells; which cells indeed do contain dry excrements, called Scubala, that
is, the dung of Dogs, some call it (...) that is, from its tormenting pain, and
passion, which this intestine is often affected with, when its passage is
stopped with cold and gross humors, or filled and dilated with wind.

( I) The strait intestine is called Apeuthymenon Enteron, because it is not
folded, and thereupon it makes a more easy excretion of excrements; it is
called Principal, for its use which it has: for if man did not enjoy that
excretion it makes, how would he live? it has a muscle adjoined, which goes
about its seat, and constring ^it; and therefore it is called (...) it has
also the Hemorrhoid-veins, which expurge feculent blood or melancholy.

( K) The liver is a most generous member, and reckoned amongst the principal
organs of the nutritive faculty; it arises from effused blood, gross, and
concreted, almost on the sixth day firm the seed conceived: and because it is
like to the substance of blood, it retains its qualities or temperament of
blood; for it is hot and moist: and as it is gotten of blood, so it has power
to get blood; for it does convert into blood, or an assimilated redness, like
to it, the chyle which it receives within it self, by a natural propension, or
specifical virtue; for it alters every thing into that color, wherein it is to
be altered. But some will say, that there are other humors gotten also;
therefore it is not the shop of blood alone. I answer, that happens by
accident, but it is the instrument of blood alone by itself: again, blood is to
be taken two manner of ways; either for pure blood, or blood that does contain
in it the other three humors; yet blood predominant over all: and in both the
latter especially the liver is the shop of blood. But some again will say, a
natural agent does not produce diverse affects, because nature acts by one and
the same manner: but the liver is the natural agent; therefore it does not
produce diverse effects. I answer, That to happen for the diversity of matter,
in which the liver acts and rests; for of a terrene portion it produces
melancholy; of crude and cold parts, phlegm; of subtle and fervent, choler; but
of a mean or middle part, it produces true blood: for although the liver does
excite these functions by it self, yet it takes and uses as instruments,
spirits, both natural and vital, which have their passage by small arteries.
Its figure is a semicircle or half moon: it is placed in the right side of the
Abdomen, under the spurious ribs.

( L) The Gibba is the bunchy part of the liver, and Sima the cavity thereof.
The Diaphragma succors the Gibba, and the proper flesh of the liver does
reside in it; and it is called Culosis, which is a conversion of chyle,
separated from its excrements, into an idoneous mass for nutrition, that is,
blood: in this do the veins gather into one, which is called cava, which do
carry the blood into all the parts of the body. Sima is the hollow part of the
liver, which does cover the ventricle in the right Hypochondria; and in it is
made Haimatosis; which is an alteration of chyle, into a fluent and succulent
liquor: but in the middle part of the liver, where the branches of vena porta
do meet, is made Diacrisis, that is, a separation of profitable humors from
the excrements.

( M) As in an artificial Kitchen, there are not only vessels for the
preparation and coction of meat, but also others for more baser uses: so in the
Kitchen of our bodies, that is, the middle of the belly, there are some organs
which are constituted for the concoction of meat, and some for the receiving
and conveying away of excrements; and like as there are three concoctions in
our bodies, so there are three excrements, and three kinds of vessels
instituted for these. In the second species of concoction these excrements are
generated; one somewhat heavy, answering to secies, to wit, melancholy juice;
another somewhat light, and more of air, like to flour, to wit, yellow choler;
the third watery and serous: now every one of these has distinct receptacles;
and because choler is expurged first of all, therefore its receptacle is nigh
to the liver. And concerning these vessels, we have before treated: the use of
this vessel, the gall gathered therein does show; and the cause is expounded,
why there is no branch carried into the ventricle from this vessel: the figure
of this vessel is long and round, after the form of a Pear; its substance is
membranous, that it may accordingly be filled or emptied, contracted or
dilated: it has one thick and proper tunicle, yet notwithstanding contexted of
a treble kind of fibers: within it the fibers are strait, whereby it allures
choler into it; and they are somewhat crooked, by which it retains it; but
without they are transverse, by which it protrudes it.

The use of this vessel of the gall, is to receive choler; and if it be carried
over the whole body, it offends, because it is endowed with a fiery virtue; for
it hinders nutrition, and inflames the body much. Why gall is gathered into
this vessel, is upon a double necessity: First, that it may heat the liver, and
hinder putrefaction, it calefies the liver, because its humor is more hot and
sharp, then blood: it hinders putrefaction, because it takes away the abundant
humidity of the sharp humor: Secondly, that it may drive out of the ventricle
the chyle into the intestines, together with its superfluities.

( N) The spleen is a terrestrial member, because it attracts by a certain
symbol, to it self, the terrestrial part of blood: in man its flesh is
obscure, but in hogs, it has a white color; but in dogs a more splendid
redness then the liver: It is lax and spungeous, that it may the better receive
the feculent and gross humor into it self; and that it may not quickly delabe
out of it, but continue longer in it, that it may be made more apt for its
nature, and so be nourished by its better part.

( O) The substance of the reins are hard and dense, like to the substance of
the heart; the humor thereof is thin, and therefore with more difficulty
attracted: When the humor here is very watrish, it cannot be expurged with a
convenient celerity from one rein; and therefore there are two, which are
placed near the spina dorsi, at the beginning of the loins: the right part
thereof in a man, is under the liver; the left, under the spleen: the emulgent
veins and ureteres, serve to evacuate the serous humidity to the reins.

( P) The substance of the bladder, is nervous and membranous, that it may more
commodiously be extended and corrugated, when it is full or empty; and it ought
to be extended, lest the water flow out at unseasonable times, but contain a
moderate quantity thereof: it has two tunicles, the one proper and internal,
whose substance is dense^ and firm, lest it should be eroded by the humor of
the air; and this is interwoven with fibers, within strait, and without
transverse, which are for the attraction, retention, and expulsion of urine:
the other is an exterior tunicle, improperly so called, and has its rise from
the Peritoneum: it has a fleshy neck, having a muscle, whereby it is
constringed, that it may hinder an involuntary flux of the urine.

( Q) The stones in both sexes, are made for the ingendering of seed; therefore
the substance of them are glandulous, white, and soft, that such a seed may be
produced, by reason of the required similitude between the generating, and that
which is generated: but it is made crass, and in color white, by reason of the
exquisite coction made by the interior heat of the vessels and stones: as the
menstruum of the dugs is converted into milk, and dealbated; so the stones do
make blood prepared in the spermatick vessels by coction perfect seed, which
becomes idoneous for generation.

(R) They are called Parastatae, for their similitude: for Parastatae signifies
certain folds gathered within themselves.

(S) The substance of the yard of a man, is spungious and rare, that it may be
both erected and flank, stiff and soft; but in other animals it is bony; as in
a wolf, dog, or sea-fox: but if it were bony in a man, it would be an
impediment in the main business.

CHAP. 12. Of the parts of the middle belly serving the vital faculty.
1. HAving expounded the natural members of the lowest region, we proceed to
the parts of the middle cavity, which are called vitals; and they are placed in
the thorax, and they are the heart and the lungs.

2. But these organs are distinguished from naturals, by a certain
partition wall, which they call Diaphragma.

3. And the (A) Diaphragma is a round pannicle, consisting of flesh, nerves and
membranes, going cross to the sides, and tied to the back, the twelfth joint,
dividing the natural members from the vitals.

4. A certain thin membrane called Pleura, does succinge and embrace all the
parts contained in the thorax.

5. Now the heart is (B) a principal part of the middle belly, consisting of
hard, dense, and solid flesh, woven with a treble kind of strings, of a
Pyramidal form, not unlike to a Pine-nut; and it is the house of the vital
faculty.

6. For it is the principle of (C) life, the fountain of heat, and nectar of
life; the Rhisoma or the spring head of the arteries; the Primum mobile of the
pulse and respiration; which being ^ively, the whole body is lively; ^f faint,
all the parts are faint; and if it perish, the rest of the ^ody perishes.

7. And although the heart is ^ut one in all animals, yet it may ^e divided (D)
into two parts, the ^ight and the left.

8. The right resembles the form of the moon increasing, and it receives blood
from the vena cava flowing into it; and prepares it, and makes it more perfect;
and so distributes it partly into the lungs, for their nutrition; and partly
into the left side of the heart, by passages not altogether occult, and as it
is with the matter of vital matters.

9. The left has the form of the Crest of an Helmet, and is more overwhelmed
into the substance of the heart, containing the vital spirit begotten of pure
blood, distributed by the artery Aorta into the body, and again receives the
air out of the lungs, by the venous artery.

10. And both these sides have their vessels, two whereof appear in the right
side, and so many in the left.

11. In the right indeed there are two veins, the vena cava, and the vena
arteriosa: in the left there are two arteries, the great artery, and the venous
artery.

12. There is a certain partition, which divides either side; the vulgar call
it the seventh medium, which at the first sight appears crass; but after a more
curious inspection, it is found to have many holes in it, that there may be an
easy passage from the left side to the right; notwithstanding what the
Neotericks exclaim against it, and urge to the contrary.

13. Furthermore there are certain appendixes membranous, and full of windings,
leaping to each side of the ventricle, which are called Auriculae, not from its
use or action, but similitude.

14. On the right side, it lies open to the door of the vena cava; the left is
placed in the orifice of the venous artery: and it is larger, because it is the
receptacle of gross blood; the latter is the less, because it contains air.

15. The chief use of those Auriculars are, First, that they be ready
receptacles of blood and air; that they do not confusedly pass into the heart,
and so to suffocate the heart by oppression: Secondly, lest the vena cava, and
the venous artery be broken in violent motions; for they have great force in
drawing of blood and air in to the heart.

16. The lungs (E) are of rare parts, light and spungious, and as it were
concreted of spumous blood; like the substance of a Snail, seated in the
thorax, filling its whole cavity; the instrument of breath and voice.

17. And although it is but one in body, yet it is divided into two parts by
the membrane called Mediastinus, the right and left.

18. Either part consists of two Globes or Knots: the one superior, the other
inferior; often discernable, and sometimes obscure.

19. The use of these is, that its flesh or substance should not be
collaberated or tired; but that it may be more actively moved, and that the
heart be embraced on every side.

20. The air is transmitted into the lungs by the asper-artery, whose structure
is constituted of Veins, Cartilages, Membranes, and Nerves.

The Commentary.
( A) DIaphragma has diverse appellations; for it is sometimes derived from the
verb Diaphratto, that is, to fortify; because Diaphrattei, that is it
separates out the middle and low belly; and also it is called the seventh
transverse: it is called Diaphragma, and by ancient Medicks called Phrenas,
because as some judge by its inflammation the mind is hurt. Its use is noble;
for it separates between the spiritual and vital bowels; and the heart and the
lungs, from the naturals: which separation Aristotle thinks to be made by
nature, lest the vapors, which do exhale from meat, offend the heart, in which
the soul, he thinks, does reside: But this opinion is false, because the fumes
do pass by the Oesophagum. To conclude, the Diaphragma has two holes placed in
organs ascending and descending. Again, it helps exspiration and inspiration:
for when the thorax is contracted, then the inspiration is dilated; but when it
is laxed, then inspiration is made. Again, it helps the ejection of the
excrements by its motion, with the muscles of the Abdomen. Again, it is the
rise of the organs, whereby it pleasantly affects the heart, and causes
laughter.

( D) The covering which defends the heart, and contains it in its seat, and
hinders it lest it should be oppressed with its vicine members, is called
Capsula, which contains also a certain watrish humor, lest it should (...),
and dry with too much heat: the substance of the heart is hard and dense, lest
it should be broken by its violent motions: Its substance, says Aristotle, is
thick and spiss, into which heat is received strongly; and therefore its
temperament is the hottest of all the members: it is endowed with three kinds
of fibers; strait, crooked, and transverse; that it may both draw, contain, and
expel. Now Aristotle thinks these fibers to be nerves, and the principle of the
nerves to be in the heart: but he is deceived; its figure is Pyramidal, but not
absolutely so in brutes, but it is more flat then in a man: it is placed in the
thorax, as the safest place, and on the left side thereof.

(C) This is the shop of the vital faculty; and therefore it is rightly called
by Aristotle, the first thing that lives, and ^he last that dies: by its
perpetual motion and heat, it begets vital spirits: for when it is dilated
(which motion is called Dyastole) it allures unto it, and draws blood, by the
benefit of the strait fibers, from the vena cava, by the venous artery: but
when it is constringed, which is called Systole, it sends blood from the right
ventricle into the lungs, by which they are nourished, and that by the venous
artery: but the vital spirit out of the left, by Aorta into the whole body; and
both ways it converts into vital spirit, by attenuating the pure blood into
vapor.

(D) There are two remarkable ventricles of the heart, the right and the left:
between these there is a partition, which distinguishes the one from the other,
which whereas it is crass and firm, it is not rightly called by Aristotle the
third side, or belly; but lest that the passages may seem to be made by this,
it sends out blood into another ventricle by narrow pores.

(E) The lung is called by the Greeks pneumon, a pneo, which is to breath,
because it is the organ of breathing: therefore the lung ought to consist of
such a substance, that it may be filled and distended with air, like a pair of
bellows. The primary Cause of which action is its proper substance, which helps
the motion thereof: for when it is dilated, it draws air, and by the venal
artery carries it to the heart; by which the heat of the heart is allayed, and
the vital spirit, as with food, thereby cherished. The figure of the Lung
resembles the hoof of an ox, which is divided by the Mediastinum into two
parts: it is the organ of voice; which I prove, because no animal has a voice,
that has not a lung: there are some that say, that there are two lungs: but
truly it is but one, divided into two parts, the right and the left. And again,
both the parts consist of two Globes, the one superior, the other inferior;
sometimes seen open, and sometimes shut: the use thereof is, that it may be
moved more nimbly, and so amplex the heart more easily.

CHAP. 13. Of the parts of the Animal faculty.
1. WE have spoken sufficiently of the parts of the middle belly. Now we
proceed to the organs of the supreme region, serving the animal faculty; and
they are such as are ^ontained in the brain.

2. The brain (A) is a soft part, white and medullous, fabricated of pure seed
and spirit, involved, as it were, in folds, compassed about with a thin skin,
and contained in the cavity of the brain, the principle of the animal faculty,
etc.

3. And this is the highest of all the bowels, and the next to heaven: this is
the tower of the senses, the highest pinnacle, the regiment of the mind.

4. For the brain is not only the seat of sense, but the artifex of motion,
and the house of wisdom, memory, judgment, cogitation; in which things, man
is like to God.

5. Therefore nature has exceedingly fenced it, not only by enrolling it
within the skull, but also by covering it with other parts therein contained;
which are two membranes, whereof the one is called dura matter, the other pia
matter.

6. Menynx or dura matter, is an exterior membrane, hard and cuticular, covering
the brain, and fencing it on every side.

7. After that is taken away, the pia mat^r is visible, which is a tender
membrane, the immediate and next cover of the brain; not covering the exterior
superficies only, but going deep into part of the substance.

8. But its substance is thin, that it may insinuate it self about all the
sides and parts of the brain; and thin also, because it need not be troublesome
to the brain, neither in gravity nor weight; and that it may deduce the vessel
through the whole body of the brain.

9. But the whole body of the brain is divided into two parts, the anterior and
posterior.

10. The anterior, by reason of the magnitude of it, obtains the name of the
whole, and is properly called Encephalon, the brain.

11. The posterior is called Pacencephalis, that is, cerebellum, which seems to
be (...) by nature, for the succor of the former, that it may keep the animal
spirit transmitted from the ends of the brain, and that it may be adapted to
the marrow of the back.

12, The brain above the anterior has two cavities, distinguished clearly by
internals, called ventricles.

13. And these are the receptacles of the spirits, which are daily brought out
of the heart by the artery; and in them they are made more lucid, like to
celestial flames of fire, and that for the better perfecting of the animal
actions.

14. And they are three in number; the right, left, and middle: the two foremost
are called by some, anteriors; but more properly, superiors.

15. The dexter therefore consists in the right part of the brain, reaching
over the whole length of it, from the anterior to the posterior; resembling the
figure of a half circle: its use is the preparation and generation of the
animal spirits.

16. The left consists in the left part of the brain; and it has the same
form, seat, and use with the former.

17. Whence experience does testify, and the observation of Physicians does
confirm, that if the brain be violently compressed, or the ventricles bruised,
that then the animal must needs be deprived of sense and motion.

18. For they place in these superior ventricles, common sense, which does
discern the objects of diverse senses.

19. The middle or third ventricle is nothing else, then the concourse or
common cavity of the two former ventricles.

20. This does produce of it self two passages: the first whereof receives
phlegm, the latter is extended to the fourth corner or bosom.

21. They place also in it, the faculty of imagination and cogitation.

22. These are the three ventricles of the anterior part of the brain: the
fourth is common to the cerebellum, and the marrow of the back: the last, yet
the most solid of all the rest, because it receives the animal spirits from the
former, and so transmits it to the marrow of the back.

23. This is the place where they say the memory is contained.

The Commentary.
( A) THe substance of the brain is soft, and medullous; and they say it is so
called, because it carries the substance of marrow: but it differs much from
that marrow which is found in the cavity of the bones, because it is neither to
be melted nor absumed, as the other is: its use is famous and noble; for in
this consists fear or courage, as also a voluntary motion of the senses,
without which man stands as an image or pillar. And it is not only the place
of sense and motion, but the house of wisdom, and the shop of the cogitations,
judgment and memory, whereby man comes to resemble God. And lastly, it is the
treasure of the animal spirits: therefore by right the brain is the noblest of
all members; whose excellency if Aristotle had known, he would never have
written of the nobility and dignity of the heart.

(B) Whereas in the opinion os Plato, the brain is the first and common
sensery; The question will be, and it is full of intricacy and obscureness,
whether the brain be endowed with the sense of feeling? It is the general
answer of modest Physicians and Philosophers, that the substance of the brain
does want sense, though it be stirred with a daily motion; but the membranes
which encompass the body of the brain, are endowed with a most exquisite sense.
But some will say, how can the brain be void of sense, and yet be adjudged the
principle of sense? this is a nonsequitur. If the heart, according to
Aristotle, be the principle of the motion voluntary; shall we therefore say,
that it is moved by the arbitrament of the will, when it is rather moved
naturally? so the brain communicates sense to other members, therefore it is
endowed with sense: this is a nonsequitur. Again I answer, that Theoreme to be
true in logic, only in Homogeneous causes; and those also that are conjoined,
and not remote: for the senses do not remain in the brain immediarely, but
mediately, by the benefit of the nerves, which arise out of the brain. Yet
Scaliger answers, the brain to have the force or faculty of sense; dunamei, but
not the act.

CHAP. 14. Of the Species of Animals, viz. of Beasts, and they both perfect and
imperfect.
1. HItherto of the parts of an Animate body: the species and differences of
animals do follow.

2. Therefore an animal is either (A) Alogon, or Logicon.

3. Alogon is called a Beast, and it is an animal wanting Reason, and only
endowed with Sense.

4. But here (B) some go about to make a noise in opposing this, both ancient
and later writers; in declaring, that certain beasts, by a singular sagacity
and art, may be obstupefied by artificial operations, that they will act those
things which cannot proceed from them, but they must be endowed with some
prudence and reason; and besides their particular sense, something that
deserves to be ascribed to reason.

5. Its true, they are endowed with some remarkable actions; but we must not
conclude them to proceed from any reason in them, but from a natural instinct.

6. And how can Brutes be said to have common reason, when reason is a faculty
of the soul, which does move and bufie it self to find out causes from the
effects; and again, from the causes to those effects which are the causes of
them?

7. Furthermore, beasts are either perfect or imperfect.

8. They are perfect, (C) which have a perfect body in substance, and not in
shadow, and endowed with blood, procreated in them.

9. And they are such as either go or fly.

10. They are terrestrial, which draw in air by inspiration; and they continue
out of the water upon the earth, or at least receive their nutriment most part
from thence.

11. And they are either such as go, or creep, or fly, Arist. 1 de Hist. An. c.
1.

12. They that go or creep, are such as move on the face of the earth.

13. And they are either fourfooted beasts, or creeping vermin.

14. Fourfooted beasts are those, that go upon four feet, or at least consist
of four such parts: as man has two arms, for two former feet.

15. There is a diverse constitution of these, as also of the temperament of
man: for in Dogs, choler does abound; in Hogs, phlegm; and in others, other
humors: whence their temperament does chiefly depend.

16. Fourfooted beasts are distinguished by the manner of their generation, in
oviparas, and viviparas.

17. Those are oviparae, which bring forth eggs, or breed after that manner,
out of which afterward the animal is produced; as Frogs, Crocodiles, Lizards,
Salamanders, Chameleons, and Serpents; all which are endowed with four feet.

18. Although these in many faculties of the soul, and parts of the body, have
no little similitude to man; yet they differ much, nay more, then such as are
born alive, called viviparae: for neither do we see the same ingenuity in them,
which is in these, nor altogether the same parts and strength of body.

19. Viviparae are such as bring forth perfect animals.

20. And those have a large lung, dense and carnous, filled with blood; and
therefore they breath.

21. The young also (D) is nourished and brought almost after the same manner,
in the bellies of their damms, as the child in the womb of a woman.

22. Therefore erroneous is that opinion of Avicenna, Albertus, and Cardan
himself; who think that all animals that are gotten in the matrix, may arise
without it, merely of putrefaction: if so be it be true, that animals do
proceed from a mutual copulation only; but never any man, or dog, did ever
proceed from putretude, but seed, Scal. Exer. 193.

23. Viviparae are wont to bring forth, either those which have solid feet; as
an Horse, or Ass, and many others which want horns: so likewise many cornuted
beasts; as the Ox, Heart, Goat, and the like; or such as have their feet divided
into diverse parts; as Dogs, Apes, etc.

24. And their young are multifarious, for the many cells in the womb, where the
seed is contained.

25. Creeping beasts (E) are those which crawl upon the ground; and they are
either Serpents, which by convolving themselves, do move; or all other kind of
worms upon the earth.

26. Furthermore (F) there are volatile beasts, which do use to fly much in the
air; and they are otherwise called birds.

27. Aereal birds (G) have by nature two feet, and they do move themselves
above the earth by their feathers by flying.

28. Their bodies do consist like to other bodies, of the four elements of a
legitimate commixtion; and they have both similar and dissimilar parts.

29. Yet they want reins and bladder; whereby it happens that they never urine,
because they drink little; and by reason of the heat and dryness of their
nature, which converts their water into aliment.

30. Their generation is of an egg, and chiefly of the white; for it is
nourished by the yolk, till it is excluded: these eggs engender and do receive
life from the heat of the damm, sitting upon them.

31. And they are sooner hatched in summer, then in winter. Hens in summer
usually sit but eighteen days, but in winter twenty five.

32. And unless they bring forth, they labor under a disease, and perish. Arist.

33. Birds (H) are distinguished by their meat: for some are very carnous,
because as they feed upon flesh, as those which have crooked claws; as the Crow
and Hawk; and some are fed by worms, others by herbs, and some by fruits.

34. So much concerning Terrestrials. Now concerning such as live in the water;
and they are called fish.

35. Fish (I) is a sanguineous animal, of cold and watrish substance; of a long
body, and squamous skin, diving in the water.

36. Their propagation is much by seed, only this difference: some lay eggs,
which are committed to the water, and thereby cherished: others bring forth
their young alive; as the Whale, Dolphine, and the sea-Calf.

37. In the time of copulation, male and female are conversant; and the female,
by a gentle touch, conceives eggs in the matrix; but they are not perfected,
till they be sprinkled with the seed of the male: for these eggs, into which
the seed is ejected, do become (...); the rest remains barren.

38. Of the particular parts of Fish, these things are to be observed: There is
a heart in most of them; but inverse, or much turned in, contrary to other
animals; whereby a certain passage is made to their gills, by which they return
the humor, which they receive into their mouths.

39. All their teeth are serrated: yet some have teeth upon their tongues.

40. Their tongue is hard and almost thorny, and so (...) to the roof, that
they seem ^o be without a tongue.

41. They have the parts of hearing and smelling, but none of sensuality but
the eyes: for the passage is broad and open, where they should have that sense;
theirs eyes are without lids.

42. They want lungs (K) and asper arteries; therefore they neither have a
voice nor breath.

43. Aristotle proves it: First, because in breathing, water must be drawn in
as well as air; which two bodies, do mutually hinder themselves: Secondly,
because they do not move any particle of the belly, as other breathing
creatures do: Thirdly, because when they dye in the water, we cannot perceive
any bubbles to be made; which happens when there is any animal that breathes,
suffocated in the water: Fourthly, because if it were so, other animals also
might breath in the water; which experience denies.

44. But some ancient writers and Neoterick Philosophers, defend the contrary
opinion; who conclude, that all manner of fish do breath.

45. It is not for the former Arguments only, that we part from the doctrine
of the Peripateticks, but also Julius Scaliger defends it.

46. But some fish do only live in the waters; some partly on the water, and
some partly on the earth.

47. Those that dive in the water, are either those that have blood, or are
without blood.

48. Those which have blood, are properly called Pisces.

49. And those are great, small* middle, or little, according to their adjunct
quantity.

50. Those are called great; the Whale, the Salmon, Dolphine, and sea-Calf.

51. Those that are of the middle rank, the Eel, Pike, Carp, Perch, Stockfish,
Tench, etc.

52. The least are these; a Horsleech, Turdus, Sprats, etc.

53. Those that are called Exsangues, are such as are without blood, and do
consi^ in its stead of a certain vital humidity; and these are either soft or
hard.

54. Those that are soft, Albertus calls them Malachias; and they are those
that neither have scales nor a rough skin; as the Cutle, Calimary, Lollium,
Polipus, sea-Wolf.

55. They are called hard, which have a crustous and scalous skin; as the Crab,
Muscle, and Oyster.

56. And amongst the rest, it is doubtful whether those that are called
Amphibia, what their natures are (they have lungs and breath) and also whether
they sleep by the mouth, or fistula; in the water, or out.

57. And they are partly fourfooted; as Frogs, Crocodiles, Otters, Badgers:
partly reptile, as the Water-snake; and partly aereal, as the Cormorant,
Wildducks, etc.

58. And thus much of perfect Animals: those that are imperfect are such whose
bodies do not so cohere, but they may be said to be divided; and they want
blood, and have their original from p^action, and are called Insects.

59. Therefore an Insect (L) is an imperfect animal, wanting blood; having a
body distinct by its open junctures, and so likewise breathes not.

60. Whence these Insects are said to consist of three chief Parts; the Head,
Belly, and some Space between both.

62. Some of these Insects (M) are engendered of Caenous earth, and putrid
slime: As for example; from putrid dung and wood, the Palmer-worm; from putrid
water, Gnats; from mire and dirt, Worms: And some from the pu^action of a dead
carcass; as the Beetle from the Ass, Bees from the Bull, and Wasps from a Horse.

63. The cause of those that take their original from putrid matter, is
celestial heat diffused in the ambient air.

64. Of them which are gotten of a mixed or cadaverous putredue, they are
procreated of the proper heat of the mixed putretude.

65. This the Philosopher indeavored to find out, when he said, In those things
that do putrefie, are animals procreated, because of the natural calidity
existent therein, which being segregated makes a body.

66. Therefore that calidity so segregated, does dispose the matter, and does
produce both a form and substance of the same; not by its proper force, as
though an arridous could effect a living substance, but by the concurrence of
the celestial heat.

67. And as the putrefied matter is diverse and various, into which the heat,
both mixed with it self, and that which is by the influence of the heavens
darted into it; so it must needs produce diverse and various Insects, and they
both noble and ignoble.

68. For if the matter be very terrene, then testaceous animals are generated;
if tender and subtle, then more slender animals are produced.

69. Hence it is, that when there is much terrene portion in the sea existent,
that of such a concretion, a shelly substance to arise; so that the terrene
part, does quickly indurate, and co^late.

70. But there are two kinds of insects: some are winged, some not.

71. Amongst those that are winged, there are some that have two, and some four
wings.

72. Those that have two wings, are such as these* Flies, Gnats, Butterflies,
etc.

73. Four wings* as Bees, (...) (...), Beetles, Spanish Flies.

74. Those that want wings, are such* as (...) upon the ground.

75. And amongst these, there are some that walk by degrees; as the Pismire,
Spider, Horslice, Locusts, Fleas: others crawl slowly on the ground; as Worms,
Grass-worms, Glowworms, etc.

The Commentary.
( A) BEtween a rational Creature, to wit, a man, and an irrational, to wit, a
beast; there is a certain Medium, called a Satyr or Ape, which is rightly
referred to monsters.

( B) Some things are here to be touched, concerning the reason or intelligence
which seems to be in Bruits: For there are some now in these days, who besides
that particular sense and reason they attribute unto them, do believe that they
are moved with a certain singular sagacity and do^lity, in wonderful
operations; which they say cannot be acted without some prudence and reason.
For the great Bucephalus of Alexander would permit no body to come upon his
back, but his Lord; and at last one putting on Alexanders Robes, and mounting
thereupon, was notwithstanding immediately thrown off. Nicomedes is reported to
have had a Horse, who when he perceived his master to be lost in the battle, he
refused to eat his fodder or provender, but pined away and died. The Panther,
after that it has tasted of poison, presently runs to man's dung, that it may
be thereby helped. The Goats in the woods of Crete, being shot with darts, runs
to the herb Dittany, and thereby have their darts plucked out. Swallows aslo
show a wonderful art, in building of their nests with clay. Bees, in the making
of Wax and Honey: And so many other Beasts several other performances, which
cannot be imitated by us; all which ^ms to some to be acted with reason. But
for true solution of this, between the true actions of Reason, and the
sensitive Faculty; for the Operations, Performances, and Actions of Bruits, are
not to be adjudged as proceeding from reason, but partly from the instinct of
Nature, partly from a Phan^e, and partly from a natural sagacity, or that daily
assuefaction they perform. And though we should grant, that these Actions did
proceed from a certain kind of force or faculty of discretion or prudence,
existent in Bruits; yet it is different far from humane discretion and reason;
neither does it differ in quantity, as more or less; but in the quality or
thing it self: for it cannot properly be called reason* or be comprehended
under the name of a rational faculty, but to be understood Analogically; for it
is the property of reason, not only to understand, know, and judge of its
action, but to vary the same, according to its will: but Beasts can do neither
of these; for those things wherein they are always occupied, in them they do
continue, and from them do not depart, neither can they vary their action at
will, as those that are endowed with reason.

But some will allege, first, that Bruits are capable of Discipline, because
they are taught many things* and to perform many works: therefore they are
competent of reason, if by Discipline they understand Science, properly so,
called* I deny that ever any Bruit was ever capable of any such Discipline: For
though they may learn (...), yet they cannot learn (...): and therefore there
are certain Birds, which learn to speak by a certain custom and inclination;
but what they say, they are altogether ignorant.

Secondly, those that are fallen into frantic fits and madness, may be said to
have had ratiocination, and understanding: but many Bruit beasts are said to be
mad; as Apes taken in drunkenness, Dogs often run mad: The Ox, Horse, Ass,
Camel, are said to suffer diseases, which Physicians rank in the regiment of
madness: therefore, etc.

I answer, it cannot truly hence be gathered, that Bruits have any similitude
with man's reason; for men are said to be mad, when they are void of that reason
which distinguishes them from a (...). Now Bruits are mad, according to their
internal senses, which are common to them, to wit, imagination and sensitive
faculty, which some call cogitativam, and aestimativam: For Madness, Frenzy,
and Melancholy, are Diseases that cannot hurt corporeal affections by
themselves, to wit, simply alone, but corporeal faculties also; for they
disturb the mind by accident, because it is contained in that very house or
situation, where this distemper raigns, and where the senses are used. But
Bruits suffer madness, by reason of imagination or their estimative faculty;
not for their reason or understanding.

( C) It is common to all perfect animals to have blood, and therefore without
it, they neither can be accounted perfect, or produce any vital action; for
blood is after a manner another soul.

( D) It is a thing common almost to the Universal Genus of fourfooted Beasts,
that their generation proceeds from the commixtion of the Masculine with the
Feminine; and they copulate either at certain times or seasons, or
promiscuously at any time. And whereas they are void of reason, especially,
when they have a sensual appetite thereunto; at which time, the Male is so
furiously, inflamed with such an irresistible light, that it will furiously
assail the Female, and prosecute her even till his appetite be satisfied: as we
see often verified in Stags.

( E) All Serpents are referred to fourfooted Beasts, because they have Blood,
Flesh, Nerves, and other internal Bowels, of that Nature with them, although
not so perfect, and also dissimilar from the members of those animals. This
animal is crafty and wise, in the preservation of its life, in seeking out a
Den to lurk in, and Food to live on.

( F) Volatiles do consist of all the elements, but chiefly of water; which we
may read and prove by sacred writ, where it is said, That the waters brought
forth both creeping things on the earth, and flying things in the air: where a
question will arise, why God produced flying things out of the water, rather
then the earth? Because the greatest part of them do reside upon the earth: For
upon the earth they feed, sleep, pull off their feathers; and altogether haunt
the earth and not the water, because, according to Aristotle, we are nourished
by those things of which we consist. Birds consist of earth, rather then water;
therefore, etc. This argues that their substance is hard and dense, which must
needs differ much from the nature of water, but little from earth. But for the
further solution, we must know that there is no animal gotten, or procreated in
the fire or air, but in the water and on the earth all Bodies are procreated,
and that of the commixtion of siccity with humidity; but of the two other
Elements, they receive light temperaments and virtues; therefore, because Birds
are wandering animals, they ought to be framed of an Aerie temperament, that it
may be consentaneous to their nature. Now Birds are procreated from the water,
which comes nearest to the nature of air, for it is made air, extenuated by
heat, as we see the density of air to pass into water: and therefore Birds are
produced out of the water, into the air, as it were a proper Element for their
nature.

( G) When in the definition, we say, Birds to be two-footed and winged, this
ought to be understood of perfect Birds; for there are certain Birds found
without feet, called Apodes, and also without feathers, of which see Scaliger:
and it is called a Bird from Avia, because it cuts an uncertain flight in the
air. For there are three things uncertain, and past finding out: the way of a
Ship in the sea, the way of a Bird in the air, and the way of a Yongman on
earth.

( H) Other divisions there are of Birds, of which see Scaliger, Exer. 227. and
of the species of Birds, see Freigeus his Physics.

( I) By Fish I generally understand all water-animals, that swim in water, and
all these are produced of the water: which their natures does demonstrate; for
if they be taken out of the waters; they die and perish, because they are
robbed of their proper Nature or Womb; but in water they grow and are
nourished, by reason of the similitude and cogination of their nature with the
place, which is cold and moist.

But how can Fish; which seem to be constituted of a (...) Matter, and a mixed
body, be produced from water alone, one simple Element, and fluid?

I answer, first, the concretion of water in the producing of (...), to be done
forthwith by the voice and command of God; insomuch that it is so constricted,
and firmly coagulated, that the body of fish is solid and well compacted.
Again, we do not deny, but that other Elements concur to this aquatical
constitution; but water has the dominion, whose nature fish emulates, because
they are cold and moist: where notwithstanding we must observe, that this same
watery constitution does participate of heat and moisture, in which the vital
faculty or life does consist.

( K) It is an old tossed question, whether fishes that want a lung, breathe?
Aristotle denies it, but Plato and all the ancient Philosophers affirm it; and
these are their Reasons: First, what animals soever have not the organs of
respiration (so called) cannot breath: but fishes have neither lungs nor
arteries, which are the organs of respiration in all other animals: therefore
fish breath not: Secondly, if fish do breath, it must either be by the mouth,
or fins; and then they both receive and let out the spirit together: but this
cannot be, because these motions are contrary in themselves; and contraries
cannot act together in the same: therefore fishes do not breath: Thirdly, if
Fishes that are destitute of attractive arteries and lungs, breath, then they
must breath by the benefit of the belly; but this is absurd; therefore the
consequence false: The reason of the Minor is, that if the belly of fish does
attract air, then it would do so in other animals; but it is not so, therefore,
etc. Fourthly, In all those animals that inspire and exspire, some part of
their body may be discerned to move; as in man, when he breaths, the breast is
lifted up; if he exspires, it is pressed down: but in fish there is no such
motion to be seen, therefore they breath not: Fifthly, when any breathing
Creatures are suffocated in the water, certain bubbles will arise, if they be
there detained till suffocation; but if fish be never so long detained, they
cause no bubbles, therefore they breath not, neither do they receive any
extrinsecal air: Sixthly, if fish did breath under the water, it would follow
then, that men and other animals might breath also: but the consequence is
false, therefore the antecedent: Seventhly, if fishes do breath in the water,
then it is so that they may attract air, which they must do also without the
water; but they do not breath out of the water, nor attract air, Ergo, etc. if
all animals do breath, then insects also should breath, which are animals; but
they breath not, Ergo, etc. the assumption is confirmed; for those animals that
breath, do breath whilst they live, and when they cannot breath longer, they
cease to live. But insects do live, though they cannot breath; for when they
are cut in two parts, they will live in each part: whereas it is not possible,
that all the parts of an animal should breath.

Observe this last Argument, to impugn all the Ancients opinion: Fishes do
therefore breath, because the life of animals consists not without breath.
These are the reasons of Arist. denying fish to breath. But because there is a
heart in them, therefore they have need to have their heat temperated; and that
it may be so temperated, they draw in by their gills, water for air, and let it
out by the same. For as in man, the lungs and the thorax are lifted up and down
in breathing; so the gills of fish are dilated and contracted, in drawing in of
water to temper the heat of the heart: for when the gills are dilated, they
draw in some small portion of water, which is conveyed by certain passages to
the heart, which cools the heat thereof; and when their gills are contracted,
the water again is expelled.

Some do stiffly oppugn these opinions; whose reasons we shall now consider of:
First, a Fish is an animal, therefore breathing is necessary, because it has
need of air.

I answer, If by breathing or respiration they understand refrigeration, then
the consequence is to be received; but if they mean the attraction of air, I
deny it: for the spiration of air is only competent to those animals endowed
with lungs; but Fish may be refrigerated by that water, which both they draw in
by the mouth and gills. Secondly, Air is contained under the earth, therefore
under the water; and by consequence, fish do attract it, and so breath.

Ans. I deny the consequence: though air may easily pierce into the earth,
which is porous, cavernous, and dry: yet into the water it cannot pierce,
because of the fluidness of its body, being so easily reduced to unity* and so
closely gathering it self together, that there can be no vacuity for air: for
if a Staff be thrust into the water, and drawn out again, there will be no hol^
left, or resemblance where it was, but will forthwith rise up, and swim at top:
But if it be fixed into the earth, the hole whereinto it was put will remain,
which is immediately filled with air; and therefore it is that the breathing
faculty of Moles under the earth, is not taken away, because they always make a
hole, whereby they receive breath. But now in water no pores or passages can be
apprehended, whereby air may be attracted; therefore it is impossible that fish
should breath therein. Thirdly, Fishes do breathe by their gills, therefore
breath is drawn by them, though not in the usual manner. I answer, that some
spiration i^ manifest or perfect; some obscure and imperfect: It Is manifest in
those animals that are endowed with the organs of spiration; and then it is
properly called respiration: but that ^tion of the fishes gills, is more
rightly termed transpiration, and only answers by Analogy to the true
spiration: for as their parts, viz. lungs and gills, differ in species, so also
their functions differ: for as the wings o^ birds and fins of fishes do agree
analogically in themselves, as to the efficient cause, viz. of motion; yet they
are not of the same Genus, because fish by their fins do not fly, as birds by
their wings, but swim: so those gills that are given to fish in stead of lungs,
are not of the same species with the lungs of animals. The fourth is taken from
Experience: if fish be put into a vessel with a narrow orifice, filled half
full of water, and so the mouth of the vessel stopped; there is so great a
desire in them of the enjoying of the air, that they strive who shall be
uppermost, swimming one upon another, for no other cause then a desire to be
next the air. Scaliger answers, the reason of their so much struggling, is not
for the enjoyment of air, but the avoiding of their close imprisonment;
endeavoring to find a way out of the vessel, to free themselves from that
scarcity of water, into a place of more plenty and liberty. Fifthly, if a
vessel full of water, and with a row orifice be closely covered, the fish that
are encloistered within, are suddenly suffocated, because no air can come unto
them; therefore it is absolute necessary for fish to breathe under the water,
for the preservation of their lives. This, if it be true, I thus answer: If so,
then it may be judged to happen rather from the defect of the celestial light,
then air; for thereby force and heat is added by the influence of light: for
all animate things stand in need of this celestial spirit, for the preservation
of their lives. Again, if it be so that fish included in a vessel are
suffocated, it must happen that the water being deprived of air, loses it
nature ( Scaliger Exer. 275) for it is preserved from corruption by the air, as
from a superior form; therefore it kills the fish. But to conclude, If fish
should die for want of air, how come they to live, where the waters are frozen
all over, many thousands of paces together? or can they receive air through the
ice? therefore the Objections of our Antagonists, are frothy and vain.

(L) Insects are called by the Greeks, Entoma, because they have Bodies
distinguished, some into two, three, and some more incisures; and they have in
stead of blood, a certain vital jui^e or humor, which is Analogous to blood,
which as soon as it is exhausted, they perish: And because those Insects want
blood, their natures are cold, and therefore it is that they breathe not: for
breath is given to animals by nature to ^ool the blood; and because those
insects (says Aristotle) want bowels, therefore they leave no respiration,
because they have no convenient organs for that use.

But against this received opinion of Aristotle, Pliny objects, that Insects do
breathe; which he maintains by two Arguments.

First, That many kinds of Insects do put forth a certain noise; as Bees, and
those that want wings: others to sing; as Grasshoppers: so also Gnats and Flies
make a certain buzzing and noise; which cannot be, except they received air.

I answer, When Bees and Flies make a noise, it happens by the agitation of the
interior spirit, and not the exterior: for those Insects that seem to sing, as
Grasshoppers, do make a noi^e from the agitation of the included spirits,
fretting, as it were, against that membrane, with which their bodies are
wrapped; for they do not make a noise by the attracting of spirit at the mouth:
for they alone in the Universal Genus of animals, by the observation of
Aristotle, want mouths.

Secondly, Insects are endowed with smelling; but smelling cannot be effected,
but with the attraction of air by respiration; therefore they breathe.

I answer, The Sense of smelling is far different in these Insects, from that
in other sanguineous animals; for they have this censory hidden within the
skull; and therefore they cannot perceive odours but by the conduct of the
ambient air introsumed: But Insects do not perceive odours, by the attraction
of air, but by the alone presence of the thing to be smelled at the censory;
which organ in them is always open, and exposed to smelling, not unlike to the
eyes of those animals that have no lids nor covering, but always open.

( M) The material cause of Insects is double, as the Insects themselves are of
two kinds; for some are gotten of slimy earth and putrid mud: as for example,
from putrified Pot Herbs, the Canker or Palmer-worm; from putrid Water, the
Gnat; from decayed Wine, the Midge; from Slime, worms; from Mud, frogs: others
arise from a mixed putretude; as Beetles from the karcass of an Ass; Bees from
a Bull; Wasps from a Horse. And as there are two kinds of Insects, so there is
also a double efficient cause of them: for they which take their rise from
putrid Matter, their efficient cause is the heat of the Sun, diffused in the
Ambient air: But they which are gotten of a mixed and cadaverous putretude, are
procreated merely from the proper heat of the mixed putretude; for that heat
does dispose the Matter, and produce a substantial form of the same, not by its
proper force; for an accident cannot make a living substance, but by the virtue
of the Celestial heat. But some may say, that heat of mixture is broken in
putretude, if putretude be the corruption of heat natural; therefore the heat
of a mixed body putrefied, cannot be the efficient cause of Insects.

I answer, In the natural decay of mixtures simply, all heat does not vanish,
so that none may be said to remain; but broken, as natural, and according to
that measure, which is necessary to retain the humidity with the ^iccity: as in
the destruction, death or decay of living creatures, all heat simply does not
vanish, but that only which was convenient for the existence of the soul in
the body, and the preservation of life; therefore that heat which is yet left
in a mixed putretude, has reason to be the efficient cause of Insects. But
some may further instance, that heat in the generation of mixtures, ought to
domineer passively, not actively; according to Aristotle, who says, that heat
and cold do generate when they overcome and rule in passives: but in putretude,
the heat of mixture does not obtain the name of dominion, because its wants
strength and vigor, and is so unfurnished, that it cannot retain the moist with
the dry, for the preservation of the mixture: therefore it cannot be the
efficient cause of Insects, which Insects are procreated of the unity and
consistency of humidity and sic^ity.

I answer, The heat of the body putrefied, may be considered two manner of
ways; either in respect of that mixture which does putrefie, or in respect of
the animals which are produced from that mixture: if it be considered after the
first manner, then it is preternatural, and not fit to retain the humidity with
the siccity, because it does not further rule in these passive qualities; but
if heat be considered in the second respect, then it is natural, and has force
and dominion over the moist and dry, and it can terminate and couple them, and
out of that matter produce a substantial form, by the concurrence of the
celestial heat: but now as the matter is various and diverse, in which heat
does exercise its action; so likewise various and diverse animals and insects
are produced: for if the matter be much terrene and corpulent, then it will
produce testaceous animals; but if tender, thin, and subtle, then heat does
generate slender animals; as Flies, Gnats, etc. For as Aristotle says, In the
sea there is much of an earthly substance: and thence it is, that from the
concretion thereof, so many shell-fishes are procreated. But again, it may be
objected by some: Every thing that is generated, must proceed from a thing that
is like to it self: for a celestial body and heat, are not similar to those
which do arise from coenous and putrid Matter; therefore from these they cannot
rightly be said to be generated.

I answer, Every thing that is generated, is said to be generated from its
simile, either according to an univocal generation, or an equivocal generation
by analogy. I call that an univocal generation, when one man begets another, or
one dog another; for here the thing getting, and the thing begotten, are of one
Genus: for the bitch generating is an animal, and the dog generated, is an
animal: But an equivocal generation is made by similitude; as a frog, that is
produced out of filth by the force of the sun; and it is so called, because the
thing getting, and the thing gotten, are Heterogeneous. But now although the
Insects proceeding from such like bodies, are not similar, according to the
univocal Genus, yet they are generated a simile, according to the equivocal
Genus by analogy, because they are produced by some existent act; as by a
celestial body, or the like, which concur in the way of act to produce a body.

CHAP. 15. Of Man and his Formation in the Womb.
1. HItherto we have Treated of irrational Creatures. Now we shall say
something of the rational, viz. Man.

2. Man is (A) an animal endowed with reason.

3. And as he is the most noblest of all Creatures, so he has the most
beautiful and excellent structure of body, of all other animals; being erect,
and looking up to heaven.

4. But as every thing which is gotten, does proceed of something, and from
something: so there are certain necessary principles to the generation of man's
Body.

5. The seed (B) therefore of both Sexes, is plentiful and fruitful, and
pronounced by the ancients, to be the Mother-blood of principles.

6. The Seed is a humid body, spumous and white, generated from the flower or
cream o^ the spirits, elaborated by the insited force of the stones for
generation sake.

7. Hence it consists of two parts; of a watrish humidity, and spirit.

8. The Serous humidity is generated of blood; whence he affirms seed to be an
excrement of the last sanguineous aliment, not in substance, but by a
profitable abundance, Arist. 1 de Genesis Anim. c. 18, 29.

9. The Spiritual part (C) is no other then the vital spirit, dilated by the
spermatick arteries to the cods, where it is exquisitely mixed with blood, and
of two becomes one perfect body: therefore the Seed is compounded of spirit and
water.

10. Maternal blood (D) or menstruum, another principle of our generation, is a
sanguineous excrement, begotten from the heat of the female, for the
conservation of her species.

11. It is called menstruous, because it comes monthly; which nevertheless,
after conception, is forthwith stopped.

12. It is called a sanguineous excrement, not that it is like thereunto, or
noxious in its quality (as the Neotericks do affirm) but that it is too
luxuriant in quantity; and therefore it is poured into the greater veins, from
the fleshy parts, that are already filled and satiated.

13. Therefore this blood is laudable, and alimentary, whose efficient cause is
the weakness of the heat of the woman.

14. For the female is always more colder then the male, therefore she cannot
make all the last al^ment, and convert it into the substance of the body; and
therefore by little and little it is sent into the veins of the womb, that it
may he excerned.

15. The time of excretion is not designed; but in many it begins at the
fourteenth year of their age, and ceases about the fiftieth year, because then
heat grows weak, and does not longer generate the relics of laudable blood,
neither can it expel them if they do abound.

16. The use of this menstruous blood is very necessary, both that it may cause
a conception, and afterward nourish after conception.

17. Therefore seed is the principle, from which, as it were the efficient
cause, the conformation is made; from which, as from the matter, the spermatick
parts are generated: but blood has the name of the matter alone, and passive
principle.

18. For of it are both the carnous parts generated, and both the spermatick
and carnous nourished.

19. But to the seed is allotted the nature both of the efficient and matterial
principle, because it consists of two parts: for the efficient is by reason of
the Spirits, on which on every side is poured; the material, by reason of the
thickness of the body and crassament, of which the spermatick parts are
generated.

20. And the seed is double; the one of the male, the other of the female: but
the seed of the male is of greatest force.

21. Neither do the Peripateticks altogether deny women to emit seed, as Galen
and not a few more, have exclaimed against them: but as they say, they do not
emit seed as men, neither have they such seed.

22. For women do put forth seed, but not such as men do, that is, not so
crass, white, and full of spirit.

23. For when man's seed is poured out into the womb, it is exquisitely mixed
with the woman's, and is, as it were, in a fruitful field; and immediately upon
the permixion of the seeds, the womb is gathered up together, and does contract
it self so close, that no empty space be left within.

24. Seed so (E) taken and strictly comprehended, is cherished in the womb, by
its heat and ingenital property, exciting its strength lurking within it; and
stimulates it to act, insomuch that it breaks out into action.

25. This action of the womb they call conception, which is a promotion of the
retained seed to duty.

26. The Signs of conception (F) are these: a tickling over the whole body,
upon the meeting of the seeds; a retention of the seed, if the inward mouth of
the womb does exquisitely shut and open: a small pain wandering about the belly:
if the Terms be stopped: if the breasts swell and grow hard; a nauseous
stomach, and frequent vomitings.

27. Therefore the spirit of the seeds is used as an instrument for this divine
faculty of generation, in going to the bottom, or center; whereby the work of
conception is carried on, and of which the conception it self is constituted.

28. This work cannot be made without ordination, position, secretion,
concretion, densation, rarefaction, extension, contraction. Arist.

29. Therefore, when the spirit begins to act in the substance of the seed,
consisting of Heterogeneous parts, it first divides its dissimilar parts: those
that are thin and tender, and full of spirit, it hides within; those that are
cold and thick, which arise from the seed of the woman, it covers without.

30. The middle and more nobler parts of the seed, are puffed up, or blown up,
by heat and spirit, to the effiguration of the members.

31. The number of these membranes are yet undetermined: we reckon only three;
the first whereof is called Amnios, which is next to the young, wrapping it from
the neck to the feet, containing the excrements also with it; in which the young
swims, as it were.

32. The second is called Alantois; it is the middle between the first and the
third, thin and narrow, only going to the middle of the young; and it is the
receptacle of urine.

33. The third tunicle is called Chorion, and it is the outermost, covering the
whole body of the young, and adheres to the womb, by the interposition of the
umbilical veins and arteries.

34. These 3 membranes mutually connated to themselves, do seem to constitute
one tunicle, which is called by the Latins secundina.

35. The interior and subtle part of the seed, being encloistered in these, and
as it were environed, the formative virtue, and as it were vital spirit, of the
same seed (which contains in potency all parts, both similar and instrumental)
does coact together, and as it were delineated, so that the rude exordium of
these parts, or at least a resemblance of them, may be seen; which is wont to
be made in seven days.

36. For when the vital spirit, which is the framer of generation, is the same,
and does act in one and the same moment, disposited into the same matter, and
altered by heat; what hinders but that this agent may decline all parts
natural, once and again?

37. Yet there is an order observed in the formation of members; (I) one member
is perfected before another.

38. And the more nobler, and most necessary, the first of all; the ignobler,
and least necessary, the last of all.

39. Therefore the formatrix faculty does perfect in the first place, the
spermatick parts of the male in thirty days, of the female in forty or forty
two.

40. Nor does it hinder what some learned men do object, that so little seed
does not suffice for the constituting of these parts; for the sperme is
appointed not only to suffice the formation, but the auction also.

41. Again, if this sperme (which proves Abortive, or may be known by the
section of the living animal) be cast into cold water, it will scarce exceed
the bigness of a large Emme^.

42. The carnous parts are framed after the spermatical delineation, from the
other principle of generation, to wit, blood, which flows by the navel vein.

43. There are three sorts of flesh which grows in the bowels: First, the flesh
(...): Secondly, the flesh of the Muscles, which is called properly and
absolutely Flesh: Thirdly, the peculiar flesh of every part: and it is likely,
that these three sorts of flesh are not generated together, but in order.

44. For first of all, the flesh Parencyma, which is the substance of the
Liver, Spleen, and Biters; afterward the peculiar flesh of every part; and
lastly, the flesh of the Muscles.

45. And amongst the fleshes Parencymate, that of the Liver is the first made,
because the umbilical vein does first pour blood into it, which concretes after
fusion, and becomes flesh; then that of the heart; and lastly, that of the rest
of the bowels.

46. So that the infant begins to be Dearticulated and absolute, after forty
five days; living at first the imperfect life, as it were, of a Plant, after
the manner of an animal, and at last the life of a man.

47. And this happens not by reason of the form, which is simple and
individual; but by reason of the matter, that is, of the organs.

48. But the embryon takes aliment only by the navel; but after the liver is
made, it ministers to all the members: but it does not yet move, though it has
life, by reason of the imbecility of the brain and softness of nerves.

49. The weak and tender members of the infant, by little and little are dried
by heat, and so made more solid; and then the young begins to feel by perfect
Sensories, and by and by to be moved in the womb.

50. But a man-child does move sooner then a female: for boys, because they
are conformed in thirty days, do move on the ninetieth day, which completely
make three months; but because the female is framed in forty or forty two
days, she moves not till the hundred and twentieth day, which is about the
latter end of the fourth month.

51. And the infant is nourished, and does increase all this space of time; and
when it is ripe it is brought forth, partly by the endeavor of the womb (for it
being burdened with its weight and abundance of excrements, it strives to be
exonerated) and partly by its proper motion: for the necessity of breathing,
the want of aliment, and the narrowness of the place, do enforce the young to
endeavor a passage out.

52. At the time of birth the doors are opened, which immediately after
delivery are shut again. This we see done, says Galen; but how it is done, we
know not; only we may admire it: Avicen calls it a work to be wondered at,
above all wonders.

53. The womb being opened, the infant begins to come out by the head: and by
many painful throws, it draws out and brings with it three membranes: and thus
by the prescript of nature, are we born into the world.

54. The time of bringing forth, is not fully defined, nor can it; for some are
delivered at seven months end, some at nine, (and most then) some at ten, but
seldom, and very seldom at eleven; but in the eighth months end, seldom any
are delivered with a live child.

55. And this is the manner of the Conception, Conformation, and Procreation of
the noblest of Creatures.

The Commentary.
( A) THe definition of a Man delivered, consists of a Genus and Difference: As
to the Genus, he is an animal; and as to the Difference, one endowed with
reason: And in this it is that man has a Prerogative, Dignity, and Excellency,
above all other Creatures: for his mind, which is Divine, is the Image of God;
and he differs much from other animals, and as it were exercises a regality
over them: for are not Lions and Elephants tamed by the strength of man, and
overcome, and made subject to him? Man is created with his face looking up to
Heaven, as it were contemplating upon God. Hence Ovid could say,

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
For whereas God created all other animals with their faces downwards to the
ground, man alone he erects with his eyes fixed upon heaven, whither he should
tend.

( B) The generation of man is made after this manner: the seed of both Sexes
being perfectly mixed, the whole does proceed from thence; therefore the matter
of the generation of man's Body, is the seed both of the man and the woman,
plentiful and fruitful. This seed does consist of two parts, watrish Humidity,
and Spirit: the watrish Humidity proceeds from the blood; whence Aristotle
affirms blood to be a profitable excrement of the last aliment, that is, of the
sanguineous aliment: I say it is an excrement, not supervacaneous in its nature
or substance; as Stones and Worms: nor in its quality; as Dung, Sweat, etc. but
only in its abundance or quantity: for because it superabounds from nourishing
the parts of the body, and cannot be assimilated thereunto; it obtains the
place of an excrement.

( C) The spiritual part of seed is no other thing then the vital Spirit, which
by reason of this Spirit, it becomes hot: and sometimes this Spirit is
engendered in the heart, and thence sent out into the whole body: so does the
Seed also, according to the Spirit, proceed from the whole, because the Spirit
is communicated from the heart to the whole: Hence Aristotle says, if the Seed
did not proceed from every part of the animal, the cause of the similitude were
false; therefore seed ejected by the yard into the womb, becomes fruitful, when
it is exquisitely mixed with the woman's seed; and it is the principal motion,
that is, the first agent for the formotion of the young, by reason of the
spirits contained in it: For this going to the bottom, as to its center, is
cherished and preserved, and so proceeds to action, as to formation: all which
things are necessary for the framing of the young; for besides the seed of the
man and the woman, it is necessary that this vital spirit concur to the
conception, because the seed of man cannot besmear all the parts of the womb,
which else will impede conception: and if the seed of the woman be only
present, that will not cause conception, by reason of its imperfection; for the
seed of man is more hot then woman's: and although this seed be not so perfect,
yet it concurs as an agent to the formation, although not as the first agent:
for as Galen observes, the mixture of the seed of man and woman, is perfect
seed; whence Aristotle says, that what arises from the seed of man and woman,
do arise from contraries, as when there are contraries in the same Genus: and
although each seed, according to Aristotle, is in its Genus an agent, yet they
do not act alike in power and strength, but differ in these functions, magis
and minus: the seed of the woman does concur, as the matter of which, both by
reason of the seed of man, which is its aliment, (for man's seed is nourished
and made more perfect by woman's seed) as also by reason of the membranes which
are produced out of it. But in this place we may take notice, what the
Peripateticks in a manner aledge, that the woman emits no seed: but they are
basely and injuriously dealt withal; it is an aspersion cast upon them, by
some later Philosophers, because Aristotle says, That the seed of the woman is
not so crass, while hot, and full of spirit, as the seed of man: but he does
not say, that women emit no seed at all.

( D) Besides the seed of both Sexes, the menstruous blood of the woman concurs
to generation: it is called menstruous blood, because it is an excrement; yet
it differs from that blood whereby a woman is nourished; and it is called
exerementitious blood, to difference it from the seminal excrement; and it is
an excrement of the second concoction, which is made in the liver and veins;
and therefore it is, that it has a red color: furthermore, that matter which
is contained in the veins, and expurged by the veins of the womb, is this
superfluous blood and excrement of the second coction: for whereas the Bodies
of women are more colder then men's, they cannot make perfect their last
aliment, nor convert it into the substance of the body to be nourished;
whereupon, that which is above, and cannot be converted, by little and little,
is thence conveyed to the veins of the womb, where it gathers together into one
place; and what of it cannot be sustained by nature, is expelled. Its use is
necessary: for as it helps conception, so it nourishes the young.

But here a question will arise, how the young, whilst it is conceived and
framed in (...) ^omb, is gotten and nourished by this same blood, when it is
endowed with a bad quality, and puts forth many ill affections?

I answer, This blood is not always so bad as is imagined: for those women,
whose bodies are temperate, their blood also must needs be temperate; and when
the body is vicious, the blood also must needs be infected. But again, this
pravity in women, is purged away every month; and in them it is otherwise,
then in those who keep their terms beyond their accustomed time: the former
has no noxious quality in it, as to hurt what is generated of it; which need
not seem strange: but if the same blood be not evacuated at its accustomed
time, but retained, it will stir up and cause many bad affections, as the
suffocation of the matrix, (...), and the like. But now if it be considered in
a woman that has milk in her breasts, it is otherwise; for then blood is
conflated of a treble substance: for then the alimentary or pure portion of it
goes to the nourishment of the young, and part somewhat impurer goes to the
breasts, and converts to milk; and the worst of all is contained as excrements
in the tunicles, where the young is enrolled: which is evacuated at the woman's
delivery.

( E) After the seed of both Sexes, together with the menstruous blood, is
received into the womb, it closes up; and the seed therein contained, is
cherished by its heat, and begins to act: the spiritual part of the seed passes
to the bottom, and begins the formation; and of the crass part of the seed, the
spermatick parts are engendered; and of the menstruous, the sanguineous parts.

( F) The Notes of conception are these: The close shutting up of the womb; A
kind of trembling and tickling over the whole body; And after that, an
exceeding refrigeration; Loss of stomach, Nauseating of victuals, Vomitings,
etc.

( G) Generation is made by the mutation of the power into the act, and an
artificial composition of many existents in the act: the Soul is the act of an
organical body: but the seed is not the organ, therefore not the animate; then
the power above will be the animate: for as the Sun, not hot, does calefie; the
Whetstone not sharp, yet does sharpen: so also the seed may animate, that is,
the young is animated by the seed, although there be no soul or life in it.

( I) It is a great and difficult dispute among Physicians and Philosophers, in
what order the parts of the young are framed? some think the liver first to be
generated, others the heart, which they say is the first that lives, and the
last that dies.

In this Controversy we are to observe, that neither the Liver nor the Heart,
nor any other principal member, nor umbilical vessels are generated first, as
diverse have judged ^everal manner of ways; but that all are inchoated in one
and the same moment, and that for this subsequent reason: The vital spirit,
which is the efficient cause of the generation, and the internal natural agent,
not the external voluntary, has the whole formatrix faculty, in every part
where it is joined to the matter fitly disposited: it must necessarily act
secundum potentias; and therefore all the parts of the body are produced by it
at once: this experience confirms by those who have miscarried in ten, twenty,
or thirty days, after conception, when the whole substance has not exceeded
the bigness a grain of Barley, a Be, or the figure of a Bean; yet all its
bowels are formed, as some late Anatomists have observed.

CHAP. 16. De Zoophytis, or of things that are partly Animals, and partly
Plants.
1. HItherto we have illustrated the first Species of Nature, Aisthetices, to
wit, an animal: the other which remains to be explained, is part Plant, and
part Animal.

2. And these Zoophyta's are corporeal Natures, endowed only with certain
senses, contracting and dilating themselves by motion.

3. Whence Hermolaus Barbarus calls them Plantanimalia: Budaeus terms them
Plantanimes, because they have a middle, and as it were a third Nature, between
Plants and Animals.

4. Whereas they have a certain sense with Animals; Hence they dilate
themselves pleasantly to such things as they attract and affect; but contract
themselves, if pricked or offended.

5. But in the effigies of the Body, they come nearest to the Nature of Plants.

6. Their forms differ according to their greater or lesser virtue of feeling:
all of them adhere to Rocks, Sand, or Mud; of which sort are these, Holothuria,
Stella marina, Pulmo marinus, U^tica spongiae.

7. To these may be added, that Tree which grows in the Province of
Pudifetanea; to which if a man draws nigh, it will gather in its boughs, as
though it were ashamed; and when he is gone, spread them abroad: for which
cause the inhabitants thereabouts, have nominated it the Chaste tree. Scaliger
Exer. 181. Sect. 28.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
THere is now in the Press that excellent Piece, entitled Natural Magic, in
twenty Books, by John Baptist Porta a Neopolitane, Enlarged by the Author
himself, and cleared from diverse errors, wherewith the former Editions were
tainted: In which all the riches and delights of the natural Sciences are set
forth. Carefully Translated from the Latin, and rendered into English by a
worthy hand. The Books of Natural Magic are these.
1 OF the causes of wonderful things. 2 Of the Generation of diverse Animals. 3
Of the production of new Plants. 4 Of increasing Household Stuff. 5 Of Changing
Metals. 6 Of Counterfeiting precious Stones. 7 Of the wonders of the
Lodestone. 8 Of strange Cures. 9 Of Beautifying of women. 10 Of extracting
Essences. 11 Of Perfuming. 12 Of Artificial Fires. 13 Of the most rare
Tempering of Steel. 14 Of Cookery. 15 Of Hunting. 16 Of invisible Writing. 17
Of strange Glasses. 18 Of Staticks Experiments. 19 Of Pneumatick Experiments.
20. Chaos.



