A COLLECTION OF Miscellany Poems, LETTERS, etc.

By Mr. BROWN, etc.

To which is added, A CHARACTER OF A LATITVDINARIAN.

LONDON, Printed for John Sparks, in Newstreet, near Fleetstreet. 1699.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
MEthinks I see the Reader under a great disappointment, to find a Book of Mr
Brown (...)ing into the world without the Equipage of a flaunting Dedication or
a Prefatory Epistle, like a painted young Whore in the Frontispiece of a Nanny
House* to inveagle Customers. What? says the Reader, has all his Munificent
Patrons made their Exits? has he dropped those necessary requisits of a Mercenary
Pen, Impudence and Importunity? or has the fumes of a long debauch raised such
Fogs about his Brains, that nothing could be pumpt from his Poets Fingers? No,
Gentlemen, he is retired into the Country with some yellow and white Chips of
the Tower, and now looks as much above a Bookseller, as a P -- Councellor
above a Porter; and the De'el a Line can I draw from him, whilst he fancies
himself Lord of India. This is an Epidemical disease among some Scribblers, who
have no Wit to sell, while they have Money to spend, or can be trusted; but
when they are reduced to a low ebb, they will sneak, fawn, and cringe, like a Dog
that has worried Sheep, and dreads the Halter. Then it is, kind Sir, your most
obedient humble Servant, wherein, Dear Sir, does it lie in the Sphere of my
Activity to serve you, and earn half a Crown to procure me Credit for a
Fortnight in a Cellar in the Strand. Now since it is inconsistent with my
Interest, to wai^ any longer in expectation of a Preface, I have adventured 'em
to run the Risque of Censure, and shif^ for themselves without one. Nor indeed
do I apprehend any Necessity to detain the Reader in the Portal, where the
inside abounds with such variety o^ excellent furniture, as will sufficiently
delight the Ingenious contemplator; here and there are interspersed some words
bordering upon Indecency, for which I hope Mr Collier, Corrector General of the
profane and debauched Press, will take my Autho^ into Chastizement, amongst
the rest of the Smutty Po^ets, and he will oblige my grateful acknowledgment in a
Bottle of Wine and a Neats Tongue, for helpin^ me to sell some Thousands of
these Books more; bu^ methinks I hear some say, how comes a Book-selle^ to
write Prefaces, why not say I, for the Conversati^on of the Town, and keeping
Company with the Wi^^ will do much; for what would Mr D -- y have done, who was
bred a Scrivener, if it had not bee^ for the Conversation of the Town; or what
would be come of the young Oxonians and Cantabridgeans if they wanted
Conversation; if any designed for the Gos -- l, they must Troop down to supply
the Coun^try Pull -- s; or, for the Law, they would be only fi^ to carry a green
Bag after a Councellor. I beg m^ Readers pardon, for being so prolix, but I
ha^^ now done, and remain his humble Servant,

J. S*

Miscellany Poems, etc.
The Contented Whore.
An Imitation of Epig. 66. in Mart. l. 12. Formosa Phyllis nocte cum mihi tota,
etc.
1.
TO Charming Caelia's arms I slew,
And there all night I feasted;
No God such transports ever knew,
Nor mortal ever tasted.
2.
Lost in the sweet tumultuous joy,
And pleased beyond expressing:
How can your Slave, my Fair, said I,
Reward so great a Blessing*
3.
The whole Creation's wealth survey,
Through both the Indies wander:
Ask what bribed Senates give away,
And fighting Monarchs squander.
4.
The richest spoils of earth and air;
The rifled Ocean's treasure;
It Is all too poor a bribe by far
To purchase so much pleasure.
5.
She blushing cried -- My Life, my Dear,
Since Caelia thus you fancy.
Give her, but it is too much, I fear,
A Rundlet of right Nantcy.
Mart. Epig. 20. l. 1. Si memini, fuerant tibi quatuor, Aelia dentes.
1.
WHen Gammar Gurton first I knew
Four Teeth in all she reckoned:
Come's a damned Cough, and whips out too,
And the other two a second.
2.
Courage, old Dame, and never fear,
The third when e're it comes,
Give me but the other Jugg of Beer,
And I Will ensure your Gums.
Advice to a Vintner.
Mart. Epig. 19- l. 1. The Hint taken from Quid te Tucca juvat.
WHat Planet distracts thee, what damnable Star,
To dash honest Bourdeaux with vile Bar a Bar?
Why should innocent Claret be murdered by Port,
Thou lt surely be sentenced in Bacchus's Court*
As for us Drunken Rakes, if we hang, or we drown
Or are decently poisoned, what loss has the Town;
But to kill harmless Claret, that does so much good,
Is downright effusion of Christian Blood:
Never think what I tell you is matter of laughter,
Thou Wilt be cursed for it in this world, and damned for it hereafter.
Mart. Epig. 5. l. 2. Ne valeam, si non totis, Deciane, diebus, etc.
IN some vile Hamlet let me live forgot,
Small Beer my portion, and no Wine my lot:
To some worse Fiend in Church-Indentures bound,
Than ancient Job, or modern Sh -- l -- ck found.
And with more aches plagued, and pains, and ills,
Than fill or Salmon's Works, or Tilburgh's Bills;
If it is not still the burden of my prayer
The night with you, with you the day to share,
But Sir (and the complaint you know is true)
Two damned long miles there lie 'twixt me and you.
And these two miles, by help of calculation,
Make four, by that I Have reached my habitation.
You near Sage Wills, the land of Mirth and Claret,
I live stowed up in a White-chappel Garret.
Often when I Have walked so far, your hands to kiss,
Flattered with thoughts of the succeeding bliss,
I Am told you're gone to the vexatious Hall,
Where with eternal Lungs the Lawyers bawl;
Or else stole out, some Female friend to see;
Or, what is as bad, you're not at home for me.
Two miles I Have at your service, and that is civil,
But to trudge four, and miss you, is the Devil.
Mart. Epig. 61. l. 11. Sit Phlogis an Chione Veneri magis apta requiris?
1.
NOthing than Chloe e're I knew
By Nature more befriended:
Caelia's less Beautiful, it is true,
But by more hearts attended.
2.
No Nymph alive with so much art
Receives her Shepherd's firing,
Or does such cordial drops impart
To love when just expiring.
3.
Cold niggard Age, that does elsewhere
At one poor offering falter,
To her whole Hecatombs would spare,
And pay them on her Altar.
4.
But Chloe, to Love's great disgrace,
In Bed nor falls, nor rises,
And too much trusting to her face,
All other Arts despises.
5.
No half formed words, nor murmuring sighs,
Engage to fresh performing
Her breathless Lover, when he lies,
Disabled after storming.
6.
Dull as a Prelate when he prays,
Or Cowards after listing,
The fair Insensible betrays
Loves rites by not assisting.
7.
Why thus, ye powers that cause our smart,
Do ye Love's gifts dissever;
Or why those happy Talents part,
That should be joined for ever.
8.
For once perform an Act of Grace,
Implored with such devotion,
And grant my Caelia Chloe's face,
Or Chloe Caelia's motion.
Hor. Ode 8. l. 1. Lydia dic per omnes, etc.
1.
TEll me, O Lydia, for by heavens I swear
You shall not deny so just a prayer.
Tell me why thus young Damon you destroy
And nip the blooming virtues of the lovely Boy
2.
Why does he never throw the manly bar,
And practice the first feats of war,
Or gayly shining in his Martial pride,
With a strong artful hand the foaming course^ guide
3.
Why does he never grasp the ponderous shield,
And meet his equals in the Field:
Or when the streams swell with the flowing Tide,
With his soft pliant arms the silver Thames divide.
4.
Why does he lurk, for I bewail his doom,
Like an Alsatian Bully still at home,
That fears to walk abroad all day,
Lest eager hungry Cits should hurry him away.
Hor. Ode 1^. l. 2. Quid Bellicosus Cantaber, etc.
1.
WHat the B -- lly of France, and our Friends on the Rhine,
With their stout Grenadiers thi^ Summer design,
Cease over your Coffee, and Wine, to debate:
Why the Devil should you, that live this side the water,
Pore over Gazettes, and be vexed at the matte^
Come, come, let alone these Arcana's of State
2.
Alas! while such idle discourse you maintain*
And with Politic Nonsense thus trouble your Brai^
Your Youth flys away on the back of swift hour
Which no praying, no painting, no sighing restore
Then you will find, when old Age has discolour^ your head
Tho a Mistress be wanting, no rest in your Be^
3.
Prithee do but observe how the Queen of the nigh^
Still varies her station, and changes her light:
Now with a full Orb she the darkness does chase
Now like Whores in the Pit, shows but half o^ her face
These Chaplets of Flowers that our Temple^ adorn
Now tarnish and fade, that were fresh in the morn
4.
But to leave off these similes, for Curate in Chamlet,
To lard a dry Sermon for grave folks in Hamlet,
While our Vigor remains, we'll our Talents improve,
Dash the pleasures of Wine with the Blessings of Love,
Here, carelessly here, we'll lie down in the shade
Which the friendly kind Poplars and Lime-trees have made.
5.
Your Claret's too hot -- Sirrah, Drawer, go bring
A cup of cold Adam from the next purling spring.
And now your hands in, prithee step over the way
And fetch Madam Tricksy, the brisk and the gay.
Bid her come in her Alamode Manto of Satin,
Two coolers I Am sure with our Wine can be no false Latin.
Hor. Ode 27. l. 1. Natis in Vsum laetitiae Scyphis, etc.
1.
TO fight in your Cups, and abuse the good Creature,
Believe it, my Friends, is a sin of that nature,
That were you all damned for a tedious long year
To nasty Mundungus, and heathenish Small Beer,
Such as after debauches your Sparks of the Town
For a penance next morning devoutly pour down
It would not atone for so vile a Transgression,
You're a scandal to all of the drinking profession
2.
What a pox do ye bellow, and make such a pother
And throw Candlesticks, Bottles, and Pipes at each other.
Come keep the Kings Peace, leave your damning and sinking,
And gravely return to good Christian drinking
He that flinches his Glass, and to drink is not able,
Let him quarrel no more, but knock under the Table.
3.
Well, Faith, since you have raised my ill nature so high,
I Will drink on no other condition, not I,
Unless my old friend in the corner declares
What Mistress he Courts, and whose colors he wears,
You may safely acquaint me, for I Am none of those
That use to divulge what is spoke under the Rose.
Come, part with it -- What she! forbid it ye Powers,
What unfortunate Planet ruled over thy Amors.
Why man she has lain (Oh thy Fate how I pity)
With half the blue Breeches and Wigs in the City.
Go thank Mr. Parson, give him thanks with a curse,
Oh those damnable words For better for worse.
To regain your old freedom you vainly endeavor,
Your Doxy and You no Priest can dissever,
You must dance in the Circle, you must dance in it for ever.
To Mr. Henry Purcel.
LOng did dark ignorance our Isle o'respread,
Our Music, and our Poetry lay dead.
But the dull malice of a barbarous Age,
Fell most severe on David's sacred Page.
To wound his sense, and quench his heaven-born fire,
Three vile Translators lewdly did conspire,
In holy Doggerel, and low chiming Prose,
The King and Poet they at once depose.
Vainly he did the unrighteous change bemoan,
And languish'd in vile Numbers, not his own.
Nor stopped his usage here:
For what escaped in Wisdom's ancient Rhimes,
Was murdered over and over in the Composers Chimes.
What praises, Purcell, to thy skill are due,
Who have to Judah's Monarch been so true.
By thee he moves our hearts, by thee he reigns,
By thee shakes off his old inglorious Chains,
And sees new honors done to his immortal strains*
Not Italy, the Mother of each Art,
Did e're a juster, happier Son impart.
In thy performance we with wonder find
Corelli's Genius to Bassani joined.
Sweetness combined with Majesty prepares
To wing Devotion with inspiring Airs.
Thus I unknown my gratitude express,
And conscious gratitude could do no less;
This Tribute from each British Muse is due,
The whole Poetic Tribe's obliged to you.
For where the Author's scanty words have failed,
Thy happier Graces, Purcell, have prevailed.
And surely none but you, with equal ease,
Could add to David, and make Durfy please.
The Ode in Horace L. 4. Paraphrased Audivere Lyce, etc.
1.
LOng have my Prayers slow heaven assail'^
But thanks to all the powers above,
That still revenge the cause of injured Love,
Lyce at last they have prevailed.
My vows are all with usury repaid,
For who can Providence upbraid,
That sees thy former crimes with hastened Ag^ repaid
2.
You Are old, and yet by awkard ways do striv^
The unwilling passion to revive;
Do drink, and dance, and touch thy Lyre
And all to set some puny Heart on fire.
Alas in Chloe's Cheeks love basking lies;
Chloe great Beauty's fairest prize,
Chloe that charms our ears, and ravishes our eyes
3.
The vigorous Boy flies over the barren Plains,
Where sapless Oaks their withered trunks extend,
For Love, like other Gods, disdains
To grace the Shrine that Age has once profaned.
He too laughs at thee now,
Scorns thy gray hairs, and wrinkled brow,
How should his youthful fires agree with hoary Ages snow?
4.
In vain, with wondrous art, and mighty care,
You strive your ruined Beauty to repair;
No far-fetcht Silks one minute can restore,
That time has added to the endless score.
And precious Stones, tho never so bright,
They shine with their own native light,
Will but disgrace thee now, and but inhance thy night.
5.
Ah me! where is now that Mien! that Face
That Shape! that Air! that every Grace!
That Color! whose enchanting Red
Me to Love's tents a Captive led.
Strange turn of Fate! that she
Who from my self so often has stolen poor me,
Now by the just revenge of Time, stolen from herself should b^
6.
Time was when Lyce's powerful face
To Phyllis only gave the place;
Perfect in all the little tricks of love,
That charm the sense, and the quick fancy mov^
But fate to Phyllis a long reign denied,
She fell in all her blooming Beauty's pride,
She conquered whilst she lived, and triumph as she dy^
7.
Thou, like some old Commander in disgrace,
Surviving the past Conquests of thy face,
Now the great business of thy life is done,
Reviewst with grief the Trophies thou have won
Damned to be parched with lust, tho chilled with Age,
And tho past action, damned to tread the Stage,
That all might laugh to see that glaring light,
Which lately shone so fierce and bright,
End with a stink at last, and vanish into night.
The x. Ode in Horace L. 3. Paraphrased. Extremum Tanaim si biberes Lyce, etc.
THo you, my Lyce, in some Northern^^ood*
Had chilled the current of your blood:
Or lost your sweet engaging Charms
In some Tartarian Husband's icy arms,
Were yet one spark of pity left behind
To form the least impression on your mind,
Sure you must grieve, sure you must sigh,
Sure drop some pity from your Eye,
To see your Lover prostrate on the ground,
With gloomy night, and black despair encompassed all around
2.
Hark! how the threatening Tempests rise,
And with loud clamors fill the Skies:
Hark! how the tott ring buildings shake,
Hark! how the Trees a doleful Consort make
And see! oh see! how all below
The earth lies covered deep in Snow.
The Romans clad in white, did thus the Fasces woe
And thus your freezing Candidate, my Lyce sues for you
3.
Come, lay these foolish niceties aside,
And to soft passion sacrifice your pride;
Let not the precious hours with fruitless questions dye,
But let new scenes of pleasure crown them as they fly.
Slight not the flames which your own charms infuse,
And no kind friendly minute lose,
While Youth and Beauty give you leave to choose.
As men by acts of Charity below
Or purchase the next world, or think they do:
So you in Youth a Lover should engage,
To make a sure retreat for your declining Age.
4.
Let meaner Souls by Virtue be cajoled,
As the good Grecian Spinstress was of old;
She, while her Sot his youthful prime bestowed
To fight a Cuckolds Wars abroad,
Held out a longer Siege than Troy,
Against the warm attacks of proffered joy,
And foolishly preserved a worthless Chastity,
At the expense of ten years lies and perjury.
Like that old fashioned Dame never bilk your own delight,
But what you have lost in the day, get, get it in the night.
5.
Oh! then if prayers can no acceptance find,
Nor vows, nor offerings bend your mind;
If all these powerful motives fail,
Yet let your Husbands injuries prevail;
He, by some Playhouse Jilt misled,
Elsewhere bestows the tribute of your Bed;
Let me his forfeited Embraces share,
Let me your mighty wrongs repair.
Thus Kings by their own Rebels powers betrayed,
To quell the homebred Foe call in a foreign aid.
6.
Love, let Platonics promise what they will,
Must, like Devotion, be encouraged still;
Must meet with equal wishes and desires,
Or else the dying Lamp in its own Urn expires:
And I, for all that boasted flame
We Poets and fond Lovers idly claim,
Am of too frail a make I fear,
Should you continue still severe,
To brave the double hardships of your fate,
And bear the coldness of the nights, and rigor of your hate.
The xxvi. Ode in Hor. L. 3. Paraphrased. Vixi puellis nuper idoneus, etc.
1.
It Is true, while active Blood my veins did fire,
And vigorous Youth gay thoughts inspire,
(By your leave, Courteous Reader, be it said)
I could have don't as well as most men did;
But now I am (the more's the pity)
The veriest fumbler in the City.
2.
There, honest Harp, that have of late
So often bore thy sinful Masters fate,
Thou a cracked side, and he a broken pa^e.
Hang up, and peaceful rest enjoy,
Hang up, while poor dejected I,
Unmusical, unstrung like thee, sit mourning by
3.
And likewise all ye trusty bars,
With whose assistance heretofore,
When Love engaged me in his Wars,
I Have battered, heaven forgive me, many a doo^
Lie there till some more able hand
Shall you to your old pious use command.
4.
But, oh kind Phoebus, lend a pitying ear
To thy old Servant's humble prayer,
Let scornful Chloe thy resentments feel,
Lash her all over with rods of Steel;
And when the Jilt shall of her smart complain,
This it is, then tell her, to disdain
Thy sacred power, and scorn a Lover's pain.
The xv. Ode in Horace Lib. 3. Imitated. Vxor pauperis Ibyci, etc.
1.
AT length, thou antiquated Whore,
Leave trading off, and sin no more,
For shame in your old Age turn Nun,
As Whores of everlasting Memory have done.
2.
Why should thou (...) frequent the sport,
The Balls, and ^evel^ of the Court?
Or why at glittering Masks appear,
Only to fill the Triumphs of the Fair?
3.
To Ghent or Brussels strait adjourn,
The lewdness of your former life to mourn,
There brawny Priests in plenty you may hire
If whip, and wholesome Sackcloth cannot quenc^ the fire
4.
Your Daughter's for the business made,
To her in Conscience quit your Trade.
Thus, when his conquering days were done
Victorious Charles resigned his Kingdom to his Son
5.
Alas! never thrum your long disused Guittar,
Nor with Pulvilio's scent your hair,
But in some lonely Cell abide,
With Rosary and Plalter dangling at your side.
The Epigram in Martial L. Imitated.
Quaeris sollicitus diu, rogasque
Cui tradas, Lupe, filium Magistro, etc*

WHen e're I meet you, still you cry,
What shall I do with Bob, my Boy.
Since this Affair you will have me treat on,
Never send the Lad to Paul's or Eaton.
The Muses let him not confide in,
But leave those Jilts to Tate or Dryden.
If, with damned Rimes he racks his wits,
Send him to Mevis or St. Kit's.
Wou^d you with wealth his Pockets store well,
Teach him to pimp, or hold a door well.
If he has a head not worth a Stiver,
Make him a Curate, or Hog driver.
In obitum Tho. Shadwell pinguis memoria 1693.
1.
COnditur haec tumulo Bavius, gravis es^ memen^
Terra duo Bavio, nam fuit ille tibi.
2.
Tam cito miraris Bavii foetere cadaver?
Non erat in toto corpore mica salis.
3.
Mors uni Bavio lucrum: nam jugera Vates,
Qui vivens habuit nulla, sepultus habet.
4.
Porrigitur novus hic Tityus per jugera septem,
Nec quae tondebit viscera, deerit Avis.
5.
Dicite (nam been vos (...)) gens Critica, vate^
An fu^rit Bavius pejor, an historicus.
6.
Militiam sicco Wilhelmus Mart peregit.
O Clemens Caesar! consulis historico.
7.
Tom writ, but the Reader still slept over his Book,
For he carefully writ the same Opium he took.
An Impromptu to Shadwell's Memory, by Dr. B --
ANd must our glorious Laureat then depart,
Heaven if it please may take his loyal heart,
As for the rest sweet Devil fetch a Cart.
In Decretum Parliamenti 1689. De non adulterandis Vinis.
CRimen adulterii vetuerunt Biblia frustra.
Jam quid ages Caupo? Parliamenta vetant.
Inscriptions designed for the Dyal ove^ the Fountain in the new Square at
Li^colns-Inn.
1.
UT referat gratam mercedem quaelibet hoc*
Munificum laudet quaelibet hora Deu^
2.
Unde fluit lapsu, quid stas ignave, perenni,
Carpe Viator iter, sic tibi vita fluit.
3.
Haec Legum domus est, colit hanc Themis aut sede*
Hospite nec Domus est dignior ulla Dea.
An Epigram under the Picture of a Bea^^*
THis vain gay thing sets up for man,
But see what Fate attends him,
The powd'ring Barber first began,
The Barber Surgeon ends him.
The Song of Go Perjured Man, set admirably to Music by Dr. Blow. Translated
into Latin.
ITo execrandis perside passibus,
Vagumque retro si taleris pedem
Visurus extremat pudendae
Reliquias inimicus urnae,
Si quando risu turbidus improbo
Recte monentem temnere pulverem
Proclivis, ornamenta quaeres
Faemineae fugitiva formae
Forte and piarum munera virginum
Flores profana dissicis manu:
Huic Sexui, Eheu! quam fugacis
Imperii monumentum and Omen.
Utar protervi vindiciis Noti,
Vocabo and Euros, tu cineris brevi
Ultoris insurgente nube,
Perpetuam patiere noctem.
To a Lady that would not grant the (...) favors under cheaper terms tha^
Matrimony.
Out of French.
LIke our great Father Adam fain would
The Paradise you drive me from, enjo^
But Caelia, you too hard conditions make,
The flaming Sword of Marriage drives me bac^
Avis sur a Marriage.
THe Husband's the Pilot, the Wife is the Ocea^
He always in danger, she always in motion
And he that in Wedlock twice hazards his carca^
Twice ventures a drowning, and faith that is hard (...)
Even at our own weapons the Females defeat
And death, only death, can sign our Quietus*
Not to tell ye sad stories of liberty lost,
How our mirth is all palled, and our pleasure all (...)
This Pagan confinement, this damnable station,
Shits no order; nor age, nor degree in the nation.
The Levite it keeps from Parochial duty,
For who can at once mind Religion and Beauty?
The rich it alarms with expenses and trouble,
And a poor Beast you know can scarce carry double.
'Twas invented, they will tell you, to keep us from falling,
Oh the virtue and grace of a shrill catterwauling.
But in pales in your Game. Ah but how do you know, Sir,
How often your Neighbor breaks up your enclosure.
For this is the principal comfort of Marriage,
You must eat, tho a hundred have spit in your Porrage.
If at night you're unactive, and fail of performing,
Enter Thunder and Lightning, and Bloodshed next morning.
Cries the Bone of your side, thanks dear Mr. Horner,
This comes of your sinning with Crape in a corner.
Then to make up the breach, all your strength you must rally*
And labor, and sweat like a Slave at the Galley
Yet still you must charge, oh blessed condition
Tho you know, to your cost, you have no more Ammunition
Till at last my dear mortified Tool of a man,
You're not able to make a poor flash in the (...)
Fire, Female, and Flood begin with a Letter,
And the world's for them all not a farthing the bette^
Your Flood soon is gone, and your Fire you man humbl^
If into the Flood store of Water you tumble;
But to cool the damned heat of your Wife's (...) tillatio^
You may use half the Engines, and Pumps in the Nation
But may piss out as well the last Confiagration.
Thus, Sir, I have sent you my thoughts of (...) matte^
Judge you as you please, but I scorn to flatter*
The Fable of the Bat and the Birds. In Imitation of that of the Buzzard in the
Hind and Panther. In the year 1689.
IN ancient times, as learned Aesop shows,
'Twixt Birds and Beasts a fatal War arose.
But whether this from State Intrigues did flow,
Or to some Church pretense its birth did owe,
Or depredations made, concerns us not to know.
Weighty, you may be sure, the cause was thought,
Which such an universal tumult wrought.
Picqueering parties first began the fray,
A sad presage of the ensuing day.
At last the War was solemnly proclaimed,
The hour of fighting set, and both the Leaders named.
The foolish Bat, a Bird obscene and base,
The scorn and jest of all the feathered race;
^r by fantastic fears, and scruples led,
Or by ambition moved, his party fled,
Joined with the Beasts, and eager to engage,
With popular Harangues urged on a feeble rage.
As fortune would, on an ill-fated day,
The Beasts drew out their forces in array:
The different kinds their grudges laid aside,
And for the common safety now provide.
Even their old piques, and warm disputes forgot
The Hind and Panther joined upon the spot;
And by one mutual league of friendship held,
Prepare for the rough business of the field.
When lo! the Birds in numerous bands (...)
And with repeated cries attack the Rear;
Give a fierce charge, and back like Parthians (...)
To repossess their patrimonial Sky:
Then strait descending, with redoubled (...)
They spend their fury, and renew the fight.
Pale Victory, all trembling and dismayed,
With doubtful Wings the purple Scene survey
At last, propitious to her feathered kind,
Declared her favor, and the Scale inclined.
Whole Hecatombs the covered field possessed,
And gave their foes at once a Triumph (...) east^
Their slaughtered (...) Dams deplored,
And many a (...) Cow mourned over her Horned Lord.
The generous Eagle (so his Stars ordain)
Chases the affrighted Lion from the Plain:
Their General gone, the rest like Lightning fly,
A cheap unfighting herd, not worth the Victory
And now the Birds with eager haste pursue,
Through lanes, and devious tracks, the scattered crew
Among the rest, beset with dangers round,
The trembling Bat was in a Cellar found:
It Is pity fame never Chronicled his taker,
But all Records agree, they sound him near Long-acre.
Percht on a Pole, they brought him to the Bar,
Where the full house sat talking of the War.
Strait at the sight, a various noise began,
Which through the spacious Hall, and neighb'rin^ Lobby rat^
Each Member in the public mirth concurred,
And droll'd upon the poor Apostatizing Bird.
First Parrot Settle opened wide his throat,
Next Cuckoo Rimer always in a note;
And Peacock Chetwood, of the Clergy kind;
But his Poetic Feet disgraced the train behind.
And Creech, and Norris, Blackbirds of renown
And Corm'rant Higden, for devouring known.
Nay, to augment the hardship of his woes,
Owl Durfy clapped his wings, and hooted in the close^
When now their Raillery began to spare,
(And faith 'twas too too much for one Bird to bear)
The Eagle ordered silence in the room,
And thus aloud pronounc^d the shivering Lub^ber's doom
Beast of a Bird, thus to desert thy friends,
And join the common Foe, for base ungenerou^ ends;
What punishment can suit so black a crime?
Hear then, and stand accursed to all succeeding time^
From all our Diets be thou first expelled,
Or those in flowery Groves, or those on Steeples held,
When our gay Tribes in youthful pomp appear,
To join in Nuptial bands, and meet the smiling year.
Nay more, to make thee mortify and grieve,
To Buzzard Shadwell we thy places give.
Him we appoint Historian of our State,
And Poet Laureat of the Woods create.
Outlawed our Realms, and banished from the light,
Be thou for ever damned to steal abroad by night.
Antenor's Speech in the Second Aeneid, applied to the Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience. In the year 1687.
Timeo Danaos, et dona ferentes.
YOu dull Dissenters, what vain folly blinds
Your senses thus, and captivates your minds?
Think you this proffered Liberty is free
From Tricks, and Snares, and Papal Treachery
Think you 'twas meant according to the Letter
Oh that such plodding heads should know the Pope no better
Trust me, this kindness either was designed
TO inflame our quarrels, and our weakness find
Or else the breach was opened at a venture,
That at one hole both Cowl and Cloak might ente^
Pray Heaven there be no farther mischief mean^
But I Am afraid there is Roman Opium in it.
Be It what it will, the gilded Pill suspect,
And with a smiling scorn your profferd fate rejec^
A Papist, tho ungiving, means you evil,
But when he scatters gifts and mercies, he is the Devi^
A Satyr upon an Ignorant Quack that murdered a Friends Child, and occasioned
the Mother upon the news of it to Miscarry.
THo 'twas thy luck to cheat the fatal Tree,
Thanks to the partial herd that quitted thee;
And, to the lasting scandal of our times,
You Are still reserved to act anew thy crimes,
Think not to 'scape the justice of my ^imes.
The impartial Muse, in pointed stabbing Verse,
Shall all thy several Villainies rehearse:
With wreaths of Henbane she will adorn thy Head,
^he'll hunt thee living, and she will plague thee dead.
Base sordid Monster! Mercenary Slave!
Thou Churchyard Pimp, and Pandar to the Grave,
Death's busy Factor, Son of Desolation,
Thy Country's curse, and grievance of the Nation.
Thou motly lump of ignorance and pride,
In all the scoundrel arts of (...)*
How shall I tell thy guilt, or how begin
To lash a Villain crusted over with sin?
Sure in some Powder-mill that hot-brained So^
Thy Father, in the Dog Days thee begot:
And some She-Bear, in horrid Woods alone,
Suckled thee young, and nursed thee for her ow^
Hence thy sour brutal temper first began,
The Beast was thinly plated with the Man:
No beams of softning pity touch thy breast,
Too vile a Cell to harbor such a Guest.
Oh had thou lived in that cursed Tyrant's reign,
By whose command the Innocents were slain,
Herod might then have saved his men the pain
At Bethlem to knock out the Children's brains.
Thy Pills alone the fatal work had done*
And soon dispatched them every Mother's Son
Why with our laws vain Volumes do we ^ill,
If such as thou have privilege to kill?
Mean, lowsy Felons, for less Crimes by far
Have often received their sentence at the Bar:
^th' face of day thou robb'st us of our health,
And yet art never questioned for the stealth.
Sure some dire Planet all thy steps pursues,
^ame All-kill, and a sickness strait ensues.
Through thy destroying skill Diseases reign,
Nor did a Blacksmith teach thee first in vain;
Not Sword, nor Plague, nor Famine ravage more,
Thou kill'st, and Fate has hardly time to score.
Death, tho unsought, waits on thy murdring Quill*
^ttends each Dose, and lurks in every Pill.
^ith little pains, and very little bribing,
^hole Nations might be killed by thy prescribing
(...) know, dull Sot, the dreadful hour's at hand,
^hen before awful Justice thou must stand.
(...) Muse her ancient freedom does assume,
(...) tremble, while she thus proclaims thy doom^
For Grubstreet Doggrel furnish out a Tale,
And be the jest of Midwives over their Ale:
For scalded heads most learnedly advise,
And in the case of Kibes, seems monstrous wise
Be never consulted 'bove a Boil, or Blister,
And to my Lady's Lap-dog give a Glister.
If thou have a mind to pick up nasty pence,
Set up for Farrier in thy own defense.
Cure Hogs of Measles, visit laboring Swine,
And order Doses for thy Neighbors Kine.
Reign over Beasts, from Barsheba to Dan,
But never, never meddle more with Man.
May none seek help from thy damned remed^
But senceless Brutes that health and fame (...)
But Sots, on whom each canting fool impose
And Carted Bawds, and Strumpets without (...)
Be the most scorned Jack-pudding in the pack
And turn Toad-eater to some foreign Quack
Gout, Pox, and Stone, with all attending ills,
Thou have so often threatened in thy Bills,
Thee, with fresh rage incessantly devour,
And leave their pointed darts in every pore.
Let them with force united make thee smart,
And own thy self a Blockhead in thy Art,
From these insulting Tyrants find no quarter,
But to thy own Prescriptions fall a Martyr.
On thy vile self the baleful potions try,
Then damn old Galen, and by piecemeal dye.
But let no Fever, (for I Will once be kind)
Or Pestilence to thee admission find:
Those generous Foes too soon conclude their rage,
I Would have thee tortured for at least an age.
May all that malice, fruitful to torment,
All that revenge of Priesthood can invent;
All that on earth despairing Wretches fear,
Light on thy head, and kindly center there.
Markd with heaven's stamp, like Adam's mu^dring Son
Through the whole Globe, a branded Villain run,
And all Mankind the raving Monster shun.
Despised, abandoned, rove from Pole to Pole,
Thy carcass jaded by thy restless soul.
Where-e're thou go, a Mother's curses meet
Pale Nurses thee with execrations greet,
And wrinkled Witches when they truck with (...)
Invoke thy Name, and use it for a Spell.
Blaspheming leave the world, and never know*
The least remitting interval from woe.
Dire Conscience all thy guilty dreams, affrigh^
With the most solemn horrors of the night,
The screams of Infants ever fill thy Ears,
And injured heaven be deaf to all thy Vows (...) Praye^
Thus I have eased in part my wrathful spleen
Nor can thou say the Muse has been too keen.
What-e're the fiercest Satyr can inspire,
^alls vastly short of what thy Crimes require.
What punishment can too severe be thought
^or thee, by whom such numerous ills are wrought?
^he living sent to an untimely Tomb,
and unborn Infants murdered in the Womb.
^or seized with grief that by thy fatal aid,
^er much wronged Child was of its life betrayed,
^he expiring Parent, whomscarce art could save,
said an untimely Tribute to the Grave.
^o what degree do Quacks like thee, annoy,
Who can even life, before it comes, destroy?
An Inscription upon a Tobacco-Box.
By Dr. Sp --
CUm tetris Pandoram armarent fata venenis,
Fatali erupit pyxide dira lues.
(...) faciles secura dederunt munera Divi,
Una fuit pestis pyxidis, una salus.
An Imitation of it in English.
WHen with rank poison Heaven equip^ Pandor^
She ope'd the Box like a Confounded Whore^
And of Diseases strait flew out a score a.
But now since Jove, like a good-natured Brothe^
Gives us the Indian weed to funk and smothe^
One Box has made atonement for another.
Upon Burning some Anti-Monarchi^^ Books to the Memory of King Charl^^ the
First, in the year 1691.
CArole gentis honos, sat Carole sangui^ Divu^^
Qui major magnis annumeraris Avis,
Relligio accepit, quo principe, nostra coronam,
Quo vivente de^us, quo moriente fidem.
Haec damus ul^rici damnata volumina flamma^
Manibus inferias, sancte Monarcha, tuis,
Seu tulerint Batavae funesta venena paludes,
Seu dederit saevam Scotia dira luem.
Sic semper pereat, quaecunque lacessere Charta
Vel Reges ausa est, vel tetigisse Deos.
To Mr. D -- upon his most incomparable Ballads, called by him Lyric Odes.
1.
THou Cur, half French, half English Breed,
Thou Mungril of Parnassus,
To think tall lines run up to seed
Should ever tamely pass us.
2.
Thou write Pindarics, and be damned,
Write Epigrams for Cutlers;
None with thy Lyrics can be shamm'd
But Chambermaids and Butlers.
3.
In the other World expect dry blows,
No tears can wipe thy stains out;
Horace will pluck thee by the Nose,
And Pindar beat thy brains out.
To Mr. Higden, upon the ill success o^ his Play.
NO longer your expected Play conceal,
But to a more impartial Court appeal*
The righteous few, true to the cause of Wit,
Will soon reverse the Sentence of the Pit.
Why should their censure men of sense alarm
Those Sons of Muggleton can do no harm.
The Wit, that often their hasty Malice dooms,
Outlives its Judges, nay, outlasts their Tomb^
Thus 'twas my fate to visit once a Friend,
Whom dire fore-boding Omens did attend:
The Doctor tells him, Sir, your hour is nigh,
Send for the Parson, and prepare to dye.
In vain the help of Physic you implore,
Art has been tried, but Art can do no more.
With this the angry Patient raised his head.
And Doctor, do you then conclude me dead?
Peace, you grave Sot, elsewhere your Cant bestow,
I Will bury half the College e're I go.
And spite of that learned Phyz, and reverend Beard,
Will live to see your Rascalship interred.
Thus he ran on, and as his Stars decreed,
Was soon from his unkind distemper freed;
Left his vain gaping Kindred in the lurch,
And saw the Velvet Fop born decently to Church.
To the same, upon his Play's being damned, for having too much eating and
drinking in it.
FRiend Harry, some furious pretenders to thinking,
Say thy Play is encumbred with eating and drinking
That too often in all Conscience thy Tables brought out,
And unmerciful healths fly like Hail-shot about.
Such a merry objection who e're could expect
That does on the Town, and its pleasures reflect
Are a dish and a bottle grown quite out of fashion
Or have the spruce Beaux found a new recreation
Else why should these Fops be so monstrous un^civi^^
As to damn at a Play, what they like at the Devi^
Upon persecuting it with Cat-calls.
WHen to Molock of old, by way of oblatio^
Any Jew of his Son made a wicked do^natio^^
The Preisthood with Trumpets and Drums mad^ a noi^^
To stifle his groans, and extinguish his cries.
Thus our fierce modern Heroes, those Jews (...) the (...)
When to damn a poor Authors attempt the think
With Cat-calls so dreadful the house they alar^
^est the wit of the Play should their fury disar^
However they may pass with the rest of the nation,
Tho their malice I blame, I commend their discretion.
For it is but convenient you will readily own,
That the Beast should perform, what the Man would disown.
The extravagant Lover, out of French* 1684.
1.
HOw quickly are Love's pleasures gone*
How soon are all its mighty Triumphs done!
In vain alas! do we the Banquet taste,
Whose sweets are swift as thought are past.
In vain do we renew the fight,
Whom even the first alarms do basely put to flight.
2.
Happy great Jove! who in Alcmena's arms,
For three full nights enjoyed Love's charms,
Nature turned Bawd, her Monarch to obey,
And pimping darkness shut out day,
Whilst in vast joys the half-spent God did sweat,
Joys as his lightning fierce, and as his Godhead great.
3.
Bravely the Game begun! Oh had it mounted higher,
Fed still with vig'orous thought, and fresh desire.
Were I but Jove, my boundless reign should prove
But one continued Scene of Love.
In ecstasies would I dissolving lie,
As long as all the mighty round of vast eternity.
A Translation of Teucer Salamina, Patremque Cum fugeret, etc. Hor. Ode vii.
lib. 1.
1.
BRave Teucer, (as the Poets tell us)
When from his native Clime he fled,
With Poplar wreaths crowned his triumphant head
And thus he cheered his drooping fellows.
2.
Where e're the Fates shall show us land,
(Remote and distant tho it be)
We'll shape our course at their command,
And boldly fix as they decree.
3.
Let no wild fears your hopes betray,
Let no despair your Courage pall,
When Heaven so loudly does to hon^ur call,
And fearless Teucer leads the way.
4.
Phoebus foretold (and he of all the powers
Commands the mystic Books of fate)
That fresh success should on our actions wait,
And a new Salamis be ours.
5.
Then drink away this puling sorrow,
Let Wine each dastard thought subdue,
Let Wine your fainting hopes renew,
We'll leave the drowsy Land, and plough the Main to morrow.
Ode ix. Lib. 1. in Horace imitated. Vides ut alta stet nive candidum, etc.
Written in the year, 1685. To Sir John Bowyer.
1.
SInce the Hills all around us do penance in Snow,
And Winters cold blasts have benumbed us below;
Since the Rivers chained up, flow with the same speed
As Prisoners advance toward the Psalm that cannot read,
Throw whole Oaks at a time, nay, Groves on the fire,
They shall be our Sobriety's funeral pyre.
2.
Never wast the dull time in impertinent thinking,
But urge and pursue the great business of drinking;
Come pierce your old Hogsheads, never stint us in Sherry,
This this is the season to drink and be merry:
Then revived by our Liquor, and Billets together,
We'll out-roar the loud storm^, and defy the cold weather.
3.
Damn your Gadbury, Partridge and Salmon together
What a puling discourse have we here of the weather.
Nay, no more of that business, but, Friend, as you love us,
Leave it all to the care of the good folks above us.
Your Orchards and Groves will be shattered no more,
If, to hush the rough winds, they forbid them to roar.
4*
Send a Bumper about, and cease this debate
Of the tricks of the Court, and designs of the State.
Whether Brandon, or Offly, or Booth go to pot,
Never trouble your Brains, let 'em take their own lot,
Thank the Gods you can safely sit under your Vine,
And enjoy your old friends, and drink off your own Wine.
5.
While your Appetite's strong, and good humo^ remain*
And active fresh blood does enliven your veins,
Improve the fleet minutes in scenes of delight,
Let your Friend have the day, and your Mistre^ the nigh^
In the dark you may try whether Phyllis is kin^
The night for Intreaguing was ever designed.
6.
Tho she runs from your arms, and retires in the sha^
Some friendly kind sign will betray the coy Mai^
All trembling you will find the modest poor sinne^
It Is a venial trespass in a beginner:
But remember this counsel, when once you have met (...)
Get a Ring from the Nymph, or somethi^^ that is bette^
(...) Imitation of the 6th Ode in Horace, l. 1. Scriberis vario fortis, and
hostium -- In the year, 1685. after the defeat of the Rebels in the West.
1.
WAller, in never-dying Verse,
Your glorious Triumphs may rehearse;
(...) lofty Muse for Panegyric famed,
(...) sing the Rebel-herd your valor tamed.
And all the mighty Blessings show
^eat James, and We to your wise conduct owe.
2.
(...) unambitious Lyre tunes all her strings,
To lower numbers, lower things;
(...) Gods, and God-like Hero^s does refuse,
(...) labor of a more exalted Muse.
Had she endeavored to relate
^^eat Alexander's deeds, or Troy's unhappy fate,
^r all the wonders that by Drake were done,
^ho traveled with the Stars, and journey'd with the Sun,
As long a space had the vain labor held,
As that famed Town the Grecian force repelled
As long had she the tiresom work renewed,
As mighty Drake through unknown Seas his wo^^drous Course pursu'^
3.
The humble Muse too well her weakness know^
Nor on her feeble self, dares the high Task impos^
Tho had not Heaven the Power denied,
No other Theme had all her Thoughts employ'^
It Is hence she modestly declines to sing,
The immortal Triumphs of our warlike Kin^
Lest her unequal slender vein
Should lessen the great Actions of his glorio^^ reig^
4.
Who can with all his boasted fancy raise,
To its just height Heroic Arthurs praise,
Or worthily recount the Trophies won
By our great Edward, and his greater Son?
But oh what Muse of all the Tribe below
Can mighty Mars in equal numbers show,
Horrid in steel, and moving from afar,
With all the solemn pageantry of War,
Tho the rough God should his own Bard inspire,
And join the Martial heat to the Poetic fire.
5.
Harmless Combats, harmless Wars,
Slender Scratches, petty Jars,
Which youthful Blood, and wanton Love,
Amongst our amorous Couples move,
Employ my time, employ my muse,
All all other subjects I refuse.
Prologue spoken before the University of Oxford, 1683.
WHen Greece overwhelmed in the wide Deluge lay,
And all the Land was one continued Sea,
The Muses ^ill secure and lofty stood,
Above the vain attempts of the insulting flood.
There good Deucalion first saluted Land,
Put in his Boat, and touched the happy Stran^
So when wild Faction all our Land alarmed,
Our Land by the prevailing Jugglers charmed
When pregnant with dire seeds the Clouds did^^
Presaging Civil Tempests in our Skies.
Here Godlike Charles did a safe harbor win,
Here laughed at all the threats of daring sin,
And shunned the popular Deluge as it cam^ rolling (...)
With you no perjured Bog-trotters were foun^
With Meal-tub Plots, and Armies under-groun^
Rogues, that would damn themselves for (...) a Crown
Rogues, that for one poor draught of middl^ (...)
Would hang a Parish, and for Tripe a Shire^
It Is true, some few you had, but Traitors (...)
Here to receive, not to deserve their doom.
So Paradise the Serpent gained at first,
Entered the blessed Abodes, but strait he was accursed.
This is your happiness:
But we are still alarmed with senseless noise,
Guildhall Elections, and lewd frantic cries.
Tired with dull Managers of duller Plots,
And freeborn Slaves, and Magna-Charta Sots.
Oh would the Town a pattern take from you,
Whom the worst times still found to Caesar true*
Discords would cease, ill-natured jars retire,
And every Muse in Charles's praise conspire.
Peace with her Train would guard our Halcyon shore,
And Britain envy Saturn's Age no more.
EPILOGUE.
NOt with more grief the Whiggish herd beheld
Their Plots discovered, their Intrigues reveal^d,
And all their Godly Villainies run down;
Than now we feel, to leave your happy Town.
Now must our Tribe, since we depart from yo^
Shake hands with Learning, and bid Wit adie^
With doggrel Rimes the stupid rout appease,
And murder English perfectly to please.
So some to get an Alms a lameness feign,
And by pretended halting pity gain.
When to some Town our strowling Troops (...)
Leave's to be granted by the worthy Mayor:
He with his numerous Train first takes his seat,
Below his Scarlet Brethren fill the Pit.
Then even our Women must less gay appear,
Leave Painting off, lest they shoud seem more fai^
Than the pale Daughter of the Reverend Mayor
If we in acting, as our part requires,
Swear by the Gods, and all the heavenly fires,
The Sot pricks up a wondrous pair of ears,
'My zeal no longer such profaneness bears,
Twelve pence for every Oath your Hero swear^
Wit here, triumphant, bears an ample sway,
And the bright Metal shines without allay;
Nothing is here condemned for being good,
Nor talk we Nonsense to be understood.
But tho your Learning the whole Isle inspires,
Your Townsmen warm not by the neighbring fires,
Born in the happy place, where Wit does rule,
They keep their natural right of being dull.
So the rude Nations, where with greatest light
The revealed Truth was first exposed to sight,
By no rewards, no miracles reclaimed,
Would even in spite of Providence be damned.
How e're our Courtiers do their fate dispose,
Dullness the Charter is they will never lose.
An Imitation of a French Ode, in the ingenious Monsieur St. Evremont'^ Works.
Tome 2.
1.
WEll, whatever sins by turns have swayed (...)
Ambition never ruled my heart;
Its lewd pretenses never betrayed me
In public Ills to act a part.
Let others, fame and wealth pursuing,
Despise a man but safe retreat,
I Will never contrive my own undoing,
Nor stoop so low as to be great.
2.
The saithless Court, the pensive Change,
What solid pleasures can they give?
Oh let me in the Country range!
It Is there we breathe, it is there we live.
3.
The beauteous Scene of aged Mountains,
Smiling Valleys, murmuring Fountains,
Lambs in flowery Pastures bleating,
Echo our complaints repeating.
Bees with busy sounds delighting,
Groves to gentle sleep inviting.
Whispering winds the Poplars courting,
Swains in rustic circles sporting;
Birds in cheerful notes expressing
Natures bounty, and their blessing.
These afford a lasting pleasure,
Without guilt, and without measure.
To a Gentleman that cut off his hair, and set up for a Spark in his old Age.
Out of Martial. Epig. 43. lib. 3. Mentiri^ Iuvenem, etc.
THou that not many months ago
Wast white as Swan, or driven Snow,
Now blacker far than Aesop's Crow,
Thanks to thy Wig, set'st up for Beau.
Faith Harry, you are in the wrong box,
Old Age these vain endeavors mocks,
And time that knows thou'st hoary locks,
Will pluck thy Mask off with a pox.
Part of the 2d Ode in Horace l. 4. Tra^^slated. Beginning at Dignum (...)
Virum.
1.
FRom dark oblivion, and the silent grav^
The indulgent Muse does the brave Hero sa^
It Is she forbids his name to die,
And brings it to the Stars, and sticks it in the (...)
2.
Thus mighty Hercules did move,
To the Eternal Palaces above:
Not all his twelve exploits advanced him to (...)
But 'twas the Poet's pain and labor (...) him (...)
3.
Thus the famed Spartan Twins did rise,
from Ornaments of Earth to gild the Skies.
Tho Heaven by turns they do obtain,
Yet in immortal Verse, the Brothers jointly reign.
4.
and Bacchus too, for all his vain pretense,
Borrowed his Crown and Godhead hence:
^e with his powerful juice first taught the Muse to fly,
And she in kind requital gave him immortality.
Henrico Higden Arm. Cum infoeliciter ipsi Comaedia cesserit. 1693.
QUod inquieta voce, risu, sibilis,
Salesque comptos and innoxios jocos,
^uperba Bruti turba sic exceperit.
Quod purpuratus Infans, and vecors Eques,
Summoque Meretrix in subsellio sedens,
Totusque delicatulorum circulus,
In te, tuumque conjuraverint opus.
Nolito in iras irritas erumpere,
Damnare Musas, increpare Apollinem,
Caelosque votis improbis lacessere.
Quin, Drama tandem luce donans publica,
Invisi^ orbem, quin timoris inscius,
Vanas Maligniorum despicis minas?
Abunde damnum sic resarcies prius,
Fa^aeque consules; Lector dabit libens
Quod improbus spectator abnegaverat.
On the Treatment of the Moder^ Drama. By Mr Kn -- of Magd. Col^
ONce Bear and Champion did engage
In mortal fray on Roman Stage:
Our Moderns have revived the matter,
The former Age renewed in latter,
And made Bear-garden of Theater.
Here Beau, the only Modish Brute,
With honest Authors does dispute:
And as on Roman Stage predicted,
Fell wound on Champion was inflicted,
When stout Bruino kept his station,
Invoking Brother Constellation
To assist him in the disputation:
To curry poor Heroic hide well,
And harrow carcass, back and side well;
But tho he got a bloody rump on it,
His Honor still came off Triumphant.
So tho the Pit Grimalkins, that maul
With wicked Serenade of Catcall,
Often rout a poor Dramatic He^o,
(As Teague was once by lero, lero.)
A well-writ Play, like Ruffians treat,
Confound the Scene, and Plot defeat,
In spite of all the Dammee Chorus,
The immortal Wit is still victorious.
I then, in person of an Author,
Since good Dramatics have no growth here,
Like pious Felons doomed to be
Made Pendulum for Gallow-tree;
That gives advice, lest sinful Mortal,
Like him his days in Hemp should curtail,
Advise you all to leave off Writing,
The mortal sin of well enditing.
But if no counsel can be used
By riming wretch when once be-mused,
(For Crown and Bum there is such a curse in,
They Are never at ease, but when untrussing)
Since wholesome Salt of Author seasoned,
To taste of Nation is unpleasant,
(When busy Noddle's next in labor,
And has a need to purge on Paper)
Invoke the bastard race of Phoebus,
Skilled in Acrostic, Pun, and Rebus,
With spirit of late Marriage-hater,
TO assist to make Lampoon on Nature,
And even on Farce itself a Satyr;
^or that alone gives titillation,
And saves poor Poet from damnation.
An Imitation of Vxor vade soras. In Mart. l. ii. Ep. 105. By Capt. Ht --
SWeet Spouse, you must presently troop and be gone,
Or fairly submit to your betters,
Unless for the faults that are past, you atone,
I must knock off my Conjugal-Fetters.
2.
When at night I am paying the tribute of Love,
You know well enough what is my meaning,
You scorn to assist my devotion, or move,
As if all the while you were dreaming.
3.
At Cribbage and Put, and All Fours I have seen
A Porter more passion expressing,
Than thou, wicked Kate, in the rapturous scen^
And the height of the amorous blessing.
4.
Then say I to my self, is my Wife made of Ston^
Or does the old Serpent possess her;
Better motion and vigor by far might be show^
By dull Spouse of a German Professor?
5.
So Kate take advice, and reform in good time,
And while I Am performing my duty
Come in for your Club, and repent of the crim^
Of paying all scores with your Beauty.
6.
All day thou may cant, and look grave as a Nu^
And run after Burgess the surly;
Or see that the Family business be done,
And chide all thy Servants demurely.
7.
But when you're in Bed with your Master and King,
That tales out of School never does trumpet,
Move, riggle, heave, pant, clip me round like a Ring,
In short, be as lewd as a Strumpet.
An Imitation of the 14th Epode in Hor
1.
ASk me no longer dear Sir John,
Why your Lampoon lies still undone,
Before George my Brain's grown addle,
Nor bid me Pegasus bestride,
Why should you ask a Sot to ride,
That cannot keep his saddle.
2.
This was the poor Anacreon's case,
When doting on a smooth chinn'd face
He pin d away his carcass.
To tune his strings the Bard essayed.
The Devil a string the Bard obeyed,
And was not this a hard case?
3.
If you a constant Miss have gor,
Thank heaven devoutly for your lot,
Such blessings are not common.
While I, condemned to endless pain,
Must tamely drag Belinda's chain
Yet know she is worse than -- Woman.
A translation of Ode xxii. lib. i. Vitas Hinnuleo.
1.
WHy flies Belinda from my arms,
Or shuns my kind embrace,
Why does she hide her blooming charms,
And where I come forsake the place.
2.
Like some poor Fawn whom every breath
Of air does so surprise,
In the least wind he fancies death
And pants at each approaching noise.
3.
Alas! I never meant thee ill,
Nor seek I to devour thee,
Why should thou then with coldness kill
The dying slave that does adore thee.
4.
Leave, leave thy Mothers arms for shame,
Nor fondly hang about her,
You Are now of age to play the game,
And ease a Lover's pain without her.
A Translation of Ode iii. L. 1. in Horace Sic te Diva potens, etc. Addressed
to his Honored Friend Mr. B -- going into Turkey.
1.
SO may the Beauteous Goddess of the Main
Appease the horrors of the Deep,
And Aeolus lock all his blustering train,
But the auspicious Western Gales asleep.
2.
And thou, kind Vessel, which before this da^
So great a charge coud'st never boast,
With care my dearer, better part convey,
And land him safely on the Thracian Coast.
3.
His fearless heart immured with triple Brass
The daring Mortal surely wore,
Who first the faithless Main durst pass,
And in a treacherous Bark new Worlds explore
4.
What scenes of Death could shake his Soul
That unconcerned saw the wild Billows rise,
And scaly Monsters on the surface roll,
And whizzing Meteors paint the gloomy Skies.
5.
In vain wise Heavens indulgent care
Lands from the spacious Ocean did divide,
If with expanded Sails bold Ships prepare
To plow the deep, and brave the swelling Tide.
6.
But Man, that busy reasoning Tool,
Cheap happiness disdains to choose,
Sick of his ease, the restless fool,
At his own cost forbidden paths pursues.
7.
From the refulgent Orb of day
A glittering Spark the rash Prometheus stole,
And fondly stamped into a Soul,
TO inform his new-made Progeny of Clay.
8.
Strait to reward his Sacrilegious Theft,
Fevers and Ills, unknown before,
Their old infernal Mansions left,
And through the sickning air their baleful poison bore
9.
Then Death, that lately traveled slow,
Content with single Victims, where he came,
Made haste, and eager of his Game,
Whole Nations lopped at one compendious blow
10.
To what fantastic heights does Man aspire,
Doomed to dull Earth, the Sot would clamb^^ higher
Heaven he invades with impudent pretense,
And makes Jove thunder in his own defense.
An Imitation of an Epigram 44. in Mart. lib. iii. Occurrit tibi nemo quod
libenter, etc.
THat Cousins, Friends, and Strangers fly thee,
Nay, thy own Sister cannot sit nigh thee;
That all men thy acquaintance shun,
And into holes and corners run,
Like Irish Beau from English Dun:
The reason's plain, and if thou would know it,
You Are a most damned repeating Poet.
Not Bailiff sour, with horrid Beard,
Is more in poor Alsatia feared,
Since the stern Parliament of late
Has stripped of ancient rights their State:
Not Tigers, when their Whelps are missing*
Nor Serpents in the Sunshine hissing;
Nor Snake in tail that carries rattle;
Not Fire, nor Plague, nor Blood, nor Battle,
Is half so dreaded by the throng
As thy vile persecuting Tongue.
If e're the restless Clack that is in it
Gives thy Head leave to think a minute,
Think what a penance we must bear
Thy damned impertinence to hear.
Whether I stand, or run, or sit,
Thou still art in the repeating fit:
Wearied I seek a nap to take,
But thy cursed Muse keeps me awake.
At Church too, when the Organ's blowing,
Thy louder pipe is still a going.
Nor Park, nor Baguio's from thee free,
All places are alike to thee.
Learn Wisdom once, at a Friend's instance,
From the two Fellows at St. Dunstan's,
Make not each man thou meet'st a Martyr,
But strike like them but once a quarter.
SONG, By Mr. Gl --
1.
PHyllis has a gentle heart,
Willing to the Lovers courting,
Wanton nature, all the Art
To direct her in her sporting.
In the embrace, the look, the kiss,
All is real inclination;
No false raptures in the bliss,
No feigned sighings in the passion.
2.
But oh! who the Charms can speak,
Who the thousand ways of toying,
When she does the Lover make
All a God in her enjoying?
Who the Limbs that round him move,
And constrain him to her blisses,
Who the Eyes that swim in love,
Or the Lips that suck in kisses?
3.
Oh the freaks! when mad she grows,
Raves all wild with the possessing,
Oh the silent Trance! which shows
The delight above expressing.
Every way she does engage,
Idly talking, speechless lying,
She transports me with the rage,
And she kills me in her dying.
On Dr. Lower, who was observed to b^ grown good-natured a little before his
Death. By another hand.
HAd not good humor over the ill prevailed
Death in attempting Dr. Lower had failed*
For he, alas, good man, in health declined,
By changing the bad manners of his mind:
And 's very Understanding got a Cough,
By leaving an old habit too soon off.
For had he kept his humor most austere,
He might have yet lived with us many a year,
Preserved in his own pickle, Vinegar:
But when the Alkali had killed the sour,
His blood being sweetened, off troopt Dr. Lower.
Verses put into a Lady's Prayer Book. Supposed to be written by the late Earl
of Rochester.
1.
FLing this useless Book away,
And presume no more to pray;
Heaven is just, and can bestow
Mercy on none but those that mercy show.
With a proud heart, maliciously inclined,
Not to increase, but to subdue mankind;
In vain you vex the Gods with your Petition,
Without repentance, and sincere contrition,
You're in a Reprobate condition.
2.
Phyllis, to calm the angry powers,
And save my Soul as well as yours,
Relieve poor Mortals from despair,
And justify the Gods that made you fair.
And in those bright and charming Eyes
Let pity first appear, then love,
That we by easy steps may move
Through all the joys on earth to those above.
The Fable of the Horse and the Stag
By Mr. S --
1.
THe Horn-arm'd Stag denied the Horse
The privilege of the Common,
Till starved, for want of equal force,
He begged assistance from Man.
2.
For why? resolved at any rate
To get his share of Pasture;
He rather chose to champ the Bit,
Than leave the Stag sole master.
3.
With Man astride he marched to fight
A foe that durst not face him,
For he with strangeness of the sight
Was frighted from his grazing.
4*
Nor had Sir Palfry much to brag
He got by this adventure,
Since Man, from routing of the Stag,
Commenced perpetual Centaur.
A Translation of Lesbia mi dicit semper male. Out of Catullus.
1.
EAch moment of the long-lived day
Lesbia for me does backwards pray,
And rails at me sincerely;
Yet I dare pawn my life, my eyes,
My soul, and all that Mortals prize,
That Lesbia loves me dearly.
2.
Why should you thus conclude, you will say,
Faith it is my own beloved way,
And thus I hourly prove her;
Yet let me all those curses share
That heaven can give, or man can bear,
If I don't strangely love her.
On one Becker, a Parson of Amsterdam who in a Book entitled, The World
Bewitched, pretends to prove there is but one Devil.
PLures O Beckere negas dum Daemonas esse
Contra te gens est imperiosa tua.
Thus in English.
More Devils than one why does the Sot deny?
All Holland gives his argument the lie.
The Fable of the Wolf and Porcupine. In answer to The Argument against a
Standing Army.
1.
ISgrim with hunger pressed, one day
As through the Woods he posted,
A Porcupine found on the way,
And in these terms accosted.
2.
Our Wars are ended, heaven be praised,
Then let us sit down and pr^ttle
Of Towns invested, Sieges raised,
And what we did in Battle.
3.
The Plains a pleasing prospect yield,
No fire, nor desolation;
While plenty reigns in every field,
And Trade restores the Nation.
4.
Yet you your Quills erected wear,
And tho none seeks to harm ye,
In time of Peace about you bear
Methinks a Standing Army.
5.
Friend, quoth the Porcupine, it is true,
The War's at length decided,
But against such tricking Blades as you
It Is good to be provided.
6.
Censorious Fame shall never say
That too much Faith betrayed me;
Who thinks of me to make a prey,
Must at his cost invade me.
7.
Let him, that thinks it worth the while,
Tempt Knaves to make a Martyr,
The Sharpers that would me beguile,
Shall find they have caught a Tartar.
The Fable of Apollo and Daphne.
1.
APollo once finding fair Daphne alone,
Discovered his flame in a passionate tone;
He told her, and bound it with many a curse,
He was ready to take her for better, for worse*
Then he talked of his smart,
And the hole in his heart,
So large, one might drive through the passage a Cart.
But the silly coy Maid, to the Gods great amazement,
Sprung away from his arms, and leapt through the Casement.
2.
He following cry^d out, my Life and my Dear,
Return to your Lover, and lay by your fear.
You think me perhaps some Scoundrel, or Whoreson,
Alas, I^ve no wicked designs on your person.
I Am a God by my trade,
Young, plump, and well-made,
Then let me caress thee, and be not afraid.
But still she kept running, and flew like the wind,
While the poor pursy God came panting behind*
3.
I Am the Chief of Physicians, and none of the College
Must be mentioned with me for experience and knowledge:
Each Herb, Flower, and Plant by its name I can call*
And do more than the best Seventh Son of 'emall
With my Powders and Pills,
I cure all the ills,
That sweep off such numbers each week in the Bills
But still she kept running, and flew like the wind
While the poor pursy God came panting behind
4.
Besides I Am a Poet, Child, into the bargain,
And top all the Writers of famed Convent-garde^
I Am the prop of the Stage, and the pattern of Wit,
I set my own Sonnets, and sing to my Kit.
I Am at Wills all the day,
And each night at the Play;
And Verses I make fast as Hops, as they say.
When she heard him talk thus, she redoubled her speed,
And flew like a Whore from a Cunstable freed.
7.
Now had our wise Lover (but Lovers are blind)
^n the language of Lumbardstreet told her his mind,
Look Lady what here is, it is plenty of Money,
Odsbobs I must swinge thee, my joy and my honey.
I sit next the Chair,
And shall shortly be Mayor,
Neither Clayton nor Duncomb with me can compare
Tho as wrinkled as Priam, deformed as the Devil,
The God had succeeded, the Nymph had been civil.
Labienus's Speech in Lucans Pharsalia* Translated by Mr. Dennis.
FUll of the Godhead in his Breast inshrin'd,
He in these words explains his mighty mind;
Words which oraculous Jove might dictate to mankind.
And what should I of these vain Priests inquire*
If I should rather thus in Arms expire,
With these high thoughts, and this unconquered fire,
Than live ingloriously to hail a King,
And my great Soul to vile Subjection bring?
What should I ask, if nothing be in Death,
And nothing in this idle vapor, Breath?
If the Good only be supremely great,
Of Fortune independent, and of Fate?
If the brave Patriot's glorious in distress,
And Tyrants despicable in success?
If in magnanimous attempts to fail
Merits renown, as much as to prevail.
This should I ask? all this I know, I feel:
And how should Hammon inborn truths reveal?
Why should the Powers their sacred Wills explain,
Since all we do, say, think, those Powers ordain,
Our wills are linked to theirs by Fate's eternal Chain.
God wants not men his meaning to convey,
But in one breath said all that he can say;
In that informing breath that kindled up our Clay*
Nor would he build in barren Sands his seat,
That he to Fools ill Verses might repeat,
And hide eternal truths in this obscure retreat.
To Jove what certain seat can be consigned?
Where can the World's great Ruler be confined?
This Universal Frame's the seat of that Eternal Mind.
Why should we seek him in this mystic Grove,
Wherever eye can reach, wherever thought can rove,
Substance and space is all unbounded Jove.
Let those who live in doubt (a foolish state)
Consult these mighty Confidents of fate,
Her irreversible decrees my constancy create*
Alike the Coward and the Brave must fall,
This mighty Jove has once declared for all,
And these inspiring sounds to Roman actions (...)
The 63d Epigram in Martial, Lib. 3 Translated by Mr. P -- Cotile Bellus homo
es, etc.
OH Iemmy you're a Beau, not I alone
Say this, but it is the talk of all the Tow^
Prithee be free, and to thy friend impart
What is a Beau -- Ay Sir, with all my heart.
He Is one who nicely curls and combs his hair,
And visits Sedgwick monthly all the year:
Sings bawdy Songs, and humms them as along
Flanting he walks through the admiring throng^
All the day long sits with the charming fair,
And whispers pretty stories in their ear.
Writes Billets doux, shuns all men as he goes,
Lest their unhallowed touch should dawb his clothes.
He knows your Mistress. Nay, at every Feast
He Will tell the Pedigree of every Guest.
^s this a Beau? Faith Iemmy I Will be plain,
A Beau's a Bawble, destitute of Brain.
To an old affected Court Lady.
By a person of Honor.
1.
TEll me, Dorinda, why so gay?
Why this Embroidery, Fringe and Lace?
Such Ornaments expose decay;
Cannot Dukelly find a way
^o shade the ruins of thy face?
2.
Will thou still ogle In the Box,
And glitter in the ring?
Have thou forget thy age, and pox?
Can all the spoils of Shells and Rocks
Make thee a fine young thing?
3.
So have I seen in Larder dark,
Of Pork a rotten Loyn,
Adorned with many a heatless spark,
As grave Philosophers remark,
At once both stink and shine.
To Belinda. Upon her Marrying o^^ that was Blind and Lame.
By a person of Honor.
1.
BElinda's sparkling Wit and Eyes
United, dart so fierce a light,
As quickly flashes, quickly dies,
Wounds not the heart, but hurts the sight.
2.
Love is all gentleness and joy,
Smooth are his looks, and soft his pace;
Her Cupid is a Black-guard Boy,
That runs his Link full in your face.
3.
Proud with the spoils of Royal Cully,
With vain pretense to sense and parts,
She swaggers like a battered Bully,
To try the temper of men's hearts.
4.
Her Bed is like the Gospel-feast,
Where the invited never came;
So, disappointed of her Guest,
She takes up with the Blind and Lame.
5.
Tho she is as sparkling, and as fine
As J^sts, and Gems, and Paint can make her,
She never can wound a heart like mine,
So Devil, and Sir D -- take her^
To his Cruel Mistress. Out of French.
1.
It Is then decreed, and now I find
I Am for a Sacrifice designed;
Since my imperious Fair denies
Rest to my Soul, and slumber to my Eyes.
2.
Go^ ache a Kiss, Love whispers in my ear;
But love, alas! gives way to fear.
Awful respect the aspiring flame commands,
Ties up my tongue, and binds my hands.
3.
Ah! must your bleeding Lover dye,
And see his balm, and see his cure so nigh?
Or fierce, and eager of the bliss,
Shall he presume to seize a balmy Kiss.
4.
No -- he will ten thousand deaths endure,
And all the rigours of his fate attend,
E're he will by Sacrilege attempt his cure,
And his dear Bellamette offend.
An Ode upon a Kiss. Out of French.
1.
NAy, now ambitious thoughts farewell,
I pity Kings in all their state,
While thus in Lesbia's arms I dwell,
And mighty Love does on my Triumphs wait.
2.
Thus let me languishing expire,
Incircled in her snowy arms,
Till she revives me with her charms,
And pours into my breast a nobler fire.
3.
Thus let me sigh my Soul away,
And revel in immortal bliss,
Thus let me spend the auspicious day,
And crown each smiling moment with a Kiss.
4.
Adonis never was half so blessed,
Nor half the pleasure shared, as I:
Tho Love's bright Goddess him carest,
And in her arms hugged the delicious Boy.
5.
Nor Jove himself such transports knew,
When Danae's charms the captive God did hold,
Tho he, the pleasure to pursue,
Mortgaged his poor Almighty ship to Gold.
6.
A thousand Loves in solemn state
On those two rosy lips reside,
While busy I, with eager pride,
Sip all their sweets, and bless my happy fate.
7.
Now on her glowing Breasts I range,
Now kiss her Cheeks, and now her Eyes;
The pleasure's heightened by the change,
And fills me with unruly joys.
8.
But ah! my Beauteous Nymph beware
How you increase my store,
For else your pampered Slave may dare,
Drunk as he is with joy, to press for something more
9.
For say, fond Lovers, what you will
To deifie a Kiss,
It Is but a pledge, or Prologue still,
To the succeeding Acts of Bliss.
A Sapphic Ode in the Valesiana.
DUlcius quam fit putat esse mollis
Virgo quod nescit, sitis inde magna
Cognitae nondum Veneris puellas Torquet adultas.
At recordantur Viduae peractas
Cum viris noctes, sit is inde major
Cognitae dudum Veneris priores Suscitat ignes.
Virgini ignosci, Viduaene malis?
Illa quod nescit cupit experiri
Haec quod experta est, avet: inde Virgo Aequius ardet.
A Translation. Principio, Coelum, and Terras, Titaniaque astra Spiritus intus
alit, totumque insusa per artus Men's agitat molem --
I Will sing how God, the world's almighty Mind,
Through all infused, and to that All confined;
Directs the parts, and with an equal hand
^upports the whole, enjoying his command:
How all agree, and how the parts have made
^trict Leagues, subsisting by each others aid.
How all by Reason move, because one Soul
^ives in the parts, diffusing through the whole.
For did not all the friendly parts conspire
To make one whole, and keep the Frame entire;
and did not Reason guide, and Sense control
The vast stupendous Machine of the whole;
^arth would not keep its place, the Skies would fall,
and universal stiffness deaden all.
Stars would not whirl their round, nor day nor night*
Their course perform, but stop their usual flight*
Rains would not feed the Fields, and Earth deny*
Mists to the Clouds, and Vapors to the Sky.
Seas would not fill the Springs, nor Springs retur^*
Their grateful Tribute from their flowing Ur^
Nor would the All, unless contrived by Art,
So justly be proportioned in each part;
That neither Seas, nor Skies, nor Stars exceed
Our wants* nor are too scanty for our need.
Thus stands the Frame, and the Almighty Soul*
Through all diffused, so turns, and guides the whole*
That nothing from its settled station swerves,
And Motion alters not the Frame, but still pre^serves*
This God, or Reason, which the Orbs does move*
Makes things below depend on signs above:
Tho far removed, tho hid in shades of night,
And scarce to be descried by their own light.
^et Nations own, and men their influence feel,
^hey rule the public, and the private will:
^he proofs are plain. Thus from a different Star
^e find a fruitful, or a barren year;
^ow grains increase, and now refuse to grow,
^ow quickly ripen, now their growth is slow.
^he Moon commands the Seas; she drives the Main
^o pass the Shores, then drives it back again.
and this Sedition chiefly sweells the streams,
^hen opposite she views her Brother's beams;
^r when she near in close Conjunction rides,
^erears the Floods, and swells the flowing Tides;
^r when attending on the yearly race,
^he Equinoctial sees her borrowed face.
Her power sinks deep, it searches all the Main,
^estaceous fish, as she her light regains.
^^crease, and still diminish in her wane.
^or as the Moon in deepest darkness mourns,
^hen rays receives, and points her borrow^d horns,
Then turns her face, and with a smile invites
The full effusions of her Brother's Lights,
They to her Changes due proportions keep,
And show her various Phases in the deep.
So Brutes, whom Nature did in sport create,
Ignorant of themselves, and of their fate,
A secret instinct still erects their Eyes
To parent Heaven, and seems to make them wise
One at the New Moon's rise to distant shores
Retires, his body sprinkles, and adores.
Some see storms gathering, or serenes foretell,
And scarce our Reason guides us half so well.
Then who can doubt that Man, the gloriou^ Prid^
Of all, is nearer to the Stars allied?
Nature in Man's capacious Soul has wrought,
And given them Voice expressive of their thought
In Man the God descends, and joys to find
The narrow Image of his greater mind.
But why should all the other Arts be shown?
Too various for productions of our own.
Why should I sing how different tempers fall,
And inequality is seen in all?
How many strive with equal care to gain
The highest prize, and yet how few obtain?
Which proves not Matter sways, but Wisdom rules
And measures out the bigness of our Souls.
^^re Fate stands fixed, nor can its Laws decay,
^is Heaven's to rule, and Matter's essence to obey.
Who could know Heaven, unless that Heaven bestowd
^he knowledge? or find God, but part of God?
^ow could the space Immense be e're confined
^ithin the compass of a narrow mind?
^ow could the Skies, the Dances of the Stars,
their motions adverse, and eternal wars,
^nless kind Nature in our Breasts had wrought
^oportion'd Souls, be subject to our thought?
Were Heaven not aiding to advance our mind*
To know Fate's Laws, and teach the way to (...)
Did not the Skies their kindred Souls improve
Direct, and lead them through the Maze above,
Discover Nature, show its secret springs,
And tell the sacred intercourse of things.
How impious were our search, how bold o^ cou^^
Thus to assault, and take the Skies by force.
A most convincing Reason's drawn from Se^^
That this vast Frame is moved by Providence,
Which like the Soul does every whirl advance
It must be God, nor was it made by chance,
As Epicurus dreamt: He madly thought
This beauteous Frame of heedless Atoms wroug^^
That Seas and Earth, the Stars and spacious Ai^
Which forms new Worlds, or does the old*
First rose from these, and still supplied remain,
And all must be, when Chance shall break the Chain
Dissolved to these wild Principles again.
Absurd and Nonsense! Atheist use thine Eyes,
And having viewed the order of the Skies,
Think, if thou can, that Matter blindly hurled,
Without a Guide, should frame this wondrous World.
But did Chance make, and Chance still rule the whole,
Why do the Signs in constant order roll?
Observe set times to shut and open day?
Nor meet, nor justle, and mistake their way?
Perform their Course, as if by Laws confined,
None hasten on, and leave the rest behind.
Why every day does the discovering flame
Show the same World, and leave it still the same?
And even at night, when time in secret flies,
And veils himself in shades from human Eyes,
Can by the signs Men know how fast he fled,
And in the Skies the hasty Minutes read?
Why should I count how often the Earth has mourn'^
The Sun's retreat, and smiled when he returned?
How often he does his various course divide
'Twixt Winter's Nakedness, and Summer's Pride?
All Mortal things must change. The fruitful Plai^
As seasons turn, scarce knows herself again;
Such various forms she bears: Large Empires too
Put off their former face, and take a new:
Yet safe the world, and free from change does last,
No years increase it, and no years can waste.
Its course it urges on, and keeps its frame,
And still will be, because 'twas still the same.
It stands secure from time's devouring Rage,
For it is a God that guides, nor can it change wi^^ Ag^
Miscellaneous Letters.
LETTER I. A Letter to the Duke of Buckingham, by the famous Monsieur St.
Evremont. Oevres Melees, Tome Sec. p. 51. Done into English.
My Lord,
AN humble Servant of yours here in Town, Monsieur Borne by name, is so fully
satisfied of the reality of your Reformation, that he expresses himself in
these terms to all that have the honor to know you.

I dare venture my own Salvation upon the same bottom with that of the Duke of
Buckingham, so firmly do I believe the sincerity of his Conversion.

Conversion, says Mr. Waller to him, have a care what you say: People don't use
to be converted now adays so easily. This new reformation you talk of in the D.
of Buckingham is owing neither to you, nor me, nor yet to any man living.

It Is a new Friend of his, but one that has been dead, the Lord knows how many
hundred years ago, that has very lately brought about this miraculous change
that so surprises us.

I mean Petronius Arbiter, the most delicate man of his age, for Poetry,
Painting, and Music. One that perpetually studied and pursued pleasure, one
that turned the day into night, and the night into the day, but at the same
time so absolute a Master of himself, that whenever his affairs requird it, he
was one of the most regular men in the Universe.

The Duke of Buckingham, who has long ago resembled him in a thousand other
qualities, was resolved of late to imitate him too in this. Thus I have shown
you, Monsieur Borne, from whence proceeds this alteration in his Grace's Life,
which you it seems have mistaken for a Conversion.

But with both these Gentlemen's leave, I shall account for it after another
manner.

It Is a certain Maxim with me, that no man of a nice palate can love vice, when
once it ceases to be agreeable, so for my part I don't wonder that a person of
so refined and delicate a taste, as your Grace, takes up with the virtue of
Continence in the North, where you have no objects to tempt and disturb you.
But I dare engage that if we had you here in Town, and showed you some of our
topping Beauties, that have charms enough to conquer the most insensible, we
should soon find the new Convert of Monsieur Borne, and Mr. Waller's new
Petronius, to be nothing in the World, but the true genuine Duke of Buckingham.

Heaven forbid that I should ever be so wickedly given as to dissuade your
Grace from so comfortable a quarter as Love. But I have another Sin to propose
to you, which of your self you would never guess, and yet I recommend it
sincerely to you, and from the bottom of my heart. I confess it has a Scurvy
name, and the World calls it Covetousness, however it would be of more
advantage to your Grace, than the Wisdom of Philosophers, and the glory of
Conquerors. To be short, I should rather choose to see your Grace copy any of
the Heroes in Lumbardstreet, than either Socrates or Caesar. Where the
difficulty is great, the merit of surmounting it is great. Now all the World
knows that your Grace will find it infinitely more troublesome to you to
imitate the former, than the two latter Gentlemen.

As we don^t all on the sudden arrive to the height of perfection, I am not so
vain as to expect you should practice all the rules of Economy at first sight,
nor so morose as to advise you to deny your self every thing, amongst so great
an affluence as surrounds you All I beg of your Grace is, that you would have
a watchful eye upon your City friends, that have the fingering of your Money,
to keep them honest in spite of themselves. For unless out of tenderness to
their Souls, you hinder them from playing the Knaves, I dare swear for them
that they would venture damnation a hundred times a day, and all in your Graces
service.

And now if you think it worth your while, when you come next to London, to
bring a small retinue with you, but a great deal of money in your pocket, you
will certainly be the wonder of the whole Nation. If you neglect this advice,
the greater part of the World will never be for you, and you must content your
self with a few admirers in private, of whom I shall always be the first, who am

Your most Humble Servant.

LETTER II. A Letter to the Duchess of -- By the same hand.
I Have presumed, Madam, to send you some advice, tho I am sensible how little
you La^dies care to receive any. But let the effect be what it will, I am too
much in the interest of your Beauty, not to inform you, that you will injure it
extremely, should you be so ill-advised as to set off, and adorn your self
after the fashion of the Court Ladies on the Queens Birthday. Let others of
your Sex make use of ornaments: for, properly speaking, they are but so many
artificial helps, which we employ to cover the defects of nature, or else to
give us some agreements that are wanting in our persons. But Heaven be praised,
Madam, you lie under no such necessity. Every ornament that is bestowed upon
you, hides a charm, as every ornament that is taken from you, restores you some
new graces, and you are never so lovely, as when we behold nothing in you, but
your self.

The greatest part of the Ladies lose themselve very advantageously under their
dress. How many indifferent faces pass well enough with Jewels and Diamonds,
and Conquer hearts by Candlelight, that would make a very sorry figure without
them. The richest Necklace in the World would have an ill effect upon you. It
would make some alteration in your person, and every alteration that happens to
a perfect Beauty, would certainly be for the worse

Leave others then to ruin themselves by their Jewels and other Decorations;
nature that has been at so vast an expense to frame you, has saved you that
charge. You, Madam, would be very ungrateful, and we should discover but a
wretched taste, should we not be equally content, with that profusion of gifts
she has heaped upon you.

I would counsel you, Madam, to take the same measures on her Majesty's Birth
day, which the famous Bussi d' Amboise formerly observed at a Tournament. Being
informed beforehand that all the Noblemen of the Court designed to put
themselves to an extraordinary expense in their Equipages and Clothes, he
ordered those of his retinue to be dressed like Lords, and appeared himself in
the plainest dress in the World at the head of so rich a train. The advantages
of nature were so conspicuous in the person of Bussi, that he alone was taken
for a great Lord, and the other Noblemen, that relied so much upon the
magnificence of their habits, past but for Valets.

Govern your self, I beseech you Madam, by the Example of Bussi: Let your Women
be attired like Dutchesses, but as for your self appear in the ordinary dress
of a Country Nymph, with nothing but the charms of your Beauty to recommend
you: All the Ladies will be taken for your Women, and the plainness of your
habit will not hinder you from out-shining all the Queens in the Universe.

I have no great inclination to tell stories, which perhaps is nothing but the
effect of an ill-grounded Vanity, that makes me prefer the expressing of what I
imagine, to the reciting of what I have seen. The profession of a Story-teller
sits but awkwardly upon young People, and is downright weakness in old men.
When our wit is not arrived to its due vigor, or when it begins to decline, we
then take a pleasure in telling what does not put us to any great expense of
thought. However, I will for once renounce the pleasure, which I generally take
in my own imagination, to recount to you a short adventure, which I once saw
happen at the Hague.

During my residence in that place, some malicious Demon, put it one day into
the head of a certain Count and his Friend, to draw the eyes of the Spectators
after them. To put which noble design in execution, they both resolved that
their dress should have all the magnificence which this part of the World was
able to give it, and at the same time discover the goodness of their invention.

The Count, who was one of the nicest men of his age, had a thousand
singularities to distinguish him. He had a Plume of feathers in his Hat, which
was buttoned up by a Diamond, the largest that could be found, for this
occasion. He wore about his Neck some Point de Venise, which was neither a
Cravat nor a Band. 'Twas a small Ruff, which had served him formerly instead of
a Golille when he liv^d at Madrid. After this, Madam, you would expect to find
him in a Doublet, after the Spanish manner, but, to your surprise, I must tell
you it was an Hungarian Vest. Then the Ghost of Antiquity haunted his memory,
so he covered his ankles with Buskins, but infinitely richer than the ancient
Romans used to wear them: on which he had order^d his Mistresses name to be
written in Letters that were extremely well designed, upon an embroidery of
Pearls.

From his Hat down to his Vest, 'twas all singular, and odd and fanciful. By
the latter you would have taken him for the Count de Serini, or some Beau of
Quality dropped out of the Hungarian world; and an old Picture of Caesar or
Scipio had inspired him with the noble thought of wearing Buskins.

As for his friend, he had apparelled himself after as extraordinary a manner
as he possibly ^ou'd, but it was in the modern French way. His Cravat reached
down to his middle, and had stuff enough in it to make a sail for a Barge. A
most prodigious Cravat-String peeped from under his Chin, the two corners of
which, in conjunction with a monstrous Perriwig, that would have made a
Laplander sweat under the Northern Pole, eclipsed three quarters of his face.
In short, he was so be-ribbon'd all over, that one would have thought all the
Milleners in the place, had joined their Stocks to furnish him.

This, in short, was the equipage of our Messieurs, when they made their
appearance in the Voorhout, which is the place where persons of Quality use to
take the air, and divert themselves.

They were scarce entered upon the spot, when multitudes ran from all hands to
gaze and stare at them; and as every body was surprised at so fantastic a
scene, they could not tell at first whether to admire it as extraordinary, or
to ridicule it as extravagant. In this uncertainty of thought, as they were
going to determine it one way or another, Monsieur de Louvigni arrived in the
place, and put a stop to their grave Contemplation. He wore a plain black suit,
and clean linen made up the rest, but then he showed one of the finest shapes,
and most agreeable face that can be imagined. His modest de^portment silently
insinuated the merits of all hi^ excellent qualities. Having thus described hi^
charms to you, it is no difficult matter to gue^^ how the Company received him.
The Ladie^ were touch^d, and the Men were infinit^l^ pleased. In short, Madam,
all the Spectator were as much affected, as the poor Count an^ his Friends were
mortified, to their great disap^pointment.

People still remember at the Hague how tri^umphantly Monsieur de Louvigni came
off, an^ still make sport with telling the ill success of the two aforesaid
Gentlemen.

I need not give my self the trouble, Madam to make a formal Application of
this story to you who have a judgment so exqusitely nice an^ discerning. Let my
advice meet with what en^tertainment it will, none of your subjects pray^ so
heartily for your long and happy reign ove^ us, as

Madam, Your most humble Servant, etc*

LETTER III. To Madam -- By the same hand.
AS nothing is to honorable as an ancient friendship, so nothing is so
scandalous as an (...) passion. Undeceive your self, Madam, of (...) false
merit of being faithful, and take it for a ^^rtain truth, that constancy is the
only thing in (...) World, that can bring the reputation of your ^^auty in
question. Who knows whether you ^^solved to love but one person, or whether it
was ^our unhappiness ^o find but one single Lover. ^alicious people will be apt
to fancy the latter.

You vainly imagine that you practice a virtue, ^hile alas you make us suspect
you have de^^cts which we don't perceive. In the mean time ^^nsider how many
inquietudes accompany ^is pretended virtue, and what a vast difference ^ere is
between the disgusts that an old engage^ent gives us, and the pleasant
conflicts of a ^owing passion.

In a new Amor we pass every hour of the da^ with new satisfaction. It Is an
unexpressible plea^sure to find that our love grows upon us ever^ minute; but
in a passion of an old standing, o^ time is spent very uneasily, in still
loving less, o^ not loving at all.

We may live well enough with persons that a^ indifferent to us; either common
civility, o^ good manners, or the consideration that the^ may sometimes be
serviceable to us, may reconcil^ us to it. But how miserably do we pass our
live with them whom we love, when we find th^^ we are not beloved again.

I have only four words more to say to you, an^ I will be so free with you as
to desire you to ma^^ some reflection upon them. If you continue sti^^ to place
your affection upon that, which oug^^ to displease you, it is a sign you have
none of the best tastes: and if you have not resolution enoug^ to quit that
which makes you uneasy, it is a dow^ right weakness: you ought to put it into
your ^^^tany, and pray to be delivered from it.

LETTER IV. Out of the Reflections of Monsieur Villiers, p. 149. To his much
esteemed friend, Monsieur --
Remember, that the last time I had the honor (...) of your conversation, we
happened to talk of ^^^eral persons that made a great ostentation of their
piety, and p^ssed for Saints in the places ^here they lived, who as we had just
occasion to ^^spect, by their over-acting the Farce, were ^wnright Cheats, if
truly examined. I was go^^g to confirm this with a story, that lately fell
^^thin my own observation; but happened to be ^^terrupted by the coming in of
fresh company, which put a stop to the discourse. However, as ^is worth your
knowing, I have given my ^f the trouble to send you a full account of it in ^s
Letter.

About a month ago I had occasion to travel to the Country with two Ladies, one
of them a young Marchioness, descended of one of the n^^blest Families in the
Kingdom; the other a La^^yers Widow, about fifty years old, who took (...) same
title upon her, tho the meanness of her ^^^traction, and her Husbands
employment, th^^ was none of the most honorable, might ha^^ secured her, one
would have thought, from so ^^^diculous a temptation. But being le^t very ric^
her own Vanity, and the complaisance of h^^ Friends had made her a Marchioness,
and this w^^ the title she received on all occasions, and at (...) challenged
as her due.

I had but little acquaintance with either of the^ but I was engaged in this
journey by a frie^^ whose commands I could not well disobey, a^^ who knew both
these Ladies perfectly well.

We were going to the Government of (...) young Marchioness's Husband, where
she was e^^pected, and preparations were made on the Road (...) her reception;
the old Marchioness traveling o^^ly as her Companion, however she had her
sh^^^ of all the Honors and Civilities that were (...) to the other. At the
first City where we arrive^ as soon as we had alighted out of the Coach, (...)
young Marchioness was invited to a very pleas^^^ walk without the Town, and it
being Sum^^^ time, she embraced the motion: but the old La^^ taking an air of
authority upon her, said it (...) be much better to go to Church, and hear a
go^^ Sermon there. The young Marchioness told her (...) ^ight go thither if she
pleased, while she took a ^alk. This answer cruelly nettled the Widow, ^^t she
dissembled the matter as well as she could, and taking the next way to the
Church, she de^^red me to bear her company thither. Although his fit of Devotion
seemed somewhat unseasona^le to me, yet good manners would not suffer me ^o let
her walk alone. So with her I went, and ^ll the way had the satisfaction to
hear her vent ^er godly spleen very plentifully at the young Marchioness; she
told me a hundred reproachful ^^ories of her, nay, she did not forbear to
censure ^ven her conduct. This language continued till he came into the
Church Porch. I admired with ^y self how it was possible for so zealous a
Ser^on-hunter to be so damnably censorious.

All the while she was at Church she made up ^er mouth as demurely as the best
of the Congre^ation; as soon as it was over, she reassumed the ^ld argument,
and railed on, as fast as her malici^us Lungs would give her leave, till we
came to ^he young Marchioness, who was still walking in ^he Garden. I had there
an opportunity to dis^ourse the young Lady in private, and to satisfy ^y self
whether there had been any former quar^el between them, turned the conversation
upon ^he old Marchioness, of whom she spoke in very ^^liging terms, and did not
say the least Syllable (...) her that was disrespectful. I then made no
dif^^culty to conclude that this formal Hypocrite, that was perpetually
disgorging broken ends o^ Sermons, and pelting every body that came nea^ her
with Texts of Scripture, was nothing near (...) virtuous at bottom as the young
Lady, who kep^ her Devotion to her self; and I made a thousan^ Observations
during this short journey, that su^^ly confirmed me in this opinion.

The young Marchioness, who, as I told yo^ before, made no great noise or
bustle about her Reli^gion, spent but half an hour at her Toilette, an^ always
got ready one of the first for her Journey*

The old Lady spent no less than three hours i^ tricking herself, and made the
Company perpe^tually tarry for her.

Our Religious Dame, for all her pretenses t^ mortification, thought it no sin
to patch an^ paint herself: The Marchioness, content with he^ face such as
Heaven made it, scorned to have r^^course to such artifices.

The former must always have her Gellies, an^ Broaths, and Caudles, and the
Lord knows wha^ brought to her before she would venture her c^^^cass out of
Bed: the latter never thought of eatin^ till the very moment before she went
into he^ Coach.

The young Lady was always in good humo^^ spoke well of every body, was
satisfied with eve^^ thing, and carefully avoided all the complime^^ and
honors that were done her, in a Countr^ where she was Mistress.

On the other hand, the old Marchioness, who was a perfect Stranger in it, not
only took every occasion to receive them, but was always complaining, that she
had not respect enough paid her. The Beds were never good enough for her, the
Dinner never pleased her, the Servants were always saucy or negligent, the
Bills unreasonable, the Coachman either drove too ^ast or too slow: Still she
found one opportunity or another to vent her pious indignation. No body's name
could be mentioned to her, but still she found something to blame in their
Conduct. Then she was the most imperious Devil alive to her Servants, none of
her Women ever lived a full fortnight with her. In short, she was eternally
railing, censuring, and backbiting, but still she did it with a godly air, and
in the language of the Old Testament.

If any one now should ask me the question, which of these two I thought to
have the most Religion, I should immediately declare my self in favor of the
young Marchioness, and yet to see how partially the World judges of Persons,
the young Lady passes by common consent for a Woman that is wholly devoted to
the World, and the other is universally taken for a Saint.

Thus you see how easily the World is imposed upon, by a fair outside, and
glittering appearances. It Is true your persons of sense see through these ^hin
disguises, and are sensible of the cheat, but where you meet one of that
character, you find ten thousand Fools that always assist to deceive
themselves. A man of true Piety, that has no designs to carry on, like one of
an established fortune, always make the least Noise. One never pulls out his
Money, the other never talks of Religion, but when there is occasion for it.

This puts me in mind of a passage that happened the other day. I made a visit
one afternoon to Madam * ^ * where I found several City Ladies of the first
magnitude. After a great deal of foolish Chat about the duty of Husbands, and
the infidelity of the Men, some body in the room, by what accident I have now
forgot, trump't up Sylvius's name, who you know is a man of great merit, and
has the happiness to be well received by the fair Sex; Says a starched piece of
formality, I wonder how he comes to make so many Conquests, but for my part,
tho he sighed a whole age at my Feet, I am sure I should never lose a moments
repose for him. I don't know the Gentleman, replys another Lady, but if he is
what the World represents him, I dare not answer to my heart, that I could
maintain it long against him. This latter spoke her Sentiments honestly, and
without reserve, whereas the other was a dissembling Coquette that had buried
two Husbands, and was looking out for a third, and if warmly attacqu'd, would,
I dare answer for her, swallow a temptation without making wry Faces, as
readily as an^ Usurer does an Orphan.

But tho a good reason may be given why we have so many Hypocrites in Religion,
when they make their for^^^es by it; I could never comprehend the mystery, that
the generality of the World should be such Asses to value themselves for things
that are apparently false.

Lucius is the Grandson of a Chimney-sweeper, all the World knows it, and yet
the Sot values himself in all Companies upon his noble extraction,
everlastingly talks of the services which his Ancestors have done the public.
Yet, says a Gentleman to him one day, finding him upon this Strain, the public
is obliged to your Ancestors; if it had not been for them Paris had been in
danger of burning more than once.

Stentor is one of the vilest preachers that ever murdered a Text. He has
nothing but his lungs and impudence to recommend him. He had never learning
enough at the College to get him a Degree, nor reputation enough in the City
to get twenty Auditors together to sit with him thro-out, yet in all his
Sermons this insect quotes Fathers and Councels, with as much assurance as if
he knew them, and talks of nothing but the vast multitudes that flock from all
quarters to hear him.

Aemelia is an antiquated Maid, censorious and deformed, she has often bribed
Midwives and Persons, to proclaim her for a great fortune, and twenty times
given money to be joined in a Lampoon, with twenty Sparks one after another, to
try if something would come on it. But after all her intriguing she could never
yet find any one Cully enough to marry her. Ye^ she perpetually tells every one
she sees, what advantageous matches she has refused in her time, such a Lords
languish'd, and such a Knight run mad for her. And if you will believe Captain
Buff, the King has not disposed of the Government of a Fort these twenty years,
but he has had the first offer of it.

But I forget I am writing a Letter, and have launched into an Essay: Therefore
I will end abruptly here, rather than trespass any longer upon your patience,
and only beg leave to add that I am

Your most Humble Servant.

LETTER V. A onsolatory Letter to Mr. H --
SIR,
I Am none of the best comforters in the world; however, yours is so common and
easy a case, that any one may set up for a Doctor, and pretend to prescribe
Remedies for it. You send me word you are a Cuckold, and desire my advice upon
the matter: why is this a time to complain of Cuckoldom. You ought to have
reconciled your self to that point long ago, before you ventured into the Holy
State, and not to mortify with the thought on it now, when you cannot help your
self. A Soldier should consider before he lists himself, how he can bear the
loss of an arm or leg; if he meets with an unlucky shot, it is but the chance of
War, and if he comes off in a whole skin it is more than he could expect, and
Providence used him better than he deserved. The Oracle in Rablais, to which
you are no stranger, long ago declared, that every married man either has been,
or is, or will be a Cuckold, and could you ever hope to elude an Oracle? For my
part, it is no more than what I expected to hear of you every post: you have
been long jealous of your Wife, and now it comes home to you, for jealousy does
as naturally ripen into Cuckoldom, as a Catterpillar into a horned Insect
called a Butterfly. However, you have got this by the bargain, that it has
cured you, God be thanked, of your jealousy, which is one of the worst
tormenters a man can have; and who would not bear with a saucy Companion to get
rid of the Devil. But after all, what you complain of is no disgrace, you share
it in common with the Caesar's and Pompeys, and most of the Heroes of former
Ages, and with the N -- and M -- of this, besides an infinite number of Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, Bishops, Knights, Aldermen, Deans, Archdeacons, Heads and
Governors of Colleges and Halls; and who would regret to be joined in so good
a Company?

But your Family's dishonored, and so perhaps it has been twenty times since
the Conquest. I told you before I had no extraordinary hand at comforting. A
thousand other Families have been subject to the same calamity, and why you
should expect to fare better than your Neighbors, I don't understand. But if I
had deserved it from my Wife. Why so much the better still: Other people use to
comfort themselves in their misfortunes, by reflecting upon their innocence,
and why should not you? If your Wife has a fancy to go to the Devil let her
never lose her longing: rather than that should happen, do by her as Charles
the fifth is said to do by a flying Enemy, build her a Bridge to go thither.

Well, but what would you have me do? you say Job, and Plutarch and Seneca,
have been so often prescribed to people in your condition, that I will not offer
them to you. My advice is then, that you would come to Town as soon as you can, and
take a Lodging in Cheapside or near Whitehall, and there I Will pass my word
for it you will be thought no monster: tho you unmannerly folks in the Country
stare at a Cuckold, as much as here we do at a Kings Evidence just after a new
Plot, yet London's a civil place, and we think him no prodigy here* But if your
affairs will not give you leave to come to Town, my next advice is, to retalliate
upon your Neighbors, plant Cuckoldom as thick as you can in your Hundred; and
for that end get in with the Aunts, the Nurses, and Midwives; but above all,
secure the Church, and get the Clergy on your side. When your numbers are grown
pretty considerable, make a descent into the next Hundred, and so on, till you
have made the whole County of a piece. When you have effected this, you will be
above the reach of scandal, your multitudes will protect you, and then you will
live as comfortably, as we do here in London. But what shall I do with my Wife?
I have already told you; Build her a Bridge, and lose no time. I am,

Your Loving Cousin, A. P.

LETTER VI. To W. K. Esquire
Ian. 22. Dear Sir,
It Is a sign I am never weary of keeping a correspondence with you, since I can
afford to do it at this terrible juncture, when the Ink friezes as I write: But
you must expect nothing else from me but what you would hear in every
Coffee-house, were you in Town, and that is, to be entertained about the Frost.
The common people here are of opinion, that the Northern Monarch, who has done
us the honor of a visit, has brought his own Country Weather along with him,
and they confirm it with a very good instance; for they remember that when the
Morocco Ambassador was here, we had the hottest Summer that ever was known.
Thus, according to these merry Philosophers, every Foreigner that comes to see
us, takes care, like Nicholas in the Virtuoso, to bottle up some of the Air of
his own Climate, and retails it among us here.

It has been a general complaint, that all the Seasons but winter have been of
late inverted. Mr. Flamsted you know has pretended that the Sun has been out of
order this good while, and a friend of yours, who loves dearly to sit up a
nights, being asked what was the reason that he never saw him, replied, that he
could not endure to see sick folks. It Is no wonder that he can do no more in
January, since for eight years last past, he has not been scarce able to
maintain his Summer Quarters, and Winter has had the impudence to bully him
even in his own Dog Days. Indeed, if he decays in proportion to what he has
done of late, the Lord have mercy, say^, on Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis of the
Charterhouse, for he will be no more able to cause a general confl^gration, than
old Parr was to get a Bastard in the hundred and fifty second year of his age.

But to leave off these metaphysical contemplations -- If this severe Season
lasts many days longer, it will as effectually try the orthodoxy of peoples
constitution, as the new A -- concerning K. I -- will show who is Stanch to the
Government, and who not. We used to say in the late Reign, that if Popery
proved to be long-lived, 'twould soon be found who were in the interests of the
Whore of Babylon. But this frost, I conceive, will make truer and juster
discoveries; for a man, if he is wickedly inclined, may play a thousand tricks
with his faith and no body be the wiser; but the Devil is in him if such
searching Weather (which penetrates deeper than the Inquisition) does not
extort very unlucky confessions from his Carcass, especially if in his younger
days he studied natural Philosophy in Covent Garden. I cannot tell how it fares
with you in the Country, but here in Town Water is scarcer than its opposite
Element, Fire; so that it is dreaded by some understanding persons, that a stop
will be put to Bap -- m for some time, unless the C -- y can get Moses's
Miracle of striking Water out of a Rock, or unless the C -- ch will dispense
with the use of Aqua-vitae in that case, as some will tell you they do in
Norway, where at this time of the year Water is as great a rariety, as truth is
at W -- and most of the Courts in Christendom all the year round.

A friend of mine happened yesterday to be in a Tavern Kitchen near the
Custom-House, and complaining of the cold; Lord, says a Sea-Captain to him,
this is nothing, Sir, to what I have felt, no more, as Gad shall judge me, than
a Tooth-picker is to the Mainmast of the Britannia* I made the North East
Voyage with Captain Wood, and have been in a Country, Sir, where they don't
bury between Michaelmass and Lady Day. What said my friend, don't the people
die all that time? Yes, a pox on them, they dye fast enough, but the ground is
as hard as a flint, so they are forced in their own defense to pile up their
dead Folks in the Belfry, as we do Faggots (...) a Wood-yard, and tie pieces of
paper about their Necks, for all the world, Sir, as your good Housewives in the
Country do about their Cordial Bottles, to know them again, and so ^hey bury
them at Spring of the year. Sir, says my friend to him, you seem to be an
honest Gentleman, and I don't doubt but what you ^ell me is true; for I in my
time have been a piece of a Traveller, and have passed a month or two among the
Samoeids, where it is so excessive cold, that as in Italy and other hot
Coun^ries, they forbid the Priests to preach out of ^he Canticles during July
and August, for fear of putting some odd whimsies into the heads of the people:
So here, the Patriarch of Mosco forbids ^ll the Clergy, under pain of
suspension, not to make the least mention of the roasting that is used in the
other world, lest they should set all their Congregations a longing to be
there. In ^hort, Noble Captain, the Parsons take as much ^are to conceal the
Doctrine of H -- ll fire, for ^he reason above mentioned, from the poor
Inhabitants of this Country, as they do the Bible from the Laity in Spain. The
Captain graciously ^hanked my friend for his News, and so they parted. --

One would be apt to imagine 'twas in such weather as this that David penned the
Psalm, where he advises people to look to their ways. The Streets are so
excessive slippery, that a man runs through half the dangers of an East India
Voyage, in passing only from Temple Bar to the Change in a Coach, and if he
ventures it on foot, he^s obliged to walk with the same precaution upon the
King's Highway, as your Fellows in Bartholomew-Fair manage themselves upon the
high Rope. For want of observing this direction, a Country Gentlewoman the other
day met with a sad mischance at the corner of Fetter-lane, for up flew her
heels, and off came her Commode, and she unluckily discovered a hideou^ breach
in her Fabric, at which two Foot-Soldiers ran away in a fright, and a grave
Citizen that passed by was exceedingly scandalized. The Physicians and
Chyrurgeons however are no losers by this Season, for what between Ptysick and
Fevers, (which really make a handsome figure in the weekly Bill) and those
providential Blessings called broken Arms and Legs, both professions find as
much employment, as Dr Oate^ will tell you the Pimps had at White Hall in the
Reign of King C. the second. Our Divines need not be over nice as to what they
preach; for there is such everlasting barking in the Churche^, that tho the
Parson had the lung* of twenty Trumpeters, yet 'twere impossible to understand
a syllable he says. Some Ptysicky old Gentleman leads up a Cough, his next
Neighbor immediately takes the hint from him, ^ ^hird pursues it, and so the
Snow-ball rowls mer^ily on, till at last the whole Congregation ^oyns in the
Chorus, and one side of the Church answers the other as regularly and
harmoniously, as two contending Nightingales in a Hedge, or ^he Vicars in the
new Quire at Paul's. The Thames is in great danger of being made a Captive, and
of wearing Fetters, which he gene^ously endeavors to throw off every Tide; and
never was so true an emblem as now of that noble spirited Island, of which he
is the defense as well as ornament, which can never have chains put upon it of
any continuance.

I am sorry to find by your last that your Neighbor Mr H -- grows fat upon
Marriage, ^or I don't see how he can answer it to his conscience. Mar^iage is a
lean, hungry, craving ^oil, on which he that can batten, may raise an Estate in
Scotland, or recover from an Ague by ^emoving into the Hundreds. Ecclesiastical
Hi^tory tells us of a Bishop that suspended one of ^is Priests for no Crime,
but because he had a ^ouble Chin. That Prelate could not be per^waded that his
Curate preached, and prayed, and minded the business of his Parish, so long ^s
he carried such an unapostolical badge about ^im. Pray acquaint your friend Mr
H -- with this adventure of the double Chin, and ^ell him from me, that neither
Canon, nor Civil, nor Common Law, will justify him in making a Sinecure of his
Wife. I am,

Your most humble Servant, etc*

SOME REMARKS UPON MARRIAGE.
MArriage being the Port, or Haven, at which most of the Sons and Daughters of
(...) design to touch, sooner or latter; it is no wonder that People are
universally curious, to know how this ticklish Ceremony is performed in other
Countries. We find here at home that the first place in the Common Prayer Book
that youn^ Maidens generally dip in, is the Service o^ Matrimony. I once knew a
raw Girl that could readily make all the Responses in that Office before she
could Answer to one Question in he^ Catechism. Which occasioned her Father, who
was a grave old Gentleman, to wish that those of her Sex would take as much
care to prepare themselves for their latter, as for this their first and, for
so it proves to most of them.

It has been frequently said that Marriage and Hanging go by Destiny, but, for
my part, I am ^o Predestinarian; neither do I believe, with ^he rest of the
World, that Matches are made ^n Heaven, any more than I believe that all Oxen
^re bought and sold there, before they come to Smithfield Market. But though I am
no admirer of Destiny, as I said before, yet I would not ^ave any one infer
from thence, that I believe ^here's no manner of resemblance between Hang^ng
and Marrying: For Hanging, with Reve^ence be it spoken, as well as Marrying, is
per^ormed by tying a Knot, which death only dissolves, and then they agree too
in this particu^ar, (which is more suitable to the occasion of ^he Book) that
all civilized Countries in the World observe different Fashions in one no less
^han the other.

The Roman Catholics make a Sacrament of ^atrimony, and in consequence of that
Notion, ^^etend it confers Grace. The Protestant Di^ines don't carry Matters so
high, but say this ^^ught to be understood in a qualified Sense, and that
Marriage so far confers Grace, as generally ^peaking, it confers Repentance,
which every ^ody knows is a step to Grace.

It must be confessed on all hands, that Marriage is the most serious Action
that a Man can engage in, and therefore we ought to think of it, as we do of
our Latter End, with Fear and Trembling. For this reason, I cannot endure to
hear people pass their ill natur^d jests, upon so holy an Ordinance. If it is a
Man's good fortune to meet with a good Wife, he ought to date his happiness is
this World from that very Moment; and if she proves not as he desires; he ought
to look over the Catalogue of his Sins, and interpret it as a Visitation, or at
least to take i^ patiently. For my part, commend me to tha^ Gentleman, who
having married a Lady, of a^ extraordinary Capacity, never complained of hi^
fate, nor made his Spouse uneasy, but honestly thanked God, that now he had a
hole to (...) his Head in.

The Ladies that read a Book called Marriag^ Ceremonies, will find sufficient
reason to than^ Providence, that they were born in so good natured an Island as
ours is, where the Preliminarie^ to Marriage are nothing near so morose and
se^vere, as they are in some places in the World* To give an Instance of this,
our Author of the Marriage Ceremonies tells us, p. 51. among (...) Sabrians (a
sort of Mungril Christians, that liv^ on the Confines of Persia next Turkey)
the Parti^^ meeting together at Church, the Minister makes (...) Bride swear
before the Women, that she is a Virgi^ As ill an opinion as the World unjustly
entertains of our Females, I am very well satisfied that there are above Forty
Thousand Conscientious Wives, within the Bills of Mortality, that would have
lost all, before they would have taken so rash and insnaring an Oath. How is it
possible that a Woman should positively swear to an imaginary thing, which may
be lost (the Lord knows how) between sleeping and waking? This I am sure of,
that no Husband was ever a jot the securer, for prescribing Arbitrary and
Unlawful Oaths.

Yet as great a hardship as this may seem to be, it is nothing in comparison,
of what hardships are practiced in some Countries, even after the Nuptial
Ceremonies are performed. Thus we find in the said Book p. 42. that among the
Greeks, of the Women find in the Bed the next day any signs of a lost
Virginity, they make a great Feast; but when that is wanting, they say nothing,
the Bridegroom sending back the Bride to her Relations and Friends. The same
inhuman Custom, is likewise observed by the Persians, as the Reader may see, p.
64. by the Moors of the Morocco, p. 73. the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Fez,
p. 75. by those of Algiers and Tunis p. 79, by the Spaniards who retain this
Custom from the Moors, p. 22. and ^ately by the Jews in Barbary As for the
latter ^ don't wonder at it, to find such an usage among them, because they
were stiff-necked people, that was always demanding Signs, and Tokens; nor
among Infidels and Mahometans; but that any Christians, that are happily freed
from the Levitical Bondage, should still hanker after the old superstitious
Leaven, is matter of the greatest astonishment to me. I cannot but reflect with
horror, how many Ladies in England that now live comfortably with their
Husbands, and are blessed with a numerous issue, had been Shamefully discarded
and sent home, if ever such an unrighteous Fashion as this had got footing
among us. It seems to argue a great deal of Cruelty in the Men, that they
should relish no pleasure but what comes at the expense of their dearest
Consorts. But it is my daily Prayer, that Providence will protect the Freeborn
Women of England, from such bloody minded Husbands.

But though the greatest part of the World, are so extravagantly fond of
Virginity, yet we find there are some People that have other Notions of things.
Our said Author p. 88. accquaints us, that when one of Conchin Marries,
whosoever he is, he may not lie with his Bride the first Night, but is obliged
to give her to a Bramino, who lies with her, and that they believe this to be a
favor and a good Omen. I hope their Parishes in this Country are not of a
large extent, otherwise the Priest has more Work upon his Hands, than he will
go through with, unless he keeps a Curate or two to relieve him, when Marriages
come in thick. The holders forth of our Conventicles, affect to be thought
great pains-takers, and really deserve the name, for their Bands will testify
for them both in the Dog Days, and out of the Dog Days, that they Sweat
exceedingly. But, Alas, what is this, if considered in the same Scales with the
drudgery, that these Priests undergo in their Ministry. I have often wondered
that the Popish Clergy that stand up so stiffly for the divine Right of
First Fruits, don't Troop in shoals to this Kingdom, when they Voluntarily pay
such an extraordinary Tribute to the Church.

It Is observable, that in most Countries of the World this Ceremony is
performed by the Priesthood, who, if they equally pretended to the power of
Loosing, as they do to that of Tying, they would have more Business upon their
hands than they could well dispense with. Only in Turkey married People are
joined together by the Cadey, or Civil Magistrate, and here in England in
Oliver's time by a Justice of Peace; the Reason alleged for it then was, that
none was so well qualified to Marry others as he, who, by his Office was
Empowered to lay People by the heels, and put them into the Stocks.

As I have already taken Notice, Virginity is reckoned so Essential to Marriage
in several Countries, that the poor Bride is Inhumanly dismissed, and sent home
to her Relations, if she be found defective in that particular; but, in this
Author, we shall find, that all the world is not of this humor, in Pegu, of
the Marriage Ceremonies, p. 9^. the King, and those of the greatest Quality,
lie not the first night with their Wives, but admit others and pay them
bountifully, that will give themselves the trouble. With all due respect to our
Women be it spoken, I humbly conceive that one half* at least, of the married
Men in this Kingdom, if they would speak their minds freely, must do their
Wives this Justice, as to own that they saved them this Porters drudgery, as a
Monarch (not inferior to Solomon for Wisdom) rightly called it. Our Neighbors
of Scotland, before they came to be civilized, used to lie the first night with
the Bride, their Vassal, but now they have flung up such a troublesome piece of
State, and make their Tenants drudge for themselves.

We rail at the Church of Rome, and not without reason, for exacting implicit
Obedience from her Sons, but alas, what signifies it to take a few Articles
upon the Credit of the Priest; but to take a Wife, as our Author tells us they
do in Muscovy, and other places, without seeing her once, or knowing what
Defects she may have, is somewhat hard upon the Subject. Heaven be praised,
that here in England we are not forced to buy a Pig in a Poke, nay, there are
some married Men in the World, that were as intimately acquainted with their
Wives before Marriage, as ever they were after. See now what it is to live
under a free Government, and to have Magna Charta on one's side.

To conclude these Reflections, it is my hearty advice, That all unmarried
Persons would choose themselves proper Spouses by the first opportunity, in
order to recruit those numbers that have been destroyed in the wars, and not
suffer their Talents to lie buried in a Napkin, for which they must severely
Answer one Day. And as for those that are Married, the best way they can take,
as I presume, is to live as easy as they can, and following the good counsel of
Hobson the Carrier, so to manage themselves, as not to tire before their
Journeys end.

LETTER VI. Another Letter to Mr. H --
SIR,
I Find by your answer, that my advice had not that good effect upon you, which
I expected. You still complain of your unhappiness, and disturb your self and
your friends with Chimera's of your own creating. If I thought complaining
would make you a farthing the better, I would out-weep a Church-Spout, and
out-lament a Widow that has buried three Husbands, and now laments for a
fourth: or if I thought you wanted any Spiritual Cordials, I would send you a
Cart-load of Sermons, to teach you that patience, which the preachers of them
could never practice. But you are a Malade imaginaire, and Moliere would sooner
bring you to your self than a Divine. In short, think no more of the Viper that
stung you, and you are well.

You talk much of what people do in Spain upon these occasions. But what have
you and I to do with them? Are we to regulate our eating by the sots of
Lapland, or to go naked in complaisance to the Salvages under the Line? Had you
lived in Spain, perhaps I had preached revenge to you, and out of my great
concern for your person, advised you to venture the Gallows, because forsooth
your Wife with the sweat of her brows had earned damnation. But since you live
in a Country, where the people are wiser than to be enslaved by such foolish
notions, pray suffer yourself to be governed by the maxims of it. I tell you
once more, Cuckoldom is no scandal in our Nation, and if you were the first and
ancientest -- in England, I could say no more to you. If it is the rarity that
makes the Monster, you will never come within the number of them. It Is only the
married men that are not Cuckolds, that, properly speaking, are the Monsters
here, as in Guinea, it is not those that have huge Lips and flat Noses, but
those that have them otherwise are really the deformed.

The old Romans, who may be supposed to have had as just sentiments of honor,
as the nicest Dons of Castile, were guided by wiser Maxims. In case of
Infidelity, the Wife was sent home with infamy to her virtuous relations, but
no manner of disgrace reflected upon the Husband. Pompey, the Conqueror of so
many Kings; Cicero, the Father of Eloquence; and Caesar, the Master of the
Universe, had all of 'em Wives that proved as errant recreants as yours, yet we
don't find that they thought themselves a farthing the worse for it, or that
they railed at their stars, or flew into such extravagances as you do. Cicero
in particular, that has written so many Consolatory Treatises, to relieve a man
under all the misfortunes, and accidents of human life, as banishment, poverty,
the loss of friends, old age, disgrace, and the like; ye^ never thought it
worth his while to part with one single drop of comfort out of his
Philosophi^^l Aqua Vitae Bottle, to cure the heart burning of a Cuckold. And,
Jack, shall it ever be sa^d, to the infamy of old England, that Heathens,
uncircumcised Heathens could practice that patience, which you, that, God be
thanked, live under a meeker dispensation, cannot reconcile your self to.

You Will tell me, perhaps, that the Romans bore this with the greater
Resignation, because they could make themselves amends out of the Sex, and
marry another Wife as soon as they had dismis^ the former. On the other hand, I
think it is happy for you that you live in a Christian Country, where they will not
let you cut your fingers the second time with a Knife, as long as the
instrument that wounded you last is in being. There Is a Fable in Aesop that
fits your case exactly, therefore pray listen to it with due attention and
reverence. A Shepherd kept a ^lock of Sheep near the Sea, and observing it to
be wonderful calm for a long time, had an itch upon him to turn Merchant
Adventurer; that ^s to say in plain English, a Gentleman liking the outside of
the fair Sex well enough, picks out one to his purpose, and resolves to marry.
So ^e converts his Sheep and other movables into (...) Purse of Money, buys a
parcel of Dates, and puts to Sea. That is to say, furnishes him a House,
provides a fine suit of Clothes, goes to Dukes-Place, and marries. A tempest
ruffled him cruelly there, (this tempest, Jack, by the by the by, is Cuckoldom)
that he was forced to ^hrow his Dates overboard to lighten his Ship; that is
to say, his Wife was so damned a Thorn ^n his side, that he was forced to drink
her to death, to get rid of her. And thus with much ^do escapes to shore, and
returns to the old place to follow his old profession, that is, breaks ^p
housekeeping, and lives privately as he did before. A few days after, finding
old Father Ocean to look merrily about the Gills; that is, ^ome of the Sex
smile and simper, as if they had (...) design to hook him into Matrimony again;
A plague take you, says he, for a dissembler: What, your chops water for more
Dates, I war^ant; but I Will see you hanged before you shall ^ave any. I don't
question, Jack, but that ^here are twenty and twenty Women in your
neighborhood that long to be fingering your Dates, but if you will follow the
Shepherd's example, they shall all lose their longing.

Well, we have got over this troublesome point, and now nothing vexes you, but
that your Wife should run away with a Soldier, (a confounded Ensign I think
you call him) and an ugly fellow too. But this is the most fantastical
complain^ that ever was heard. It puts me in mind of an Irishman in the Civil
Wars, that when he was going to be hanged, set nothing to heart but that he
must be trussed up in a Halter, and not in a Withe^ If your House was robbed, I
suppose it would be all a case to you, whether it was a Beau or ^
Chimney-sweeper that did you the honor to rifle you: And in your present
misfortune what relief would it be to you that a Blue Garter plante^ your
Horns, any more than a Blue Apron, the Duce take me if I can see. But you I
find are somewhat of Bessus's humor in the Play, who comforted himself after a
good kicking that hi^ honor had not suffered, because in the first place 'twas
a Lord that kicked him, and secondly 'twa^ done with a Spanish leather Slipper.
In your next Letter I expect to find you lamenting, because the fact was done
under a hedge, or upon a ba^e floor, and not with the usual accommodations i^ a
Bed. Once more, the fellow was ugly: Why s^ much the better still, the
Cockatrice of your bosom will have the less to say for herself another day,
and that ought to be no little comfort, Jack, ^o one in your case. Besides, it
justifies the old ^aying, that Subjects and Wives, when they re^olt from their
lawful Sovereigns, seldom choose ^or a better. As for her pitching upon a
Soldier ^o be her gallant, I don't wonder at it. The Gen^lemen in red, and
their Brethren in black, have ^or several ages been in possession of the Sex,
the ^^tter upon the account of their secrecy, which may be the reason perhaps,
why they wear the Rose, the badge of silence in their Hats; and the other, upon
the score of the mighty performances which the Women expect from them. The
Ladies imagine them all to be Heroes, and as the La^y formerly believed that
Black conferred Grace and Greek, so they vainly think that Red gives the
wearers of it courage and vigor above their neighbors. If we may believe
Antiquity, Vul^an had a broader back than Mars, and was the ^tronger made of
the two, yet the latter with the powerful charms of his embroidered Coat, and
^teenkirk Cravat, so won the Goddess's heart* that ^he was easily tempted to
cuckold the poor Black^mith. In short, women are like Mackarel, bait ^ut a hook
with a piece of red Cloth, and you in^allibly take them.

But to return to the Chapter of ugliness, from which we have digressed, I told
you before ^wou'd make it the worse for your Wife at the ^e -- on, but upon
second thoughts, I don't know but she may have a great deal to say for herself*
You are a handsome fellow, Jack, I own it, but perhaps have convinced her by
sorrowful experience* that as the proverb has it, all is not gold that
glisters* Who can tell but your Wife has read natural Philosophy enough to
know, that where the ground ha^ the roughest, the most unpromising surface,
ther^ the richest Mines lie below.

After all, whether it is so or not, variety is ^ mighty matter, and much may
be said on so fertile a head. People love to alter their hands, the it is not
always for the better, a clear instance o^ this we find in Plautus Amphitryo.
Jupiter wh^ by the high post he stood possessed of, one wou'^ think should have
no gross palate, lies with Al^mena the very night before she was delivered o^
two chopping Infants. The Lady for her part was complaisant, that is certain;
but Women, ge^nerally speaking, are not so refractory as Came^^ are, that when
they have got their burden, ris^ up, and will carry no more: So this is no
great wonder. But what the Du^e should bewitch (...) Lover, that had the whole
Universe before him to make his Son Mercury pimp for him for the space of
twenty four hours by the clock, to pu^ himself to the expense of a Miracle, to
make the Moon and the rest of the Stars do double duty to keep back the Sun,
and make an universal di^^order in nature, and all to carry on a foolish
in^trigue with a big-belly'd woman? It Is agreed b^ ^ll the Dutch Commentators,
that he would never have done so much for Juno, his lawful Spouse; ^n one of
her most engaging moments, with all ^he advantages of dress and art to
recommend her; much less under such embarrassing circum^tances. What then may
we imagine to be the ^eason of it? Why, that partly variety, and part^y the
itch of making a Cuckold, engaged him in ^his expedition. But all this while I
forget that I am ^leading for your Wife, like the Bishop that was employed to
write against Luther, and turned one of ^is party.

Thus I have briefly run over all your scruples, and endeavored to make you
rectus in curia; but before I conclude, give me leave to tell you a short
^tory. A Gentleman of my acquaintance had a ^enant that rented about some forty
Shillings a ^ear of him. The Hutt he lived in was a sad wretched hole, made up
of a few feeble poles, ^over'd with mud, dung, and straw: 'Twas not ^o be
mentioned on the same year with a Crows^est, either for the materials, the
convenience, or ^rchitecture of it. The least puff of wind ruffled (...) more
severely than a Hurricane does a Ship in ^he Indies. The discharge of a Gun at
a quarter (...) a miles distance would give it a Tertian Ague ^or a fortnight.
Then as for the furniture, it was (...) of a piece with the building, half a
score wood^^n Spoons, with a Platter of the same metal, a ^roken backed Chair,
and what they called a Bed, ^y a bolder Catachresis than is to be found in all
Mr Cleveland. It was not so much as furnished with a Suit of Grubstreet
Tapistry; I mean, a (...) of Protestant Ballads, or the Devil tempting (...)
London Prentice, or the Tanners advice to hi^ Children, or the Royal Family on
Horseback, t^ keep the poor Walls in countenance. The fel^low's whole substance
was a Bee-hive, half a sco^^ Cabbages, and an Apple Tree in the yard, on the
success of which he depended more than the Con^ -- tes on that of a Campaign in
Flanders: ^ Tit that sharpt for his livelihood on the Com^mon, but as lean as a
Projector's Footman; ^ Cow, whose Milk was meat and drink, and he^ tail an
Almanac to the family; with a Coc^ strutting at the head of a progeny; and a
bra^^ of Pigs educated within doors, and served with a^ much care as the Heir
apparent to the Cottage His Music when he came home was to hear a lit^ter of
young dirty Children squawling on on^ side of him, and the abovementioned
Messieurs (...) Porceaugnac grunting on the other, and his ran^ two-handed
Spouse, that never had a drop of wa^ter touch her face, since the Parson
sprinkled he^ at the Font, by the same token even then it mad^ her cry out,
endeavoring to keep the Kings Ma^jestys peace between them. Yet amidst all the
poverty and filthiness the fellow looked merry, an^ in good humor, snor'd as
contentedly at Church as the best of his neighbors, in an old Sund^^ Coat that
had outlived six Generations, (...) whistled at his work, and what is more,
without any of the Parish to assist him, once a year got his Wife with Child,
as if he breakfasted every morn^ng on the Duke of Buckingham's famous Broth.
So his Landlord asked him what shift he made to ^eep himself so cheerful and
merry? Why Master, ^ays he, when I think of such ^ine folks as your Worship,
that ride in your Coaches, and eat and drink of the best, without doing any
thing for it, why then, an't please you, I cannot forbear cursing my old Father
for begetting me under such a ^^arving Planet: But when I consider how few are
in your case, and how many millions in the ^ame condition with my self, if not
in a worse, why then I set my hand to my Plough, and jog on as merrily as I
can. Jack, this story needs no ^pplication; do but think of the millions you
have on your side, enough to confound the Turk and Pope, nay, to carry the
whole world before ^ou, if you knew your own strength; do but ^hink how many
Noblemen and Courtiers you have to lead the Van, how many Cits to bring up ^he
main Body, how many Soldiers to fight, ^awyers to plead, Physicians to
prescribe, and Divines to pray for you, and I dare engage you will ^leep heartily
upon it, and persecute me with no more of your whining Letters: who am

Your Humble Servant.
P. S.
A Physician of my acquaintance, that ha^ heard of your misfortune, called upon
me thi^ morning just as I had ended my Letter, and les^ my advice should fail
of making a good impression upon you, was so kind to send you the following
prescription. If these precepts will not cure you, we must proceed to Topics, and
one of the best remedies I know is what follows. When you^ discontented soul
labors with a little Brow-anguish, take a Child's Coral, with Whistle and Bell^
to it, moisten it with fasting Spittle, and rub you^ forehead with it ter in
die horis medicis. It will make your Brow-antlers cut easy, for some Cuckolds
are as froward under the breeding of Horn^ as some Children are under the
breeding of Tee^^ Once more Adieu.



LETTER VII. To the Reverend Mr. -- in Sussex.
I Have had a mind to write to thee this long while, but the misfortune on it
is, that a man ^oes not know how to accost thee, without being ^t the pains to
consult the Herald's Office. Ge^^on, of tripple-headed memory gave his Subjects
suppose the same trouble, who when they came ^o deliver a Petition to him,
found themselves (...) much embarass'd, which of his heads to address ^o, as I
find my self at present, under which of ^our three capacities I am first to
consider you. (...) short, I am told you have got three strings to ^our bow,
that you are a Parson, a Grazier, and ^ Physician. Now which of these is your
Top-^rofession, I mean that which brings you in most ^oney, the Lord knows:
however hoping the ^est still of the Church, this comes to tell you Reverend
Sir, that I am glad at your good fortune, and wish you all the prosperity you
can desire.

All your Friends here in Town are extremely ^leased at your grafting the
Grazier upon the Clergyman. You have reduced things, they say to their
primitive condition, and joined two trades, as the world makes them now, that
lived peaceably together long before the Flood. The old Patriarchs, you know,
were both Priests and Graziers, and had an equal jurisdiction over their two
legged and four legged Congregations. When Paganism got footing in the World,
the case was somewhat altered; Then Sacrifices came in play* and the Priests
and Graziers turned Butchers; which noble employment some malicious people will
tell you, their Successors have kept up under another dispensation.

But as for your joining the Physician to the Divine, they are not so well
satisfied. Some wondered why you would take up a profession that lie^ under the
imputation of being in the hands o^ Atheists: but Gentlemen, said I, don't
troubl^ your selves for that matter; for let a Parson tack ^ hundred other
professions to his own, yet I Will engage that like Oil among other Liquors, the
Clergy^man will still float uppermost. Besides, who knows but it was your ill
fortune to live among^^ such a refractory perverse people, as Don Diego's were,
that would not knock off in any reasona^ble time, but lived long, on purpose to
spi^^ their Relations, and defraud the Church of (...) perquisites. The Ropes
grew moldy, and (...) Bells were in danger of forgetting their notes so want
of exercise, and the grass in your Church yard for want of being corrected by
the Spad^ grew so scandalously and enormously high, that ^he Archdeacon
complained of it at the Visitation. Then the poor Sexton, God help him, finding
^o employment from the Dead, was in a fair way ^o be starved among the Living,
and had as little ^o do as a Pimp at Newmarket, when the C -- t is not there:
Then he and you, oh I beg your ^ardon Doctor, then you and he, under the
me^ancholy Yew-tree that faces the Church Porch, ^ll alone like Mr. Drydens two
Turtles in the Siege of Granada, coo'd and murmured to each others moan, and
made as mournful a Consort between ^ou, as two Seamens Widows in a Brandy shop
near ^he Navy Office. Husbands complained of their Wives, and Wives of their
Husbands, for sticking (...) unmercifully long to one another, and what is a
^readful thing to consider, there had like to have been a general insurrection
of all the young fellows against their most unnatural Fathers for the same
^ccount. To prevent these, and a thousand other ^nconveniencies, I think it was
very discreetly ^one of you, to set up for a Physician, and now I ^on't
question but the Bells troll merrily, the Ropes ^re made tractable with using,
the Churchyard ^ooks like a place of Business, and your Sexton can ^fford to
treat himself with a Capon at Supper.

As I was reading Caligula's life the other morning, ^ou came into my head I
protest, and I could not ^orbear to wish, that it had been your good luck ^o
l^ve under his auspicious reign. That Emperor, who was not partial to his own
species, but hea^^tily encouraged Merit wherever he found (...) whether in
man or Beast 'twas the same thing (...) him; generously bestowed a fat
Parsonage upon his Horse Incitatus, whom by the by he designed (...) make Lord
Mayor o^ Rome the next year, but gran^^ed him I suppose a dispensation to
officiate by Curate, because the poor Brute, had a nature impediment in his
Speech. So I was thinkin^ with my self, if this noble-spirited Prince cou^^
present his Horse to a rich Living, what prese^^^ment would he have refused to
a Gentleman (...) your Ability, had you lived in Rome at that tim^* But you
have prevented all these wishes in you^ friends, by the wise course you have
taken to ge^ money, for the Devil's in it if three gainful trad^ in Confederacy
cannot make a shift to keep t^^ French Wolf of Poverty from the door. Some
people indeed think you come within the Cano^ about Pluralities, but that is a
jest. They (...) as well call a double chin a plurality, and the^ the Lord have
mercy on the Wicked, and give^ Bear and Fiddle that scandalous name, which
wou^^ touch the Copyhold of half the Curates in Wale^ I would fain know why
the incumbent, where (...) Benefice will not keep Body and Soul togethe^ should
not be suffered to make himself amends i^ some other employment, as well as
your Merce^ in a Country Village, to sell every thing from Broad Cloth and
Satin, down to Tape an^ ^ick-thread. Besides all the world knows that ^he
Reformation stripped the Church of Confession and several other advantageous
points, which ^ept the Laity in good order; now what could ^etter supply the
absence of these things than ^he profession you have taken up, since we find
^he world is so wickedly given, that they have greater regard for their
transitory Bodies than ^^eir Souls; so now if any of your Parishioners are
^^stinate, don't threaten 'em with the Ecclesi^^tical Court, but ply them with
Pills, don't ex^ommunicate them, but give them Physic, for ^^at will sooner
send them to the Devil than the ^nsure of the C -- h.

I that am at so great a distance from you, please ^y self now and then with
the thoughts that I be^old you in your own Dominions, with as busy a (...), as
a Country Attorney standing at his door, ^ith a brace of Pens in his Hair;
sometimes I see ^ou in the Pulpit knocking down sin like an Ox, ^^metimes
handling of Bullocks in the Market, (...) from thence sent for to feel the
pulse of a Far^ers plump Daughter in ordine ad Spiritualia. ^hen out comes the
Clyster-pipe, and when that administered, the Prayer Book is lugg'd piping
(...) out of the same pocket, to beg a blessing uppon't. ^he harmony of Authors
too in your Library ^^st needs be admirable, Culpepper's Midwife, and (...)
Sherlock upon Death, Harvey de lue Ven^rea, (...) Burgess of original Sin,
Colebatch of Acids, and Twisse of the Gospel-sweets, the dispensatory and the
Concordance, a Father and an Urinal-monger. But what pleases me most is to
hear, that you are grown the gravest person in all the Country. Whatever you
do, keep to your gravity, and that will keep you. Some people I know will call
it dullness, and to say truth, dullness and gravity like the two Sosia's in the
Play, resemble one another so much, that it is almost impossible to distinguish
them, but no matter for that; still hold to the Text of Gravity, for the
topping men in all professions are protected by their gravity, as the Towns in
Holland are by the mud and dirt about them.

Having been told of several of your cures, I wish we had you here in Town, to
show a piece of your skill upon an old acquaintance of yours, who is troubled
with a dead Palsy on one side, which I am afraid he will never recover of till
death, or you come to his relief. I mean poor Harry S -- who has lately married
the Widow D -- For my part I can never see him, but I think of the Embalmer in
Herodotus, that committed fornication with a dead Body. St. Franci^ that was
forced to run into a heap of Snow, to correct the insolences of nature, would
have turned as cold and motionless, as Lot's wife at the very sight of her. A
generous well-bodied Calenture, such as they have under the line, man perhaps
put her Blood into some motion, but ^ common ordinary Fever can no more warm
her, than you can roast a Surloin of Beef by a farthing Candle. By this you may
guess what a wretched condition your Friend is in. If there is any thing in
your art, that can give this Gentlewoman a civil lift into the other World (for
really she is too good for this) you are desired to communicate it, and besides
a good round gratuity, Harry promises you shall preach her funeral Sermon, so
that after you have destroyed her with your Pills, you may likewise murder her
with your Oratory. I am

LETTER VIII. By one of the Commons.
Dear Jack!
O mihi post nullos.

THo at this present juncture, superos, and conscia sidera testor, I am in no
very good condition to write Letters, secessum scribentis and otia quaerunt,
because my headakes, accessit fervor capiti, and with last nights drinking my
hand trembles quid non ebrietas designat, yet I cannot forbear, tenet
insanabile multos, to send you an account of our meeting at the Sun, forsan and
haec olim meminisse juvabit, and what happened upon it, Exitus acta probat, but
Ill endeavor to be as brief as I can, summa sequar festigia rerum, for I hate
prolixity and all its works.

You must know then that a parcel of young fellows of us, in cure curanda plus
aequo, jolly toping Companions, sponsi Penelopes, nebulones, who when are we
are at a Tavern never cry to go home, fruges consumere nati, met at the Sun to
drink some tokens sent out of the Country, O rus quando ego te aspiciam. At
first we were exceeding cheerful and merry, nunc te Bacche canam, the Glasses
troll'd about like lightning, nec mora nec requies, we drank prosperity to old
England, dulce and decorum est pro patria, nor was the best in Christendom
forgot, spelunca alta fuit, vastoque immanis hiatu. So far then every thing
went well, hac Arethusa tenus, the Candles burn clear and bright, noctem
Flammis funalia vincunt, the Tobacco smoaked agreeably, Volvitur ater odor
tectis, but you know the old saying, pleasure has a sting in its tail, nocet
empla dolor voluptas, people seldom know when to give off, O quantum in rebus
inane, for mark what followed, felix quem faciunt, we had the Devil and all to
do before we parted, Alecto stygiis caput extulit ^ris, nothing but bloodshed
and desolation, ^ella horrida bella, and a Woman occasioned it ^ll, dux femina
facti. One in the Company it ^eems was deeply in Love, omnia vincit amor, so ^e
began his Mistresses health in a bumper, Naevia ^ex Cyathis, swearing she was
an Angel, a Goddess, and I know not what, trahit sua quemque ^oluptas, but his
next neighbor like a fool refused to pledge him, quis nisi mentis inops
oblatum respuit. Upon which Rogue and Rascal strait ensued, nulli tacuisse
nocet, one ill word begot another, verba accusandi genitivum regunt, after
which Bottles and Candlesticks flew like hail, j^mque faces and saxa volant,
and some undermining moles in the company, that no body could tell what to make
of, incerti generis sunt talpa, blew up the coals to make more mischief,
spargere voces in vulgum ambiguas, till at last all of us were hooked into the
quarrel, O miseri, quae tanta insania, cives! 'Twas to no purpose to preach up
peace and moderation, in campo siquis asellum, for the Wine was in and the Wit
was out, foecundi calices quem non fecere? One with his Mazzard demolished,
quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore, fell down on the floor, dat gemitum tellus,
and lay as flat as a Flounder, procumbit humi bos; the other with his Nose
dismounted, quis cladem illius noctis, fell a swearing like a Dragon, tercentem
tonat ore deos, and flung the Monteith at his opposite, furor arma ministrat. A
third had his Eyes closed up, monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens. A fourth his
Laced Cravat and Perriwig torn to pieces, quis funera fando explicet. In short,
the distraction was universal, post vacat pars nulla, it reigned from Dan to
Bersheba, ab o^^ usque ad mala, for by this time all of us were at pell mell,
legitque virum vir, but such a noise and such a confusion, good Lord! ferit
aurea sidera clamor. I warrant you there was work enough for the Chirurgions,
multa vi vulnera miscent, but it is an ill wind, youll say, that blows no body
good, aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo. At last the man of the house appeared,
vir gregis ipse caper, with a Constable and a mob of Watchmen at his heels, una
eurusque notusque ruunt, commanding us in the King's name to keep the peace,
tollite barbarum clamorem, and not to fight like Beasts or Dutchmen over our
Drink, pugnare Thracum est: what, says he, do ye think there are no Magistrates
in the Neighborhood, Creditis avectos Danaos, or do ye know my Lord Mayor and
the City no better, sic notus Ulysses? Come pack up your Awls, and be gone,
ille regit dictis animos, or I shall send you all to the Counter, horrisono
stridentes cardine portae. Upon this the mutiny was soon quashed, omnis pelagi
cecidit fragor, we had no mind to be longer at Logger-heads, non ea vis animo,
a Prison was no such desirable place, Centauri in foribus stabulant, so the
reckoning was called for and paid, de moribus ultima fiet quaestio, every one
went toward his respective home; seeds quisque suaes, some in Coaches, and
some on Foot, scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. But see the
uncertainty of humane affairs, omnia sunt hominum, we were stopped by the Monarch
of the night at Ludgate, apparent nova Monstra. Cries he, whence come ye; sed
vos qui tandem, or whether are you going? Quove tenetis iter. Shall I send one
of my Myrmidons to see you home? auxilio tutos dimittam, or will you reign with
me in this Elbow-Chair of State, vultis and his mecum pariter considere regnis.
By my Faith my Throne and all is at your service, Vrbem quam statuo vestra est.
No, said Ned Townly, I beg your excuse, haud equidam tali me dignor honor, I
love you, Gentlemen Constables, with all my heart, Od^ profanum vulgus and
arceo, but I have a morose thing called a Father at home, est mihi namque domi
pater, besides a Mother-in law as mischievous as a fury, Hircanaeque admorunt
ubera tygres. So if you please we'll even take our leaves of one another,
worthy Sir, satis est quod sufficit, and thus through so many nocturnal
principalities and powers, per tot discrimina rerum, we at last got safe to the
Commons, tendimus in Latium.

Had I the Lungs of a hundred Lawyers, non mihi si centum linguae sint, yet
were I not able to tell you all my adventures, omnes scelerum compendere
forms. But to conclude, this was the issue of this tragical night, haec finis
Priami fatorum; but who the plague could have foreseen it, quid sit futurum
^ras fuge quaerere. However, I shall have more wit for the future, piscator
sapit ictus, so begging your pardon for this tedious Letter, veniam petimus
dabimusque vicissim, I promise you Ne quid nimis shall hereafter be the word,
with

Your most humble L. I.

LETTER IX. To Madam -- kept by a Jew in Covent Garden
By Capt. Gr --
AT my coming to Town, I was supriz'd to hear two things, That the Duke of
Savoy had quitted the Confederates and gone over to the French, and (what
startled me more) that Mrs Lucy -- had thrown off her old Christian
acquaintance, and revolted to the Jews* Faith, Child, I could never have
imagined, that you of all the women in the world would ever have chosen a
Gallant out of that Religion, which clips and diminishes the current Coin of
Love, or could ever be brought to like those people that lived two thousand
years on Types and ^igures. But perhaps you fancied the Nation for Sampson's
sake, of brawny memory. If you did, you are like to lose your longing; for you
may as well look for some of the race of the two Giants at Guild^hall in
Cheapside, as for any of Sampson's progeny in Duke^s-place. Some of your
Friends allege in your justification, that you were wholly directed by your
interest in this choice, and troth I cannot blame you. Our Statesmen and
Senators, our Divines, Merchants, and Lawyers, act all upon that principle, and
why a poor frail woman should not be allowed the same privilege, I cannot see.
So then, I find it is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision that avails any
thing with you; but money, which is in reality of all Religions, and you only
put in practice what your kind Keeper's Ancestors did formerly in the
Wilderness, that is, you fall down before the Golden Calf, which the Rabbis
say was some excuse for their Idolatry. Upon this foot I Will allow you to grant
some favors to your old Testament Spark, so long as his pot of Manna continues
full, and you find him like the Land of Canaan flowing with Milk and Honey.
However, in the mean time consider how his Predecessors served the Egyptians,
and let it not disturb your pious Conscience to use him in the same manner. For
your comfort, all our C^suists agree, that it is no more sin to cheat a Jew,
than to overreach a Scot, or to put false Dice upon a Stock-jobber. And now,
old friend of mine, to tell thee the truth, I have a great inclination upon me
to be wonderfully loving to thee, and I Will tell thee the reason: if thou had
kept still within the pale of the Church, I believe you and I knew one another
so intimately well before, that I should have lain under no great temptation to
trespass with thee. But since thou have admitted an Interloper into thy Bosom,
I have a wonderful longing to beat up his quarters, and am resolved to cuckold
this Eleazar, this Aben-Ezra, this Son of Circumcision, only to show my zeal to
Christianity. Therefore meet me, dear Lucy, this very evening in the Pit, for I
long to know first, how thou made a shift to pass the Levitical muster with
him: and secondly and lastly, to be informed whether Aaron's Bells make better
Music than ours.

Adieu.

LETTER X. From a Gentleman in Holland, to his Friend in England. By the same
hand.
YOu may imagine I lead none of the most comfortable lives here, when I tell you
that I am quartered in a little pimping village on the Frontier of Flanders,
where I have no men to converse, and no women to intrigue with. To begin with
the former, I am a perfect Barbarian to them, and so I believe I should be, if
I lived among them till Doomsday. For all I know, they may wish me at the Devil
and curse me, when I fancy they are at their compliments. However, this is no
more temptation to me to learn their croaking language, than I should have, if
I were married, to imitate the jealous Italian in Poggius, who gelt himself on
purpose, to know whether his Wife was true to his bed. Then their liquor is so
abominable, that there is no enduring it: rather than do penance in such vile
stuff, two of my Soldiers (...) forced to fill their guts with water every day,
and then stand upon their heads a quarter of an hour together, to make
themselves giddy, which gives them some feeble representation of drunkenness.
In short, I am grown rusty for want of exercise, and pass away my time as
uneasily, as a poor Carp that has been used to range in a River, does in a
little Cistern of Water at a Fishmonger's by Temple Ba^* However, I could make
a shift to bear the brutality of the men, if the other Sex made me amends, but
in faith they are cold to such a degree, that neither Love nor Wine can unthaw
them. I must needs own, I have the same quarrel to the generality of your Women
in London, as the Cl^rgy have to the Laity, that is to say, they know too much;
but a plague on it, the Females here have the contrary fault, and are such
flegmatic, stupid Creatures, that a man must live the Age of a Patriarch among
them* to teach them to fetch and carry. In short, you may sooner teach a
L^plander Algebra. Tho the Virtuosi may be mistaken in their universal
Character, yet (...) thought Love had an universal language, which was
understood from Pole to Pole, and that h^ kept an Exchange in all corners of
the Earth where the two Sexes might barter their Commodities; but here it seems
this Traffic is no^ practiced, tho they trade in every thing else* By signs
and other motions I can make a shi^^ to tell them what I would eat and drink,
but ^ cannot, with all that my eyes can speak, with ^ll that my fingers can
express, make the wo^en understand my meaning, so as to relieve ^y more
pressing necessities. Looking once ^ith a languishing ridiculous air, as people
in love use to do, my Landlords Daughter thought (...) was ill, and a Physician
was presently sent ^or, (so I guest him to be, by the Clyster-pipe ^anging by
his side,) but I had the grace to re^^se the civilities he designed me. To try
her ^et farther, I put a pledge into her hands, which the Women in all other
parts of the Globe (...) willing enough to exchange, and know the ^alue of, but
she looked upon as it unconcerned as (...) Cheapside-Cit does at a Cuckold, and
returned (...) me back, and yet the Wench was plump and ^andsome, was past
twenty, and seemed to be ^ade of the same good natured materials, with ^he
Women in England. It Is a common saying, ^ut untrue, that no Nation is so
barbarous, but love and Religion have got footing in it. If ^e may believe our
modern Travelers, the ^otantots have no Religon, and I have found ^y sorrowful
experience, that the Dutch Wo^en have no taste of Love; whether this proceeds
^^om their natural coldness, which produces ^he same effects here, that Grace
does in other ^^aces, or whether their business, to which they ^re no less
bred, than the men, proves too prevalent for all amorous impressions, I cannot
tell; but this is certain, that as a modern Author expresses himself, we find
among these Pagan people un certain usage de pruderie quasi generalement
etabliet je ne scaj quelle vielle tradition de continence* qui pass de mere en
fille comme une espece de Religion. In short, if Love be a Deity, there are no
such damned Atheists in the World, as in this strange Climate. It Is true, in
other places those of the fair Sex, may be too profuse in their offerings, but
as the Divines rightly observe, Superstition is better than Profaneness. Those
few here that pretend to own his power, pay their oblations to him with as ill
a will, as a breaking Tradesman pays his Taxes to the Government. It does not
come from any generous principle within, the heart has no share in the
sacrifice, and the Soul which in other Countries, loves to assist and go along
with the body upon these occasions, is as unconcerned here, (...) a Tradesmans
rake-helly Prentice at a Quake^ meeting. Not but that there are whores and
married Women too in this Country (which may seem to destroy what I have said
before) but the latter know no more what Gallantry mean^ than they understand
Arabic; and the former ar^ such rampant mercenary Devils, that they wou'^ lick
old Lucifer's cloven foot, for a single Gil^der. In short, there is not one
honest Rahab (...) be found among them, to justify the profession and Love has
never a Court in all the seven Provinces, where a man can be heard in forma
^auperis: which is a sad thing for us poor Soldiers, that are not over-stock'd
with the Ready. And then, as I have already told you, those that pass for Maids
are such insensible things, that one may succeed much sooner in his pre^ensions
elsewhere, than he can here make himself understood; or, to express my self in
the language of Westminster hall, one may get his Cause tried, enter upon the
Premises, and levy a Fine elsewhere, before he ^an put in his Plea here, let
him use all the art ^e can. The young fellows are made of the same unthinking
Clay, they sometimes talk of the flames of Love, but it is so as we at this
di^tance of time talk of the fire of Troy, which nothing concerns us. It Is next
to an Article of Faith with them, that no evacuation is so re^reshing as a
Belch, that nothing warms but Brandy, and that nothing is worth a man's ^ourting
but Money.

Guess then what a dismal penance I have undergone in this wicked place; but
now, Heaven be praised, my persecution is like to ^e at an end, for next week
we are ordered ^o join the Army at Nivelle, where I hope to meet good store of
Champaign, and to make my self amends out of the female recruits that ^re
arrived from England. Come Battle and Murder, Bloodshed and Desolation, Fire
and Faggot; in fine, any thing but Dutch Women, and the curse of Sobriety. Thus
prays

Your most obliged Servant.

LETTER XI. To a young Lawyer that dabbl'd in Poetry.
SIR,
YOur friends in the Country, understanding to their grief, that you are
infected with Verse-making, by the same token that the spots of Parnassus have
broke out upon you in several Love-Sonnets, and a Pindaric Ode upon the Peace,
they have desired me, whom they knew to labor under the same distempe^
formerly, to attempt your Cure, with the same prospect, I suppose, as the
people of Spai^ and Italy employ the Priests to exorcise the Devil, because
they are best acquainted with him Take it therefore for an undoubted truth,
tha^ Law and Poetry are as incompatible as War and Plenty, and that the Lawyer
and Poet ^an no more inhabit in the same person, than a Beau and a
Chimney-sweeper. The Law proposes interest for its end, and that considera^ion
makes its Thistles palatable; but you will find your self damnably mistaken, if
you think to advance your self by the Muses. After you have spent your whole
age in their service, you must not expect to have your Arrears paid so much as
in Malt-Tickets, or Exchequer-Notes. They^ll put you off to one Mrs Tattle
alias Fame, the veryest Coquette that ever was, and that prating Gossip will
sham you with an Immorta^ity-Ticket forso^th, which is not to become due to
you, till you are laid asleep in a Churchyard; and neither you, nor your Heirs
will be a farthing the better for it. What is worse, the nine Sisters
abovementioned, will not only disappoint your expectations ^s to a reward, but
will engross all your fa^ours, and suffer no Rivals to interfere with them.
Like the East India Women, they will expect you should prove constant, and bestow
no marks of benevolence elsewhere, otherwise conclude to be poisoned by them,
and made incapable of any thing else; and nothing you know is so furious as the
revenge of a discarded Mistress. If you design to touch at the most
advantageous Port in the land of Poetry, called the Theater, consider how
visible the dangers, and how unsuitable the returns are. To please the Ladies,
you must take care to lard the Dialogue with store of luscious stuff, which the
Righteous call Bawdy: To please our new Reformers you must have none, otherwise
gruff Jeremy will be upon your bones. In short, a Poet has as hard a task on'^
to manage, as a Passive Obedience Divine that preaches before the Commons on
the 30th of January. Then to sit with an aching heart for three long hours
behind the Scenes, within an inch of damnation all the while, tho you should
come off never so victorious, can you imagine the succeeding pleasure can make
you amends for so much pain and anguish. But you fancy the Indies are lodged in
Drury Lane; and that the Spanish Plate-Fleet is not to be compared to a good
third day. To undeceive you then, the Theater is not so overstockt with ungodly
Mammon, as you may believe. Rablais somewhere says, that the very shadow of an
Abbey Steeple is enough to get a woman with Child; and I can tell you for your
comfort, that the shadow of the Theater is starving; and the air of it as
naturally produces poverty, as that of the hundreds in Essex begets Agues.
There was a Woollen-draper in the Strand, that unhappily dreamt but of a
Candle-snuffer of the House, who is at least four removes from a Poet, and the
poor fellow broke within a week after.

So then, if you have the fear of Interest before your eyes, stick close to the
Law, and let Poetry go the Devil. Ovid will be an everlasting testimony of this
truth to all ages of the world. His Father, like a wise old Gentleman, designed
him for the Bar, but the giddy Fop flung up that profession, and set up for a
Wit; but observe, I beseech you, what he got by the exchange. By some of his
foolish Verses he drew the Emperors displeasure upon himself, who sent him a
grazing to teach him more manners, and so he lived a miserable fugitive, in
partibus infidelium, where he had leisure enough to curse the versifying Planet
which betrayed him to these extremities. One or two perhaps in the compass of
six thousand years have made their fortunes by it, but is this any
encouragement for you to betake yourself to Apollo's high road? What man of
ordinary sense would hazard his All in a Lottery, in hopes of meeting a
Benefited Ticket, where he has forty thousand to one odds against him. Besides,
Business and Poetry agree as ill together as Faith and Reason, which two
latter, as has been judiciously observed by the famed Tub-drubber of
Covent Garden, can never be brought to set their Horses together. Those poor
Rogues, that do Apollo's drudgery, like the Servants that belong to Dr Ch --
n's Land Office, must e'n take their labor for their pains, for Apollo and the
Dr pay no wages; and they agree in this too, that Paper pas^es with both for
Ready Money.

On the other hand, the Law has all the baits you can think of to take you.
Crowds of Clients to dance attendance at your Chamber every morning. Wealth
perpetually flowing in upon you, and all this attained with a few
qualificatitions; nothing but a strong pair of Bellows, called Lungs, and a
Forehead of the Corinthian Order, are required. So that if you abandon so rich
a soil, to starve upon a barren Common, the very Stones in Westminster Hall,
like the blood of the Recorders Horses, will rise up in judgment against you.
After all, if you are not master of Philosophy enough to set your self at
liberty, and cannot entirely shake off the Rhiming disease, let me advise you
as a friend, to trespass that way in private; let not your Mistress, nor so
much as your Bottle-companion know any thing of the matter, but when the
Writing fit is upon you, do it with as much prudent circumspection, as discreet
Thieves when they are going to commit Burglary. Otherwise you must lie under
the scandal of being thought a disaffected man to Cook and Littleton, and if
that should arrive to my Lord Chief Justices ears, good night to your practice.
This is all that I have at present to say upon this head, who am

Your most humble, etc.

LETTER XII. From a Vintner in the City, to a young Vintner in Covent Garden*
By Mr. M --
Cousin John,
YOu have done two very adventurous things of late. You have taken a new House,
and a new Wife, and all in the compass of a week: not having the fear of some
late Acts of Parliament before your eyes, which have made Housekeeping so very
chargeable. After this convincing proof of your boldness, should you take a
Lion by the Whiskers, it would not surprise me. For, Cousin, to deal plainly
with you, you have set up in a very perilous time, when it is fall of the Leaf
with poor Tradesmen all the year round. The Taxes run high, but never was there
such an ebb of Money since the Creation. Drunkenness, the Lord be praised,
notwithstanding all that the new Reformers have done to it, still makes a shift
to maintain its ground: If it leaves one liquor, it takes up with another, like
the Sea, which, what it loses in one place, gains somewhere else. All the
Nation, to give them their due, would be drunk if they could, to forget their
sorrows; but alas, not one quarter of the Nation can afford to be at the
expense of it. The situation of things being thus at this present writing, you
ought to manage your self with more than ordinary discretion, if you intend to
make a figure in this transitory world.

In the first place, lay it down for a fundamental rule, never to trust, or at
least as seldom as you can. But when you commit that folly, let it not be with
men, who are protected by their dignity or character, or (what will not be
unseasonable advice* to one that lives in Covent garden) with the Wits, who are
protected from paying by their poverty. The less Faith you have for other
people, the more Charity you show for your self; for let the P -- sons say what
they I will, never knew man of any profession justified by Faith. Rather than
venture that, cheat as much as you can, I mean in a lawful way, and when you
have got an Estate then it is time enough to think of compounding your sins with
Heaven by building of an Hospital, according to the laudable and ancient
practice of the City. If you have a mind to be saved by your Faith take my
advice, do it by wholesale, but never by small parcels. In the mean time get
Money and promote Trade, for that (as a wise Alderman long ago observed) is the
Law and the Prophets.

Secondly, consider, that the Trade of a Vint^er is a perfect mystery, (for
that is the term the Law bestows upon it,) now as all mysteries in the world
are wholly supported by hard and unintelligible terms, so you must take care to
christen your Wines by some hard Names, the farther fetched so much the better,
and this policy will serve to recommend the most execrable Stumm in all your
Cellar. A plausible name to an indifferent Wine, is what a gaudy title is to a
Fop, or fine Clothes to a Woman, it helps to conceal the defects it has, and
bespeaks the world in its favor. Men naturally love to be cheated,
particularly those of our own Nation, for the honor of old England be it
spoken, and provided the imposition is not too barefaced, will meet you half
way with all their hearts. I could name several of our brethren to you, who now
stand fair to sit in the Chair of Justice, and sleep in their Golden Chains at
Church, that had been forced to knock off long ago, if it had not been for this
artifice. It has saved the Sun from being eclipsed, the Crown from being
abdicated, the Rose from Decaying, the Fountain from being drawn dry, and both
the Devils from being confined to utter darkness. If your own invention is so
barren, that it wants to be assisted, or you have not Geography enough to
christen your Wines your self, I advise you to buy a Map of Spain, Portugal,
France, and Italy, and there you will find names of places, fit for your
purpose, and the more uncommon they are, they will be the more taking. Neither is
this piece of policy only practiced in our, but in most other Trades. A
Bookseller to help the sale of a dull Pamphlet, will spruce it up with a most
glorious Title, and tell you the Edition is almost sold off, when he has five
hundred lying dead upon his Hands. A Perfumer will pretend that his Essences
came from Montpellier, or Florence, tho he made them at home. The Glover talks
of Cordova, and the Mercer of Naples, till their Lungs are foundered, when both
their Commodities were of London extraction. And what harm is there in all
this? If the people cannot be pleased otherwise, we must in our own defense act
as the Nonconformist Divines do, and humor them in their folly. Si populus
vult decipi, decipiatur, was the saying of a Churchman, who understood the
World so well, that he would have made an admirable Vintner, had he thought it
worth his while.

Thirdly, don't forget to commend your Wine, for those very qualities, that
your customers find ^ault with it, like the Poets of the Town, who ^lways
justify those passages in their Plays, for which the Critics condemn them. For
exam^le; if they say it is sour or harsh; why, Gen^lemen it is the nature of true
French Wine to ^e so; if they tell you it is small, you must reply that it has a
concealed body; and if they quarrel with it for being heavy and strong, you may
stop their mouths, by saying it is so much the fitter ^or our Climate, and that
a Frieze Coat is not false ^atin in England, whatever it may be in a warmer
Country. At other times it will not be amiss ^o shift your Sails, and use
another Conduct. As for instance, A company of well-drest Gen^lemen come to
your House, and in respect to their quality and gaudy outsides, you draw 'em
^he best Wine in your Vaults. Pshaw, says one, what the Devil have you brought
us here? damn it, cries another, this stuff is not fit to be served at a
Porter's Burial. Then you may ha^angue them to the following Tune. Why
Gentlemen, this Wine, an't please you, tho it displeases you so much, has the
good fortune to be liked by other Palates. There Is Sir John Squander, and my
Lord Topewell, and twenty more I could mention, Senators* and men of
understanding, that drink their Gallons of it every night: But to say the
truth, it is not, between friends, true Orthodox. I find your Palats are
extraordinary, so I will go down my self, and bring you the Flower of Europe,
tho I say it. A small parcel of it came over the other day: it only grows in one
Vineyard belonging to the Monks, a plague on 'em I have forgot the place, the
greatest part was bought for the Kings use, against a public entertainment,
and the Merchant befriended me with the rest. But for God sake Gentlemen speak
not a word of this, to any of my Customers, you shall have of it for your own
Company as ^ong as it lasts, but if ever this should be known to my Lord, and
Sr John, and the W -- Country Parlia -- nt men, that come to my House, I am
undon for ever, therefore I hope youll be secret* Then fly down stairs like
Lightning, bring up a Flask of the worst Wine you have, take off the Oil
nicely, and present the Glass to one of these judicious Gentlemen. Now observe
how the Scene is altered. A plague on it, why this will do, says the first. Do?
cries the second, spirting it critically upon the floor, this is fit for Angels,
and not poor sinful Mortals. Why, Jack, says the third, this is exactly the
same Wine you and I used to make merry with on the other side the Alps. An^t
please the Lord, cries the fourth, I^ll get my full dose on it to night. Master,
we are obliged to you. Here Drawer, bring me up a Napkin; and then a good
Supper is bespoke, and drunkenness ensues. A certain Brother of the Quill, that
does not ^^ve full a hundred miles from the Exchange, has ^ot a brave Estate by
this very trick, therefore ^ee you put it in practice. There are a thousand
^ther stratagems to be used in our profession, but should I pretend to recount
but half of them ^ere, I should make this more tedious than (...) Pastoral
Letter. A little time and expe^ience will soon bring you acquainted with them.

I have nothing now left upon my hands to ^o, but to answer the Scruples you
proposed ^o me in your last; which I will dispatch with ^ll the brevity I am
master of. You desire to ^now whether a Vintner may take advantage ^f people
when they are in their Cups, and ^eckon more than they have had. To which I
^nswer in the affirmative, that you may, pro^ided it be done in the way of
Trade, and not for any sinister end. This case has been so ad^udg'd many years
ago in Vintner's Hall, and ^ou may depend upon it. Don't you see how in all other
Trades they never scruple to make a penny of a Customer's ignorance. (else how
could the Bookseller in Paul^s Churchyard, have palm'd Ogilby's Fables with
Cuts, upon a Country Wench for a Common Prayer Book, and told her that Aesop
with his Beasts about him, was Adam in Paradise) and is not drunkenness, while
it continues upon a man, a state of ignorance; Besides, is it not a sin, a
heinous sin? and ought not we that are in some measure accessory to it, to
mortify and punish it, and does any thing more disturb the Conscience of an
English man, than to make his pocket do penance? After all, if the fraud is
discovered (and it is ten to one whether it be or no) the Master of the House is
not at all affected by it. A Vintner, like the King, can do no wrong. The Bar
indeed may mistake, the Drawers may be Sons of Whores, and mis-reckon, but a
Master is not to be damned for the transgressions of his Servants. Even General
Councils with the Pope at the head of them are not infallible. Humanum est
errare, the poor woman at the Bar is but just come out of the Country, or the
noise of the Bell, or the hurry of business distracted her. Gentlemen, to make
you amends I Will call for my Quart: I Would not do an ill thing for the Universe;
and thus the farce concludes.

In the next place you would know how you ought to govern your self in relation
to lewd Women that Gentlemen bring to your House: to which I reply; That as Men
that have Wives are commanded to live as if they had none, so in this wicked
Town, a Vintner that has Eyes must behave himself as if he had them not, and
sometimes too he must have no Ears, otherwise damned Rogue, and Cuckoldly
Villain would make but ill music in them. So long as all this serves ^or the
promoting of Trade, for my part I think ^here's no great sin in it; this I am
sure of, that ^f it were not for this practice, our Neighbors ^he Apothecaries
and Surgeons would fairly ^^arve; and you know we should love our Neighbors
as our selves. The worst effect it produces, is in respect to our Wives and
Daughters; it sets their mouths a watering, and often makes them wish to be in
the Harlot^s place. ^ once knew a Vintners big-bellied Wife, that ^aving taken
notice of a painful Whore, who by the sweat of her Brows, had earned fifteen
pints of White Wind one night with fifteen se^eral Men, went ill from the Bar,
and nothing would serve her turn, but she must be delivered ^n the very Chair
that had assisted so much ^ornication. But you^ll say it is against your
Conscience. Cousin John, you are a young beginner in the world, therefore
follow my direction, and clap a muzzle upon your Conscience When you have got
twenty thousand pound in your pocket, you may take off the Muzzle, if you think
fit, and leave it to itself. Then you may shut up your doors at nine, look as
discreetly as the gravest Hypocrite in the City, forbid singing of Catches in
your house, deliver a Gill of Wine through the little Wicke^ only on the Lord's
Day, call the Sunday the Sabbath, strut to the Parish Church at the head of
half a dozen notched Drawers lugging a Geneva Bible between them, and take the
Sermon in Shorthand, as many of your Predecessors when they thought they were
wealthy enough to deserve damnation, have done before you. This is all, from

Your affectionate Kinsman,

LETTER XIII. To my Lady -- that married an old decrepit Widower.
Madam,
YOu have used yourself with greater cruelty than the most barbarous Tyrant
durst have done, had it been your ill fortune to come within his power. Algiers
itself inflicts no such punishment upon its vilest Slaves, as you have
voluntarily and freely imposed upon yourself. Mezentius, so execrable in
History for tying the living to the dead, reserved this inhumane usage only for
his Enemies: As brutal as he was, he never dreamt of using his friends in that
manner, much less himself. Yet you, Madam, have thought fit to practice it upon
one, who to my knowledge deserved a better treatment at your hands.

All the Town was melancholy upon the news, but especially those who are in the
Interests of Beauty, lamented as heartily, as some pious people do when they
hear of a Christian Town fallen into the hands of the Infidels. And that we
fear is your case, for if a man has no other way of showing his Faith but by
his Works, it is concluded by all sides that your lot is fallen upon a person
who is as nearly related to an Infidel, as an Informer is to a Villain.

I have lately read over some of the old Martyrologies, where innumerable
instances are to be found of persons of both Sexes, who in a fit of devotion
practiced strange austerities; but none of them come up to you, even of those,
who, for the singular mortification they enjoined themselves, have been
advanc^d to the Calendar by Holy Church.

We meet with frequent instances of young Virgins that have leapt into the
flames to make profession of their belief, and courted death in its most
terrible mein, as eagerly as other Women do a Coronet and a Title. Some have
attended the sick in Hospitals, and in the midst of affluence and plenty, have
denied themselves the conveniences of life, and mortified in Sackcloth. Some
after the Priest has done his office, have refused to receive the lawful
tribute of Matrimony, and some have obliged themselves to a perpetual silence,
which is certainly self-denial enough in a Woman. Others have injured their own
Beauty to preserve themselves from the Courtship of their Lovers, or from the
lust of Tyrants. But, alas, what proportion does this bear to what you have
done? Death puts a period to all our miseries: but you have given a greater
proof of your constancy, by resolving to live. You have confined your self to a
walking Infirmary, and nothing but providence can give you a discharge. You
have sacrific^d your youth and beauty, to one that can enjoy neither, nor will
suffer others to do it for him* like the modern Library Keeper of St. James's*
he will neither peruse your Manuscript, the fairest in the world, nor lend it
to others who can make a better use of it. In short, there'^ never a Ghost in
Glanville or Aubry, if he me^ him a Churchyard, but would take him for his
Brother Spectre. You, and your Husband between you, really undergo two of the
seve^rest punishments which antiquity believed to b^ in Hell. He, like
Tantalus, sees the Fruit ever^lastingly before him, which he is not in a
ca^pacity of tasting. You, like Sysiphus, take an infinite deal of pains to no
purpose, to roll a Stone every night, which is no sooner up, but it falls down
of itself, and will do so to the end of the Chapter.

Tho I need not exaggerate your own torments to you, who are so well acquainted
with 'em, yet as a Divine sometimes explains the effects of Drunkenness to his
Parish that know them as well as himself, give me leave to lay down part of the
persecution you undergo before your Eyes, that through you the world may know
what you endure.

The night approaches, but the night which bountifully rewards the pains of
other Lovers, proves but the beginning of your misery. Even the Bed, where all
the married world besides find happiness, or at least a relaxation from their
pain* is the Scene where you suffer most emphatically. That old solemn piece of
antiquity, called your Husband, leads you to this place of real Martyrdom, but
no execution, with his head muffl'd up in an infinity of Caps, and his Lungs,
lest Music should be wanting to the entertainment, are sure to serenade you
all night long. Thus he disturbs your repose, but has nothing about him to
reward you for keeping you awake. If he has got his Cargo of Wine in his guts,
he snores by your side as heartily, as Garagantua and the Monks in Rabelais do
after they have rocked themselves asleep, with singing the penitential Psalms.
But if in spite of impotence and age, he pretends to disturb you with his
vigor, his shot scarce reaches the Walls of the Fortress. Thus your fate is
just the reverse of Semeles; she generously expired in the arms of the
Thunderer, whereas your Fumbler chills you with his warmest embraces; his very
flames gives you an Ague fit, and like the weather we have had of late, his
Summer has a spice of Winter in it. The mischief on it is, that every day will
leave him a worse practitioner than other, and time, which uses to soften other
hardships, will daily make yours more insupportable.

What is it then that could induce your Lady-ship to pitch upon so rigorous a
penance, which your very Enemies, (were it possible for you to have any) would
never have imposed upon you? Since your Body can be no gainer by this wicked
match, one would imagine you did it for the benefit of your Soul; but Religion
produces no such miracles in this age, whatever it has done formerly. It Is
enough now if people stick to it while they get by the bargain; for few, very
few, even of those that wear her Cloth and eat her Bread, will be losers for
her.

It Is, in short, the desire of unrighteous Mammon that has drawn this servitude
upon you. You took this nauseous Pill only for the sake of the gilding. That
pale-faced metal, to purchase which our Merchants ransack every corner of the
world, make you take up with this leaky battered Vessel; but with this
difference, that whereas they are at liberty to shift their Climate as they see
fit, you have confined your self to the Latitude of 70, and have settled in a
Country, which is eternally covered with Snow, and affords no prospect of a
Spring. All that your humble Servants can do, is to wish that your Tyrants
Reign may be but of short continuance,, which is the daily prayer of --

Lysander*

LETTER XIV. June 2.92. To Mr P --.
-- Iucundissime Willielme
Ni te plus oculis meis amarem.

IF I did not love you better than our Statesmen do a new Plot, a Fop a new
Fashion, and the Would be-wits at Wills do a new Criticism, I would never leave
a parcel of honest fellows that are now dusting it about, to retire to a corner
by my self, and send you the transactions of Hartfordshire.

So much by way of Preface, without which even a Letter to a Friend now adays,
not to mention those unwieldy things called Epistles Dedicatory, is thought as
naked, as an Archdeacon's Hat would be thought by the Country people, without a
Rose in it.

I have now passed just two tedious months ^n the Country, and cannot forbear
now and ^hen to cry out, with a little alteration from ^he words of our beloved
Horace, O urbs quando ego te aspiciam, quandoque licebit
Phyllide nunc pulchra, nunc Bacchi divite succo
Ducere sollicitae jucunda oblivia vitae!
The effects of this cursed War appear no where ^o lamentably as they do in
these parts of the world. In London you only find it in your Gazettes and News
papers. You have the Playhouse to divert you, and the Taverns are as much
crowded as ever. Here we have com^any indeed, and drink; but when we consider
^ow much the latter is degenerated from what ^t was in the time of Peace, it
palls our mirth, and we are as heavy-hearted as the Jews of old were at the
sight of their Second Temple.

The Wine, in those few places where we ^ind it, is so intolerably bad, that
tho it is good ^or nothing else, it is a better argument for So^riety, than what
all the Volumes of Morality ^an afford. My Companion, Jack Freeman, who you
know is a Libertine in his nature, says (...) ought to be employed only in
sacred uses, for whatever preparation it deserves beforehand, (...) never
fails of giving a man a weeks repentance ^fterwards. The Duce take me, if in
some of my sullen moments I don't envy a London Fly I don't mean an inhabitant
of Smithfield or Wap^ping, but one that tipples in a creditable Ta^vern
somewhere about the Exchange or Temple bar. Where this sorry stuff is not to be
had we are forced in our own defense to take u^ with Punch; but the ingredients
are as long (...) summoning, as a Captain would be recruitin^ his Regiment. In
my conscience the King might sooner get a Convocation of honest dis-interest^ed
Churchmen together. We must send to (...) Market Town five mile off for Sugar
and Nut^meg, and five mile beyond that for rotten Lemons. Water itself is not
to be had without traveling a league for it, and an unsanctify'^ Kettle
supplies the place of a Bowl. Then when we have mixed all these noble
ingredients which, generally speaking, are as bad as thos^ the Witches in
Mackbeth jumble in the Caldro^ together to make a Charm, we fall too
contentedly, and sport off an afternoon. It Is true our heads suffer for it next
morning, but what i^ that to an o^d Soldier? We air our selves nex^ morning on
the Common, and the sin and the pain are forgotten together.

At other times we do penance in stale March-beer, which fills and clogs, but
never in^spires. If it gives any mirth, it is sickly and faint like the light
one receives from burnt Brandy and our smiles like those of the moody Almanzor
in the Play, are hardly to be distinguished from a frown. This course of life
we led till ^ur stock was all exhausted at home, and then ^twas with us in the
case of drink, what it was ^ormerly between Mahomet and the Mountain upon
another occasion. If the drink will not ^ome to us, we must even go to the drink,
and that we do with a witness; for we make longer pilgrimages to a Tub of Ale,
than a Jesuit would ^ndergo to make a Royal Convert. Our di^ector in these
matters is an honest Parson of the neighborhood, one that has made a shift to
get ^ red Nose and a double Chin in the service of the Church, tho he has but
thirty pound a year, and to keep his Palate orthodox, and still in ^une, he
carries the tip of a dried Neat's tongue ^lways in his pocket. He has some
acquaintance with Books and Critical Learning, and pretends to have discovered
a false reading in Minutius Felix, which has hitherto escapt all the German
Commentators. It Is that famous passage non magna loquimur sed vivimus. He says
and proves it by the context, that it ought to be bibimus, and has brought us
all to be of his opinion. ^n short, you may talk of your Secretaries of State
and Ministers as long as you please, but he is a person of the most universal
intelligence I had ever the honor to be acquainted with. No sooner does one
Tub decline, but he has his Emissaries to tell him when another is fit to
bleed; and thus ten mile ^ound him. Then we Saddle our Horses, and make as much
haste to examine the Vessel, as a Messenge^ does to seize a Delinquent come
from France.

Having thus tir^d you with our drinking you expect, I suppose, to have an
account o^ our Women. I was five days in this Family before I saw one female
face. Whatever the matter is, they are as shy of being seen by (...) Londoner,
as a Dutch Trooper, the modeste^^ animal in the Universe, is of meeting a
Frenc^ Dragooner in Flanders. But the other morning as I walked in the Garden, I
heard a squeaking Treble murder a Playhouse tune, at least a^ old as herself;
however it was new here; and presently after, a thing in a Commode looked out
of the Window, but as merrily as King Charles the Second peeps out of the Royal
Oa^ in a Country Sign. The Governess of the Castl^ at last believed we were no
Monsters, and re^solved to give us the honor of her Company (...) never saw so
diminutive a Creature in my days when she came into the Dining Room between her
two strapping Daughters, that were at least (...) Foot high, she looked,
methinks, like a pair o^ Snuffers between two Monument Candlesticks After the
first salutation was over, she com^plain'd of the Taxes, and the sins of the
age that occasioned them; but for all her Sanctity the old Gentlewoman thought
it no si^ it seems, to paint; which she ha^ (...) on as thick as an Author does
flattery (...) a Dedication. The Fucus had be^^ow'd some r^d upon her Cheeks,
by (...) same token it made them guilty of a (...) of false Chronology. It made
a resem^^ance of youth amongst furrows and wrinkles; (...) I could not help
thinking upon some (...) Varelst's pieces, where you see Winter (...) Summer
flowers, that never grow toge^^er, joined in one Picture. But for all that, was
a very godly discreet old Lady. She asked (...) a thousand questions about the
Funds, and (...) Lotteries, and whether ^he might dispose ^er Money safely to
the Government? No doubt (...), Madam, The Confederates and we are a ^undred
thousand strong in Flanders. Besides, ^ussel has played the Devil with them at
Sea. ^he Messieurs one of these days will come up. (...) their knees to
supplicate for a Peace. And (...) we parted for that time.

A few days after, this old Lady desired ^ack Freman and me to bear her and her
daugh^ers company to a Wedding in the neighboring ^illage. At the very mention
of a Wedding ^e rejoiced as much as the people in Cornwall (...) at the news of
a wreck. So down we ^ent to the Farmer's House, whose heir appa^ent was to be
matrimonially bound to his good ^ehaviour. The Bride was a fat fresh colored
^ench, well built and ruddy, and a great pains-taker (to use Harry Higden's
word) I dare war^rant for her. The Husband Elect looked some^what grum upon the
matter, as knowing how much business he had upon his hands. To b^ short, we saw
'em conducted to the Enchante^ Castle, where the sacred Magician perform'^ his
office; when he came to the terrible word^ you wot of, the Bridegroom looked as
pale as ^ Parson that preaches a stolen Sermon at a Visita^tion; and the Bride,
after the laudable custom of her Sex, dropped a few precious tears, and wip^ them
off with her handkerchief. From thence w^ came back to the old place of
Rendezvous where one would have thought the whol^ Country was assembled to
behold the Cere^mony; but it is an old commendable custom o^ your mothers all
England over to bring their Daughters to such a sight, to prepare them for what
they must undergo another day; as you^ Keepers call in their young Dogs at the
pluckin^ down of a Stag, to enter them. All Dinner time the Bridegroom and
Bride ogled one another lik^ Adam and Eve in an old Bible-Cut. When that was
over, we removed into the yard, where we shak'd our heels in Fresco, and
toward the close of the afternoon were interrupted by ^ parcel of Country
fellows, with a ^iddle at the head of them, who gave us a spice of their
abili^ties under an Elm-tree. When I first saw them move, they gave me an image
of Lucretius^ Atoms, and how they jumbled and interfered (...) the Vacuum. I
could not forbear to make another reflection upon it, which shows upon that
chimerical grounds people build their sa^^sfaction. These fellows by the pure
instinct of nature, did what Mr Dogget has learnt to do ^ith pains and long
imitation. Yet Mr Dogget ^leases, and we should hiss these off the Stage ^or
Scoundrels and Blockheads.

A little before Supper we had a cessation of ^iddles, and our old Lady, whose
Piety and Ptisic ^ade her equally troublesome to herself and all (...) world
besides began the discourse with com^laining of the strange debaucheries of the
men, and to show her wonderful charity was pleased (...) affirm, that not one
man in five hundred ^^at had been bred at London, but had passed (...)
Surgeons hands two or three times before (...) day of Marriage. Well, the
Lord be praised, (...) a Gentlewoman newly married that sat ^ext her, I have no
reason to complain of my ^usband, he is no drunkard, make me thankful ^^r't,
nor given to lewd Company, and what (...) of my neighbors can say, I am sure
he never knew any Woman before my self* Sure (...), cries Jack Freeman, rising
up and bowing to (...). For Heaven's sake, Madam, how was it possi^le? For
Moses, Madam -- Pugh* Says she, what (...) ye tell me of Moses -- With
submission, Ma^am, Moses was an honest Gentleman, and tho he has set down
certain marks by which a Man may know whether his Wife comes a Maid to him --
Lord what stuff is here -- Yet he no where instructs the Women to know whether
the Men have been trespassing before -- No matter for that -- Did you believe
him then upon his own word -- I will not tell you whether I did or no -- Or did
you discover him to be a Virgin, as we do a raw undisciplined Soldier -- How
is that -- Why, Madam, by the awkward handling of his Arms, and making his
attacks irregularly. With that all the men fell a laughing, and the women
blushed behind their Fans. But this was not enough for Jack Freeman, for with an
assurance equal to that of a thorough-pac'd Evidence, tho he ne^ver saw this
woman's Husband in his life before, yet, as if he had been one of his old
intimate acquaintance, he thus went on -- Indeed Madam I cannot tell what
stories Mr N -- might tell you of his own Virtue, and all that, but I knew him
perfectly well at the University. He and I* Madam, were of the same College; I
believe we have drank this room full of Bottled Ale to^gether, and we took him
for no Saint there There went a scurvy report of him, but I won'^ justify it,
because Fame's a common Harlot, and a Liar ab initio. But the report, was I
remember, that he was very great with his Bed-maker No tawdry young Creature, I
must do him but a justice grave stayed discreet person. A Venerable old Matron
upon my word, and fit to have made a Wife for Burgersdicius, if ever you heard
of him. She wore about her a girdle, some threescore and ten Keys* which when
she walked made as delicious Music as a Carriers Bells. And Madam we had a
Tradition amongst us, that he seduced this ancient Person with Nine-pence; in
hard money, and a pair of blue worsted Stockins, but God sorbid, that I should
affirm this, yet for all I know, it may be true. For, Madam, all flesh is
frail. Upon this the Company laughed as heartily as before; the poor
Gentlewoman looked blank in the mouth, but Supper came very seasonably to her
relief. So to eating we fell, then the fiddles struck up and we danced till
ten. At which time the old people, taking the Bride's case into their pious
consideration, whose concupiscence had stood upon tip-toes ever since the
Parson had put her into the Church-pound, took her up stairs, and as Mr. Otway
says, dished her neatly in bed. What happen^d afterward you may easily guess.

It Is a sign you don't know when you are well, otherwise you would not long so
furiously to be here only upon the score of the Country Nymphs, as you call
them; for I dare engage you would soon wish yourself at home again. A raw Wench
here in the Country, not to recount to you a thousand other impertinences,
before you can bring her to bear, will put you to the Devil and all of expense
in perjury. All which is sav^d in London. The Women there are better bred than
to ask it of you, or else know the world too well to depend upon it. Produce but
the half piece, and they trouble their heads no farther about you. But here you
must run through as strict a scrutiny, as if you were to take a post of the
greatest trust in the Government -- And my Dear will you be everlastingly true
to me -- No doubt on it Child -- But when you have served your turn you will leave
me for some body else -- But indeed I will not -- It wou^d break my heart if you
should -- Never fear it -- Swear then, my Dear -- Why there is no occasion --
But you shall swear, dear Rogue, now your Honey bids you, or -- So then you are
oblig^d to part with as many Oaths in a moment, as would handsomely maintain
one o^ the Kings Majestys Garrisons for a twelvemonth. Now this is very hard
upon the Subject, especially the tender-conscienc'd. Nay to give you the last
proof of their ill breeding in the critical minute of joy, when they ough^ to
be all rapture and contemplation, then even then, when they should be wrapped up
in holy silence, they will ask you a thousand foolish questions, as mal a propos,
as if one should interrupt a Popish Priest at the Elevation, and ask him wha^ a
clock it is. You complain that the Damsels with you dress too fine, and that a
pretty woman, set out in all the advantages of art, is too luscious a dish to
feed upon, and as bad as Sack and Sugar. I can answer for no body's palate but
my own: and cannot help saying with the ^at Knight in Harry the Fourth. If Sack
and Sugar is a sin, the Lord have me^cy on the wicked.

During my stay in these parts, I have reconciled my self to all the sports of
the Country, but ^ox-hunting. They have got me out twice upon that account, but
if ever they get me ^gain, I Will give them leave to hang me. For (...) part, I
believe some Priest first invented it, because it requires so much implicit
Faith, and ^he drudgery is so stupid. A man must ven^ure his neck for a thing
he never sees, and ^hen he has got it, it is not worth his while. and this
doctrine I daily preach to the Gentle^en, but they mind me no more than the
Bank^rs in Lumbardstreet did the zealous David Jones ^eclaiming against Usury.

Thus I have plagued you with a tedious long ^etter, which I have not patience
enough to ^ook over again, and going to make excuses ^or it, am interrupted by
the following Com^liments -- What a plague are you doing all this ^hile by
yourself -- Here we have scor'd you (...) Glasses -- Come, or we shall lay a
heavier fine upon you -- Thus I am forced to conclude with ^^bscribing my self,

Your Humble (...)

LETTER XV. To Sir John *** From the Cro^^
WE are at the Tavern, and have your (...) under our present consideration.
(...) concluded on all hands that you can neith^^ justify your present way of
living to yours^^^ nor yet to the public, which ought to be (...) some regard
with all lovers of their Count^^^ You are got into the modern foppery of
Keepi^^ and behold what are the sentiments of this h^^nourable board about it.

Mr.... who you know is a Poet, delive^ himself in the language of his
Profession. (...) maintained that, whatever the wicked (...) thought to the
contrary, a Miss was as (...) inferior to a Wife, as the Pindaric Muse is to
(...) Epic; that one is a Whore without Stay^^ whereas the other is a civil
well-bred per^^^ that always wears them.

Mr..... who is likewise a Son of Parna^^^ desired me to tell you, that a Miss
and a Wife (...) ^er only as a single Epigram, and a large Collection ^f Poems,
viz. that a man sooner rids his hands ^f one than the other. But that, as
Martial has ^ong ago declared his opinion in the latter case, Quid prodest
brevitas, dic mihi, si liber est. That is to say, what the plague is a man the
better for the shortness of a Distich, if he obliges himself to read a whole
Cart-load of them; so he desires to know where lies the mighty advantage of a
Whore above a lawful Spouse, if the Spark keeps constant to her; and if he does
not, where is the sense of keeping her in pay.

Mr.... expressed himself against the predominant sin of Keeping, to this effect.
Of all the vices the present age is to answer for, nothing comes near it, and
yet the Sots make merry with Marriage; which is full as ridiculous as if Dr
Chamberlain should laugh at the Bank of England for paying people in Paper. If
Marriage is expensive, Keeping is certainly more, and with less pretense. I
knew, says he, a Gentleman that loved Gaming as he did his eyes. One night he
lost a hundred and fifty Guinea's at the Groom-Porter's. When he came home he
found his Lady in the Parlour, with two Candles burning before her. Lord! Wife,
says he, what a strange extravagance is this: Two Candles lighted at a time,
and housekeeping so chargeable? But he forgot, it seems, what his shaking of
his elbow had cost him that evening. This is the case of all Keepers; what our
Churchmen charge the Dissenters with, is actually true of them, they startle at
a Gnat, but can swallow an Elephant.

Right, says Harry.... Keeping is the greatest Solecism a man of pleasure can
commit, If the Gallant is true to his Mistress, it has all the Phlegm, and if he
is fond of her, all the expense of Matrimony. In short, I have an equal
aversion to Marriage and Keeping. They differ only like Holbourn and Cornhil:
Both are streets. But to do Sir John justice, the latter is nothing near so
long as the former.

That is as it happens, cries virtuous Mr... for I can show you several persons
about the Town that parted fairly with their Wives before the first month was
over, and yet could endure to cohabit with their Harlots many years. But
imagination governs all these matters. For my part, I think of Women as I do of
Books, the finest of both sorts will hardly endure a thorough examination. If
they find more savor than this, they may thank the Courteous Reader for it,
who sees more in them than they deserve. I remember I took Mr Waller and Sir
John Denham last Vacation down with me into the Country. I read them over, and
what was a consequence of that, I was weary of them. You may laugh at me for a
man of a vicious palate, but I cannot help that. Before I came to Town I was
glad to borrow Wesley's execrable Poem of the Parson of the Parish, only for
variety.

Tho I am not wholly of your opinion, says Mr.... to him, yet I agree with you
that Keeping is nonsense all over, and that for a reason which none of you have
yet assigned. Sir Henry Wooton's Definition of an Ambassador in part belongs to
him. Legatus est vir bonus ad mentiendum foris Reip. gratia. And a Keeper is a
good man to maintain a pretty woman in fine Clothes, handsome Lodgings, and all
that, for the public benefit of the Commonwealth.

Mr.... the Merchant is in our company, who has traveled abroad, and seen the
world: He says that a Whore in the Civil State is what Farthings are in the
business of Trade, only to be used for the convenience of ready Change. But
that a Man, that makes a Whore, if not his constant Wife, yet his constant
Companion, and a Government that makes Farthings their only current Money, will
soon be convinced of the vanity of their politics. And he said Ireland was
lately a sad instance of the latter.

What vexes me most, says.... is to hear these Keeping Coxcombs magnify
themselves upon their discretion. I save charges by it, cries one --

Yes, replies his neighbor, they are as much savers by the bargain, as one
that goes down to Tunbridge or the Bath, to save his expenses in Town. But
since this point has been spoken to already, I will say no more to it. Only
give me leave, Gentlemen* to capp the story of the two Candles, with another
like it. A brace of Country Attorneys w^nt into a Tavern one morning to take a
whet, and because they had not seen one another ^or a Term or two, they drank
to the tune of eleven Pints. At last one of them called for a French Roll: Why
Brother, says the other, are you not ashamed to inflame the Reckoning? Let the
Keepers apply this.

Well, but I escape Confinement by it, says another -- I don't know that, says
Mr N -- for I think a man is as much a Prisoner by a Gout or Rheumatism of his
own begetting, as if the Government had confined him. What signifies it a
farthing to one in this case, whether the Priest ties the knot, or he does it
himself? It Is true, the confinement of Keeping does not last so long as that of
Marriage, but it devours more in a month than the other does in a year. It Is
like falling into the hands of the Black Rod, or a Sergeant of the House, where
the Fees run so high, that you spend more in a few weeks, than would handsomely
maintain you in another Prison all your life. But to see by what Chimera's the
world is managed. Matrimony is Hell in Folio, because it is a charm that cannot
be dissolved when a man pleases. At the same time those that Keep can sometimes
submit to a confinement full as long and severe; yet bear it ^asily, because
forsooth it is of their own ordering. This puts me in mind of the famous Citizen
of Paris, who had passed threescore long years within the City-walls, and never
had the least inclination to make a step into the Country. So soon as he heard
that his Prince had commanded him never to stir out of it, he discreetly died
with the thoughts of being a Prisoner. There are Penitents in Spain, who on
certain days of mortification lash themselves as heartily as any of our Newgate
Rogues are whipped by the public Executioner. It Is certain the pain and anguish
are the same. But one does it voluntarily, and the other cannot help it. What
pretty Salvos a fruitful imagination can find out

Thus far, Sir John, we have given you our thoughts of Keeping in general,
without descending to particulars; but now we come to consider your own case
more nearly. To the surprise of all your friends, you have pitched upon a
Daughter of the Stage, upon an Actress, to show your particular favors to; and
pray be pleased to hear what the company thinks of it.

Mr... who next to Mr Rymer is the best Historian about the Town, says that
this transaction of your life will be bound up with the Annals of Goatam in the
next age; because to pretend to confine a She-Player to one's self, is
altogether of a piece with hedging in a Cuckoo.

Mr.... the Poet first mentioned, proved out of the ancient Records of
Parnassus, that all Actresses belong to those of his Profession; and that if a
Lay person pretended to lay his unhallowed hands upon her, he was guilty of
making an Impropriation, and ought to be indicted in Apollo's Spiritual Court.

Mr.... of the Temple, who, tho he never goes to Westminster, is nevertheless
an Oracle of the Law, pretends that your Case comes within the Statute of
Monopolies, that you have done as bad as enclosed a Common, and that all the
lovers of Magna Charta ought to break down the Fence.

It Is but fit it should be so, cries another, for he that pretends to confine a
Damosel of the Theater to his own use, who by her character is a person of an
extended qualification, acts as unrighteous, at least as unnatural a part, as
he that would debauch a Nun: that after all, such a Spark rather consults his
Vanity than his Love, and would be thought to ingross what all the young
Coxcombs of the Town admire and covet.

Captain.... ended this serious debate. He said, that whoever gave pay to a
Woman or a Soldier expected they should prove faithful to him. Now, continued
he, to expect fidelity from a Female that has been raised up in that Hot Bed
called a Playhouse, is to expect honesty from an Evidence. It Is a folly not to
be excused. It Is to bottle up Air, like Shadwell's Virtuoso. It Is to wash a
Blackamoor. It Is to make Dr Otes rectus in curia. It Is, in short, to grasp at
more than attaining an impossibility; for it is impossible to secure any other
Woman to your self, but much more an Actress.

Thus we have sent you, Sir John, the opinion of the Committee of our whole
House upon this occasion. You are desired to consider of it cooly by your self;
and when you have so done, if it is possible repent; otherwise do like some of
our Divines when they contradict what they formerly asserted, and stand buff to
it.

Tom.... would have you meet us to morrow night at the Rose, where he pretends
to attack you with so many arguments against the Female Sex, that he does not
question to make you a Proselyte to the Bottle.

LETTER XVI. The Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Find I have a whole Posse Comitatus to encounter; but I rely so much upon
the goodness of my Cause, that without calling in the assistance of my
Brother-Keepers, without giving my self the trouble to repel numbers by
numbers, I don't question but that I am able in my own single person to
maintain the field against you.

You are divided, Gentlemen, like all other Assemblies, in your opinions: Some
of you seem to favor Marriage, but declare against Keeping: Some of you
denounce War equally against both, and consequently must set up for Fornication
at large. I make this Inference, because my Charity will not suffer me to believe
that any of you are such rank Infidels as to discard the Sex by wholesale. If I
thought you had any of that complexion among you, yet I should not think it
worth my while to dispute them into better sense. It Is an old re^ceiv'd Axiom,
you know, that contra negantem Principia non est disputandum.

As for the former Gentlemen, I mean those that have some respect for Marriage,
but are utter enemies to Keeping, they would oblige me to prove that lying at
an Inn, where a man stays no longer than he finds himself well used, and the
place agreeable, is half so chargeable or foolish, as staying there all one's
life, let the entertainment be what it will. There are certainly degrees in
confinement, and the Fleet is not altogether so Pagan and uncomfortable a
place, as Sally, or Algiers. Oh! but Imagination governs all these matters. If,
as we have frequent instances of it in History, Imagination can kill as
effectually as a Blunderbuss loaded with a dozen Bullets, deliver me, I say,
from the hands of that Tyrant Imagination. But tho this is answer enough to so
trifling an objection, yet, Gentlemen, I will prove that there is something more
than bare Imagination in the case. A Miss's Patent runs durante been placito,
and she lies eternally at the mercy of her Patron. A Wife has a Lease of your
Body for term of Life, and has no such obligations upon her to keep within
bounds. One like an open Town can make no resistance, and consequently has no
Temptation or Interest to rebel. A Wife is a sort of a Garrison, fortified by
Law and Act of Parliament, which the Sovereign cannot dismantle when he pleases.
She lies secure behind that unrighteous Bulwark called a Settlement, which is
made as strong as the Westminster-hall-Engineers can contrive it, and tho she is
never so plainly convicted of revolting from her lawful Master, and holding an
Intelligence with the Enemy, she forfeits neither Life nor Limb; nay, she can
challenge a subsistence as long as she lives. This, I think, shows with a
witness that there is a vast difference between Marriage and Keeping: but to
dismiss this point, were a Wife never so sincere, and never so submissive, yet
there is a Duty in the case. Consider what I say Gentlemen, there is duty in the
case, in which single word there is dullness and impotence, and death and
desolation, and, in short, every thing that inspires horror, and casts a damp
upon pleasure. It Is as bad as the Mean Tekel on the Wall, the very name carries
a Palsy with it. It puts people upon unlawful evasions, it makes them think on
other folks, when their thoughts should be at home, and leads them to commit
downright Adultery in the Nuptial Sheets.

Even that Pink of Courtesy, Sir John Falstaff in the Play, who never was a
niggard of his Lungs, yet would not answer one word when the Must was put upon
him. Were Reasons, says that affable Knight, as cheap as Black-berries I would
not give you one upon compulsion, which is but another word for Duty. And now
we are upon this Chapter, Gentlemen give me leave to copy from you, and tell
you a short story. A Nobleman, who shall be nameless, in King Charles the
Second's time kept a Chaplain, that was a Rakehell enough in all Conscience. He
would break windows, kick and cuff, get drunk and swear, and do all the
boisterous things you can think of, as uncanonically as any of his cloth. This
fellow had not lived a full month with my Lord, by the same token that they
kept him as hot as a Glass-house all the while, but, weary it seems of his
reception, he came staggering into the Room where my Lord was drinking with
some friends; faith my Lord, says he, you and I must part, before George we
must. Why so, Doctor, have not I used you with all the civility -- You mistake
me, my good Lord, I love Drunkenness as well as ever a Peer of you all; but a
plague I hate the thoughts of being forced to mount the Guard every night, I
hate to be confined to it. You make Drunkenness a Duty, my Lord, and
consequently a Virtue, and I Would have you know I hate all Virtue -- Pray let me
advise you to think of this at your leisure.

I come now to those worthy Gentlemen, who are against Enclosures of all sorts,
and fall upon the first Game they can start. Not to call their judgments in
question, which they never put to the expense of choosing for them, I would
fain be informed why a man should be so foolhardy as to expose himself to the
fortune de la guerre, when there is no occasion for it; or what mighty
satisfaction there is in coming off with the loss of an Arm or a Leg, when he
might have kept himself safe. Were there no such things as Diseases in the
World, and had Colum^bus never discovered the Indies, perhaps I might be
reconciled to this sort of life: but as I am a professed Disciple of Epicurus, I
would by my good will husband every moment to the bes^ advantage: for this
reason I scorn to take u^ Pleasure, as young Prodigals do Money, at fifty per
Cent. Interest; and it is for this very reason that I abominate Drunkenness, the
only Pande^ that can make you swallow intreaguing in com^mon, because a man
gives half an hours seeming satisfaction, and two or three days real sickness

I am now arrived to the last part of my In^dictment, where you play all your
small shot a^ me, because I have thought fit to be particula^ with an Actress.
Some of you pretend tha^ such such a choice has more Vanity than Lov^ in it.
Admit it has, yet I shall never be asham'^ to act upon so honest and so
universal a princi^ple. What first set up a Coach and six, but Va^nity? My Lady
might show herself to as much advantage in a Chariot and two; and if m^ Lord
would condescend now and then to bea^ the hooff, as his predecessors did before
him it would not be the worse for his Honor health. What introduced Perriwigs
as big a^ Hay-cocks, when the Border, of venerable me^^^ry, would have served
the turn as well, or what ^ustifies those Gigantick grievances called Commodes,
but variety? In short, what furnishes luxury, and sets off magnificence, what
plunders every corner of the world, and puts us upon ransacking every Element,
but this very ^ame inspirer of all our motions, for which you wisely condemn
me. You may rail at variety as long as you please, but I would not give a
farthing for a Woman, whom all the Town does not desire to lie with. For this
reason I would have her frequently seen by all the young fellows, and my self
that enjoy her, pointed at in ^he streets, and envied by all that know me. This
sets an edge upon a man's inclination, tho it flagg'd never so much before, and
makes his Mistress still new and charming, because still desired by others.
Indeed some of you are pleased to call the Playhouse a Hot Bed. If this were
any ^eproach, so are the Exchanges, and the Boarding Schools; and so, in short,
is all London, and ten miles about it. I was in my passion going to say all the
Island; and if I had said it, I think in my Conscience I had not been guilty of
Scandal. After all, if the Playhouse is a Hot Bed, so much the better: for I
have a mortal aversion to coldness, and every thing that resembles it. But to
expect Constancy from a She Player! I always thought them made of the same
ingredients with the rest of their Sex, and if they have not their Hypocrisy
to answe^ for, I think it is a sign of their discretion at least* It Is an Article
of my Creed, that no Woman i^ constant but she that finds it her Interest to be
so* If that cannot keep my Damosel within due bound I shall never break my
heart for the matter.

And to conclude this Letter, if I must be cheat^ed, which I am afraid is the
case of us all, I ha^ rather it should be done by a Jew, from whom we expect
it, and whose Profession it is, tha^ by a sniveling precise Villain, that has a
Tex^ for doing it. Gentlemen, I am

Your most humble Servant

LETTER XVII. To his Mistress, that showed his Letters to his Rival. By Mr A --
YOur barbarous and unjust usage of me has had this good effect, tho I am not
at all obliged to you for it, as to make me a very good Christian. I was in a
fair way to commit ^dolatry, and to pay my adoration in a wrong place, so far
had a gay outside imposed upon me. But, Madam, you have absolutely cured me of
this superstitious blindness, and now I can plainly discover the Fiend, where I
imagined a little before, that nothing but a Goddess inhabited.

Since my eyes have been thus opened, I can look upon the fairest of your Sex,
without finding the least emotion in my heart, and the most beautiful Woman of
Heaven's making, affects me no more than one of Sir Godfry's. Nay, in some
respect the Copy may be said to exceed the original. It has as fair and
charming an outside, but nothing of that vanity and impertinence, nothing of
that Hypocrisy, Malice, and Dissimulation, which make up the composition of
the other.

I dare appeal to yourself, who are none of the most impartial Judges in the
world, whether I ever said, or did, or writ one misbecoming thing to you.
Passion, perhaps, which intoxicates no less than Wine, might betray one to some
excesses, but still they were to your advantage, on which score you were
obliged, if not to forgive them, yet at least to bury them in silence. I never
approached you but with a sacred awe, and always represented a Divinity to my
self, when ever I took Pen in Hand, to acquaint you with the sentiments of my
Soul. If my incense was not of the first sort, (for I am humble enough to
believe, that you might have received much better from a thousand other hands)
yet the sincerity of him that offered it, ought to have covered him from your
displeasure. Tho you dislike my flame yet in common Charity you might have
suffered it to expire in its own Urn. If you were resolved to punish it for
aspiring so high, one single frown would have extinguished it, or at least
secured you from being troubled with it any longer: but to divert yoursel^ and
my Rival at the expense of an unhappy Lover, who was then bleeding for you, to
publish his infirmities only occasioned by the violence of his passion, Ol^
thou downright Devil, I should say Woman, wa^ cruel to the last degree; and
such usage, that the worst of Princes never treated the worst of Sub^ects with.
But Heaven be praised, it awakened ^very resentment about me, and in spite of
my weakness, gave me courage enough to tear you from my heart, which you had so
unjustly usurped.

But I forgot, Madam, that you made me a Christian, so to show that I am still
in perfect ^harity with you, I hope, and that without any ^eserve, to see you
married to my Rival. Since ^our vanity takes such delight to be addressed, the
^ery next day after the Priest has joined your ^ands, may you receive more
Letters from your ^retended or real admirers, than are sent to a Se^retaty of
State after the first discovery of a Plot. May you show them to your Husband,
in hopes he will challenge one of the Sparks and fall in your quarrel. May they
have that effect as to ^ly-blow him in the jealous side of his head, but may he
never think you worth the while to ven^ure the cutting off a finger in the
defense of your honor. Still may the Sparks persecute you with their Billets,
and still may he think 'em to be of your own contriving, and treat you
accordingly in short, may he and you live long, exceeding ^ong together, and
may providence so influenee all his actions, as to make him an instrument of
doing Justice to you, and to the

Much Injured, J. S.

LETTER XVIII. From a Beau, dissuading his Brother Beau to go to Flanders.
ALL the Chocolat-Houses at this end of the Town are exceedingly surpised at
the inhumane resolution thou have taken of passing this Campaign in Flanders,
and talk of going into Mourning for thee. Nay, would thou believe it, those
brawny Insensibles the Chairmen take it to heart, and threaten to renounce Flip
and All-Fours, since thou have decreed to leave England. Prithee Tam what have
the Ladies done, that thou should be so cruel to them? or rather what
unweildy sins have thou committed, to be so barbarous to thy self? For my part,
I look upon thee to be bewitched, for I cannot otherwise account for thy
madness. Thou have no Religion to fight for, that is certain; and there are
Liberty and Property-Fools enough in the Nation without thee to help to
increase their numbers.

Lord! what will the degeneracy of this Age come to? That a Gentleman that
understands Dressing to perfection, and has spent so many ^ours at Lockets, and
the Blue Posts, to cultivate ^is Palate, should ever be such a Sot, as in cold
blood, and of his own true accord to visit that hel^ish Country, where the
Burgo-masters and the ^oors conspire between them to infect the very ^ir with
their Belches. Rot my Diaphragm if the ^asty word has not polluted my Ink, so
that I am ^orced to put some Orange Water into the Standish, to correct the
unsavory smell. Really Tam, ^o think of the miseries thou must endure this
Summer, is as bad as going up to the Monument. It has made me giddy, confound
me else, and my head turns round like a Weathercock. In the first place, to
lie in a damned sneaking Tent, where you can scarce turn yourself round, with
no Curtains to your Bed; nay, not so much as a Looking-glass in its lowest
signification: then no other Pulvilio to scent your Perriwig, but the dust of
the Plains and Gunpowder, and to stink worse of the latter, than Cheapside did
formerly on a Lord Mayor's Day, upon those unrighteous things called Marches,
no such convenience as a Chair to be got. For your comfort, Tam, you must walk
through thick and thin with no Waiter behind you to clean your Shoes, among a
herd of skirtless Rascals, that stink worse than Pole-cats. Oh let me think no
more of them. Besides, it is a million to one, that walking thus in the Sun,
will dignify your Face with some Pimples. Horrid and hideous! the very thought
of a Pimple has so discomposed me, that feeling something itch in my Forehead
-- I must beg your pardon Tam -- if being under the apprehensions of such a
Disaster* I now and then make bold to consult that faithful Oracle my Glass --
Heaven be praised it is not so bad with me -- and yet what the Devil means that
little spot of red -- It Is well it is no worse, I may thank my sotting for this
-- Them it, to drink a whole pint of Claret at a sitting -- Hell and Furies how
it increases -- I would not have a P^^ple Tam for the Indies -- But it is gone
after all, and I find my suspicions were in vain.

To come now Tam to the Field of Battle, those ill-bred whoreson things called
Bullets, are no respecters of persons. A pox on them, they observe no
distinction between a fine Gentleman and a Dragooner. Perhaps it would not
grieve a man to lose his life upon a good occasion, (I speak this by way of
supposition only) but to survive the untimely fate of one's beloved Wig, to see
one's embroidered Coat mangled and hacked, is enough to break the heart of
Hercules if he were alive, and had a true sense of things. To dissuade you, if
it is possible, from embarking in this pernicious affair, let me conjure you as
a friend, to reflect upon Sir John Foppington's Case. About two months ago he
put on a milk white Suit, designing to show himself in it that evening in the
Park: and to do Sir John justice, he never ^xerted the brightness of his
imagination so much ^s he did upon the trimming of it. Coming by Catherine
Street, a saucy impudent Chimney-Sweeper daubed his Coat. I wonder Tam, by the
^y, that the Parliament never made a five mile Act to banish such profane
Villains out of all Corporations, as once they did the Dissenting Ministers.
But so it happened as I tell you, and ^oor Sir John immediately went home, and
took ^is Bed upon it. He had all the agonies of a despairing sinner -- Come
Knight, says I, there is no ^arm I hope, prithee take courage and get up -- Good
Heavens! my Coat cried he -- Why there is no danger, but it will recover and do
well -- Oh that confounded Chimney-Sweeper -- Providence sent him to visit you
for your Sins, Sir John -- But what ill have I done to draw such a judgment
upon me -- The ways of Heaven, Sir John, are dark and mysterious. Jack -- I
never committed Murder nor Sacrilege in my life, why then should -- So he run
on for above six hours. All this while we endeavored to soften his calamity to
him, by re-minding him of the inconstancy of human affairs. We refreshed his
memory with stories of Kings deposed, and famous Monarchies subverted, but
'twas all in vain; he could not be persuaded to live, till the Scowrer had
taken his Oath before a Justice of Peace, that the Coat was not a farthing the
worse. Nay, this was not enough, the Tailor was sent for to confirm the
Scowrers deposition; and the Woman of the House, who saw him put it on in the
morning, must swear as she hopes to be saved that it was not in the least
injured.

If this melancholy instance, Tam, is not enough to deter you from your wicked
resolution, and you have no bowels of compassion for the issue of your own
fancy, meaning your Clothes; pray retire for a moment or two to your Closet,
lay your hand upon your heart, and ask it cooly and soberly, how it would
relish that most extraordinary accomplishment, a wooden Leg. Think what a
decent figure you will make in a Ladies Chamber, with so fine a qualification.
Good Lard, a wooden Leg! It Is almost as charming as the Devil's Cloven Foot. A
Lover made of Flesh and Blood above, and of Timber below, what an odd
composition is that! The Minataur in the Fable, who was half Man and half
Beast, was a Cherubim to him. Or Tam, if this does not mortify you, pray
consider that there are certain impudent things in an Army called Guns, that
without asking any questions, will demolish a man's Nose, or run away with one
of his Arms, or carry off half his Teeth an Under-jaw, and yet there lies no
action against them for it. Such blessings as these are to be had in Flanders,
with due care and application; and Tam, you may see several Heroes about the
Town, who purchased them at no little expense of time and blood at Steenkirk
and Landen. But, Tam, if you have any Guts in your Brains, you will never long to
make one of the number.

Having mentioned the loss of Arms, Teeth, and Legs, without which, Tam, we can
neither make our reverences with a good air, nor talk agreeably to the Ladies,
nor perform our parts at a Ball. If this will not fright you, 'twould be
impertinent to put you in mind that you have another thing still to lose, and
that is your life. For alas, Tam, what is life worth, when we have lost the
only thing that makes the trifle dear to us? As for me, confound my glandula
Pintalis, if I am not of Will Essence's opinion, the greatest Genius that
Covent Garden ever produced, for exquisite dressing, who used to say, for his
part he knew not what a man's head was good for, but to hang his Hat or his
Perriwig on, and that if it were put to his choice, he would as soon lose that
as any other part about him; that the chief end of man was to dress well; and
death itself was not so formidable as a Dishabille. But whether does this
subject hurry me, or how came that sower monosyllable Death in our Pens way?
Faith Tam, I dare trust my thoughts no longer with so melancholy a Theme. So
hoping you will be so kind to yourself, as to consider more of this matter.

I am Votre tres humble Serviture.
The Shoulder-knot Cabal meets to morrow night near St James's, to do a
singular act of Justice, and to think of ways and means, how to restore those
long neglected Ornaments. Your Company is expected there.



The Contents of the Miscellany Poems.
THe Contented Whore. An Imitation of Ep. 66. in Mar. l. 12. Formosa Phyllis
Nocte cum Mihi tota, etc. page 1 Mart. Ep. 20. l. 1. Si memini, fuerant Tibi
quatuor, Aelia Dentes. p. 3. Advice to a Vintn^r. M. Ep. 19. l. 1 The hint
taken from, Quid te Tucca juvat. Idem. M. Ep. 5. l. 2. Ne valeam, si non totis,
Deciane, diebus, etc. p. 4. M. Ep. 61. l. 11. Sit Phlogij an Chione venere
Magis, Apta requiris? p. 6. Hor. Ode 8. l. 1. Lydia dic per omnes, etc. p. 8.
Hor. Ode 11. l. ^. Quid Bellicosus Cantaber, etc. p. 9. Hor. Ode 27. l. 1.
Natis in usum latitiae Scyphis, etc. p. 12. To Mr Henry Purcel. p. 14. An Ode
in Hor. paraphrased, Audivere Luce, etc. p. 16. The 10 th Ode in Hor l. 3.
paraphrased, Extremum Tanaim si biberes Lyce, etc. p. 19 The 26 th Ode in Hor.
l. 3. Paraphrased, Vixi puellis Nuper Idoneus, etc. p. 23. The 15 th Ode in
Hor. l. 3 imitated. Uxor pauperis Ibyci, etc. p. 25. An Epig. in Mar. imitated,
Quaeris sollicitus diu, regasque Cui tradas, Lupe, filium, Magistro, etc. p.
27. Upon Tom. Shadwel. p. 29. In decretum Par. 89. Non de Adulterandis vinis p.
29. Inscriptions designed for the Dyal in Lincolns Inn Sq. p. 30. An Ep. upon a
Beau per idem. The Song of Go Perjured Man, set by Dr Blow, Translated into
Latin. p. 31. To a Lady that would not grant the last favor under cheaper
terms than Matrimony p. 32. On Marriage per idem. The Fable of the Bat and the
Birds, in Imitation of that of the Buzzard in the Hind and Panther, in the year
1689. 35 Against the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in 87. p. 36. A
Satyr upon a Quack p. 41. An Inscription upon a Tobacco Box. p. 47. An
Imitation of it in English p. 48. Upon burning some Anti-monarchial Books in
the year 1691. per Idem. To Mr D -- on his ballads p. ^9. To Mr Higden upon the
ill success of his Play, p. 50. The Extravagant Lover p. 53. A Translation of
Teucer Salamina, Patremque cum Fugeret, etc. H O^ 7. l. 1. p. 54. O. 9. l. 1.
Hor. Imit. Vides ut alta stet Nive Candidum etc. Written in 85. p. 56. An
Imitation of the 6 th O. in H. l. 1. Scriberis vario Fortis, etc. hostium in
the year 85 p. 59. A Prologue spoken at Oxon. p. 61. Epilogue. p 63, An
Imitation of a Fr. Ode in St Euremont's Works Tom. 2. p. 66. To a Gent. that
cut off his Hair, and set up for a Spark in his old age. p. 67. Part of a 2 d
Ode in Hor. l. 4. Translated p. 68 Henrico Higden Arm. cum Infoeliciter Ipsi
Comoedia cesserit 1693. p. 69. On the Treatment of the modern Drama p. 70. An
Imit. of the 4 th Epode in Hor. p. 75.
Table to the Miscellaneous Letters.
A Letter to the Duke of Bucks, by Monsieur St Euremont done into English. p.
129 To the Duchess of -- by the same hand p. 133. To Madam -- by the same
hand. p. 139. Letter out of the Reflections of Monsieur Villiers. p. 141. A
Consolatory Letter to Mr H -- p. 148. A Letter to W. K. Esquire p. 152. Some
Remarks on marriage. p. 160. Another Letter to Mr H -- p. 166. Letter to the
Reverend Mr -- in Sussex. p. 177. Letter by one of the Commons p. 183 Letter to
Madam -- kept by a Jew in Covent Garden, by Capt. Gr -- p. 188. -- From a Gent.
in Holland to his Friend in England. p. 191. -- To a young Lawyer that dabbled
in Poetry. p. 196. -- From a Vintner in the City to a young Vintner in Covent
Garden. p. 201. -- To my Lady -- that married an old dicrepit Widower p. 310.
-- To Mr P -- p. 316. -- To Sir John -- p. 328. -- The Answer. p. 336. -- To
his Mistress that showed his Letter to hi^ Rival. By Mr B -- p. 343* -- From a
Beau, dissuading his brother Beau to go for Flanders. p. 346*
FINIS.
A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in the Country, TO HIS Friend in the CITY. Leeds,
Feb. the 2d.
I Have at last, with much Difficulty, procured you a Copy of the Character of
a Latitudinarian Anatomized, which you have so long, and with so much
Importunity desired of me: All I can learn of the Paper is, that the Author
Calculated it for the Meridian of York, as I take it, (the Magistrate of which
place in the Year 44, was a famous Ambidexter) and that it will equally serve
for any Corporation within his Majesty's Dominions; but I will not detain you
from it any longer.

A Latitudinarian is a walking Amsterdam of Religions, out of whom all the
Ancient and Modern Heresies might be easily retrieved, though the Volumes of
Epiphanius and Ross were lost. He thinks no part of a Church sacred but the
Weathercock, and honors the Memory of him that Invented A Windmill, because
it can Grind indifferently with East, West, North and South. He talks much of
Moderation, yet is as hot as one of his own Custards, and as Choleric as a
Hasty-pudding; he is as Positive in his own single Self, as an Assembly of
splay-mouth'd Divines; Geryon and Cerberus were only Types of him, but though
he has three Heads, viz. An Independent, ^ Presbyterian, and a Church of
England Head, yet he has not Brains to furnish any one of them. By his Wisdom
and Gravity one would think he had Long Ears, but it is certain he has none, for
he is Deaf to the Cries of the Poor; and though he devours Widows and Orphans
at a Morsel, yet he has no Bowels. His Conscience is as unaccountable as a
Modern Hypothesis, which spares Cockleshells in Noah's Flood, and dissolves the
hardest Metals; for it starts at an innocent Ceremony, when it makes nothing
to digest Perjury and Oppression. It Is impossible to frame an Oath, but what
he will readily Swallow to gratify his Ambition. He calls them State Counters,
takes them for his Interest, and breaks them for his Convenience; he calls God
to witness, and yet believes nothing of his Existence, like the Fellow in
Plautus's Amphitrio, that Swears by Hercules before he was born. Trade, with
him, is the Law and the Prophets, and, in opposition to the Text, he is resolved
to serve God and Mammon together. Had he lived in the time of Constantine, he would
have gone to the Christian Assemblies one day to save his Bacon, and to the
Heathen Temples the next to secure a Stake against a Pagan Revolution. The Men
of Gotham are Registered for a pack of Fools, for endeavoring to hedge in a
Cuckoo. Is it not then a scurvy Reflection upon a certain wise City's care for
Religion, to pitch upon a Chameleon for its Head, who changes his Color as
often as he shifts his place? It Is pity that our Laws, that Order so
honorable a Reward for plurality of Wives, have not made the same wholesome
provision against plurality of Religions. He rails at Superstition, and
pretends to stand up for the Primitive Church; but though we read that the
Apostles were Fishers, they were not Watermen, to look one way and row another.

He is very severe against the Bakers, and punishes them upon every Occasion;
not for Cheats, for as such he honors them, but only to show his Skill in the
History of the Bible, where he finds it was one of that Profession that first
hansell'd the Gallows. He designs to adorn the Annals of his Government with
something Extraordinary, and to purchase a Name as Herostratus did of old, by
Inflaming the Church. Stow and Hollingshead that took such pains to describe
Calves with six Legs, and all unnatural Births; if they had lived in our Age,
What a strange Account would they have given of this Triple-headed Beast, that
exceeds all the Monsters that ever were shown in Bartholomew Fair, that ever
Afric or Holland produced?

When his Dullness is mounted on Horseback, he makes me think of some Ancient
Coats of Arms, where the Supporters are of the same Species with the Beasts in
the Scutcheon. If the City, to give another Instance of their Discretion,
should choose B^ll to succeed his Master, as we find Caligula once designed his
Horse for the Consulship, I dare Engage for Ball, that he will make the soberer
Magistrate of the two; and after he has had his Belly full of Hay and Oats in
the Morning, that he will not kick, and winch, and keep a pother to be carried to
Brewer' s Grains, and Chopped Straw, in the Afternoon.

Whatever he may be to the rest of his Servants, his Cook leads a very easy
Life with him, and has as little to do all the Year round as a Barber in
Muscovy, a Lord Treasurer in Scotland, or a Tailor under the Line where they
all go Naked. He preaches up Temperance at his own Table, but is Harpy
incarnate when he can Devour on Free-cost, and hates no Sins but those that are
Expensive. He shows his Charity to the Poor, by providing Prison-room for them;
and for fear they should Dye of Surfeits, takes care to let them Blood with a
Dog-whip.

In his own single Self, he out-does all the strange Changes in Ovid's
Metamorphosis. Oedipus himself, were he alive, could never unriddle him. The
Satyr that quarreled with the Fellow in the Fable, for blowing Hot and Cold
successively with the same Breath, What would he say to our Flea-bitten
Magistrate, that can do both at the same Instant? If he varied his Body, as
often as his Soul tacks about, no Tailor could fit this Posture Clark in
Religion, but he that made a Manteau for the Moon. In vain he promotes a
Reformation, who ought to begin it at home, and stands up for the Sabbath,
which no one profanes like himself, for he Teach^s more Atheism by his
Example, than all the Parsons in the City can ever hope to preach down. He is
of several Churches, but of no Religion, as we say of Hermaphrodites, that by
being of both Sexes, they are indeed of none, and can neither conveniently
receive Love, as Women, nor Act it vigorously, as Men. He pretends to hate
Divisions, and yet encourages Schism, which he foolishly judges to be Expedient
for the State, as the Women on the other side of the Tweed refuse to be cured
of the Itch, because, forsooth, it is wholesome.

Nebuchadnezzar's Image had a Head of Gold, and Feet of Clay. Our Idol has a
Skull as soft as Pap, to a Face of Brass, and Arms of Iron. Having mentioned
Brass, commend me to that Murus Aheneus his Conscience, which has long since
learnt the Trick Nulla pallescere Culpa.

I wonder with what pretense he can punish Beggars, who is himself the most
inexcusable Vagrant in the Three Kingdoms. If the Pythagorean System of
Transmigration be true, the next remove his Soul makes must be into an Otter,
or some such amphibious Animal, for one single Element can never content him.
He alters his Shapes according to the Company he is in, like those experienced
Sharpers, who when they are at Court would pass for Good City Security, and
when they are in the City, would be thought to have an Interest at Court. When
he thinks his Authority will bear him out, Lucifer is less Haughty and
Absolute; at other times he is as Submissive and Humble, as a Temple Bar Vintner
in the Long Vacation. But who would not bestow a Cudgel upon this fawning Cur,
that will leap over a Stick for the Pope's Nuncio, and next minute do the same
for a Crop-ear'd Tub-drubber?

He goes to a Sermon with the same Intent, as the Prisoners in Ludgate go to
the Grate, only to show his Chain; or, as the Beaux go to a Play, not to Reform
his Manners, but hear himself exposed. But though he sees Hypocrisy lashed
every Sunday, he stands all the Fire the Parsons flash at him, like a Managed
Horse: He Is convinced that it is a Cowardly Scoundril Sin, yet he will not part
with it, because it brings him in Gain: As I knew a Fellow once, that had Aches
all over his Body, which punctually foretold all Changes in the Weather, yet
could not be persuaded to be Cured, because he would not lose his Almanac, as
he called it. Had this Linsey-wolsey Brother lived under the Mosaical
Dispensation, how finely had he been trounc'd, for ploughing thus with an Ox
and an Ass, and dividing himself so nicely between a Cassock and a Cloak. He
revives the Story of Penelope, still Unravelling what he had done before, and
Unlearning under one Teacher what he Learned under another.

The poor Cully in Aesop, with his two loving Wives, one of which cleared his
Head of the Black, and the other of his Gray Hairs, till at last they left him
none between them, is a true Emblem of him. The different Churches he goes to
will so Weed and Purge him by degrees, that they will not leave him a Rag of
Religion to cover his Nakedness. With him, as in the Creation of the World, the
Evening still goes before the Morning; for though he vouchsafes his Morning to
the Established Church, yet in his heart he is at the Meeting, and his Thoughts
still run upon his Afternoon's Extempore Repast. Thus he is guilty of Schism,
even when he seems to Assist at the public Service; like the Man that
committed Adultery with his own Lawful Wife, by thinking on another. I never
see him at the Cathedral, but he makes me think of an Algerine putting out
Christian Colors. Indeed, if the Churches were shut up, something might be
said for his going to the Barn, for even Horseflesh we know was laudable Diet
a^ the Siege of Londonderry. If he does it for Variety, it is a sign he has a
most wretched Palate. Who, but a Coxcomb would go to a Farce in Smithfield,
when the Playhouse is open? Who, that has Dined at Locket's, would afterward
Sup among Porters in a Cellar in the Strand?

This last place puts me in mind of his extraordinary Housekeeping, though so
great a Gormondizer of Spiritual Food, which costs him nothing, yet very little
will content him in his own Kitchen. By the power of good management, he can
extract three Meals for himself and Family out of one single Shoulder of
Mutton, which piece of Frugality he learned, I suppose, from the Story of the
Welsh Sherriff, that converted an old Cloak first into a Coat then a Wastcoat,
and last of all into a pair of Breeches. I have heard of a Gentleman, who,
purely to save his Money, would take a Coach that cost him Twelve Pence to be
Trimmed by a Two-penny French Barber in Soho. The City perhaps, with equal
Discretion, chose him to Husband their Stock; but by starving the Poor, he has
put the Parishes to such Charges in Burials, that they are not like to save any
thing by him; unless as old Chiron was, both a Tutor and a Pad-nagg upon
occasion to Achilles, so they make the Beast serve them in a double Capacity,
that is to say, both as their Horse and their Magistrate.

I have been told of a Man that had a very bad Memory, so very treacherous and
unfaithful, that if he had made an Assignation in the morning, he was sure to
forget it long before the hour came. Well, says he, to prevent this for the
future, I am reseolved to buy a Memorandum-Book, But what was he the better for
it? He soon after forgot that he had bought any such Director to relieve his
Memory. This is the Case of our Latitudinarian: When those of his Party are
under Hatches, then all his Discourse runs upon Christian forbearance and
Condescension, and never a Passage in the Old or New Testament escapes him,
that makes for that purpose. But when they are mounted, and in the Saddle, the
Tables are turned, and he lays about him like Thunder and Lightning, and
forgets that Persecution is the Mark of Antichrist. It Is true, all the while he
devours you, he cants of Moderation, and pretends he does it unwillingly, but
this is only a Copy of his Countenance. He first tears you asunder, as the Jews
did Isaiah of old, with the wooden Saw of a dull heavy Speech: But who would
not rather choose to make a Breakfast for a generous Lion, than to be Eaten by a
weeping Crocodile?

For my part I wonder that the Priests of the different Churches he repairs to,
don't execute a piece of Military Discipline upon him, and truss him up for a
Spy. But I suppose he keeps in with all, by telling them severally in a corner
that each performs best; like the Harlot, in the Play, that was kept by three
Gallants, and told each of them in private, that he was the Person that gave
her the most Satisfaction. It Is next to a miracle to me, that the Priesthood,
who are so sharp-sighted upon other Occasions, don't see through the thin
Artifices of this barefaced Impostor, and dart the Thunder of the Church upon
a Wretch who pretends to be a Friend to all, and yet is an Enemy to the whole
Tribe. I hope none of the Prophets have given it him under their hands, that
it is no Sin to go to the Temple of Rimmon. But this present Contending between
the several Persuasions to secure him to their Party, gives me a perfect
Resemblance of an Ant-hill, where there is the same lugging, and tearing, and
struggling about a dead Fly.

In short, our Latitudinarian is a Retainer to all Churches, but a Member of
none; and will never have the Benefit of his Clergy, though he pretends to make
his Court to all the various Sorts of them. It Is an unthinking Sot, that keeps
the Streets cleaner than his own Conscience. At last, every Body finds out his
Disguise, and despises him; and as several Cities formerly contended who gave
Birth to Homer, so, in his case, all Churches and Congregations strive who
shall Disclaim him first. Though he has a middle Station here, he must not
expect one in another World. Lucifer only can pay him the Wages of his
Hypocrisy, in whose Clutches we leave him.

Your most humble Servant, H. E.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Am informed that Dr. Otes has been very prolific of late, pray send me down
all his Books by the Carrier, for* I long to be opening his Magazine of
Scandal. An honest Parson in the Neighborhood calls him Orestes, because he is
Scriptus and in tergo, nec dum finitus. Another applies this passage of Horace
to him, Ubi quid datur OT I illudo, which he Interprets thus, When any thing of
Dr. Otes 's Writing comes abroad, I fall a Laughing, and make my Self merry
with it.



FINIS.

