QUAKERISME The pathway to PAGANISM Or A Vieu of the Quakers Religion; BEING
An Examination of the Theses and Apology of Robert Barclay, one of their
number, published lately in latin, to discover to the World, what that is,
which they hold and own for the only true Christian Religion.

By JOHN BROWN Minister of the Gospel.

Printed for John Cairns, and other Booksellers in EDINBURGH ANNO MDC LXXVIII.

An EPISTLE to the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER.
Having, in the following Discourse, given (as the Lord was pleased to help)
at some length; yet with as much brevitie as the matter would suffer, and thy
good and edification (which I was called to consult) would permit, my poor
Testimony unto those precious Truths, which are trod upon by this late Upstart
generation of Quakers; I shall not detain thee long in the entry: Only let me
say, That, as this impendent Pestilentious Cloud of Heathenish and Hellish
Darkness, which the Devil by the ministry of these Locusts (only Masculine in
Malice against Christ, being the very impure Spawn of perfect Antichristian
Enmity to our Lord Jesus his Person, Offices, Work, Institutions, and to the
Whole of the blessed Gospel; and in consonancy to that Hel-hatched design,
breathing forth nothing but that putrid Poison, that innate Serpentine Venom
of manifest and mad Opposition to all the Mysteries of God, concerning our
Salvation; which as they have implanted in them from their Father the Devil,
that it may appear, they are his very Children, by working his works; so they
endeavoure to propagate to others) has now exhaled out of the bottomless Pit;
and by their Activity and Diligence, Assisted by his Art, and Prompted by his
Spirit, brought unto this Prevalency of darkening our Horizon, and infecting so
many even of such, of whom sometimes better things were expected, should, as
upon the one hand, make all of us look back with grief, and fix our eyes upon
our misimproving and abusing the fair day of the Gospel, that we enjoyed,
until our eye affect our heart, and we, in the conviction of our heinous guilt,
in this matter, (the Nature and Aggravations of which are clearly enough seen,
in this judicial stroke, which carries a Proportion, both as to Kind and
Degree, with the Sin, and is therefore much more dreadful, then Famine, Sword
and Pestilence would be) become humbled and sorrowful after a godly manner; so,
upon the other hand, the consideration hereof should raise in us a more high
esteem for the Precious Interests of Jesus Christ, and kindle in us more godly
Zeal for his Truths and Cause, and make us heartily receive not only the Truth,
but the love of the Truth, that we may be saved; for the neglect of which Duty,
it was foretold and threatened, 2 These. 2:11, 12. that for this cause, God shall
send strong delusion, that they (to wit, who received not the love of the
truth) should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believed not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. When the Lion is roaring, ought
not we to tremble? When the Jealous and Righteous God is sending on a
generation of Undervaluers and Despisers of the great and inestimable benefit
of the Everlasting Gospel, a sader stroke, than his three great Plagues would
be, that should make populous Countries and Cities waste, and without
Inhabitants, in a very short time, what Christian heart will not tremble and be
afraied? When the Lord sends upon a Land his three great Messengers of wrath,
which can but destroy the Body, that must at length however return to the dust,
are not all called to consider their ways, and to turn unto the Lord? How much
more are we now called hereunto, when the Lord is saying, I will also choose
their delusions; and is giving many up unto this Spirit of Delusion and
Apostasy, whereby some, that have been formerly enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gift, etc. put themselves under that terrible impossibility,
whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6:6. Of being renewed again unto
Repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame; and under that dreadful sentence, Heb. 10:26. For if we
sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries; and under
that much sorer punishment (ibid. verse. 29.) which they shall be thought worthy
of, who have trodden under foot the Son of God, and have counted the blood of
the Covenant, wherewith He was sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done
despite unto the Spirit of grace? For I know not, if ever there was a Seck of
Heretics, and Apostats from the Truth once received, since the Apostasy of
the Jews, unto whom these passages are more truly and emphatically
applicable, than to the Apostat- Quakers; who at length shall know, how fearful
a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, though now they be so
bold and wicked, in their way, that it is not enough for them to Apostatize
from the Truth; but they must also with a furious madness persecute the same
Truth which their souls do now hate, with their blasphemous mouths and pens;
and with their railings and Rabshakeh-language reproach the Ways of God, and
all who follow the same. Sure I am, a due pondering of the desperate Design,
pernicious Ways, hellish Doctrine, and wicked Practices, which these
Emissaries of Satan project and follow-forth with a stupenduous activity,
should affect us otherwise, than (alas!) we seem to be at present. What, are
we asleep? Are we not crying to the Lord, night and day, that he would arise,
and vindicate His own Truth, when an enraged company of Runagadoes are
destroying (so far as they can) the whole of our Religion, and driving us back
to Paganism, and betraying the whole of our sacred Interest into the hands of
their Master, the Devil? Can we hear our blessed Lord and Savior thus
blasphemed, as he is by this Paganish Antievangelick Seck of Quakers, and not
be so much moved with Indignation against them, as even Turks (who
blasphemously assert our Lord to be no more, than a Prophet, inferior to their
deceiver Mahomet) would be, of whose just severity, in punishing a Jew, who, in
his rage, striving with a Christian, did blaspheme the blessed name of Jesus of
Nazareth, according to the sentence of one of their Muftees, we have heard, and
found standing on record, to the shame of Christians, who have not so much Zeal
for Him, whom they profess to own for the true and living God, and for the
only Son of God, and Savior of Man, as Turks have for a Prophet of God? Thus
it ought not to be; and a redress is called for, at the hands of one and other,
according to their Place and Station. And however, it is the duty of all, who
love our Lord Jesus Christ, and hope to see His face, one day, with joy, and of
all who would carry as true and loyal Subjects unto Him, and would not be
charged with the guilt of this God-darring, Christ-blaspheming, and
Spirit-despiting generation of the prodigiously profane and arrogant Seck of
Runagad-Quakers, to be this day, holding them up in their addresses unto God by
prayer, to our Lord Jesus, the righteous Judge, as His sworn and stated
Enemies, and as standing in perfect Opposition to His Kingdom and Interest; and
to cry unto Him night and day, that He would arise and appear against them, and
plead His own cause, in His good time, for the glory of His name; as also to be
mourning for those sins, that have provoked the Just and Jealous God to
suffer such Hellish Locusts to arise, and darken with their pestiferous
blasphemies all the Glorious and Comfortable Truths of the Gospel; and to be
manifesting the truth and sincerity of our Repentance, by the native and kindly
effects thereof, mentioned by Paul 2 Cor. 7:11.

And if it were thus with us, sure I am, it would not be needful to say much,
to move all unto a fixed abhorrence of the Errors, Ways and Practices of
these Men, and to a fleeing from them, as from Men, carrying about with them
the very Credentials of Hell, and the Devils Commission to go forth, and
pervert the right ways of the Lord, and to destroy Souls. We would not need to
inculcate the duties already pressed in the Scriptures, in reference to such
Heretics and false Teachers; to wit, to beware of them, to avoid them, turn
away from them, to reject them, and not to receive them in our houses, or
salute them, lest we should be partakers of their evil deeds, Mat. 7:15. Romans
16:17. Phil. 3:2. 2 Timothy 2:5. Tit. 3:10. 2 Ioh. verse. 10, 11. For every one
would, of his own accord, by a special Christian instinct, flee from them, more
hastily, then from persons having the blak botch, upon the account, that when
these could endanger only the Body, those were actively seeking to destroy the
precious Soul: And all, who feared to fall under that sad sentence of summar
Excommunication from Heaven, Anathema Maranatha, durst ever enter into a
friendly communing with them, have any followshipe with them, or give them the
least token of kindness and affection, by word or deed, yea or by a cast of the
eye, let be by more homely Discoursings and Conversings. And it is more then
probable, that if this course had been followed with them at the first, they
had not prevailed so much, as they have done, to our Shame, Sin, and Sorrow,
this day. O that this were yet thought upon, and amended!

Much less would there be any necessity to use much seriousness, in dissuading
all, who had any love to their own souls, from harkening to their discourses,
even though assurance were had (which who, that know what their Principles and
Designs are, can expect?) that they should say nothing, but what is consonant
to Truth; seeing it will be easily granted, that the Devil, speaking in
whomsoever, and uttering whatsomever, should not be listened unto, lest
afterward he cause these same persons either question, or deny these same
truths, because held and declared by such, who by their other abominable
Errors, declare whose Slaves and Emissaries they are; beside the advantage he
has, when he gets an hearing ear, to distill and insensibly drop-in
soul-destroying venom, suggared over with fair Speeches, and plausible
Insinuations.

Moreover, were all affected with this matter, as they ought to be, there would
not be much need of Arguments, dissuading from a Perusal and Reading of their
Scripts and Pamphlets: For this impression would prompt them to an abhorrence
of such Libels against the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, against
blessed Jesus of Nazareth, (of whom these Quakers say, as their Father the
Devil did before them, what have we to do with thee, thou Ie^us of Nazareth?)
And against the holy Spirit of grace. Is it not obvious to all, that beside the
advantage the Devil has in our loss of so much precious time, spent in
reading of their heretical and blasphemous writings, (which may be one end why
the Devil prompteth them to be at so much pains and charges, to Write, and
Printe so many pernicious Scripts, and distribute them so freely) he has this
also, that the reading of their Impertinent Reavings, in and about the holy
things of God, and with all, of their Presumptuous and ridiculously confident
Assertions, does often excite the Reader to laughter, who should rather be
weeping over the manifest Effrontry done to the holy and precious Truths of
God; and Indignity done to the Holy Lord, when His name is thus taken in vain:
And much more, when the reading of their Blasphemous and Outrageous Speeches
against the Holy One; of their Profane and Temerarious Abusings and Wrestings
of the holy Word of Truth; of their Audacious and Wicked Overturnings of the
whole Gospel of the grace of God; of their Subdolous and Crafty Undermining of
the Fundamental points of our Religion; of their Supercilious and Effronted
Rejectings of, and Mockings at the sacred Truths of God; and of their
Irreverent and Fearless Prattings about the Mysteries of Divine and
Unsearchable Wisdom, cannot but insensibly debauch the spirit of the Reader
into, at least, unsuitable thoughts about these great Matters, if he be not more
then ordinarily ballasted with the apprehension of the dreadful Majesty of
that God, whose Truths these are. The consideration of which should, me thinks,
cool our Curiosity; and cause us, even when some necessity is laid upon us,
which we cannot evite, to read them, as when called to write against them, and
to discover their abominable and blasphemous Assertions, for preventing of
further mischief (a necessity that lies not upon every one of our Common
People) to live nigh to God, and to be often praying for a stayed frame of heart,
that our spirits be not debauched, by the reading of such things, as have a
native tendency thereunto; nor place be given to one thought of these great and
glorious matters, as if they were but indifferent, or of small moment. Who can
dive into the depths of Satan, the mysteries of their Blasphemies and
Abominations, and not be in hazard of receiving hurt thereby, if the Lord do
not strengthen and steel the Soul?

Finally, were we as we ought to be, there would be no necessity of dehorting
any from giving countenance, in the least, unto their Synagogues of Satan, and
Diabolical Conventicles, where some, out of curiosity or some other corrupt
ends, sisting themselves within the jurisdiction of Satan, who there reigns,
being there solemnly Served and Worshipped, have been) as the Quakers themselves
do boast, and this R. Barclay professes himself to be a clear instance)
catched by the Devil, and made to drink of the same Cup of Delusion, with the
rest; and to devote themselves to the same service of the Enemy of God and of
Mankind, in which these Master-workers are so active and busy. It is not good
to approach too nigh to a rageing Devil, nor to tempt the Lord: The history of
the two persons, that would be present at stage plays, is known; and the
Reader may see the same related to his hand, by the worthy Author of the first
Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to Mr Durham's Exposition of the Commands. Let
any sober and judicious person consider that, which these Quakers call their
Solemn Worshipe, as this R. Barclay has laid it forth before us, and judge,
whether there be not there to be found, without any narrow search, such plain
Vestiges of Devilrie, that may cause all, in whom is the least mea^ure of the
fear of God, run far from them, as from persons possessed with an evil Spirit,
and acted by the Devil, the God of this world, the Prince of the power of the
air, the Spirit, that now rules in the Children of disobedience. Nothing,
that I ever heard or knew of them before, did so much confirm me of their
Devilrie, as the reading and examining of that, which thou have here Chap.
XXII. Beside that, every one may know, that it is something more then Humane,
for persons Illiterat, and of mean Understandings, when turning Quakers, to
learn in so short a time, in a few days, if not, in a few hours, all their
Notions, Errors, Blasphemies, Prancks and Practices, (all so contrary to the
Way and Profession, wherein they have lived from their Infancy) that they can
act their ways, and utter their Abomination, in their very dialect and tone,
so exactly, as if they had seen nothing else, all their days; to speak nothing
of Persons civilly educated, who yet, turning Quakers, can so suddenly and so
perfectly imitate and follow their rude and rustic carriage, as if they had
never seen civility with their eyes: All which may confirm Rational Persons,
that it is not humane, but the work of some powerful Spirit, possessing them;
And what this Spirit is, which Teaches, Possesses, Prompteth, Acts,
Leads, and Drives them, and Speaks in them, the Word of God does
sufficiently evidence, and may satisfy all Christians: By the fruit we know a
tree; and by their doctrine, we may as infallibly know, that it is the Spirit
of Satan, that rages in them, if we will be satisfied with, and submit to the
Decision of the Spirit of Truth, speaking in the Scriptures. Their Unsavory,
Pernicious, and Blasphemous Positions and Assertions will put this matter
beyond all debate. I have gathered together an heap of such, to the Number of
Three Hundred and Fifty, and more (and the Reader may possibly find yet more,
that have escaped me, and that without noticeing such things, as may be drawn
by just consequence from their Positive Assertions; for if these were
collected, we might soon find out the number of the Name of the Beast, Six
hundereth Sixty and Six) to which may be added Sixty and Five, found in one
book of G. Keiths, set down here at the end, after the Postscript; by which,
thou may judge, what a Mass would be found, if all their Books were
searched. But I suppose, the fearer of God will say, there is here enough, and
more then enough, to cause all Christians abhore them and flee from them, as
from the Devil himself.

I shall not trouble thee, with any Apology for the work it self; Only because
I apprehend, some will think I am too large, and might have contracted the
whole into narrower bounds; I must tell thee, that considering the genius and
temper of these Quakers, and knowing how ready they would be to vaunt and
triumph, as if any thing they said were unanswerable, if I had passed over any
thing said by their Patron and Advocat, and had not examined particularly, not
only his Erroneous and Blasphemous Assertions; but also all that he did allege
for confirmation of the same; and also all that he belched out against the
Truth; I was constrained to leave nothing untouched: and that the book might be
of more universal use, I saw a necessity of clearing and confirming the Truths
Opposed, by other Grounds and Arguments, then this Contradicter of the ways of
Truth had taken any notice of: And yet I have done it with that brevitie, that
makes me apprehend, More shall blame me, upon the other hand, for not
confirming the Turths at greater length; seeing, as to several Heads, here
touched, Others now a days, beside Quakers, are appearing against the Truth,
once received. The Heads, it is true, are many; and I have in most, for
confirmation, adduced only our Confession of Faith, and Catechismes, to the
end, that one and other may be enduced to peruse that book more, as a good
Antidote against the many Errors of this time, pointing withal the Readers to
apposite passages of Scripture, for the ground of their faith. And if I had
handled each Controversy, here touched, at full length, how many volumes
should I have been necessitate to have written? What intertainment this shall
find with the Quakers (a sort of Men, that cannot be silent) I am not much
concerned to enquire; And if they examine it, as Rats or Mice use to deal with
books, snatching at a word here, and at half a sentence there, and no more, I
suppose no man will think me called to notice the fame; nor yet to be troubled
at their Railings, and Barkings: And as for any answer to the whole, that
shall savoure of Reason, Religion, Candor and Plainness, I do not expect it
from them.

Farewell, J. B.

A Catalogue Of the arrogant, erroneous and blasphemous Assertions of the
Quakers, mentioned in this book; which may serve for an Index to the same.
1. Of themselves.
1. THey arrogantly style themselves the servants of God, etc. 3, 10 2. They
glory of the Title Quakers 4 3. They account themselves the only Teachers of
truth, equalizing themselves with the Apostles 9 4. They say, they are perfect,
without sin 11 5. They assert their experiences, in matters, that cannot be
experienced 213 6. They say, they only taste, see and smell the Inward light
240 7. All their preaching is to call people to turn-in to the light within,
and to the Christ within them 281, 292 8. They assert themselves to be equal
with God 326, 546 9. They say, their quaking arises from a struggling within,
betwixt the power of life and the power of darkness, whereby they have the very
pains of a woman in travail 418 10. All is done without the Spirit, that is
not done in their way 440, 442, 447 11. They remain covered, when we pray or
praise, to keep their consciences unhurt, as they say; but really to mock 460
12. It can appear to them, when the Spirit of the Lord concurreth with one of
our Ministers, and when not 460 13. They falsely say, that all who are against
them, maintain the lawfulness of Comoedies and vanity of Apparel 533, 534 14.
They account their doctrine very harmonious; and think that to them alone, the
ancient paths of Truth and Righteousness are revealed 543 15. They say. They
only exhibit the true, spiritual, pure and substantial Christian Religion 544
16. They say, the form of their person at death returns from whence it was
taken 546 17. They are as Christ was, who thought it no robbery, to be equal
with God 547 18. Their writings are the voice of the Son of God, by which the
dead are raised; and the Shield of truth, etc. 548 19. Their trembling and
quaking is such, as Moses and other Prophets had 553 20. They ascribe as much
to their own writings, as to the Scriptures 83
2. Of Humane Learning.
1. They inveigh against humane learning. 5 2. They speak basely of learned men
8, 10 3. They condemn the study of original languages 382
3. Of the Scriptures.
1. They speak most basely of the Scriptures 8, 11, 33, 45, 46, 50, 54, 57 2.
They deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of life 11, 54 3. They deny them to be
the word of God 51, 547 4. They speak jejunly of their necessity, excellency
and perfection 55 5 They make them, at most, but a subordinat Rule 58, 65, 82
6. They have no authority with them, without a new Revelation 63 7. They are no
Rule to them 67, 82, 84 8. They call them imperfect 74, 80, 87 9. They say, it
is blasphemy to call the letter the word of God 547 10. It is the Devil, that
contendeth for the Scriptures being the word of God 547 11. Who say the letter
is the Rule and Guide, are without, feeding on the husk 547 12. Who look on the
Scripture for a Rule, give that to it, which belongs to Christ 547 13. The
Scriptures are but inck and paper, a writing, the old and dead letter, part of
it are words of the Devil, they have no light in them 548 14. They are an
earthly root, a shadow, and dangerous, to feed on 548 1^. They dissuade us from
reading and studying them 548 16. They say, we have Moses and the Prophets
within us 548 17. They say, Scriptures cannot bind us 549 18. They say, we
have the Scriptures within us; and that they were read within, before they were
read without 548 19. To say, that the light in the Scriptures must be guide to
the light within, is idolatry and evil 549 20. They call them useless to repel
temptations 549 21. They wish we were stripped of all Scripture-knowledge 549
22. They call them Traditions of Men, darkness and Confusion, Nebuchadnezzars
Image, Putrefaction and Corruption, Rotten and deceitful, Apostasy, the Whores
cup, the mark of the Beast, Bastards brought forth of flesh and blood, Babylons
brats, and Graven images 549 23. They say, To observe the practices of the
Saints, recorded in Scripture, is to make to ourselves a graven image 549
4. Of God.
1. They deny the distinction betwixt God's will of Command; and his will of
Good pleasure 159 2. They deny his active Providence about sin 150 3. With
them, God only works a possibility of Salvation 250 4. They say, it is
injustice in God, to require more, then he enableth to do 339, 344 5. They say,
God ordained nothing from eternity 11
5. Of the Trinity.
1. They deny three distinct persons, in the Trinity 10, 11, 15
6. Of the Holy Ghost.
1. They are not clear and distinct concerning the personality of the Holy
Ghost 41
7. Of Christ.
1. They deny, that Christ is God and Man in one person 11 2. They deny, that
he is a distinct person from any of his Members 11 3. They say, his coming
again is in the Spirit 11 4. They deny his second coming again 17 5. They are
not clear, concerning Jesus of Nazareth's being the Son of God 24 6. They
acknowledge no Christ, but a Christ within them 91 7. They say, Christ is as
really in every Man, as in that flesh, that suffered at Jerusalem 92, 239 8.
Christ is the Election, and the elect Seed with them 228 9. They give him only
a gradual preference to themselves 238, 239 10. They say, Christ dwells in us
by his Seed 238 11. They make him nothing but a mere holy Man 239 12. They say,
He is in all persons, as in the Seed and Light 245 13. They say, He is
crucified in unbeleevers 246 14. They call the body, that Christ had of Mary,
an outward Body and Temple; beside which, they say, he had a spiritual body 488
15. By this Spiritual body, they say, he revealed himself to men, in all ages;
and by it men had communion with God and Christ 488 16. When we look to Christ,
they say, we look to a Redeemer afar off 551 17. That which Christ took upon
him, they say, was our garment 551 18. They say, the bodily garment was not
Christ; but that, which appeared and dwelt in that body 551 19. A Christ
without is but a carnal Christ, with them 551 20. By this carnal Christ, they
say there is no salvation 551 21. They say, we feed on a thing dead long ago
550
8. Of Adam.
1. They say, the Covenant wherein Adam stood, was the Covenant of Grace 11, 16
2. They say, the Law written in Adam's heart was not the Moral Law 16
9. Of the Fall.
1. They are unclear touching the sin of Adam, and the fall 88 2. They say, the
knowledge of the fall ^s not necessary 89 3. They say, Man fell only in a
certain respect 89 4. The fall did not take away, say they, the light within 94
5. They deny bodily death to be a punishment of sin 98, 125, 126, 127
10. Of Original sin.
1. They make original sin to be a substance 96 2. They talk enigmatically of
the depravation of man by nature 97, 100 3. They deny original sin in Infants,
whether as to imputation of guilt, or as to corruption of nature 111, 112, 113,
etc. 4. They deny all imputation of sin to Infants, till they actually sin
themselves 122, 123 5. They say, sin is not propagated, but comes by occasion,
or imitation 124, 125
11. Of the State of Nature.
1. They deny natural corruption to be sin 120, 121 2. They say, Natural men
can do good by virtue of a Seed in them 100, 102 3. They will have our power to
good, to be measured by the command 221 4. They say, that God by grace
mollifieth the heart of all men, at one time or other, so that if they resist
not they shall be saved 249
12. Of the Soul.
1. They say, the soul is a part of God, eternal and infinite 90, 546, 547 2.
They say, at death, it is centred in its own being in God 546 3. They call it a
living principle of the Divine Nature 547 4. And the immortal and incorruptible
seed of God 547 5. They call it something of the living word, which was said to
be made flesh 547 6. And that, which the Lord from heaven b^getteth of his own
Substance 547
13. Of Heathens.
1. They deny that Heathens have any thing of the Law written in their hearts
103 2. They deny all in bred notions of a God, and of honesty, etc. 106 3. They
say, a Pagan can perform all inward Worshipe easily 461 4. For God is nigh to
help him* 461
14. Of Enthusiasmes.
1. They plead for immediate Revelations, as necessary, in place of the
Scriptures 19. etc. 2. They confound these Revelations with the gracious
operations of the Spirit 20, 21, 80 3. They succeed to the old Enthusiasts 22
4. They prefer their Enthusiasmes to Scripture 57
15. Of the Gospel.
1. They turn the history of Christ's death and resurrection into allegories 11
2. They wildly describe it 11 3. The preaching of the Gospel is not necessary,
with them 244 4. They say, there is no more advantage to be had by the history
of Christ, then by the history of other Saints 244 5. They call the Gospel an
inward power and virtue, that is in every creature 259 6. They call every thing
the Gospel, that reveals any thing of God 260 7. They plead for an Universal
Gospel 267
16. Of the Light within.
1. They make the light within their only guide 11 2. They prefer it to the
Scriptures 59 3. They make the authority of the Scriptures to depend upon it 59
4. They make it the Supreme Judge of all Controversies 60, 85 5. They call it
Christ, God, the Divine Essence, the Savior of the world, etc. 92 6. They call
it the Essence of God 228, 230 7. And the Omnipresence of God 228 8. They call
it damnable heresy to deny the worshipping of it 228 9. They call it a measure
of Christ, and of God, and God Father Son and H. Ghost 228 10. They say, it is
sufficient to salvation ibid 11. They deny it to be a Creature 228 12. It is a
Teacher beyond the Scriptures 229 13. It is the Word of God, and grace, and
gifts, and what not? 229 14. It is a spiritual, heavenly, invisible Principle;
the Vehicle of God, in which God dwells, as Father, Son and H. Ghost 230,
231, 233 15. It is an instrument of God 230 16. It is a divine and glorious
life 231 17. It inviteth all Men to good 232 18. It is the flesh and blood of
Christ, that came down from heaven 233 19. It bears witness against all evil
234 20. It can be crucified and exstinguished 234 21. Where it is, God and
Christ are involved 235 22. Where it is resisted, God is resisted 235 23. From
it is Christ formed in the soul 236, 237 24. All men are commanded to believe
in, and obey this Light 238, 257 25. It delivers from all sins 238 26. They
call it a Substance 240 27. They call it the Sure Mercies of David, a Leader
and a Commander 264 28. And that word, by which faith comes 264, 265 29. And
the fire and hammer spoken of Ier. 23:29. 264, 266 30. They say, by it God
sees the thoughts of men 264 31. They say, the illumination hereof, when
received, becomes an holy birth, etc. producing righteousness, etc, 296 32.
All may confidently appear before God, who hearken to the light, and are
thereby renewed 324 33. They say, the light manifesting sin and nakedness, is
the body of Christ 489 34. This alone searches the heart, and by it alone God
manifests himself, and saves from the wrath to come; and men see their own
faces 548 35. It can forgive sins, and make new crea^ures 551 36. It is the Man
Christ Jesus, the Mediator, which humbled himself to the cross 551 37. They
expect no justification or Salvation, but by this light 551 38. Hereby they
come to know Christ revealed in them 552 39. Who seek Christ any where else,
but in this light, seek dreamings and night visions, and spend their time in
slumbering and dreaming 552 40. By owning and obeying it, they are reconciled
to God 552 41. This Christ within suffers, and his sufferings are
satisfactory wherever 552 42. They speak of killing the just one within us, and
of his riseing again 552
17. Of the Seed.
1. They talk of a seed, which they call a measure of God, Christ, the Spirit,
etc. 95, 100 2. They talk of its being wounded 247 3. They call it, the
manifestation of the Spirit 278 4. They say, it is hid in the earthy part of
every Man's heart; and that herein is the kingdom of heaven, as man in the
embrio 279 5. As this small seed of righteousness, say they, arises, and is
suffered to come to the birth, that new substantial birth is naturally fed with
the spiritual body of Christ 489
18. Of Reprobation.
1. They deny all absolute Reprobation 133. etc. 2. They miserably mistake the
orthodox judgment hereanent 143, 144 3. In exaggerating the matter of
Reprobation, they belch out against God 254. etc.
19. Of Grace.
1. They deny Faith and Repentance to be the gifts of God 153 2. They deny that
the grace of God, in Conversion, takes away the resistance of the heart 273 3.
They imagine the grace of Conversion to be as physic, which a man may hinder
to operat 273 4. They imagine, that God puts all some way out of the pit of
misery, and thereafter lets such fall again, as spurn and resist 275 5.
They will not grant, that the grace of God makes any real change of the
corrupt nature of man; or gives a new heart 276
20. Of Universal Grace.
1. They say God has granted to all men, Schythians and Barbarians, a day of
Visitation, wherein they may be saved, if they will 212, 214. etc. 2. And that
God offers Remission and Salvation to all, upon condition of non-refusal 249
3. They plead for sufficient grace to all 269 4. They say, Heathens, that never
heard of the Gospel, may be saved 282 5. And that Paul Romans 3. proves that the
Heathens were saved, by doing the works of the Law 289 6. They say, the
Heathens had the knowledge of Christ, though not under that denomination 290 7.
And that because they spoke of Wisdom which is one of Christ's names 291 8.
They grant remission of sins to some adult persons, that never heard of Christ
302 9. Every man has sufficiency of influence for prayer, till his day of
Visitation pass, say they. 454 10. Every man has that, which is as good, as
the Spirit of Christ 546
21. Of Universal Redemption.
1. They plead for Universal Redemption 157. etc.
22. Of Salvation.
They say, there is no possibility of Salvation, after the day of Visitation is
ended 215 2. And that God gives to every man a certain measure of grace, in
order to salvation 226, etc.
23. Of Christ's Satisfaction.
1. They speak not distinctly of Christ's Satisfaction 242 2. They vilify its
virtue and efficacy 243 3. They say, the outward blood of Christ, or the blood
of his vail, cannot cleanse 295 4. They call it an abomination, to say, that
God punished Christ that he might thereby satisfy for sins 296 5. Christ with
them procures remission, in procuring grace, whereby Christ is formed within
308
24. Of Justification.
1. They confound Justification with Sanctification 295 2. And say that we are
justified, as we are sanctified 295 3. It is ridiculous and worse, with them,
to think to be justified by the imputation of another righteousness 295 4. Yea
they say, such a justification is irrational, irreligious, ridiculous and
dangerous 296 5. It is an abomination to say, we are justified by imputation
296 6. Yea they call it a doctrine of Devils, an arm of corruption 296 7. By
the light within we are justified, as well as sanctified, say they. 297 8. All
the reconciliation we have by Christ is, that we are made capable of
reconciliation 302, 303, 304, 308 9. Sanctification with them is the formal
cause of Justification 305, 311 10. They say, we are justified by the
revelation of Christ in the soul 316 11. We are justified by works of grace,
say they 321 12. What righteousness, say they, Christ performed without us, is
not our justification, nor are we saved thereby 550 13. They deny all
imputation of righteousness 11
25. Of Perfection.
1. They say, works done by grace are perfect 322, 323 2. They plead for the
perfection of Saints here 325. etc. 3. They hold a perfect freedom from all sin
325 4. Sanctification must be perfect, because, say they, it is Christ himself
326 5. Yet they say, this perfection may be lost 332 6. And that some may come
to that hight of perfection, that they cannot sin any more 332
26. Of Perseverance.
1. They assert the Apostasy of the Saints 350. etc.
27. Of Infallibility.
1. They plead for infallibility to Ministers and to all Christians 378
28. Of the Patriachs.
1. They say, the Patriarchs had no faith of the Messiah to come 289
29. Of the Church.
1. They take-in under the Church all, who obey the light within, howbeit not
professors of Christ, or of Christianity 361 2. Pagans, Turks and Jews,
though both Ignorant and Superstitious, are members of the Church of the saved,
with them, if they be good single hearted men 361 3. All members of their
Churches teach 362 4. Such as are ignorant of the very history of Christ may be
members of the Catholic Church, that is, of the Church of the saved 362 5. Yet
members of particular Christian Churches must give assent and credit to truths
delivered in the Scriptures 362 6. Outward profession is necessary to make one
a member of a particular congregated Church, though not of the Catholic Church
364 7. They deny men to be Christians by birth 364 8. They say, none can be a
member of the Church without grace 379 9. They make the Church, or Fold the
same with the Shepherd 545 10. With them all Members are Officers 10
30. Of Ministers.
1. They say, the light received prepares, constituteth and fournisheth a
Minister 365, 370 2. Ministers must be called by the Spirit, and know, that
they are led and moved by the Spirit, and be sensible of the work of the
Spirit, and of his inward call 372 3. The power and life of the Spirit is the
most necessary qualification of a Minister 378 4. Ministers must have no
learning, but what is taught by the Spirit 283, 384, 386 5. They would have
Ministers learning trades, whereby to live 396 6. They will not have Ministers
make use of what they have learned or read, in their sermons 438 7. They will
not have Ministers studying their sermons 431, 441 8. They account all such
Ministers of the world, and of the letter, who are for the ordinances of Christ
545
31. Of the Ministry.
1. They say, all things concerning the Ministry, are in confusion, in the
Christian Church 366 2. They are against the Ministerial Office 387, 389 3.
They deny the distinct offices and officers, in the Apostles days 388, 389,
391 4. They account all the Offices and Officers, Fo^mes and Shadows 388 5.
And to be the work of Antichrist, and the mystery of iniquity 389 6. They make
the work of the Ministry common to all 390 7. They make it free to all to
preach in public, when moved by the Spirit 393 8. They deny, there was any
such Officers, as Evangelists 393, 394 9. They say, Apostles, Prophets, etc.
were but distinct names 394 10. They allow women to preach publicly in the
Churches 397
32. Of Ordination.
33. They deny Ordination and Imposition of hands 377
33. Of Ordinances.
1. They deny all external institutions in Worshipe 381 2. They do not
acknowledge a precept for an ordinance, where there is an Institution 491 3.
They are against all ordinances, calling them forms 545 4. They deny that ever
God did, or will reveal himself by them 545 5. They say, Christ blotted them
out, and they must not be touched 545 6. To seek Christ in ordinances, is to
seek the living among the dead 545, 546
34. Of the Sabbath.
1. They deny the Lord's day to be the Christian Sabbath 412 2. They hold all
days alike 412
35. Of Worship.
1. They say all Worshipe must be done by inward Inspirations, as to time,
place, duration 411 2. They condemn our having a Preacher to preach, in our
solemn Worshipe 412 3. External actions in Worshipe need particular influences
or enthusiasmes 461 4. When we move, say they, without the Spirit, it is the
unclean part, which offers to God, which he will not accept 545
36. Of the Quakers Worshipe.
1. They have no preparation to their Worshipe 412, 413 2. Nor do they begin
with prayer 413 3. Nor do they make any use of the Scriptures in their Worshipe
413 5. In their Worshipe, they unchristian and un-man themselves 414 6. They
talk of God's power transmitted from Vessel to Vessel, whereby when one is
affected, all are affected 415 7. They lay aside all words, even Scripture
words, in their Worshipe 415 8. Then they must Introvert unto the inward
principle within them, as unto the most excellent Doctor 415 9. This doctor
teaches them to cease from their own words and actions, and to feel the inward
seed of life; and thereby be moved to pray, preach, or sing 416 10. And hence
comes a flood of refreshment, that runs over the whole company 416 11. And
then they need neither Baptism nor the Lords Supper 417 12. If one present be
not introverted, if the power be a little raised, in the assembly, he is
presently laid hold on, and this power warmeth him, as fire warmeth a man 417
13. If any present wander in their imaginations, one, in whom the life is
raised, will feel a traveling woman's pains, for them, and they will be
pricked secretly, though nothing be spoken 417 14. Yea, if a stranger come to
gaze and mock, he is so terrified at the sight, that if his day of visitation
be not past, he becomes a convert 418 15. In the first place, they must of
necessity be silent, in their Worshipe 420 16. God is speaking in every man,
and therefore they should be silent and hear, that the good seed may arise 422
17. In this silence, they must lay aside all sense and fear of sin; thoughts of
death, of hell, of judgment, and of glory; prayers and all religious exercises
422 18. Thus they must be abstracted from all operations, imaginations, and
ejaculations of soul 422 19. And then the little seed, planted in every man,
gets room to arise, and becomes an holy birth; and that Divine air is it,
with which man's spirit is fermented, and then they become fit to hear his voice
423 20. While they are thus Introverted, they cannot be deceived 424 21. For
the Devil cannot simulate this Introversion, nor work there; for he is
excluded, and works only in Natural men 424 22. When they once introvert,
they are in a castle, and they feel themselves to be without the Devils reach
425 23. Hereby they keep communion with other, when scattered asunder 425 24.
Before they speak or preach, they must Introvert, and consult the dim thing
within 441 25. They must be acted and moved by Immediate impulses, and
extraordinary motions of a Spirit 443, 444, 450, 452
37. Of Preaching.
1. They are against our way of preaching from a text of Scripture 437
38. Of Prayer.
1. They are against praying morning and evening, before and after sermon,
before and after meat 450, 451 2. Their inward prayer is an Introversion of the
soul 453, 454 3. They speak of praying outwardly under a degustation, which is
neither public nor private prayer 455 4. They speak of ejaculatory prayers,
made to man's self 455 5. No public prayer without Introversion 455 6. Beside
Introversion, there must be an immediate inspiration, calling and prompting to
prayer, or else we must not pray, 455 7. They say, that praying to God, without
the feeling of the Influences of the Spirit, is a tempting of God 456 8. Men,
say they, must introvert to that place, where they may feel that, whereby they
may be led to prayer 457, 462 9. Watching is only the souls attending on the
Spirit, that it may feel him leading to pray 457 10. To command men to pray,
without the Spirit, is to command them to see without eyes 459 11. They say, we
pray without the Spirit, because we have our limited times 460 12. They say,
the wicked sometime have the influences of the Spirit to pray, and then they
may pray acceptably 462, 463
39. Of Singing Psalms.
1. They are against our way of singing of Psalms 463 2. Alleging that
thereby ofttimes abominable lies are uttered to God 464 3. And that we
Immediately thereafter in prayer, confess ourselves guilty of the same sins,
for redemption from which we have given praise 464
40. Of the Sacraments.
1. They think, if the word Sacrament were laid aside, all controversy about
the Sacraments would cease 468 2. They think the definition of a Sacrament can
agree to many other things 468
41. Of Baptism.
1. They are against baptism 465 2. They say, there is but one sort of
baptism 469 3. They make the outward Element and the inward Grace two
baptismes 469 4. Washing of water is not Christ's baptism, with them 471 5.
They own no baptism, but the baptism of the Spirit 471 6. They deny all
baptism, but what is with the H. Ghost and with fire 545 7. They would have
the ordinance of baptism wholly laid aside 473, 475 8. They say, the ark was a
type of Baptism 473 9. And that John's baptism was a figure of Christ's
baptism 474 10. Baptism with water is with them a figure of baptism with the
Spirit 474 11. Washing with water in baptism is contrary to Christian Religion
475 12. Christ did not warrant his Disciples to baptize 475 13. Washing under
the Law, and our baptism are the same 476 14. They reckon baptism among
Jewish ceremonies and rites 477 15. They condemn our baptizing in the Name of
the Father, Son and H. Ghost. 479 16. They say, the Apostles baptized by
permission, and not by Commission 480 17. They say the Apostles mistook
Christ's spiritual baptism, and took it for John's water baptism 480 18.
Baptism with water, say they, was in use among the Jews before John's days
481 19. Water baptism, say they, is but formal imitation, the invention of
man, and a mere delusion 545 20. In contempt hereof, they say; outward water
cannot wash the soul 550
42. Of the Lords Supper.
1. They deny the Lord's Supper to be an Institution of Christ 482, etc. 2.
Instead of this Ordinance, they profanely substitute their ordinary repasts 486
3. To their ordinary repasts they profanely apply the ends of this Ordinance
486 4. The body, which they eat, and blood which they drink, is the celestial
seed, the Divine substance, the Vehicle or spiritual body of Christ 486 5. To
this spiritual imaginary body of Christ they apply all that is said of Christ's
body John. 6. 487 6. They say, this spiritual seed, as it gets room to rise
up in the heart, is bread to the hungry; and thereby the soul is revived 487 7.
They enjoy this breed, by believing in the manifestation of this light 487 8.
They say, the Supper of the Lord is truly possessed, when the soul introverts,
etc. 489 9. They say, believers enjoy this at all times, especially when they
meet together, to wait on God 489 10. They say, Christ only took occasion from
the bread and wine to tell his disciples, that as these nourished their bodies,
so His body and blood should nourish their souls; And so did institute no
Sacrament: and this is the only meaning of these words. This is my body, etc.
492 11. They call it a bare ceremony 492 12. They will have Paul, 1 Cor.
11:27. only to say, that if they would needs perform this ceremony, they
should do it worthily 493 13. With them, do this in remembrance of me, says no
more, but that, seeing this was to be the last occasion of his eating with them,
they should look to him, that by commemoration of that occasion, by his
passions and death, they should be stirred up to follow him 495 14. They call
the practicing of it a Jewish ceremony 496 15. They think, the wine was merely
accidental 496 16. They reckon the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, among
the things of the earth, Col. 3. 499 17. They say, we have this Ordinance from
the Pope 545 18. They say, He whose death we are to remember, till he come, is
the word and prayer 545
43. Of Ministers Maintenance.
1. They are against the fixed maintenance of Ministers; and will only have
their necessities supplied if need be 401 2. They will have no limited
maintenance 401 3. They will not have people compelled to give any maintenance
407 4. Ministers, say they, must seek nothing by Law 407, 408 4. They say, it
is a carnal Ministry, that must have maintenance 410
44. Of Magistrates.
1. They deny Magistrates to be lawful, who are not of their way 11
45. Of Liberty of Conscience.
1. They plead for libery to all errors 501 2. Magistrates, say they, may not
hinder people to meet together, to Worshipe God as they judge best 505 3.
Otherwise they sin against the nature of the Gospel 508 4. And against sound
Reason and the Law of Nature 511 5. The old Laws for punishing of Idolaters,
they say, no more bind us, then the Jews killing of the Canaanites, or their
taking gold, etc. from the Egyptians 509, 510
46. Of W^rs.
1. They are against all wars 514. etc.
47. Of Lawful Oaths.
1. They are against swearing before Magistrates 523. etc. 2. Swearing by the
Name of God of old was, as they say, a ceremony 525, 526, 527 3. Oaths, say
they, did prefigu^e God's truth and fidelity 528 4. And had their rise from the
Devil 528 5. Christ might swear, say they, as being under the Law; not we, who
are under the Gospel 529 6. They say, we ought not to regard what Paul did, as
to this, even in his Epistles 530 7. Yet they will swear, but not upon a book,
nor by lifting up the h^nd 529, 530
48. Of Civil Honor.
1. They are against the giving of all honor or respect to Superiors or
Equals 533. etc. 2. Christians, say they, may not give nor receive titles of
honor 537 3. They use no other compellation for all persons, but Thou and Thee
539 4. They will salute no person, nor signify any respect by uncovering the
head 540 5. They account this adoration; and yet their first Father James
Naylor received Divine Worship at Bristol 541, 542
49. Of the Resurrection.
1. They deny the Resurrection of the same body 17, 552, 553
50. Of Heaven and Hell.
1. They assert no Heaven or Hell, but what is within us 553, 554
AN Examination and Confutation of ROBERT BARCLAY, The QUAKER, his Theses and
Apology.
CHAP. I. Some remarks upon his Preface to his THESES.
1. BEfore this Author come to set down his Theses, he premiteth a Preface,
wherein (1.) He gives us the Title and inscription of them. (2.) He shows to
whom he does particularly make his address, or to whom he directs these his
Theses, to be considered, or confuted. (3.) He is pleased, to prevent our
mistake, to give us a description of himself, their Author. And (4) We have his
prologue, or preliminary discourse, to those, unto whom he addresseth himself.

2. I shall not so far preoccupy the judgment of the Reader in the threshold,
as to show and demonstrate, that his Theses, which he styles Theological,
might more fitly and truly be called Ethnical, or, if you will, Diabolical:
for upon the review of the whole, after the ensueing examen, this will appear
so manifest, as if written with a sun-beame, to all not blinded with prejudice,
and who believe the Word of God, and close with it, as our only Rule of Faith
and Practice.

3. His Theses he directs to all Clerks, or clergymen, or what he will have
us understand by Clericis (for thus he loves to speak, whether Ironically (as
he supposes we call him, and others of his way, Quakers) and out of contempt
and disdain, or upon any other account, I leave every man to judg^: But what
Clerks are these? To Clerks (says he) of all sorts of the whole Christian
world. Whereby it is obvious, that he acknowledges a Christian world, in which
are Clergymen of various kinds, and to which he himself, and others whom he
here Patronizeth, do not belong; for he speaks of them all, as belonging to
another Profession, than what he and his fraternity hold: and while he thus
manifestly excludes himself and his party from the Christian world, every one
may freely judge to what a world he and they must needs belong. It is ominous
to stumble thus in the very threshold. But whom does he mean by these
Clericis? The following words will not suffer us to think, that he means all
the people of God; nor will the expressions themselves admit that; because
these Clerici must be but apart of the Christian world. And if he understand
hereby Church Officers, as distinct from Church Members, he joyneth herein with
Papists against Protestants, who account the whole Church, and not the Officers
thereof only, as do Papists, to be God's Clergy or Heritage, as does the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet, 5, 3.

4. More especially, in the next place, he directs them to Doctors,
Professors, and Students of Theology: (and this* I cannot but think, is spoken
indeed ironically; for in his esteem, it is not true Theology, which is taught
by these Doctors and Professors, and learned by these Students:) and that we
may know, who these all Doctors etc. are, he adds, in all the Academies of
Europe, whether Popish or Protestant: what his design hereby is cannot be hid;
for who sees not that he intends his Theses as a chartal to provoke them, or
any of them all, to a disput; which must needs argue too great an excess of
blind confidence in this Man: and withal, there is a subdolous Insinuation
here manifest; for hereby he would make the world believe, that his opinions
are equally different from and repugnant to the Popish Abominations, and to the
Protestant Truth: which is a shreud presumption, that his ensueing doctrine
will not savoure much of Christian candor; seeing it is so obvious, and shall be
made manifest, ere all be done, that his opinions homologate more with the
Popish, than with the Protestant doctrine. And if a provocation to dispute were
not here intended, why would he direct his Theses more especially to
Professors and Students in Academies, and not equally unto all Christians in
common; as charity would require of one, who should intend the common good,
that is, the edefication and right information of such, as he supposes to be
out of the way? But I am apt to think, (and it may be every one shall judge me
not far mistaken in this) that this confident brag was resolved upon, to the
end common people might hear, that such a Quaker had provoked all the learned
men of Europe to a disput, and none durst enter the lists to fight with this
Goliath: and thence suspect, if not conclude, that the Quakers are the only
maintainers and owners of Truth: and their sayings must be all unquestionable
and irrefragable Assertions: But the judicious and learned may at the first
see, there is little cause to be moved at all this confidence, there being so
little said hereby him, which has not been examined, and condemned both from
Scripture and found Reason, by the faithful asserters of the orthodox truth,
writting against the Pelagians, Arminians, Socinians, Enthusiasts, Anabaptists,
Papists, and others, to whom alone he is obliged for all that he has said,
whether in his Theses, or in his large Apology and Vindication, and that
before he was borne. So that once to take notice of what he has here
scraped-together out of the writings of the Heterodox, might seem a rejecting
of the wise man's counsel, Prove. 26:4. answer not a fool according to his
folly, lest thou also be like unto him: But the consideration of the humore of
these men will enforce a compliance with what the Spirit of the Lord, in and by
the same wise man, says, Verse. 5. answer a fool according to his folly, lest
he be wise in his own conceit, and the simplicity of some, who are ready to
believe every thing, set off with such art and cunning, as these men study, and
the pronenesse of many in this generation to a relinquishing of the received
Truth, will in some sort necessitate an examination of what this late Disciple,
and now Patron, of the Quakers, has so say, in his own and in their defense.
Notwithstanding that the beginning of strife is as when one lets out water,
and that therefore it were better to leave off his contention before it be
meddled with; yet, upon the forementioned considerations, and to establish such
as, it may be, are staggering, or ready to be shaken; and others, who desire
further clearing of, and their own confirmation in the Truth, I shall, through
the help of the God of Truth, (howbeit I be none of those, whom he particularly
here describes, as the men he would fainest deal with) adventure to discover
what evil apprehend to lie wrapped up in his fifteen Theses, and in his large
book entitled an Apology, written for futher confirmation and explication of
his Theses; and that in the language best understood by our country men, whom
I judge most in hazard by these men's doctrine: leaving such of those, he most
particularly bespeaketh in his preface, as shall judge it convenient and to
edification, to emit in latin, a discovery of his pernicious, but groundless,
errors.

5. He styles himself a Servant of the Lord God: upon what true account I know
not, unless upon the same account, that all the works of creation bear that
Title, Psalm. 119:9^. which yet, if we consider his work, may be very much
questioned, seeing he endeavors so much (as a Servant of Satan rather) to
darken and deface (so far as he can) the glory of that God, whom the works of
creation, after their kind, extol. But if he speak thus, upon a more special
account, as some will confidently believe he does, he must not be offended, if
I desire to see his credentials, that it may appear, he takes not that honor
to himself, but is called thereunto, as all are who run not unsent. It is no
strange thing for this sort of Fanatics (a sort of men truly such) and
Enthusiasts, to pretend to immediate missions, and to assume this style to
themselves: the history of the Anabaptists in Munster, and in other places of
Germany and Helvetia, will not suffer us to forget this: Thomas Muncer styled
himself so in his letters; Melchior Hoffman would needs be called and accounted
an Apostle from heaven; and what blasphemous titles David Georg did assume to
himself, is sufficiently known. It is obvious enough, what mo^ed the former
Fanatics unto this, and what this man designeth by arrogating to himself this
style: but reason will require, that we try such Impostors before we trust; and
that we have clear and manifest evidences of his divine call, who comes with a
new doctrine and a new Gospel* Nay, I think, it will be saifest for us to
hearken to Paul, saying, Gal. 1:8, 9. But though we, or an Angel from heaven,
preach any other Gospel to you, than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed: as we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that you have received, let him be accursed. And
this ground abiding firm, we need not auxiously enquire after the nature and
quality of this man's call; for be he Man or Angel, an Apostle, or any Other
Person, the other Gospel or Antigospel, which he preaches in his Theses and
Book, discovers the cursedness of his Call and Employment: I wish, we all
more minded what our Lord said, Mat. 7:15-20. Beware of false Prophets, etc.

6. Moreover, in his single Theses, he calls himself, one also of these, who
are ironically (as he supposes) called Quakers, but I find that he leaves
out this particular in the second edition of his Theses, premitted to his large
Apology, whether as ashamed thereof, or upon whatever other account, I leave
to others to judge. I need not descant upon the Name, nor use many words to
show the appositness of its application, or the grounds thereof; seeing it is
sufficiently known, how, at the beginning of their appearance, they used, while
at their meetings, to be strangly affected with Quakings, Shakings, Tremblings,
Foamings at the mouth, and other such like Unusual Motions of the body: Others
of his persuasion rather own this title, as disowne it, w^ile they maintain
the thing, and look upon it, as an effect of the same power, that made Moses to
quake, shake and tremble; saying that Moses was a Quaker: so Richard Farnworth,
in his Return to the Priests about Beverly (as he styled his book Page 14. as
also in his writings against Mr. Stalham, saying, Thou speaks against the power
of God, that works effectually in his people, as it did in Moses, Habbakuk,
David, Paul, and others, etc. Insinuating that as they are all Prophets,
immediately inspired, so they are made to quake the same way that Moses,
Habbakuk and the rest were. Nay himself gives us this account of the matter,
in his Apology Page 230.231. That from the inward birth, while the darkness
striveth to obscure the light and breaks through the darkness, there arises
great trouble in the soul, which affects even the outward Man, so as that by
these workings, ofttimes the body is wonderfully shaken, many sighs and groans
are emitted, yea, as it were, the pains of a woman in travail are felt; and
this not only in one person alone, but in the whole meeting, so that every one
fighting against this power of darkness, and being moved with the motions of
contrary waves, are exercised as in a day of battle; and thus trembling and
motions of the body seize upon all: And then he tells us, that hence came the
name, Quakers, whereof (though they did not choose it to themselves, yet) they
are not ashamed; but rather rejoice that they are made sensible of this power.
And seeing it is so, why he should account this name ironically attributed to
them, I know not; especially seeing it is the most apposite characteristick that
can be, expressing in a signal manner that which they account their glory, and
which manifestly distinguishes them from all other Secks, which we know now a
days, But passing this, I only observ^ from thence, That he clearly intimates
a distinct party, of which he accounts himself a member; and withal gives us
no other name, by which they should be called, who make up that distinct Seck:
and therefore till he help us to a more apposite characteristical
denomination, and to a more adequate distinguishing title, we must, with his
favor, use the old, though he should think, that we used it only ironically.
If he say, that his meaning is, That all those, who ironically (in his
judgment) are called by others, Quakers, should go under that distinguishing
character and title, which he assumeth to himself; and so be discriminated from
all other persons of the Christian world, by the Name and Style of The Servants
of the Lord God. Then indeed, beside that his latin conjunction et, will not
well admit of that construction, or sense, we must of necessity cast away our
Bibles, as no more to be regairded, than the Turks Alcoran, (which, it is like,
they would gladly have us do) before we be induced to own them, as such.

7. His Salutation, being a wish of sincere repentance unto the acknowledgment
of the truth, is good in it self, but what his perverse meaning is, cannot be
hid: and I shall not here anticipate a clear and full manifestation of the
perverseness of his meaning; our following discourse will abundantly discover
that. Only I add, that I think all true Christians should repay him and his
Associats, with a full measure of the like kind, shaken together, pressed
down and running over, If it can stand with the unchangable purpose of God.

8. Having thus described himself, and the party, for whom he appears* to
prevent our mistake, in the next place he bespeaketh those, he directs his
Theses unto: and first he would persuade them, that his following propositions,
being read and viewed in the fear of God, will discover simple, naked, and
plain truth. But though he, both in his Theses and in his large Book, holds
forth his meaning* more plainly and nakedly, than heretofore others of his
persuasion have doneus, so far as I could observe, (in which I must needs
commend him;) yet I dar not say, that he is in all things so clear and
distinct, as I could have wished; as I shall have occasion to note hereafter.
And whereas he thinks, that such as read and view his Theses, in the fear of
God, will observe simple, naked and plain truth, I must needs judge him to be
in a mistake, and to speak thus through the blindness of prejudice: for after
all the reading and pondering of them, that I can make, (and, I hope, in the
fear of God) I cannot come to that light or persuasion; for I find them to be
a Farrago of errors, old and late, patched up in a bundle, and sometimes set
off with dark and enigmatick expressions, which can no way suite plain, simple
and naked truth.

9. Secondly he goes on, and inveigheth, in a subdolous manner, against all
humane learning, that has been any way made use of in Theology, not spareing
even useful Commentaries written upon the Scriptures, complaining that the
whole of the worthy labors of pious and orthodox writers, has but darkened the
Truth, an hundred fold more, than it was in itself. I will be loath so far to
contradict him, as to say that, through the corruption of man, and Satan
improving the abilities of some to his own wicked ends, there is nothing of
this too true; for, as in all ages, so never more than in this present, Satan's
wicked designs have been and are carried on, by the writings of men of corrupt
minds, darkening the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and perverting the
Truth, as it is in Jesus: Yet I must needs say, that, though his single sheet
of Theses bears no great bulk, it has, in its design, contributed,
nevertheless, no small assistance unto the corrupting and darkning of the
Saving truth of God: yea, I may saifly say, more than any, or many of the
volumes, at which he carpeth; Nay, I doubt, if more error, pernicious in it
self, and dangerous to souls, shall be found amongst the heterodox writers
themselves, couched up in lesser, yea or in so little, bounds, as is his single
sheet of Theses, than is to be found here. It is usual with this sort of men,
as it was with their forefathers, or fore runners, to cry down learning and
books: John Matthize at Munster, after a revelation from heaven, (as he
pretended) commanded all books to be brunt, except the bible; and I nothing
doubt, but that had been commanded to be burnt with the first, if he had not
seen how odious that would have made him, and how it had crossed his corrupt
designs. And they ordinarily cry out against Learning and Schools of learning:
what they intend hereby, is so obviously notour, that it cannot be hid; for if
all books were once destroyed, and all learning once banished away, how easily
might they prevail with their errors, and lead captive silly people, with
their fair flourishes of glorious-like expressions, and make fair way unto
their dreams and pretended Revelations, and to their setting up their Diana,
the Light within, their Scripture and all? But they know, that the learned and
judicious, having read of the Pranks and Pretensions of men of their stamp, in
former ages, and of the heterodoxies of men, corrupt as to the faith; and of
their grounds, in all former ages, will soon be in case to detect their
pernicious errors, and deceits, now again revived, and brought up from the
bottemless pit; and discover their abominations, which, by all means possible,
they would carefully prevent. I should judge it superfluous and unnecessary,
upon this occasion, to digress, and show the usefulness and necessity of
learning, and of books written for our help to understand the truth and the
mind of God, revealed in his word, whether by particular Treatises, written on
particular and practical subjects, or by more general Treatises, clearing up
the whole body of divinity, or by Commentaries on one or more particular places,
or books of holy Scripture; seeing the labors of the worthy and painful
servants of Christ, in this kind, speak sufficiently for themselves.

10. He complains moreover, that the world is overburthened with books:
wherein, I acknowledge, he speaks not far amiss: But I would feign know, why
he and his party contribute their assistance, to the making of this burden
heavier? It is sufficiently known, how busy they are in scribbling, and
troubling the world with their Pamphlets* and though his sheet of Theses did
not add much weight unto the oppressing burden of books, under which, he
said, the world was groaning; yet his Apology, consisting of more than fifty
sheet in a large quarto, adds some considerable weight.

11. He inveigheth also against disputes and debates, or books written of that
nature, calling them altercations, and thus would condemn all the useful works
of the faithful vindicators of Truth against heretics, and other erroneous
persons; and among the rest, all that have been written against Papists,
Pelagians, Arminians, and others, of whose dregs he has made a mass, and
framed it into fifteen Piles, to be swallowed by such as love death; and, that
they may the more easily go over, has painfully labored to guild them over
with his voluminous Apology: But I think he might in prudence have forborne
this, not only because, he hereby gives a manifest ground of suspicion, that
he loves neither the detection, nor confutation of error; but also because
his one Sheet smells rankly of Ismael; and so, as his hand is against every
man, who is not in all things of his judgment, so every man's hand must be
against him: and his thus chartaling of all Doctors, Professors and Students,
in all the Universities of Europe, whether Popish or Protestant, is no great
toaken, that he would have all Disputes and Altercations laid aside and his
voluminous Apology is a demonstration hereof, beyond contradiction.

12. He proceeds and inveigheth against Scholastic divinity (as it is
called) telling us, that an age were not sufficient to learn it, and that it
helps no man nearer to God, nor makes any less a sinner, or more righteous.
I must confess, that I am not a very fit person to judge in this matter, being
it may be, as little, if not less, conversant in this kind of writings, as
himself; and shall willingly grant, that much of that learning might have been
spared, as being more adapted, I mean as spun out by light, audacious and too
too philosophical brains, to the drawing of minds off the serious study and
improvement of substantial and necessary Truths; than to the fixing of hearts,
in the faith and practice of saving Truths: and though much of it be not very
necessary, yet it is not wholly to be rejected or thus condemned, as noxious or
useless; for though it be (as the best things may be) abused by some, and not
only idle and vain questions handled therein, but errors and pernicious
doctrines maintained thereby; yet experience has taught us, that worthy
instruments have been raised up of the Lord, who, having had a competent
knowledge therein, (which they acquired in far less time, than the one half of
an age) were in case to defend the Truth against Papists, (who most study, and
cry up this Scholastic Theology,) against Socinians, Pelagians and Arminians,
who make no little use of that sort of learning to maintain their errors: as
also against other heretics, and erroneous persons; having had hereby no small
advantage in detecting their shifts and evasions, and in urging them to a
punctual debate, without oratorious declamations, long and tedious
argumentations, and subtle subterfuges; so that such as have had most
acquantance therewith, have been most fit to deal with adversaries: and I
suppose (though it be little to the commendation of that learning, upon the
account of its perversion) had himself been an utter stranger hereunto, he had
not been in case to have said so much (to such good purpose, as he imagines)
as he has done, in his Apology, in the defense of his Theses. Upon which
account, as also because, Papists, Pelagians, Arminians and Socinians, (to whom
he is so much endebted for his new doctrine) have by their practice so much
declared their approbation thereof; I cannot but wonder at the man's
unadvisedness in this point; and especially because, some, most acquanted with
this sort of learning, can tell us, how much Quakers are beholden to it, for
some of their prime notions, which have either had their first rise there, or
confirmation therefrom. As to the censure, which he passes upon this
Scholastic Theology, I shall only add, that howbeit he prefer his Script,
to all learned volumes, written by Scholastic divines; yet I must needs say,
That the chief heads of his doctrine (Theology I cannot call it) which I
confess may be learned very quickly, and that without the help of subtle
Teachers, being (so far as I can judge of it) borne with every corrupt son of
Adam, and deeply seated in the dunghill of corrupt Nature, if reduced into
practice (which is the end he drives at) shall prove no less, if not more,
insufficient and inept, for the effects mentioned by him, that is, to bring Men
nearer unto God, and to make them less sinners and more righteous; as our
following examination will manifest.

13. I do the less wonder at his taking in, among the rest, the commendable
labors and pains of such, as have written Commentaries, for explaining of
Scripture, (though I will not say, but that, as all that proceeds from Men,
wants not its own dross) when I consider, how low an esteem this man and his
party have of the Scriptures, which they will not look upon, as our only sure
Rule, by which we are to order our Paths, and to examine the Teachings of Men.
One Francis Howgil (as Mr. Stalham shows in his Revilers rebuiked part. 1.
sect. 2.) called the Scriptures, other men's words. Commonly they deny that the
Scriptures should be called the word of God; and therefore in contempt they
call it, a printed bible. So did Richard Farnworth call it, as Mr. Stalham
reports, in the forecited place: and sect. 36. he tells us, that one John
Lawson, another Quaker, called it, the letter, the written word, which is
natural and carnal. Such like is to be seen ordinarily in their writings, as we
will hear afterward.

14. For a ground of his prejudice against the many volumes, written in
divinity, he allaigeth, That they have more darkened, than cleared up the
truth. And yet I judge, that the smallest Systeme of divinity, that ever was
put forth by an Orthodox writer, is able abundantly to discover both his
error, and ignorance; and will be found a fitter mean to clear up the Truth,
and to attain the ends by himself mentioned, than Cart-loads of such Theses as
his are, though backed with as many more of his Apologies, which do manifestly
both darken and deny Truth. But I am apt to think, that the real ground of his
prejudice, is, that there is so much to be found in any of these books (I mean
such as are written by the Orthodox, and upon the points, here touched by him;
or more generally upon the wholly body of divinity) against his old errors, new
broached again, and put into a new dress, that he could wish, for salving of
his own credit, and for helping forward his disperate design, that either
these were all consumed, or that they were utterly laid aside; for he cannot
but know, that who ever reads these, must needs see his nakedness and folly,
without much study.

15. The account he makes of all the learned men of the world, beside himself
and his party, is, that they are the Wisemen, the Learned, the Scribes, and the
Disputers of this world, whom the Lord has cast down, or destroyed,
understanding, no doubt, such as Paul means, 1 Cor. 1;19, 20. But this is the
measure of charity that must be expected from them: However, let his esteem of
them be as mean as he will, there are among them, who shall be found to be,
whether he will or not, no enemies to the cross of Christ; and to whom the
preaching of the cross is not foolishness, but the power of God; and who,
through grace, are helped, by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
believe; and make it their work to preach Christ crucified, even Christ the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. And on the other hand, what enemies to
Christ, to his Cross, to the Preaching of His Truth, and to all His Ordinances,
he and his party are, we may have occasion to show, ere all be done. And I am
not afraid to say, that they will be found among the Chief Enemies of the
cross of Christ, howbeit he would feign equalize them to the Apostles, whom I
supposes he means by, the fisher men, he mentions. Hereby also we can see,
that this new Seck, would feign become, yea make themselves, the only
Compurgators of all that hithertil has been written in Theology; and from them
alone we must expect the indices expurgatorii, which will only except, or
reserve, some writings of Papists, Pelagians, Semipelagians, Arminians,
Enthusiasts, Anabaptists, Perfectionists, Antiscripturists, Libertines, and of
such as are against the Ministry and the Ordinances of Christ; or some special
pieces of their writings, which serve to confirm his sentiments, which are an
Hotch Potch, made up of the Quintessence of all these: and for the rest, that
any way contradict him, they will have but one sentence and censure passed
against them, viz, all is naught. It is remarkable also, that according to this
Man's judgment, the pure and naked Truth of god was never unfolded and declared,
until this Generation of Quakers arose, and (if some of themselves be to be
believed, it is far from half an age, since they appeared in our Horizon) which
neither agrees with truth, nor with himself.

16. He tells the Clergy, That God thrust down the wise men, etc. and has
chosen some few despicable and unlearned persons, as to Scholastic learning
(as he did of old fishermen) to publish his pure and naked truth; by whom no
doubt, he means himself and his fraternity; for which we have nothing but his
own assertion: If their call be thus immediate and extraordinary, it can be
evidenced by such characters of credentials, as may rationally satisfy any man
concearning it: and what these characters are, I would gladly understand. The
Apostle Paul has told us, that the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later
times, some shall depairt from the faith, giving heed to seduceing Spirits, and
doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy* having their consciences
seared with an hot iron. 1 Timothy 4:1, 2. And how fitly this will quadrate with
this sort of men, the sequel will evince The same Apostle has told us in that
same Epistle, Chap. 5:3, 4, 5. That who ever consent not to wholesome words,
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine, which is according to
godliness, is proud (or a fool, as the margin has it) knowing nothing, but
doteing about questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, stri^e,
railings, evil surmiseings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposeing that gain is godliness: from which he
advises Timothy, and us all in him, to with draw. He describes also, in his
second Epistle, a sort of men, whom he would have shuned, saying Chap. 3:1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shall
come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, trucebreakers false accusers (or make bates, as it is in the
margin) incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having the
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away: for of
this sort are they, which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women,
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth. And how app^sitely these all, or the most of
them, agree to this generation of Men, a few words might evince, if it were my
present business: But all that I now design, is to evince a necessity laid
upon us, to try Pretenders, before we trust them; especially such pretenders,
as are thus described by the Apostle.

17. As concearning these fisher men, he mentions, and to whom he compares
himself and his accomplices (by whom I imagine, he means the Apostles, except
Paul, who was no fisher man, but was learned, being brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel) I would enquire at him, if he thinks, that they did publish the
naked and pure truth? If so, he must know, that we desire only to follow that,
as we have it recorded to us in the Scriptures of truth, which he and his party
do not much value. And I would ask further. How it comes to pass, that there
is such a discrepancy and contradiction betwixt what these Apostles did teach,
and what he and the rest of the Quakers do teach? Truth, sure, and pure and
naked truth cannot be contrary to it self. And if he say, that there is no
difference, betwixt his doctrine and the truth delivered by the Apostles, he
must not be offended, if we try the same by their writings, and make use of
what light within we have, to this effect.

18. It is not enough for him falsely to accuse all tha^ have written of
Theology, of darkning and obscuring the truth; but he must also usurp the
throne of God, and judge of the heart and intentions of men: for he alleidgeth
that this was their end, That the poor common people might admire them, and
maintain them: which carries as little truth in it, as it evidenceth
Christian charity in the asserter: But we must not storm at such reflections,
from the men, whose works declare what Spirit they are of. Nor shall I retaliat
(though I might) nor enquire what way they are maintained; it is enough, that
there are shreud presumptions, that their stock lies at Rome.

19. Whatever we think of them, they will needs look upon themselves, as the
only called and authorized dispensers of the Gospel; for he says, that God
has made choice of some few despicable and illiterate persons, to publish the
pure and naked truth; and among the rest of himself, to be a dispenser of this
Gospel. So that among them, all are equal administrators, and dispensers of
this their Gospel, for they have no select officers, especially set apart for
this work: and so with them all are eyes, ears, etc. and their body is no
organical body; so that their Church (if their combination may, with any
propiety of speech, be called a Church) must needs be a monster. But passing
this, which sufficiently discovers, what enemies they are to Gospel Order,
and to the institutions of Christ, in his Church; of which more when we come to
his Tenth Thesis: we think ourselves concearned to know, what for a Gospel this
is, which they pretend to a mission to preach. Sure, it is not that, which
Christ and his Apostles taught, and left on record, as this man puts beyond
all debate, in his writings; and others clearly demonstrate by their books,
containing such positions, as overturn and destroy the Gospel. Mr Norton,
teacher of the Church at Boston, in New England, being appointed to write
against the Quakers, by order of the General Court, tells us, in his Tractat
printed A. 1660. Page 6.7. etc. that the Quakers deny, that the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, are three distinct Persons; that Christ is God and Man in one
Person: that Christ is a distinct person from the person of the Father: that
Christ is a distinct person from any of His Members: And so their Christ does
unchrist Christ. He tells us moreover, that they deny the Scriptures, or written
word, to be the Rule of life; and that they make the light within them, and the
Spirit without the Scriptures, to be their guide: that they own none as lawful
magistrates, who are not of their way: that they assert an infallible light
within them, above the trial of the Scriptures: that they will not acknowledge
that they sin; but profess perfection of degrees in his life. Mr Stalham, in
his Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to his Reviler rebuiked, shows us, that
they make nothing of the historical letter of Christ's Death, Resurrection,
etc. but turn all into allegories. And that they are, with H. N. in his joyful
message of the Kingdom, Page 170. ready to call these things mere lies, which
the Scripture-learned (through the knowledge, which they get out of the
Scriptures) bring-in, institute, preach and teach. As also, how they join with
Jacob Behme, who slighted the imputed righteousness from without, and magnified
the little spark within, whereby the Father draws them all to Christ, and
teaches all within them: and say further, that in Adam stood the Covenant of
grace: that there is no certain Ordination from eternity, upon any soul
particularly, which is yet to be borne; but only a common universal foreseeing
of grace. He shows us also, how Will. Erbury, in his Call to the Churches.
Page 4. said, what Gospel or glade tideings is it, to tell the world, that none
shall be saved, but the elect and believers? and that the Gospel, which Christ
taught was but in part, that which was proper only to the Jewish Church; not
that to be preached to the world. And moreover Page 6. he tells us, that he
said, the Gospel, which the Apostles preached to the world, was not that, which
they wrote to the Churches, nor yet what they read in the Scriptures of the
Prophets: but the Gospel was a mystery, which in the light of God, they could
manifest to men, and make all men, see themselves in God, that is in Christ. And
Page 9. that God is in our flesh, as in Christ's -- for the mystery of faith
was more than men imagine, and, it may be, more than Paul wrote to the Romans
and Churches of Galatia. And Page 37. that Christ's coming again promised,
Act. 1:11. was nothing but his coming in Spirit and power in the Saints, and in
their flesh, when they are most confused and dark. Further the same Mr Stalham,
in the book cited, shows how they contradict Scriptures, in several points,
as concerning Scriptures, Trinity, the Light within, the Law, Sin,
Justification, Regeneration, Sanctification, and its Perfection, Christian
warfare, Repentance, Means of grace, Baptism, Lord's Supper, Prayer, Singing,
Elders and Ordination, Ministers maintenance, Immediate calling, Immediate
teaching, Civil honor, Swearing: unto which might be added several things
brought out of their writings, by Mr Hicks; beside what we shall have occasion
to remark in this Author, with whom we now deal. By all which, we may
conjecture, what a Gospel this is, which they teach, even another, than we have
in the Scriptures, and than that, which the Apostle taught: And what welcome
such as come with another Gospel, were their credentials angelical (unto which
these men are strangers) should have, Paul has taught us Gal. 1:8, 9. as was
mentioned above: which is a sufficient warning for all that fear God, to beware
of these men.

20. This man has an high and mighty conceit of his Theses, calling them
though short yet ponderous, and saying, that they comprehend many things, and
denote the true original of knowledge, of that knowledge, which leads to life
eternal. And I do indeed conceive, that they contain much (though I dar not
say the whole) of the marrow of that Gospel, whereof he is a dispensator; we
may look upon ourselves therefore, as called more narrowly to consider and
examine them. If the matter contained in them were good, I should not quarrel
at their brevity; but I see, what they want in length, the Apology has,
Ponderous he calls them; but we know, wet sand, though of small value, is more
ponderous than what is more worth; and indeed so ponderous are they, that they
will sink the poor soul, that embraces them, without any other super added
weight, into the bottomless pit. His saying, that they point forth the true
original of saving knowledge, will never persuade me that they do so. How
defective they are as to this, we may show in the next Chapter. Nay rather: I
dar say, that they discover the true original of that science (falsely so
called) which leads to the bottomless pit: and this I hope, to make appear,
ere all be done.

21. He tells us that he bears witness to this truth, in this his work: But he
must hold us excused, to seek for a more sure ground to our faith and
persuasion, than his bare testimony, especially when he speaks not only not
consonant to Scripture, but so manifestly contrary thereto. Indeed if we were
called to rest upon his and his copartners bare testimony, all further dispute
were at an end, and we might cast our bibles at our heels, and learn all our
divinity, at their mouth, or at the light with in us, and rest thereupon,
notwithstanding it contradict sound reason and experience, let be Scripture.
But through grace, we have not ye^ drunk-in that principle; and therefore must
stand upon our old bottom, and go to the Law and to the Testimony.

22. In fine, he tells us, that he leaves this his testimony unto the light of
Christ, illuminating every one of our consciences: which words may have a
double sense, as expressed in his latin; and either import, that he leaves
this his testimony, as a confirmation of that light of Christ, which
illuminateth every man: and if this be his meaning, the preaching up of this
light, must be the whole of his Gospel wor^, and the whole Intent and design
of his writting and publishing these Theses; yea if so, these Propositions of
his must serve for no other end, but to confirm the truth and reality of this
light of Christ; But then I think, They, or He by them, should have given us
some clear discovery and explication of the nature of that light of Christ,
which is (as he says) within every man; which I find not: but it may be, what
is here wanting is supplied by his Apology. But if his meaning be* that he
leaves this testimony, to convince that light of Christ, which illuminateth
every man's conscience, than it seems, that light of Christ has need of his
information; and that, notwithstanding thereof, conscience may refuse to
receive his doctrine and information: so that this light of Christ, though it
enlighten the conscience, cannot captivate the same to a kindly submission to
that Gospel, which he preaches, till some other thing work. But seeing he
leaves this his testimony to be pondered and considered by the light of
Christ, which enlighteneth every man's conscience; and thereby grants, that
every man has this Supreme light of Christ within him, and thereby may, and is
allowed by him to judge of what he says; he cannot be offended, that I judge
by all that light of Christ within, enforming my soul and conscience, from that
light of Christ, which is held forth in the Scriptures of truth; and determine
accordingly against his Assertions.

CHAP. II. Of the true ground of Knowledge.
1. HAving thus considered his Preface, with which he ushereth-in his Theses, I
come now to a particular examination of his doctrine, expressed in his Theses
and vindicated and explained, in his large Apology: His first Thesis, which is
concerning the true ground of Knowledge, is short, wherein he tells us, that,
seeing our chief happiness is placed in the true Knowledge of God (for this: is
life eternal, that they might know that true God, Ioh. 17:3.) the true and
genuine understanding of the right original and ground of Knowledge is
especially necessary to be known and believed.

2. Christ indeed in his prayer Ioh. 17:3. speaks to his Father thus. And
this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent: which last words, why this man did leave out (and
his etc. added in his second edition is but a small relief) who can tell? if
of design, it must be a bad Omen, and gives small ground of expectation of a
full and satisfying discovery of that knowledge of ^od, which is through faith
in Jesus Christ, and is thereby begun felicity here, and leads forward to the
certane fruition of God. However, Christ hereby gives us to understand, that
that knowledge of God, which is eternal life begun, cannot be had without the
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, as the sent Ambassador of God, in whose face
and manifestations, God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
shines into the hearts of his own, to give the light of the knowledge of his
glory, 2 Cor. 4:6. Our Lord does not mean here a bare speculative knowledge,
but such a knowledge, and beholding of the glory of the Lord, as changes the
beholder into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3:18. and so is accompanied with Faith, apprehending and closeing
with the Son, in whom is this eternal life; so that he who has the Son, has
life 1 Ioh. 5:11, 12. And it is this Son of God, who must give us an
understanding, that we may know him, that is true, and we are in him that is
true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life, 1 Ioh.
5:20. And another foundation, or original, of knowledge, that is saving, and
the way to eternal life, can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3:11.

3. It is good and necessary, I confess, to have the genuine and true
understanding of the right original and ground of this true and saving
knowledge: But whether this man's doctrine has a genuine tendency thereunto, or
not, the sequel will evince. I am far mistaken, if, after trial, his doctrine
prove not a perverting of the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1:7. and of the right
ways of the Lord, Act. 13:10. and contradictory to that Gospel, whereby life
and immortality is brought to light, 2 Timothy 5:10. and which is the Gospel of
Salvation, Ephesians. 1:13.

4. We might readily think, that one, taking upon him, with no small
confidence, to teach the whole world, and to give a new discovery of pure and
naked truth, which hitherto has been (as he supposes,) darkened and obscured;
and who openly declares, in the beginning of his doctrine, that the genuine
understanding of the right origin^l knowledge of that God, whom to know is life
eternal, is necessary to be known and believed, should explain to us some
hidden mysteries of God, and help us by his new grounds to some more distinct
apprehensions of what is revealed to us of God, in his word: But alas! this
man's ignis fatuus is no sure guide to us. The grounds he lays down are both
defective and destructive: Of their destructive nature, we will have large
occasion to speak hereafter: and how defective they are, a few Instances may
clear.

5. And first. Seeing he would hold forth to us clear and naked truth, and
acquant us with true divine and saving knowledge, how comes it to pass, that
in his Theses, we hear nothing of the nature and attributes of God? Supposes
he, that we can attain to the true and saving knowledge of God, and yet not
know Him to be a Spirit, Pure and Invisible, without a Body, Parts, or
Passions; nor know, that He is the only True and Living God, Infinite in Being
and in all Perfection? Shall we think, that it is no part of that knowledge of
God, wherein consists true felicity, to know Him to be Immutable, Immense,
Eternal, Incomprehensible, Almighty, Most Holy, Most Absolute, Most Just, Most
Righteous, Most Wise, Most Gracious, and Long-suffering, etc. Is it no part of
the genuine knowledge of God, that tends to life, to know, that He has all
Life, Glory, Goodness and Blessedness in and of Himself, etc. and that He is
the sole Fountain of all Life, Glory and Goodness, which the Creature
partaketh, or is capable of; and the only Author of their being? what for a
knowledge of God must that be, in which all felicity consists, whereof the
knowledge of these particulars mentioned shall make no part? And if he
thinks, that the knowledge of God does of necessity comprehend the knowledge
of these particulars; how comes it to pass, that in his Most comprehensive
Theses, and his large Apology too, which hold forth (as he would make us
believe) that knowledge, which leads unto life eternal, there is such a deep
silence of these so many particulars, so necessary to be known and believed? It
concerns him to answer this.

6. Next, Shall we think, that it is no necessary part of this saving knowledge
of God, to know that there is one God in Essence, and Three distinct persons in
the Unity of the God head, of one Substance, Power and Eternity; viz God the
Father, being of none, neither Begotten, nor Proceeding; God the Son eternally
begotten of the Father; and God the Holy Ghost, eternally proceeding from the
Father and the Son? And if the knowledge of this be such an essential part of
Christianity, and a ground of that knowledge of God, which leads to
salvation, and so necessary for the right uptaking of the great work of
Redemption and Salvation, as it is, and cannot rationally be denied by any
sober man, who considers what a sure basis this is unto the Christians hope,
peace and comfort; how comes it to pass, that there is no express, and
distinct mention made of this fundamental point, in all his Theses? we have
heard how the Quakers of N. England have denied this foundation: And Mr Stalham
in his Reviler rebuked part. 1. sect. 7. tells us, that the Quakers, against
whom he wrote, d^nied that there was any Scripture for the Trinity, and said,
that the Holy Ghost was no Person. It is known also, how others of them inveigh
against this fundamental Truth. It is true* I find not this man, either in his
Theses, or in his Apology, directly writing against this truth; Yet, as I find
no expressions hereanent, in his whole book, others than such, as might come
out of the mouth of an Antitrinitarian Socinian; so I judge, if his Theses had
answered his great brags in the Preface, they had expressly and distinctly not
only mentioned, but clearly have unfolded this truth.

7. In the (3.) place. If by his Theses he would direct us into the Saving
knowledge of God, and make a plain discovery to us, from the very fountain,
of all that knowledge, that leads unto life eternal; how comes it to pass,
that we have no declaration made to us, of the Eternal Purposes and Decrees of
God, whereby some Men and Angels, are predestined unto everlasting life, and
others foreordained unto everlasting death; and whereby, according to the most
wise and holy counsel of his will, he has freely and unchangeably ordained
whatsoever comes to pass? Shall we think, that the knowledge of this has no
interest in the saving knowledge of God, or in that knowledge, which leads
unto life, which yet undeni^bly yields such a noble ground of Faith,
Dependence, Praise, Reverence, Humility, Hope, Consolation, Admiration and holy
Fear? Nay, this Man not only does not asserte or explain this; but, as we
shall hear, does deny and impugn it, with all his might.

8. How comes it (4) That in all his Theses, or Apology, there is not the
least mention, direct or indirect, made of the Covenant of Redemption; or of
those mutual actings of the blessed Persons of the Trinity, resembling a mutual
Covenant and engagement, concerning the everlasting Interest of man? Shall any
man think, that this point of truth, which is such a sure ground of all our
hopes and consolation, such a sure support of staggering souls, and such an
armor of proof against the assaults of Satan, makes no part of that
knowledge, which leads unto life, or has no place in true and saving
knowledge?

9. Further (5.) Does not the doctrine of the first C^venant of Works, entered
into with Adam, as the representative of M^n-ki^de, upon condition of Personal,
Perfect, and Perpetual obedience, belong to that necessary knowledge, which
brings forward unto life; or unto that knowledge of God in Christ, which is
begun felicity? How is it then, that his Theses are so silent herein, or at
most give us such a dark and jejune hint of this, as is next to none, as we
shall see? It is one of the Quakers tenets, as Mr Stalham Shows in his
forecited book, Part 1. Sect ^7. that Adam was not under a Covenant of Works:
that the Law, which Adam had in innocence written in his heart, was not the
moral law: that Adam did not stand by the observation of the positive branches
given him in command, according to that Law. So said I. Nayler and R. F. as he
shows us; and that the same James Nayler, in his Book called, The discovery
of the Man of sin Page: 23. went about to prove this by such pityful Arguments,
as these, The Covenant of Works says, do this and live; but he (that is Adam)
had the life already, while he stood in it, and so it was not to be obtained by
working; as if do this and live, could not hold forth the condition of
continueing in life: and again, That the law was added because of
transgression, which, if it had been before the transgression, could not have
been; as if the law must not of necessity be before sin, which is the
transgression thereof, 1. Ioh. 3.4. and could not afterward beheld forth as a
glass to discover the foul spots of transgressions: and the same would R. F.
in the 12. Page of his Book go about to prove.

10 Moreover. (6.) If his Theses be such an unfolding of clear and naked truth,
how comes it, that he speaks so obscurely, and enigmatically of the fall of
Adam? Does not the clear and distinct knowledge of this truth concern such as
would be acquaint with true and saving knowledge?

11. But especially, (7.) We may wonder how it comes to pass, that in his
Theses, which he would give out, as a sum of saving knowledge, nor in his
great Apology, we have no description, explication or delineation, yea, or
mention of the Covenant of Grace, wherein Life and Salvation, Pardon and
Acceptance, Grace and Glory is promised and offered, through faith in Jesus
Christ, or acceptance of Him, as He is offered in the Gospel? Shall we think
that the knowledge of this is no part of that pure and naked Truth, which is
necessary to be known? Or that it can contribute nothing unto that knowledge of
God in Christ, which is the sure way unto eternal life? How shall he be able to
persuade us hereof?

12. Again. (8.) Shall we think, that the doctrine of the Redemption,
purchased by Christ, of the Atonement made by him unto Justice for the sins
of his people; and of their Reconciliation unto and Acceptance with God, upon
the account thereof; of the Sufferings of Christ in Body and Soul, in his state
of Humiliation; of his Death Resurrection and Ascension, and Sitting at the
Fathers right hand; of his Obedience, and of the Sacrifice of himself, which
he, through the Eternal Spirit, once offered up unto God, to satisfy Justice,
and purchase not only Reconciliation, but also an everlasting Inheritance, in
the Kingdom of Heaven, for all such as were given to him of the Father? shall
we think, (I say,) that the knowledge of this is not necessary unto Salvation;
nor necessary to such, as would have such a knowledge of God, as is eternal
life? If he dar not be so impudent as to say so* why is there such a shameful
silence hereof in his Theses and Book, as there is? Had he no will to displease
his friends, the Socinians.

13. Further (9.) Shall it be thought, that the doctrine of the Incarnation of
the Son of God, the Second Person in the Trinity, has no great interest in
that pure and naked truth, the knowledge whereof leads unto life, because it
has no place in his writings?

14. The like (10.) may we say of the work of Grace and of Sanctification, of
which his account is so dark and enigmatical, that it is far from an holding
forth of pure and naked Truth: And how comes it, that he is so silent in
explaining to us the nature of Faith in Jesus Christ, and of its Actings; and
of Repentance unto life, and of our Communion with the Father and his Son,
through Faith? do not these appertain to that knowledge of God, which is
Eternal Life? What shall we then think of this Gospel, which He takes upon him
to be a publisher of?

15. In the next place (11.) To speak nothing of the law of God, in obedience
whereunto, with a right frame of Spirit, consists true Sanctification, and
that Obedience, which is a real mark of true Love to God; and so must be
necessarily known, to the end we may come to the possession of Eternal life,
whereof notwithstanding he not only gives no plain or naked account; but
also, with the rest of the Quakers, lays down grounds destroying all
obedience to the law of God, as we shall hear: How comes it, that in all his
explication of the true nature and original of that knowledge, which leads
unto life, whether in his Theses or Apology, we have no account given to us of
that Eternal life, which we are to aim at and intend, as our last end; nor yet
of its opposite, Eternal Death and Hell, whereby we might come to know some
thing of the nature, worth and necessity of Glory?

16. Yet once more (12.) I would ask why it is, that in his Theses, he gives
us no account of the Resurrection of the Body, nor of the last Judgment? He
cannot say, that the knowledge and faith of these particulars are not
necessary, unless he be of the same opinion with other Quakers, who either
speak dubiously thereof, or do down right deny it, Mr. Hicks shows us, in his
Book, called, The Quakers appeal answered, Page: 21. that one Whitehead asserted
in the hearing of many witnesses, that this body shall not rise again, and
that Will. Pen, in his Book entitled. Reas. against Rail. Page 133. says,
That it is inconsistent with Scripture, Reason and the belief of all Men right
in their wits. And Page 134. that the absurdity of the Transubstantiation is
rather outdone, than equalled, by this carnal Resurrection. And that Page 138.
he called it a Barbarous conceit. Shall I think, that this our Apologizer is of
the same mind? If not, it concerns him to speak more positively thereunto;
for his silence will go for an approbation of what his party speak expressly:
and further, as concerning the last Judgment, we may suppose, that such as look
on the Resurrection of the dead, as a figment, will give no place in their
creed unto the doctrine of Christ's coming again to judge quick and dead: and
indeed, I find in the second Dialogue of Mr. Hicks Page: 42, 43, that
Whitehead, in his Christ ascend: Page 18, 20, 21, 69. denies That Christ has
a personal being, at the Right Hand of God, without all men. And Page 2^. that
he denies, That he shall come visibly again, saying that they are like to be
deceived, who are expecting, that Christ's second comeing will be a personal
comeing. And I find G. Keith, in his Immediate Revel. Page 77. applying the
second or next comeing again of Christ, mentioned by James Cap. 5:7, 8. by
Paul Heb. 9.28. and by Peter 1 Pet 1:13. to Christ's revelation, when he shall
appear in us glorified, who before was crucified in weakness, yet now raised
in power, and living by the power of God, and raising us up together with him,
and setting us in heavenly places in him? Whereby he cannot but mean a second
coming again of Christ, which is already past; and nothing else.

17. By these particulars, and several others, which might be added, every one
may judge, what a delineation of that knowledge, which leads to Salvation,
this confident man will give us, in these his Theses, when so many, so
important, and so necessary and essential parts of our Christian faith, are not
once by him mentioned or asserted, let be cleared up or explained; but rather,
tacitly or expressly, rejected and condemned. We may also judge, what that
knowledge of God, wherein is life eternal, is, which he shall point forth to
us, in his Theses; when so many things, so manifestly belonging to true divine
and saving knowledge, are, if not denied, yet waved, by him, as not necessary
to be known and believed. Hereby also we see ground to suspect that Original
and Foundation of knowledge, which he follows, and would propose to our
understanding and faith, in the two next following Theses: for either that must
be a false Original and rotten Ground of saving knowledge; or he is yet a
stranger to the true and genuine Knowledge thereof; otherwise he should be in
case to give us a more distinct and faithful account of these and such like
particulars, which are so necessary to be known and believed.

18. I Shall readily grant, that it is very necessary and useful, to know what
is the true ground and original, out of which we are to draw that knowledge of
God, and of his ways, which is necessary for us to know and believe, in order
to the obtaining of that felicity, which consists in, and is had further by,
the knowledge of God in Christ; not only because many are ready to drink-in
false Notions and Principles (as he says, but very obscurely and indistinctly
in his Apology Page 1. and 2.) of God and of his Truth; and to hold fast what
they have so, through Ignorance, Misinformation, and Prejudice, imbibed; but
especially because, so many Pretenders to high and great matters, as he and his
like, are ready to embrace a Shadow for a Substance, and take a suggestion of
Satan, the Father of lies, or a dream of their own brains, or a lying Vision
of the Prince of the powers of the air, for Revelations and Manifestations of
the God of Truth; and the Motions of their own corrupt minds, enlightened with
the wildfire of their own fancies, or the fire flaughts of the God of this
World, for the Motions of the spirit of God. That such things have been, and
may be, himself dar not deny; and if he should deny it, sad experience of the
fantastic Enthusiasts, and false Teachers, which every age has produced, will
put it beyond all denial; as also the Idolatry and Superstition of so many
Nations and People, (as himself affirms Page 2.) which were a clear evidence
of the false and fictious Opinions and Apprehensions, which they had of God,
and a fruit of the false Divinations and pretended Revelations, which they
trusted to. And therefore, with good warrant, and with his own approbation, I
shall say, That it is a most dangerous thing to lay a wrong foundation of
Knowledge, and to draw the same out of a corrupt Original; and that we ought to
be sure, that the Ground and Original of our Knowledge be such, as we may
saifly trust to and build upon. But whether the Original, which He and other
Quakers do follow, and which he would prescribe unto us, be the true and
genuine Original, and Ground of saving Knowledge, he must allow us liberty,
seeing the danger here is great, (as himself confesses) and such as enter not
by the door are Thieves and Robbers, to examine; and to try, whether the Ground,
he holds forth, be Saife; or the Ground, we build upon, be not Sufficient.

CHAP. III. Of inward and immediate Revelations.
1. The maine scope of his second Thesis, which is concerning Inward and
Immediate Revelations, is, to give us the true and genuine understanding of the
right original and fundation of Knowledge: So that this Thesis must point out
unto us this Original and Ground of true and saving Knowledge: and by the
title, which he has prefixed unto this Thesis, we learn, that his opinion is,
that Inward and Immediate Revelation is the only right Original and Foundation
of Knowledge: and this Inward and Immediate Revelation is given us, in place of
the holy Scriptures, as his adjoining the third Thesis, concerning the
Scriptures, and what he says of them therein, make manifest.

2. We should now come to the examination of what he says, of this Inward and
Immediate Revelation; but in the entry of his explication of this Thesis, in his
Apology Page 4. we are staved off by a hudge Preoccupation, and meet with a
dangerous Dilemma; for either we must give our assent unto what he says, in
this Thesis; or bear the stigma and blake mark of Carnal and Natural
Christians, ignorant of the motions and operations of the Spirit of God in our
hearts. But perceiving an open way of escapeing from betwixt the horns of his
dilemma, and waving his uncharitable censure of such, as oppose him, as being
not only strangers to these motions of the Spirit in their hearts; but as
accounting them no way necessary; yea as mocking them, as foolish and
ridiculous, and much more to this purpose (wherein, as he manifests what
Spirit he is of, and with what Spirit he is led; so he bewrays much ignorance
of the mind and assertions of his Opposites) which would be both endless and
unprofitable, for me once to take any notice of, let be to answer, seeing a
simple contempt of his Calumnies is sufficient: Waveing, I say, these his
impertinencies, as the native fruit of his imbittered Spirit, against all that
do not applaud his wild Notions; I shall tell him, that I cordially give my
assent unto that of Paul, Romans 8:9, 14. -- now if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God. And I know no Christian, whether Private Person, or
Doctor, Minister or Divine, that will not homologate with me in this, howbeit
he flander us, as not only denying this, but also as contradicting it.

3. But he would hence deduce, that no Knowledge of God can be acquired,
without a Divine and Immediate Revelation; and for this cause, he distinguishes
betwixt a Certane and an Vncertane; a Spiritual and a Literal; a Saving and an
Empty, Aerie and Brainy Knowledge of God, and says, the One can be many ways
acquired, but the Other not without an Inward, and Immediate Manifestation of
the Spirit of God, shineing in the heart, and enlightening the understanding.
By which we see, what Darkness and Confusion occupies this man's mind; and
how, either through blind Ignorance, or wicked Prevarication, he labors to
pervert the true state of the Question, and leads his Readers into the same
ditch of Ignorance and Prejudice, wherein himself is fallen. If he cannot, we
know, how to distinguish betwixt the Spirits Inward and Immediate Revealing and
making known the mind of God, as he did of old unto the Prophets, and
Apostles, whether by Dreams, Visions, Vive voice, or inward efficacious
Inspirations; and the Spirits gracious In-working and Impressing the Truths,
other ways revealed and made known mediatly, upon the soul of a man, giving
him, through the spiritual Illumination of his mind, and the gracious and
effectual Moving of his heart, grace to See, to Embrace, and to Close with and
savingly Improve the Truths revealed. These things which are most manifestly
distinct, and clearly different, he is pleased, either out of mere Ignorance,
or our of Design, all alongs, to jumble together and confound, that he might
the more darken the Reader, and prejudge him, both of the right state of the
Question, and at the orthodox truth, which he maliciously misrepresenteth. The
difference betwixt these two Operations of the Spirit, without running forth
here into a tedious and unnecessary digression, for the clear information of
the Reader, and for preventing our further labor afterward, we shall thus make
plain and manifest. The first Operation of the Spirit mentioned, is that which
he, and the rest of the Quakers, endeavoure to assert and plead for, in
prejudice of the Scriptures, which now to us, under the New Testam. supplieth
richly, and with advantage, the want of the Immediate and Extraordinary
Revelations of the mind and will of God, concerning duty, whether as to Faith
or Practice, by which the Lord was pleased formerly, after diverse manners and
ways, to make the same known. The other, which we assert and maintain, is an
Efficient and not Objective Revelation, and confirms the authority and truth
of the Objective Revelation of the mind of God, both touching Faith and
Manners; and so reserveth to the Scriptures their due place, as our compleet
Objective Canon and Rule, and confirms them therein, bringing home, with
power and saving grace upon the heart, the Truths therein revealed, and casting
the soul into the mould of these saving Truths. The One, which they plead for,
takes away all the use of the letter of the Scriptures, all the study thereof,
or all the pains to be used, in Acquireing the knowledge of the Original
tongues, in Reading of Commentaries for attaining to the knowledge of the
letter, in Preaching and Hearing of preachings, and in Useing other means, for
reaching the knowledge of the Truths, delivered in the Scriptures. The Other,
which we maintain, presupposes in ordinary this knowledge of the letter of
the Scriptures, and the use of means contributing thereunto, as a mean
appointed of God, whereby we may come, through his Grace cooperating on our
Understandings and Wills, unto the saving and soul-captivating knowledge of the
same Truths. As the saving and gracious believing and improving of the Truths
of God, revealed of old by his immediately and extraordinarily inspired
Prophets, unto others, did presuppose their hearing and understanding the
letter of what these Prophets and extraordinary Messengers revealed, as the
mind of God; and did not destroy and make useless that mean: as the way of
Quakers would necessarily have done; for they alleidge, that every individual
soul, before they could savingly believe and understand the Truth of God,
behoved of necessity to have the same, as Immediately, Inwardly and
Extraordinarily revealed to themselves, as it was to the Prophets; and thus
every man was to be an immediately inspired Prophet to himself: and what need
was there then of immediately Inspired Prophets, singularly pitched upon and
raised up, for the use and benefit of others?

4. This being plain, and a sure basis, whereupon we may stand; and such a
clear stateing of the Question, betwixt us and the Quakers, that none needs
be ignorant of the true difference betwixt us and them; we may very shortly
dispatch this Man and his Doctrine: which for the most part (as we shall see)
runeth upon this Confusion and Mistake, for thus he begins Page 5. to tell
us, That in all ages this has been acknowledged viz, That there is no saving
knowledge of God to be had, without the Spirit: and to this end cites some
passages out of Augustine, Clemens Alexandr. Tertul. Hierom, Athanasius,
Gregorius Magnus Cyril Alexandr. Bernard, Luther and Melanch^on: None of which
speak any other thing, than what I have already granted and asserted; and no
true orthodox Christian, or any that I know, will deny, except Pelagians,
Arminians, and the like, with whom this Man does too much conspire, as we shall
hear. But, can he produce any of the Fathers, or of our Reformers, maintaining
such Inward and Immediate Revelations of the Spirit, as the Quakers, with their
predecessors, the Enthusiasts, do assert now to be necessary, and do pretend
to? If he be so well acquanted with the writings of the Fathers, as by these
his citations, he would have us believe, he has done wisely for himself, but
not very honestly, in concealing what several of the same Fathers, and Others,
write expressly against such high Pretenders, as the Quakers now are, and in
whose footsteps they, in many things, now tread, Theodoretus in Epit. Haeret.
Fab. Cap. 3. gives us Cerinthus, as the first Patriarc^ of Fanatics,
pretending to such Revelations: Irenaeus lib. 1. advers. Valentinum etc. Cap.
9. shows how Marcus Valentinianus had a great Impostor, and a certane Devil
for his Assessor, by whom he himself seemed to Prophecy and foretell things; and
how he made some certane women, whom he accounted worthy of that honor to
prophecy, and speak some braine-sick discourses, when warmed by that empty
Spirit, so that they supposed themselves to be Prophetisses: Theodoret, in the
forecited book Lib. 3. Cap. 11. tells us, that one Montanus, out of an ambition
to excel all others, alleidged that he had all his Opinions from the instinct
of his Spirit, the Paracle^e; and did pretend to Enthusiasmes and Revelations;
and that he took unto him Priscilla and Maximilla, as two Prophetisses, calling
their writings Prophecies, or Prophetic Books, and preferring them unto the
divine Evangel. And from this Montanus, borne at Pepuza in Phrygia, came the
Seck of Cataphrygians and Pepuzians, Augustine may also be read concerning
this, Catal. Haeret. Number. 26. and 27. And these men, because they pretended
much to the Spirit (as our Quakers do now) were usually called, Spirituales,
and they called and accounted others, Carnal Persons, Psychici, Animales.
Eusebius Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 16, and 17 may be read to this purpose,
relateing some of the pranks, and opinions of these Cataphrigians, and how one
Apollonius wrote against them and their revelations, and how Serapion and
others gave witness against them. Let him, if he please, read also Epiphanius
contra Haeres. Tom. 1. Lib. 2. Haeres. 48. and 49. Where he will meet with some
things, not unworthy of his consideration. Of this sort also were the Euchites,
who came of the Messalinians, who were also called Enthusiasts, concerning whom
see Theodoretus Epit. Haeret Fab. Lib. 4. Cap 11 and Phylostr. Haeres, 49. A
wonder it is, that he cites not Tertullian's books written de Ecstasi, after
he turned a follower of Montanus, whom, and whose ecstasies, he labored to
defend, in these books; sure such, could he have fallen upon them, had been
more apposite to his purpose, then what he here cites out of his book, de
volandis Virginibus: and we could also cite his book de pra^cript. advers.
Haeres. Cap. 52. where he inveigheth much against such Prophets. Among others
of the predecessors of Quakers, may the Circumcelliones and Donatistae be
reckoned, who did pretend to Visions, and such Revelations: and we may take in
Quintius the Liber^ine, though much later, and others of the like stamp.

5. In his. 3. he goes on ranting at the same rate, inveighing against all
Doctors and learned Persons, who are not of his judgment, as being void of the
Spirit (and so no more to be called Christians) as subserving, in their
writtings and labors, the design of Satan, being only instructed in the
external letter of the Scriptures whileas others, that had only this inward and
immediate revelation, were true Christians: and hence he very profoundly does
infer, That the inward and immediate Revelation is only that sure and
undoubted method of true and saving knowledge. I shall not be the man that
shall plead for Doctors or Professors, that deny, or are strangers to the
workings of the Spirit of God: only I may say, that the Quakers have not as yet
given such irrefragable demonstrations of their being illuminated and led, by
the Spirit, as may make us secure and confident, as to the truth of all, which
they say. I suppose the Spirit of God would teach them to speak more soberly of
such, as they are yet great strangers unto: But to what purpose is all this
waste of words, if he mean nothing else by his Inward and Immediate Revelation,
than what we formerly. 3. did own and explain, against. whom does he fight?
But if he mean (as he must, if he speak to the purpose) what we said was the
opinion of the Quakers, all his wit and skill shall never be able to infer
his Conclusion from the Premises. I grant, that the knowledge of the letter of
the Scriptures, will never bring a man to heaven, if with that there be not
some gracious and saving Work of the Spirit, working up the man to an
Imbraceing, Closeing with, and rightly Improving of the Truths there contained;
yet I dar not say, that the very letter of the Scriptures, in its kind, as a
compleet Canon and Rule, is not able to make us wise unto salvation, seeing the
Apostle is express for this 2 Timothy: 3.15. nor will I say, that to the end the
Truths revealed in the Scriptures may be savingly believed, there is a
necessity that every one have these same Truths revealed and declared unto them
Objectively, by new Inward and Immediate Revelations, as the Prophets and
Apostles had the Truths revealed unto them, which they delivered unto others,
in the name of the Lord. And when he shall be able to infer this Conclusion
from solid Premises, we shall think our selves concerned to take notice of it.

6: In his. 4. He would have us believing, that he does not hereby condemn all
other second ways or means, as he purposes to clear in the next Thesis,
that is, all other Ways and Modes of attaining to the knowledge of God; for he
grants these to be profitable, and that they may conduce to facilitate the
work; but he is here pleading (as he says) for that which is absolutely
necessary. But all the question is, concerning the true meaning and import of
that, which he accounts so Necessary; if it be such Revelations of Truths, as
the Prophets, and such as were Immediately inspired, had, and as Enthusiasts
plead for, I deny the necessity hereof; and, as to this, what way, I pray, can
other means and modes, as the Scriptures, conduce to facilitate these
Revelations? have they any influence upon the person, who is to receive these
Revelations, disposeing him thereunto? Let him explain this, and then he may
hear what shall be further replied. If the thing so necessary unto the saving
knowledge of God, be only that operation of the Spirit, which we mentioned
above, we assent; and only say, That he should speak more intelligibly, than
call this an Inward and Immediate Revelation: But it is usual with this sort of
men, to speak, (as did the Libertines, against whom Calvin wrote Cap. 2.) after
an high and lofty manner, as if they were always ravished in an ecstasy; for
as they always have the Spirit in their mouth, so they use a strange idiome,
that such as hear them are at the first amazed; and this they affect of purpose
to deceive their hearers, and raise in them an admiration of them and their
Opinions.

7. Having thus premised what he thought fit to say, to clear the Question,
and to make way, for vindicating of his Thesis, he comes next to the
explication and confirmation of his Assertion in his Thesis, where he tells us
of five particulars, 1. That there is no knowledge of the Father, but by the
Son. 2. That there is no knowledge of the Son, but by the Spirit. 3. That God
did always reveal himself by the Spirit. 4. That these Revelations were the
formal object of the faith of the Saints. 5. That the same object of faith
remains. He names here, we see, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; and we
might readily think, that he would here hold forth the order of working of the
glorious Persons of the Trinity, in things without, ad extra; and particularly
in the Revelation of the mind of God concerning man's duty: But whether we may
rest persuaded, that his judgment herein is Orthodox, and that verily he
believes, that there are Three Persons in the God head, equal in Power and
Glory, of one Substance and Duration, may be a doubt, partly because, the Light
within, which to him is the supreme and only adequate Rule of Faith, cannot
teach this mystery: and hence it is, that the Socinians not only will not
admit this, as an article of their creed; but do also with much industry and
rage oppose it and mainly upon this ground that their Natural Reason, or the
light within them (which upon the matter, so far as I can judge, differs not
from the Light of the Quakers) cannot comprehend it: and partly because I find
other Quakers, such as those of New England, and those against whom Mr Stalham
wrote, as I hinted above, denying it. It is true, this man has several
expressions further, in the words following, which would seem to evince, that
he is orthodox herein: and there are some also that may seem to look another
way. But not purposeing to make more debate with him, than I must needs do, I
shall not fix any thing upon him, for which I see not clear ground: only I
wish, that the next time he comes forth in public, he would be more plain and
positive, as to this.

8. As to the first of the forementioned Propositions, It is true, that no man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matthew.
11:27. Luke 10:22. for no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Ioh. 1:18. and God,
who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers, by the Prophets, has, in these last days, spoken unto us by his Son,
etc. Hebr. 1:1, 2. and so the Son of God, the Second Person of the Trinity,
being the true Eternal God, of the same substance; and equal in power and glory
with the Father, when the fullness of time was come, took upon Him man's nature;
so that the Word was made flesh, and tabernacled among us, Ioh 1:14: to the
end, that He might execute his Offices, and, among the rest, declare the whole
Counsel of God concerning man's Salvation, as the great Prophet and Teacher of
Israel: But shall we suppose, that this Man looks upon Jesus of Nazareth, of
whom the Father said, Mat 17:5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him, to be this Son that reveals the Father, and to be
that grand mystery, God manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, bel^eved on in the World, received up into
glory, 1 Timothy 3:16? The reason of my doubt is this: because I find some
Quakers give a very indistinct and unsatisfying answer to such a question as
this, and give ground to suppose, that they understood nothing by the Words
being made flesh, but the Light within them. But his proof and explication of
this Proposition is observable Page 9. He proves it thus: Because God, who is
the root and fountain of all operation, made all things by his eternal word
and Son; and cites Ioh. 1:1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 3:9. If hereby he understand the
first Creation, with the orthodox, how shall he evince this Consequence, That
because God created all things in the beginning by his Son Jesus Christ;
Therefore there is no knowledge of the Father, but by his Son? and is this a
point so difficult to be proved, that he was constrained to run back to the
first Creation for an argument? This would justly give ground of suspicion,
that the man means by the Creation in the places cited, not the First, but
the Second Creation, with which Christ's Revelation of the Father has a more
clear and natural connection; and so joyneth with Socinus and his followers,
Enjedinus, Smalcius and Schlightingius, in denying, upon this account, Christ
to be God creating all. They say, that, when the Scripture says, God made all
things by the Word, etc. the meaning is, God made all things by his own word
and virtue; the same expression, which this Man uses here: and thus interpret
and apply the same Scriptures, which he here cites, even that Ioh. 14:6. But
admitting that he takes the Creation in the orthodox sense, we may observe
some other Abomination lurking under this; To wit, That this manifestation of
the Father by the Son, is not to be understood of a Gospel Manifestation, but
of a Natural Manifestation, had in and by the works of Creation; and so not of
a Manifestation peculiar to the Church and people of God, but of a
Manifestation common to Heathens, and all without the pale of the Church;
otherwise he shall hereby destroy what afterward he labors to build, viz.
the Universality of this Manifestation. But whoever considers the Scriptures,
by us cited, shall find, that Christ means a manifestation and declaration
of the Father, in and by the Gospel, and Gospel, Ordinances, to the destruction
of this man's Universality.

9. He comes. 6. to the clearing of his second Proposition, viz. That there is
no knowledge of the Son, but by the Spirit: And who will deny this, as to that
Knowledge, which is truly and eventually saving, (of which Saving, Certane and
Necessary Knowledge, his Proposition is to be understood, as himself expressly
shows us, with an Observandum) and 1 Cor. 2:11, 12. and 12:3. whereby he
proves this, are clear enough: but I see not the necessity of adduceing, as a
proof hereof, Revel. 3:20. behold I stand at the door, etc. Yet beside this
Saving knowledge, there is a Literal knowledge, had by the common gifts of the
Spirit, which is also true, in its kind; and though as to any Saving Effect,
it be Ineffectual; yet we must not say with him Page 12. that the Spiritual
Truths in the Gospel are as lies, in the mouth of carnal persons; for they are
true, even as to them, Heb. 10:26. Some may sin wilfully after they have
received the knowledge of the truth, for whom no more sacrifice remains, and 2
Pet. 2:20, 21. Some may have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and have known the way of
righteousness, who, after they have known it, turn from the holy commandment,
etc. I cannot then say, with him, that this Knowledge of Christ is no more
properly to be called a Knowledge of Christ, than the speaking of a Parot is
properly humane knowledge; for I cannot think, that when Christ sent Judas to
preach the Gospel, it was as a man sending an embassage by the hand of a Parot;
or that Balaam had no real knowledge of what was revealed unto him, in his
trance.

10. But, not insisting on this, which is not much to the maine purpose, I
Observe, that the thing, which concerned him chiefly to clear up and prov^ is
not once touched by him here. He should have proved t^ us, That this teaching
of Christ by the Spirit, is, and was always, by Immediate Revelation, that is,
by Enthusiasmes, and such Extraordinary Ways: Nor does he (which is also
remarkable) distinguish betwixt Christ's teaching by the Spirit, in the Prophets
of old, and the Apostles of late; and Christ's own teaching Immediately in his
own Person, while Incarnate: which two the Apostle clearly differenceth, Heb.
1:1, 2. and 2:3, 4. Nor does he speak any thing of Christ's Mediat teaching,
whether by Apostles, extraordinarily assisted, or by Ordinary Ministers, or by
his Word: nay, by his language we might suppose, that he excludes these ways,
from being ways of Christ's teaching, contrare to Math. 10:20. 1 These. 4:8. 2
Cor. 5:19, 20. Mat. 28:18, 19. and many other places.

11. Let us proceed, and see what he says. 7. in confirmation of the third
Proposition viz. That God did always make himself manifest to the Sons of Men
by the Spirit. For this cause he would have us considering, how God, from the
beginning, did manifest himself in his creatures. But our enquiry should be,
how he did manifest himself to his creatures: These words in creaturis suis, in
his creatures, cannot but be understood of the way of his manifesting himself.
But to Manifest Himself in or by the Creatures, is not the same with
Manifesting H^mself in or by the Spirit. For confirmation of his Proposition he
adduceth Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the face of the
waters. Is not this a pregnant proof of Gods revealing his mind unto Men, who
were not yet created? B^t passing this ridiculous Argument, which moreover
perverteth the genuine meaning of the Spirit of the Lord, in that passage; let
us see what he adduceth further. I think (faith he) no man will deny that from
Adam, to Moses, Gods communion with man was by immediate manifestation of the
Spirit: I answer Though it be true, that Christ, as the great Prophet of his
Church, did by the Spirit reveal the Counsel of God, concerning man's salvation;
yet that he did this by the Spirit's Immediate Revelation, unto every Individual
Person, will never be proved: now, this being the matter, that he would have us
grant, and which only makes for his purpose, he must prove it, ere we assent
to it. That the Lord was pleased to reveal his mind Immedialy to Some, and by
them to Others, from Adam to Moses, we know: but that every individual Person,
even of the people of God, were advanced to this privilege, I deny. Yea, even
dureing that time, we read in Scripture but little of these Manifestations. We
know, what was spoken immediately to Adam and to Cain: we read also of the
Prophecy of En^h, in Iud's Epistle, (which yet was not any new Truth revealed)
we read also of what was revealed to Noah, and to Abraham, to Isaac and to
Jacob, and to so^e few others. But what will all this make for his point? Sure,
these few persons were not all that lived, dureing that long tract of time:
what then became of the rest? how were they instructed? was it not Mediatly by
those Patriarchs, and selected Persons? And did not the Fathers instruct their
children from generation to generation, that the right worship and knowledge of
God might be propagated from hand to hand?

12. This proof evincing nothing, let us see the next, afterward (says he) in
the times of the law, the Lord spoke no other way to his children; which cannot
be denied by such, who acknowledge the Scriptures to have been written by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Answer, That the Scriptures of the Old Test.
were so written, I grant: That the persons, employed in that work, had immediate
Revelations to this end, I grant: Nay moreover I grant, that, all other true
Prophets, who were raised up of the Lord, whose Prophecies the Lord thought not
fit to make a part of the Canon of the Scriptures, had Divine* Inward and
Immediate Revelations: But this Reason is as childish, as the preceding. Does
he think, that this is enough to prove his point? Does he think, that all the
rest of the people of God, in those generations, had those Immediate
Revelations? or that this follows, as a clear consequence from his Argument?
What folly is here? He might as well prove, that all the people of this
generation are Quakers, because he, and some few more, are such. But Page 13. he
says, That the Lord did always speak immediately to the High Priest, when he
entered the holy of holies, who did communicate the same will of God unto the
people. Answ. How will he prove, that the High Priest had always then and
there Divine Immediate Revelations? And though it were granted; what has he
gained, seeing himself confesses, that this was not the privilege of the
people, who were to learn the mind of God, at the mouth of the High Priest.
He goes on, at the same rate of raving, and tells us, that no man was excluded
from this inward Communication, who did diligently seek it, and attend upon it.
Which is his fond and groundless conceit, fit to be taught unto his admirers,
but to be hissed at by all rational persons. Then he says, That others beside
the high Priest had this inward communication. And who denies it, who
remembereth, that there were Prophets in those days, who were neither High
Priests, nor Levits? But he adds a wonderful confirmation, adduceing
instances from Numb. 11:25.29. Neh. 9:30. Psalm. ^1: v. 13. and 139:7. Esa.
48:16. Is it imaginable, that this Man knew what he was doing, when he wrote
thus? Or did he write his book for his foolish and credulous followers. Were
these seventy Elders, the whole congregation? Or was that Spirit, that rested
upon them, a Spirit, inwardly revealing the mind of God, concerning the duty
of the people of God; and not rather a Spirit of government, fitting them for
the employment, to which they were called? Why did he not cite also the
Instances of Bezaliel and Aholiab, Exodus 35:30 -- 35. and of wicked Saul, 1 Samuel 10:10, 11, etc. and of the Inchanter Balaam, Numb. 23, and 24? Did not the
good Spirit by Moses, guide his people in the wilderness, Neh. 9: v. 20. as
afterward by the Prophets, verse 30? Had all the people the privilege of Moses
and of the P^ophets? what can such foolish reasonings import? Did David speak
of the Spirit of Prophecy, Psalm. 51? And who denies that David was a Prophet,
and had many Revelations? And what would he infer from the place of Esai?
Does any say, That Esaias was not immediately sent of God?

13. By these his reasonings, he does abundantly declare, that he can prove no
more, than what no body will deny, (though many of his proofs come even short
of that) viz. That there were Prophets immediately inspired of God, from Moses
to Malachy. But did the Lord inspire all the people with the knowledge of his
will Inwardly and Immediately, as he did these Prophets? Though this be the only
thing he should say, if he would speak to purpose; Yet he dar not say it, it
being so manifestly false. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 1:1. That God spoke in
time past unto the Fathers, by or in the Prophets; and so not Immediately to all
the Fathers: when the Lord had solemnly given the law at mount Sinai, and had
written it once and again in Tables of stone, Exodus 34:28. Deuteronomy. 4:13. and
5:22. and 10:4. He gave orders to Moses, to write the rest of the law, Exodus
24:4. Deuteronomy. 31:9, 22. And this law was to be written in a book that it might be
kept and read. There were also officers appointed to Interpret and explain
this law, Josh. 23:6. 1 King. 2:3. Josh. 1:8. Deuteronomy. 29:21. and 30:10. and
31:26. and 17:18. Josh. 8:31. 2 King. 14:6. and 22:8. 2 Chronicles. 17:8, 9. and
24:4. Neh. 8:8. Act. 15:21. The like we may see of the Prophecies of the
Prophets, Ier. 30:2. and 36:2, 10. and 45:1 and 51:60. Ezech. 2:9, 10 Hab. 2:2.
Nah. 1:1 Luke 4:17, 20. and 3:4. and 20:42. Act. 1:20. and 7, 42. Was this
teaching and instructing by books read, studied, and explained, the Immediate
Revelation of the Spirit? Or was it no Revelation of the mind of God, because
it was not an Immediate Revelation? Hence then we see, that even when this
Immediate Revelation was most in use, it was not the only way of God's
communicating his mind to every individual Son of Adam.

14. Then he tells us, That it is confessed by all, that under the N. T. the
Lord revealed himself by his Spirit, unto Apostles and Evangelists. This is
very true, but makes no more for his purpose, than what he has already said;
for we know, that all are not Apostles nor Evangelists, 1 Cor. 12:29.

15. His fourth Proposition, viz. That these revelations were of old the formal
object of the Saints, comes next to consideration. But before I proceed to
examine what he says of this, I must first dispatch some things, which he
says in his Thesis, which will contribute to our more compendious examination
of his Apology, both as to this, and the following proposition. So then, when
he speaks thus, by this formal object of faith he must mean, the total
formal Object, or all that which is the ground of faith of, and obedience to
such, or such particulars. Next, I, would know, what he means by these
Revelations? whether the Things revealed; or the Revelation of the particulars,
in such or such a way; or both? If he understand hereby the Propositions, or
Assertions, or Duties, or Rebukes, or Instructions and Laws, and the like,
which were Revealed: Then he cannot call these the Formal Objects of faith;
because they were only the Material Object, or the particulars, which were to
be received and believed; and not the Reason or Ground why and upon which they
were to be received and believed, If he understand hereby the Revelation it
self, either simply considered, or as so or so modified: Neither can he call
this properly, the formal Object of divine faith: for, suppose the Devil should
have deceived some, by Dreams, Visions, or any other way, (which was not
impossible (he always laboring to be God's ape) as we see, Deuteronomy. 13. Ier.
27:9. and 9:8, 24. (and 23:27, 32.) here would be Revelation, and a Revelation
so and so modified; and yet there was no ground of faith, as the same places
prove. But if he say; That he speaks of a True Divine Revelation, which must
of necessity be the Ground or Formal Object of faith* I answer, Then it is
manifest, that the Revelation, whether as considered in it self; or as so or so
modified, is not the total Formal Object of divine faith: But the Veracity and
Truth of God, declaring by Prophets immediately inspired his mind, must be the
Formal Ground of receiving what is delivered, as Truth to be believed by a
divinefaith; and the Supreme Authority of God, declaring by the same men of
God, hiswill and command, must be the Formal Ground of receiving what was
delivered as a Law to be obeyed: Both which were comprehended in this sentence,
Thus says Jehovah, with which the Prophets did usually usher-in their Sermons
and Prophecies. As it is not a man's bare saying, or signifying this or that to
us, which is the Formal Ground of our giving credit thereto; but the Truth and
Honesty of the Person speaking these words: nor is the simple Reading or Making
known such or such a Command to us, the Formal Ground of our receiving it, and
of yielding Obedience thereto, as a Law; but the Legislative Authority of the
Person giving out that Law, in such a manner: So it was not the Prophets their
simple declaration or revelation, that did solely ground the peoples
Obediential belief of, what they spoke; But the Veracity and Authority of God,
speaking in and by them. Revelation, whether to the Immediately Inspired Holy
men of God, or by them Mediatly to others, was a necessary mean, to hold forth
the particulars to be believed and obeyed; but not the total formal Ground,
upon which the particulars revealed were to believed and obeyed; But this, Thus
faith Jehovah, which was also conveyed unto the people, and made known unto
them by the Sent Prophets: As a man's speaking is a necessary mean to make us
know both what he asserts as truth, and what he would have us believe upon his
report; And as Promulgation of laws is a necessary mean to convey the
knowledge of the particular Laws, together with the authority enjoining them,
unto the Subjects concerned; and cannot be the whole, but at most a part of the
formal object of faith and Obedience, or a natural means of the Production of
the material Object: for whether the Revelation be to be looked upon, only as
such a means (as some) or as a part of the formal object (as others) it is all
one against the Quakers: and we need not fall upon that debate here. But if he
understand* Both together, Then neither can that be the Formal Object of Faith
divine, as is clear from what is said. It is not from the Revelation simply,
that such or such a Proposition is true; but from the Veracity and Truth of
him, that makes the proposition. Nor is it from the Promulgation, that such or
such Words, framed into the form of a Command or Law, have the force of a Law;
but from the legislative Authority of him, who gives forth the command. Hence
we see, That it is all one, as to the Formal Object, or Ground of Faith and
Obedience, whether the Revelation be Mediat, or Immediate, One way or Other,
providing it hold forth the Proposition to be* Believed, and the Law to be
Obeyed, as coming from Him, who is Truth, and the undoubted and supreme
Legislator. So that our believing of such or such a Proposition with divine
Faith is resolved into this, Thus says Jehovah to us, who is Truth it self and
cannot lie; and our divine Obedience to such, or such a Command resolves into
this, Thus says to us, and thus commands us the Supreme Lord and Lawgiver
Jehovah: and here the outward testification or declaration of God, is not
excluded, but included rather.

16. That we may not walk in the dark, with our confused and confounding
Author. When he calls Revelation the Formal Object of Faith, I would gladly
understand, whether by this Revelation he means the Lord's making his mind
known, unto the Patriarchs or Prophets themselves, by Voices, Visions, Dreams
etc. Or the Revelation made known by these Prophets or Patriarchs unto the
people, by vive voice, or by writing etc? or does he mean Both? If he
understand the first, then he speaks only of the Formal Object of the Faith
of these Patriarchs and Prophets, who received these Immediate Revelations from
God. But I would feign know of him, what was the Formal Object of the faith of
the people, to whom these divinely inspired Patriarchs and Prophets made known
these Revelations, with a Thus says the Lord* The Revelation made to the
Prophets could not be the Formal Object of the Peoples faith, because it was a
Revelation Immediately made only unto the Prophets, and revealed to the people
not Inwardly and Immediately by Vision, or Representation to their minds; or
God's Vive Voice to their ears; but Mediatly by way of Declaration, or
Preaching outwardly to their senses, by the Prophets. If he understand the
Second, then the Immediate Revelation is not the Formal Object of Faith; for the
Revelation, which they had, was Mediat. If he mean Both. Then his Thesis is
defective; and this should also have been mentioned; for a Divine Revelation,
coming to us Mediatly by the ministry of Men, divinely inspired, may hold forth
the Formal Object of faith to us; as the Scriptures, penned by men immediately
Inspired, do now hold forth to us the Formal Object of our Faith; for we
believe with a Divine Faith what is asserted in them, because spoken and
delivered to us by the Lord Jehovah, who is the God of Truth, not Immediately,
but Mediatly.

17. Upon this ground, we see what way to Interpret that word in his Thesis,
Divine inward revelations are absolutely necessary for Founding of true Faith:
For it is true, Nothing can be received by a true divine Faith, but what is
delivered by God, or revealed by the First and Prime Verity, who is Veracity it
self; yet it is not necessary, that this First and Prime Verity reveal his
mind Immediately to every person; as if none could be, or were, obliged to
believe with a true and divine Faith, what God says, but only such, as are
Immediately inspired. Bec^u^e (1.) Then the People of old, to whom the Prophets
were sent, with a thus says Jehovah, might have refuised Faith and Obedience;
and alleiged, that these Revelations were not made to them Immediately; and
therefore, they were not bound to Believe and Obey them. But we find that the
Lord spoke even to the Fathers by the Prophets Heb. 1:1. (2.) If this were
true, then the people of Israel, that heard not God speaking from Mount Sinay,
being borne after that time, were not obleiged to receive the Law, delivered on
Mount Sinay, with a divine Faith: and yet the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward Heb. 2:2. And he that despised Moses's Law (though Moses only had that
law from God by Immediate Revelation, except the Ten words) died without mercy
Heb. 10:28. (3.) Then the Prophets and Patriarchs, or such as had the Inward
and Immediate Revelations, could only be guilty of Unbelief and Disobedience,
and not the People, to whom they spoke; contrare to the wole tenor of the book
of the Prophets. How then, I pray, could Saul's disobedience to the command of
God by Samuel be as the sin of witch craft 1 Samuel 15:19*. 23.? See Ier. 7:23.
and 11:4, 7. and 26:13. and 38:20. and 42:13. and innumerable more places. (4.)
How then could this aggravate their sin, that God himself spoke unto them, and
called upon them, by his Prophets? Hos. 6: ver. 5. Ier. 7: ver. 13, 25. and 25:
ver. 3, 4. and 35: ver. 14, 15. and 26: v. 5. and 29: v. 19. and 44: v. 4. and
11: v. 7. and 32:33. (5.) Then there was no difference, as to the yielding of
Faith and Obedience to what was spoken, to be put betwixt a True Prophet, that
spoke in the name of the Lord; and a False Prophet, that prophesied out of his
own heart, Ezech. 13:17. and spoke lies in the name of the Lord, Ier. 23:25.
and 26:36. and 27:10, 14, 15, 16. and 29:9, 21. (6.) Then it could not be said,
at that time, that he that despised, despised not man, but God; and yet we
find this charged upon them, 2 Chronicles. 36:16. Prove. 1:30. Esai. 5:24. Amos 2:4.
It is manifest then, how Uncertane, yea how False this is, which he here
asserteth: and this being the only pillar of his fabric, we may judge how
tottering it is.

18. He grants in his Thesis, That these divine inward Revelations (which he
maintains yet to be in use) neither do, nor can contradict the external
testimony of Scripture and sound reason. Whence it is clear, that such inward
Revelations, as do contradict either Scripture, or found Reason, are not
Divine: if then, upon trial, it be found, that he and others pretending to
divine Revelations, deliver Assertions point blank contrary to the Scriptures
of truth, we are allowed to reject them, as being not Divine: And upon this
ground, I may boldly say, that these Theses* (let the Author pretend to what
Inward Revelations he pleases, in conceiving and frameing of them; and let him
allege, that they were given to him, by Inward Revelation, as much as he
thinks good) are not of Divine Authority: and if he had them by any Inward
Revelation, it has been a Revelation of Satan. My reason is, because they are
so diametrically opposite to the testimony of God in the Scriptures of truth:
and this shall appear yet more manifest, ere we have done. And he cannot be
offended at my trying of his Assertions and Revelations, by the touch stone of
the Word, seeing he here grants, that a Divine Inward Revelation will deliver
nothing contrary or contradictory to the testimony of God in the Scriptures;
and consequently, that it can be no Divine Inward Revelation, which does
contradict the Scriptures; for God being a God of truth, yea Truth it self, His
testimonies cannot be Yea and Nay.

19. While as he adds, That hence it will not follow; that divine Inward
Revelations should be examined and tried by the Scriptures, as by a more noble
and certane rule, he gains nothing; for though this should not follow upon
the ground, which he laid down; yet it may follow upon another more sure and
certane ground: for albeit a divine Inward Revelation, carrying its own divine
evidence with it, needs not be examined by him, who is thus Immediately
inspired thereby, by the Rule, of the Scriptures, as by a more noble and
certane Rule: as the Prophets, truly inspired of God, received what was really
and divinly manifested by the Spirit of God, without Further examination: yet
that same Divine Revelation, when it comes to be published and declared to
others, may justly and warrantably be brought to trial and examination by the
Scriptures, as a more sure Rule and Test to us. Though one divine Testimony
cannot be more true and certain, in it self, than another; yet one may be more
clear and evident to us, than another; and we may try that, which is less clear
and evident unto us, by that, which is more clear and unquestionable, without
the least impeachment of the divinity of the other; and that also by Gods
allowance and approbation: For (1) we find the noble Bereans highly commended,
as acting gallantly, and more nobly then those of Thessalonica, because, though
they received the word of Revelation, delivered by Paul, with all readiness of
mind; yet they received it not without examination; for it is added Act.
17:11. That they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.
They would not take Paul's bare word upon it, though he was one divinely
Inspired, and had the Gospel by Revelation, which he preached, Ephesians. 3.3. but
brought this Revelation to the test of the Scriptures, as a more sure Rule
unto them. (2.) It was the command of the Lord, of old, Esai. 8:20. that his
people should go to the law and to the testimony; and consequently examine what
was brought before them, and delivered unto them, as Revelations; that so they
might know, which were truly Divine or from God; or which were only from
Wizzards, or such as had familiar spirits, pretending to divine Revelations.
(3.) What means, I pray, the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1:19.20. to say, that the
Prophecy of the Scriptures is a more sure and firm ((...)) word, than was even
a voice from heaven? His words are remarkable verse 17, 18, 19. for He (i. e.
Christ) received from the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice
to him, from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: and this voice, which came from heaven, we heard, when we were with
him, in the holy mount. And then adds verse 19. We have also a more sure word
of prophecy, or prophetical word, ((...)) which was a standing authentic
Canon; and though not more sure and firm, in it self, than was the voice from
heaven; yet it was more sure as to men, and less obnoxious to Cavils,
Suspicions and Exceptions of Adversaries. (4.) It is remarkable, that Christ
himself directs his hearers to search the Scriptures, in reference to the
trial of the truth of what He delivered, Ioh. 5:39. Search the Scriptures, for
in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me
(5) We are commanded to beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7:15. etc. Therefore we
must try and judge of their Doctrine and Revelations; and so come to know the
Prophets, Pretenders or Real, by this fruit. So we are commanded not to
believe every spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God, 1 Ioh.
4:1. and consequently, we must have a Rule, by which we must try the
Revelations, both of False and of True Prophets* and this Rule must be more
clear and unquestionable to us, otherwise it can be no Rule. (6.) So, of old,
when the people of Israel were commanded, Deuteronomy. 13. not to hearken to a Prophet
or Dreamer of dreams, though he should give a sign or a wonder, to confirm
his commission, when he would draw them away after other Gods, contrare to the
standing Law of God; this standing Law and Commandment, not to go after other
Gods, to serve them, was the Test, by which they were to try the Revelations
of Prophets Divine, or mere Pretenders: and so of necessity it behoved to be
more clear unto them, than a divine Revelation made known to them by a True
Prophet. (7.) When Paul says, Gal. 1:8, 9. that though Apostles, or Angels
from heaven, should come and preach another Gospel, they should be rejected, as
accursed, he clearly shows, that the Gospel already delivered was such a
clear and evident Rule, that by it we may warrantably try and examine all
Doctrines and Revelations of Angels, or Apostles; and so must be a more clear
and certane Rule to us, than divine Revelations, brought to us by Prophets, or
Apostles: (8.) The same may be cleared from these Passages, Mat. 24* 11, 24
Mark. 13.22. 2 These. 2:2. 1 Timothy 1:4. But the matter is evident enough from what
is said: I proceed.

20. If he say. That he may grant all this, without any detriment to the maine
thing he drives at here, upon this account; that, though others may be allowed
to try by the Scriptures, what some deliver, as Revelations from God, unto
them; yet such as have the Revelations immediately from God are not to try them:
and consequently, that he and others of his persuasion, who have such divine
Manifestations and Revelations, are to act accordingly, without any further
trial and examination, by Scripture, or any other Rule. I answer first, Then
he, and the rest of the Quakers, cannot be offended with us, for not receiving
their Assertions by faith, and not yielding thereunto all submissive Obedience,
as the very Assertions and Commands of God, until we find the same to be
consonant to Scripture, notwithstanding that they should, with all the
confidence imaginable* affirm to us, that they have those Doctrines and
Assertions delivered to them by divine Revelations. Secondly, Then certanely,
we should have an higher esteem of the Scriptures; and not look so
contemptuously upon them, as the Quakers commonly would have us do; not say,
with Nicolas Lucas, a Quaker, That if the Bible were burnt, as good an one
might be write, as Mr Hicks reports in his 2. dialogue. Page 5. and evinceth
again dialog. 3. against Will. Pen. Page 86. Thirdly, Then I think He, and the
rest, should obtrude nothing upon us, without Scriptures; but should confirm
unto us all their Assertions out of them. Sure, we find the Apostles, though
divinely inspired, yea and Christ himself, confirming their Doctrine from the
Scriptures, Mat. 12:3, 5, 7. and 26:31. Mark. 14:27. Luke 4:8 1 Pet. 1:16. Rom
11:8, 26. and 10:19, 20, 21. and 12:19. and 15:9, 10, 11, 12, 21. and 14:11.
Gal. 3:20. 1 Cor. 1:31. 2 Cor. 4:13. And Paul in his Apology does plainly
affirm, Act. 26:22. that he delivered no other things, than those, which the
Prophets and Moses did say should come, Fourthly, Either it must be granted,
that some Illuminations, strong Persuasions, and the like, that come as new
Revelations, may and must be examined by a Rule: or it must be said, that there
are now no diabolical Injections or Delusions, working upon the Fancy and
Imagination, and casting-in Wild Fire and Wild Light in the Mind; or that
all these Manifestations and Illuminations must be received, as unquestionably
good, and believed and obeyed, whether they come from the Father of lights, or
from the Father of lies. But no rational man will assert this last; nor will
the many Enthusiasts, or Entheasticks, or Ecstaticks and the like, who have
been, to manifest conviction, deceived and deluded, suffer us to asserte the
Other. Therefore seeing there have been, and yet may be, Satanical Delusions,
instead of Divine Revelations; and seeing these must not be received as good
come, it is manifest, that they must be tried by a Rule, and we know no other
Rule, beside the Scriptures, by which we can try the Spirits, and the
Insinuations of Spirits, for we own not the Doctrine of Swenckfeldius or of
the Antinomians and Familists* who said the word should be tried by the Spirit,
and not the Spirit by the Word. Fifthly, may not the Lord give up some to strong
Delusions? Sure, Paul gives us to understand so much 2 These. 2:11. when then
some are judicially deserted of God, and given up to strong delusions, to
believe lies, and to receive Impressions of lying and deceiving Light, Either
they sin not in receiving and walking according to that light, or they are
under an obligation to reject such a corrupt guide. The First cannot be said:
and if the Last be said, then such persons are under an obligation to try and
examine these Revelations and Discoveries, by some certane Rule, with
whatsoever plausible and insinuating Glance, they dazzle and affect their
Minds and Imaginations: And if so, we have our point, seeing it will be readily
granted, by Protestants, that nothing can pretend to be this Rule, beside the
Scriptures only. Sixthly, The great doubt is, if it be the Lords fixed and
established way now, under the New Testament dispensation, when the Gospel is
sufficiently promulgated, and the Foundation of Gospel administrations
abundantly laid, to reveal his mind, and make his will known, concerning what
we are to believe, or what we are to do, by Inward, Immediate and Extraordinary
Revelations and Inspirations: And if this be uncertane, as shall appear by
examining what he has said for it; than it is more than manifest, that such
deep Apprehensions, and fixed Phancies; yea and (it may be) Injections or
Insinuations of the Prince of darkness, in the Minds and Imaginations of men,
either naturally Melancholic, or given up of God to strong Delusions, which
some may meet with, and fondly look upon, as divine Illapses of light, may very
warrantably, yea must be brought unto trial, by the touchstone of the
Scriptures. As of old, even when the way of Prophecy was more ordinary and
common, the false Prophets might warrantably have brought their diabolical
Inspirations, and fantastical Delusions, to the trial of the Law and of the
Testimony; so much more now, when that extraordinary way of the Lords
manifesting of his mind is ceased, may this course be taken, to prevent a
deceit; especially seeing, we have a full and complete Rule, whereby we are to
walk, and to regulate ourselves, both as to Faith and Manners.

21. The reason, which he adds in the end of his Thesis, to wit, That a
divine Inward illumination and Revelation, is of it self clear and evident,
compelling the intellect, that is well disposed, and insuperably moving and
bowing it to an assent, and that by its proper evidence and clearness, etc.
evinceth nothing contra^y to what we h^ve said: for, though a truly divine
Illumination or Revelation (Extraordinary and Immediate, of which kind we are
here speaking) will bring its own credentials alongs with it, and by its own
evidence prove it self Divine, and so powerfully persuade the soul, that there
shall no hinke or doubt remain, concerning its authentic Authority; yet every
Revelation, or Enthusiastic Illumination, which men may be carried away with,
and yield up themselves unto, as fully persuaded of the Reality and Relevancy
thereof, will not p^ove truly Divine, or such, as ought to be received with a
divine Faith, without being once questioned, or put to the trial: for, as was
hinted just now, then it must be said, that the Devil, the Prince of the powers
of the air, the God of this World, the Prince of darkness, and the Spirit that
works in the Children of disobedience, cannot deceive any with his false
Lightnings; n^y, not even such as are judicially given up of God to strong
delusions to believe a lie: which yet the experience of all ages would confu^e;
and the Scripture also tells us, that Satan can transform himself into an Angel
of light 2 Cor. 11:14. and that he has his depths Rev. 2:24 and his devices 2
Cor. 2:11. That he is the Ruler of the darkness of this world, and spiritual
wickedness in celestials Ephesians. 6:12. What means, I pray, the working of
Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivablness
of unrigh^ousnes in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth? mentioned 2 These. 2:9, 10* do we not hear Revel. 12:9 that the great
Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, deceived the whole world?
But not to insist on this, which the many Energumeni, persons obsessed with the
devil, and phanaticks with Enthusiasts, and the like, wherewith Histories of
all ages abound, will not suffer us once to call into question; and which the
late relations of John of Leiden^, Thomas Muncer, John Battenburg, Melchior
Hophman, David Georg, Swenckfeldius, W^igelius, in Germany: and of Hacket,
Coppinger, Arthington, and the rest of the Grundletonians, in England; with the
instances of Phanaticks among the Papists, mentioned by D. Stillingfleet, in
his Idolatry of the Church of Rome Chap. 4. do put beyond all debate; let us
but consider, how it was with the false Prophets of old, in whom Satan was a
Lying spirit to persuade Ahab 1 King. 22:20, 21, 22. Were not they, and the
like, deceived with false Impressions, supposing they had the Spirit of the
Lord, when it was but a lying Spirit deceiving them 2 Chronicles. 18:23. 1 King
22:24? Is there not a Spirit of Error, as well as a Spirit of truth 1 Ioh: 4:6?

22. But, that we may put an end to this, this Man's own expression confirms
what I say: for he has a restriction or qualification spoiling all his
purpose, while he says, that this divine Revelation moves an understanding,
that is well disposed, to an assent. Whence we see, that every Revelation,
pretending to be Divine, is not to be submitted to, as such; but that
Revelation only, which proves it self unto an intellect well disposed, and
discovers thereunto its own proper Evidence and Perspicuity: And therefore,
all Revelations, even though supposed to be divine, ought not to pass without
examination. But I had thought, that all divine Revelations and Inspirations
Extraordinary and Immediate (for we speak not here of the Lords Mediat and
Ordinary Illumination, whereof all the children of God are made partakers, in
one degree or other) did either find, or make the intellect well disposed, for
receiving the Impression of Light and Truth revealed, so that a graceless
Balaam could say Numb: 24:4. Balaam the Son of Beor has said, and the man,
whose eyes are open, has said: He has said, which heard the Words of God,
which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his
eyes open. Hence Elisha called for a minstrel, that his Spirit might thereby be
composed, and he in case to receive the Revelations of God, 2 King. 3:15. So
that while the Intellect was out of frame, through one passion or other, the
man was not in case to receive the divine Illapses of Light, and Revelations of
God's mind. Now, while this man insinuates, that even divine Revelations may
come into an understanding, not well disposed; it must be much more probable,
that other Revelations, which are not truly Divine, may affect a distempered
understanding. And yet, I doubt, if this Man can give such clear marks of
distinction, betwixt an Understanding that is Distempered; and an
Understanding, that is Sound and well Disposed, at the receiving of such
Revelations; whereby the Persons, under these receipts of Illumination, can
certanely know, whether their minds and understanding were Well or ill
disposed; that thereby they may certanely know, what to judge of these
Revelations. Yea, I doubt, if he can give instances of persons, so immediately
Illuminated, even by the Father of lies, sensible and convinced of a
distempered understanding, while receiving these glances of new light. So that,
even because of this, and because it is possible, that such Meteors of new
Light may fall upon a distempered understanding, and be received and
entertained as Divine, when nothing less; it is certane, that these
Illuminations should pass under examination and trial; and there must be a
Rule and Measure, whereby they must be tried: and consequently, that the
Scriptures must be that Rule, seeing among Protestants, nothing else can pretend
to this umpireing Power.

23. Having premised these things, to facilitate our way in what follows, we
return to the Examination of what he says in his Apology, Upon the fourth and
fifth Propositions, formerly mentioned. His fourth Proposition is, as we heard,
That these Revelations were of old the formal Object of the Faith of the
Saints, And by these Revelations, he must mean Inward and Immediate
Communications of the mind of God by Dreams, Visions, Vive Voice or the like;
such as these were, which the Patriarchs and Prophets of old had; or, as we
have shown, he shall speak nothing to the purpose he would be at. New let us
see what way he proves this. He adduceth for this end the definition of faith,
given by the Apostle, Heb. 11:1. saying, that faith is the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. But to what purpose, I do not
see; seeing it is a most certane Truth, that all that have had, and now have
this faith, have not had, nor yet have, these Inward and Immediate Revelations,
whereof we are speaking. That the Object, or ground of this Faith was the
saying and promise of Jehovah, is unquestionable: but the thing that he should
prove, is this. That this saying of God, which says gripped to, and laid hold
on, was immediately spoken by God to every individual believer; as for example,
that promise, which was immediately revealed to Adam, That the seed of the woman
should tread down the head of the Serpent; or That immediately revealed to
Abraham, That in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed, etc.
and the like. Does he think, that no man can believe a promise, but he to whom
this promise is immediately spoken by God? Let him prove this; for I will not
grant it. He attempteth a proof from the Instances mentioned in that Chap. and
adduceth only two, Noah and Abraham: And I willingly grant, that not only these
two, but all others, who had immediate Revelations from God, whether touching
matters of Faith or Duty, had the Word and Authority of God, immediately so made
known unto them, for the only formal Object of their Faith. But withal I say;
that all others who believed, though still the Word and Authority of God, was
the formal Object of their Faith, and ground of their Obedience, had not this
formal Object conveyed and made known unto them by Inward and Immediate
Revelation: and of this, beside the manifest and unquestionable evidence of the
thing it self, we have Instances in that same Chapter: dar he say, that all,
who believed from the beginning, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of
God, etc. had this truth revealed unto them by God Immediately, either by
Dreams, or Vive Voice, or the like? where reads he of Revelations Inward and
Immediate made to Abel, who yet by Faith offered unto God a more excellent
Sacrifice, than Cain? Where reads he (to pass by others) of the Inward and
Immediate Revelations, upon which their faith was founded, who, through faith
subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, stopped the mouths of lions,
Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valient in fight, turned to flight the armies of the
aliens, received their dead raised to life again, were tortured not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection, had trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings, and moreover of bonds and imprisonments; who were
stoned, sawne asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, who wandered
about in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; who
wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth? Where
reads he, I say, of such Revelations, made to all these persons, who yet had
faith, and by faith were they Encouraged, Enabled, Supported and Carried through?

24. Because he foresaw, that some would Object That hence it would follow,
that there is no formal Object of faith now, because the Lord does not reveal
his mind by Angels, Dreams and Visions, and the like. Therefore he takes
notice of this Page 14. and 15. but his answer is so confused and indistinct,
that you can hardly know, what he would say. He will not limite the power and
liberty of God, Wherein he does wisely. But will he say, that God either did,
or now does reveal the whole Object of faith, to all believers, in such a
manner? He distinguishes betwixt what is substantial and universal in the
object of faith, and what is circumstantial and accidental: And hereby he
either speaks nonsense, or destroys his own cause; for if the Immediate
Revelation, by those ways mentioned, was but accidental, it cannot be called
the formal Object of the faith of all believers. He distinguishes next betwixt
what was obnoxious to doubting, and what was not; But he leaves us in the
mist, while he explaineth Neither. Then he tells us, That these vive voices and
dreams etc. were the thing which they did believe; and not the formal object
or ground, upon which they bel^eved. I should rather think, that the word of
Truth or Command, which was made known unto them by vive voice, or dream etc.
was the Material Object (not the Formal Object quod, as he ignorantly speaks)
or the thing, which they were to believe and receive, and that these dreams,
etc. were but the manner of conveyance both of the material Object, and of the
Formal. He adds a serious truth, viz. That they were not ignorant, that the
Devil could have formed sounds of words in the air, and delude the external
senses by false apparitions, and this daily experience proves: Whereby he
confirms what we formerly said, and gives us fair warning to take heed, and
beware of such Delusions. I wish, he and the rest of the Quakers would carry
the impress of this Truth always with them. But how then was the formal Object
of faith secured? He answers, There was a secret testimony of the Spirit in
their hearts, per^wading them that these voices and visions were really from
God But was this secret testimony distinct from that, which came alongs with
these Divine Voices and Dreams etc? If not; what will he gain hereby? or
against whom would he fight? if it was distinct; than it seems God's Immediate
speaking by Voices, Dreams, Visions etc. were not so clear and evident in
themselves, as to Compel, Move and Bow the intellect, that was well disposed,
by it is own evidence and clearness, unto an assent; and were not so clear and
evident as the common principles of natural Truths are, viz. That the whole is
more than a part: Two contradictories cannot be both true and false, which move
and bow the Mind to a natural Assent: and thus he contradicts what he said
in his Thesis. See above. 2. Moreover, if the matter was so, he must say, that
there was no more Objective Evidence and Clearness in Gods speaking by Voices,
Dreams etc. than in the Devils speaking so; for without this new testimony,
the Prophets themselves could put no difference betwixt the One and the Other.
Again, could not the Devil come with a false toaken, and persuade the false
Prophets, that the voices and visions they had were really from God? And may
not the Devil do so now, especially in such, as are given up of God to strong
delusions, to believe a lie? But what would he make of this falsehood* He would
Infer, that this Inward Testimon^ was the Principal and original Object of
their faith. A wild assertion; for th^s Inward Testimony should rather be
called the Principal and Original Cause, or the Efficient Cause of faith, than
the Object of it, for its use was (according to his own doctrine) not to
Declare immediately the Object of then Faith; but to work up their soul and
mind to receive and close with the Object, which was proposed, in these Divine
Dreams and Visions; as that power, which opens the eyes of the blind, is
not the formal Obj^ct, but the efficient Cause, of the man's seeing the sun.
Then he adds. That these expressions. The Lord spoke, the word of the Lord
came, or was to such, or such an one, and the like, will not evince, that God
spoke by audible voices: and that, he who asserteth it must prove it. But we
need neither Assert it, nor Prove it: for it is enough to us, if these
expressions signify that singular way (whatever it was) which the Lord used,
in communicating his Mind to the Prophets; and so a way distinct from that,
which he used with every individual, private and particular Believer. The
answer to his formal argument, with which the closes this Paragraph, may b^
taken out of what is said, and I need not spend time, with repeating the same
things.

25. He comes. 9. to the maine business, the last Proposition, viz. That the
Object (he should mean the formal Object) of the faith of the Saints is
alwa^es the same. And thinks he that any Christian will deny this, which yet
he must spend words about the proof of? Thinks he that we believe not, that
there is one faith? But what reasoning is this, There is one faith. Therefore
faith has but one Object? what object me^neth he? Formal or Material O^ject?
if the first; we grant, that always and in all ages the formal Object of faith
divine, was the Truth and Veracity of God, as to things believed, and h^s
Supreme Legislative Authority, as to acts of Obedience. If he mean the Material
Object, he speaks nothing to the purpose; because he must here speak of the
Object he spoke of in the foregoing Proposition, and of none other. And yet the
man, as ignorantly as a child, talks in the following words of the Material
Object: for to prove that the Fathers had the same object of faith, that we
have, he adduceth Abraham's faith, and the Fathers drinking of the same rock,
which was Christ 1 Cor. 10. (and yet all that drank of that water, had not
saving faith in Christ) whereby he can mean nothing but the same Material
Object, which we grant to have been the same, as to the substance. But I would
know, what he would say of the Material Object of Adam's faith, before the
fall? Was Christ tha^ Object? No certanely; and yet Adam had a divine Faith.
And after this discourse of the Material Object, he concludes rarely and
profoundly, that the Object of their faith and ours is the same viz. Inward and
Immediate Revelation, which before he called the formal Object of faith. Is this
man fit enough to boast all the learned men of Europe, who cannot distinguish
betwixt the Formal and Meterial Object of Faith? who would not pity such an
Ignoramus, that yet is so confident, as if all the wit and learning of Europe,
were nothing to this rare und^rstanding? Thinks he, that none of his Read^rs
were able to observe this master piece of Ignorance and Confusion? The same
line of Confusion is drawn over the rest of that paragraph; for he cites Gal
1:16. which he may apply to both: then he cites Heb. 13:7. which only speaks
of the Material Object: and then he tells us, that the diversity of
administrations alters not the object; what object? He adds a reason, that
would seem to plead for the same formal object; for otherwise (says he) God
should be known some other way, than by the Spirit: But his next reason is
most rare, all actions are specified from their Objects, says he: These things
need no further examination; to rehearse them is more than enough, so exotic
and non-sensical are they.

26. But at length he would seem to speak some thing more to the purpose, when
he says, That such as deny this Proposition of his, make use of a distinction,
granting that God cannot be known, but by the Spirit, but withal denying that
this knowledge is Immediate and Inward, because it is by the Scriptures. But the
same Confusion is continued; for we know not, whether he speaks of the Formal
Object of faith, or of the Material: If he mean the Formal, I know no man, that
says, that the Scriptures are the formal Object of Faith; but that they
contain the material object, and express the veracity and authority of God,
which is the formal object; and so are, at most but a part of the formal
Object. If he mean the Material object, who grants, that the Spirit is that?
That the Spirit is what the Scriptures say he is; and does* what the Scriptures
say he does, is, I grant, a part of the Material Object of our Faith. It may
be, that through ignorance, he falls upon another question here, than his
Proposition gived clear ground for; and would discuss this question, whether
the Scriptures contain all that is necessary for us to believe unto salvation;
or must we have new Revelations making known to us, what we ought to believe,
or what we ought to do, in reference to salvation? together with this (and so
still there shall be confusion) whethe^ the Lord does now Instruct us Inwardly
and Immediately, as of old he manifested his mind to the Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles; or does he it Mediatly by the Word, and Ordinances Public, and
private, which he has appointed for this end? But the man walks in the dark
all alongs, either through ignorance, or worse. Waving what he here denies
concerning Scriptures, till we come to examine his next Thesis, let us here
see, what he undertaketh to prove: we are here to prove (says he) That the
Christians now a days, no less than of old, are led inwardly and immediately by
the Spirit, after the same manner, though it may be not all together in the
same measure. Here still nothing but confusion and darkness: For (1) How all
the People of God of old were led by the Spirit, he has not showed; or what
way they were led Inwardly and Immediately: was the privilege of a few
Patriarchs and Prophets common to them all? were none of them led by the Spirit
in an Ordinary way, by the Teachings and Information of others, the Spirit, by
his grace and efficacious Operation inwardly, concurring? were none of them
Taught and Instructed by the Ordinances of God, established among them, and
blessed by the Spirit? 2 We know not what he means by this Inward and
Immediate Leading, whether that which is Ordinary and Common to all saints,
whereby the Spirit does Efficiently and Powerfully draw and determine the soul,
to a compliance, in Faith and Obedience, with the will of God, revealed in his
law, and to a right Improvement of his Ordinances, which He has established in
his House and Church, for building up of his People, in their most holy faith:
or that which is Extraordinary and peculiar to a few, whereby, for the good of
others, and their further instruction, he was pleased, in a singular manner, to
Communicate his mind; and to Reveal Immediately what others were to believe and
to do. If he mean^ this last, we shall attend his proofs; If he first, he
beats the wind, and fights against his own shadow 3. We know not what he
means by the same measure, of which he speaks so doubtingly. Sure as to the
light of saving Knowledge, and as to the Object of faith, there is much more
clear discovery thereof under the New Testament, than was in the time of the
Old Testament, as Paul proves 2 Cor. 3: concluding verse. 18. But we all with
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: And as the
whole Gospel evinceth. See Ephesians 3:9. 1 Pet. 1:10, 11, 12. Act. 2:14-20. Luke
7:28. From all which, it is manifest, that we cannot understand, what it is
which he would prove, and what his Arguments must conclude.

27. Yet, let us see what his reasons are. He adduceth. 10. these promises of
Christ Ioh. 14:16, 17, 20. and 16:13. and hence would clear to us three
particulars, First, That the Comforter and the Spirit, here mentioned, is not
the Scriptures, and he learnedly proves this from other Scriptures: As if any
sober Christian ever Asserted such a thing. But in the bye, as if he had no
friendship with the Socinians, he redargueth their incogitancy, that do not
acknowledge any Inward Spirit or Virtue, but a mere Natural one. But in what
Socinian does he read such a thing? I think He rather and the Socinians are
one, denying this Spirit and Paraclete to be a person, and a divine person, as
to Essence one with the Father and the Son, but as to subsistence distinct: The
Socinians do say, that the Spirit and Holy Ghost is but the Inward Spiritual
Virtue of God; and are not so carnal and natural as to say, that it is a mere
Natural Spirit or Virtue. Thus he helps us to know, what himself means by
the Spirit, here and elsewhere mentioned, viz. Not a distinct person of the
Trinity, but an Inward Virtue, which they call the Light within. The second
pa^ticular is That this Spirit is inward; and for this he citeh Romans 8: v. 9,
10. 1 Cor. 3: v. 16. and that, all noble works are ascribed to this Spirit,
citeing Ioh. 6: v. 63. Act. 2: v. 4. and 8: ver. 10. Romans 8: ver. 2, 13, 15,
16, 26. 1 Cor. 2: ver. 10. and 12. v. 8:9, 10, 13. and closes with a saying of
Calvines Institut. Libr: 3. Cap. 2. By all which what he would say, and against
whom he would disput, I know not: do we deny the Spirits work in his children?
Do we deny his Union with them, that he is in them, and dwells in them; or
their Union with Him, that they are in Him and walk with Him? All the question,
is about the way how this is Conceived and Expressed. Will he say, That the
Spirit so is and dwells in, and abides with believers, that hereby they
become personally united with Him, and so are one person with Him? Some indeed
have said little less; and thereupon inferred, that believers were Godded, etc.
as they loved to speak: But if this be his meaning. I account him a Blasphemer?
Supposes he, that the Spirit is in ^elievers as a Virtue or Spiritual power,
and is the Light within them? Then as he contradicts himself, saying that
this light and virtue is within every man, which here is but promised to
believers; so he gives us a shreud presumption, that he is a Socinian, denying
the personality of the Holy Ghost, which the texts cited by himself, and many
others of the like import, do manifestly evince. The third particular, is the
work of the Spirit to guide into all truth, etc. which we shall be loath to
deny, whatever his friends the Arminians and Pelagians do. Do we cry up the
Traditions and Precepts of Men? Do we exalt corrupt and carnal Reason? Let
himself see to this, who cries up the Light within, which is but Nature under
a new name, as shall be shown, in due time. This is his first Argument: but
what is his Conclusion? Ergo The holy Spirit abides and dwells in and
leads his own. All true Christians have the Spirit of God dwelling in them,
as in his Temple: and Ergo (For this Argument must be branched-out into many,
so fertile is the man's invention) The Spirit moves, instructs and leads
every true christian into the knowledge of such things, as are necessary unto
salvation. Ans. Concedo totum, and what would he have more? But poor man,
knows he not what is the point in difference? Has he Concluded, that the
Spirit communicates the knowledge of Gods mind, to all his saints, in the
same manner and way, as he did of old to the Prophets. who were extraordinarily
Inspired: and that that immediate way of communication of Truths to be believed,
and Duties to be performed, which was peculiar to Patriarchs and Prophets, or
to the Apostles, is continued, and common to all believers? No: This point is
too hot for his fingers to touch: and we must be satisfied, to hear him prove,
that which he can prove, though it be the same, which we assert; and so to no
purpose:

28. Before he come to this second Argument, he tells us. 11. That there are
some who do confess, that the Spirit does now breath upon, and lead the Saints,
but this is Subjectively and in a blind way, coeco modo; but not objectively;
that is, He illuminats the understanding to believe what is revealed in the
Scriptures, but presents not any verity objectively, and this they call medium
incognitum assentiendi, an unknown medium of assent; that is, of which the man
is not certain, nor sensible. Ans: Whom he does particularly here mean, I
know not, and so I cannot judge, whether he reports their opinion faithfully,
or not; nor how they explain the terms here expressed? I know men may have
various conceptions of the same Truth, and so may have various and
different-like Expressions, and yet mean one and the same thing. And for my
part, though I cannot assent to some expressions here used; yet I think the
substance of the truth, which I own, is held forth here. The Scriptures are a
complete Rule to us, in all things concerning Faith, and Manners, in reference
to Salvation, and hold forth the revealed Mind of God here anent, as an outward
Objective mean, or an external Rule. And therefore, we need now no new
Revelation, either as to Truths to be believed, or as to Duties to be obeyed,
in order to Salvation; but we need the Breathing, Light and Power of the
Spirit, both to cause us see the matters already revealed, and to close with
them, as divine Truths and Commands. Let us see however, what he answers.
Though this opinion (says he) be more tolerable than the former, yet it is
not true, And why? First because there are many truths, which as they respect
every one, (ut singulos recipient, it may be he means and should h^ve said,
Personas singulares) are not all found in the Scriptures. But what are these
Truths? Are they Truths concerning salvation? if so, I deny what he says, and
shall wait his proofs, in the Next Thesis, where he promises to show this.
Secondly, because (says he) the Arguments adduced do also prove that he
proposes truths to us Objectively. But suppose, that several of the Scriptures
by him formerly adduced should conclude this, as to the Apostles and some
others; yea and more, viz. That they should be filled with the Spirit, and
Immediately and Extraordinari^y Inspired and acted to pen Scripture, and
infallibly to hold forth Gospel Truths, to set down immutable Gospel Rules, to
establish Gospel Ordinances, and the like (which also was so) will he think,
that the promises in this extent belong to every individual Believer, so that
each of them, by virtue of these promises, are Infallible Dictators, writters
of Scripture, and the like? let him assay the proof of this, and we shall
consider what he says. But further, though I should grant, what he here
says, he has gained nothing: for I would say so, that the Lord Jesus has by
his Spirit revealed Truths even Objectively unto us, and even this way made
good these promises: but how? By Inspireing Apostles and others, to pen
Scripture, wherein all New Testament Truths, necessary, and sufficient for us
to be believed, and obeyed, in order to Salvation, are contained and revealed.
Is not this a proposeing of Truths Objectively. Nay more, I say, the Spirit, to
this day, is proposeing to us truths Objectively, in and by the work of the
Ministry and Ordinances, which are established and maintained by the Spirit,
for this end, to clear up the word of Reconciliation, and to explain all
Gospel Truths, which we are to believe and obey: Here is also an Objective
proposal by the Spirit. But you will say. it is not an Immediate Objective
proposal. I grant it; and yet it is sufficient to confute his reason, which
mentions not this Immediatness; nor will he prove any such thing, out of
these Scriptures, in reference to all believers.

29 Now follows his Second Argument, taken, as he says, from the new
Covenant, whereby he would prove, that we are to be led by the Spirit not only
Immediately, but also Objectively. A strange conclusion, as full of confusion as
the former; for any would think, that by Objectively here he means Mediatly.
But I suppose, he would have said, not only Subjectively, but also Objectively.
For clearing of the matter, and to prevent a fighting in the dark, we would
know, That the work of the Spirit, in order to the believing of Truths, is
either in and about the Soul of the man, whom he is to give a Revelation of the
truth unto, or is in and about the Truth, which is revealed, and to be
believed. The First is that which is meaned by the word subjective, because the
man is the subject in which the Spirit is to work faith. The Other is that
which is expressed by the word Objective, because the truth revealed is the
Object, which is to be believed and received. Now the Subjective Operation of
the Spirit in this matter, is by enlightening the Understanding of the man,
taking away the vail, that was over his eyes, and thus enabling him to see the
Object; as when Christ cured the blind man, he put him in case to see the
light, which he could not do before; so the Spirit opens the eyes of the
mind of the man, that he may see the wonders out of his law Psalm. 119:18. As
to this immediate work of the Spirit (though the Lord thinks good to do this
ordinarily, in and by the use of means, which he has appointed; so that the
word Immediately must not be so understood, as to exclude these) he makes no
debate with us. But as to the Objective operation of the Spirit, it is by
proposeing of the Object, or Truth to be believed unto the Intellect, as true,
and as spoken by God: and this is twofold, either External, or Internal;
External is when the Truth is proposed by God to the Intellect by outward,
means, such as the Scriptures, Preachers and the like, and this may be also
called Mediat. Internal, which may be called Immediate, is when the Lord's
Spirit does immediately propose the Truth to be believed, as true, and as spoken
to them, as a truth now to be believed, because thus spoken by Him immediately
unto their souls, unto which is requisite a real secret operation of the
Spirit, immediately carrying the truth in upon the Understanding by Supernatural
and Immediately Infused intelligible Species's. The former mediat way, this man
is not Satisfied with: and this last immediate way is that whereby Truths were
revealed extraordinarily to Prophets, and Apostles and other^, who were
Inspired, and is usually called Prophetic Revelation; and in this sense is the
word Revelation ordinarily taken in Scripture: And this is the Revelation
Immediate and Objective, which this man would plead for, and which we deny to be
common to all believers, whether under ^he Old Testam. or under the New; And
which we also deny to be ^he way, by which we are to expect the Teachings and
Leadings of the Spirit now; seeing we are built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians.
2:20.

30. Now let us see how he proves his point. He adduceth two passages of
Scripture Esai 59:21. and Ier. 31:33. with its parallel Heb. 8:10. where the
Lord promises, that the words, which he shall put in their mouth, shall not
depart out of their mouth, nor out of the mouth of their seed, nor out of the
mouth of their seeds seed, from hence forth even for ever. And that he will put
his law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, etc* And what, I
pray, can all this Evince? Cannot the Lord put his words in the mouth, and
hearts of his People, Mediatly? Ay but says he, the Lord says not, that he
will do this by Scriptures, or other Means: Nor does he say, say I, that he
will do it without them: when he opened the heart of Lydia, and when he caused
the Thessalonians receive the word, not as the word of Man, though preached by
Paul, but as it is indeed the Word of God, did he not put his word into their
mouth, and write it in their hearts? But says he, hereby is the law and the
Gospel differenced, that the law was written in tables of stone, but the Gospel
in the heart. Ans. Said not David Psalm. 40:8. that the law of God was in his
heart. And Ps. 119:11 that he hid Gods Word in his heart? If it be so, why said
he before, and went about to prove, that the Object of faith of believers,
under the Law, and under the Gospel, was the same? and how had all the Saints,
under the Law, Immediate Revelations? Other answers might be given here, but
these are sufficient to show the man's Ignorance and Inconstancy: when he has
reconciled himself to himself, we will have less to do. What he speaks
afterward of Immediate Communion, (which is not the same with Immediate
Revelation) in respect whereof the state of believers under the Gospel, is
better than that under the Law, is but to confirm further his self
contradiction. Let him reconcile this with what he said before of believers
under the Law, and of the sameness of the Object formal of the faith of both,
and we shall think ourselves concerned to notice what he says. But further, to
multiply his self contradictions, he adds an Untruth, viz. That under the
Law, they had the high Priest immediately receiving the Word of God, in the holy
of holies, to teach the people; and we say now under the Gospel, there is
nothing but the external letter of the Scripture, in the meaning of one verse
of which scarce two do agree: For neither can he prove, that the High Priest
had such Revelations always, in the Holy of Holies: And we say, as well as he,
that believers now have free access to Christ, the great Teacher of his
people, always, to get his mind known, and written in their hearts; but not to
get Prophetic Revelations: and even as to the Scriptures (of which this man
speaks so basely) though they also had the Law and the Testimony, Esa. 8:20.
and were to search the Scriptures, Job. 5:39. we cannot think they had the
advantage of us, in respect of the many Immediate Revelations made unto the
Prophets, because of what the Apostle Peter says, 2 P^t. 1:19. Beside that
every one may see, that the Word of God, Written and delivered by men immediately
Inspired, is as sure a ground of faith to others, as the Word of God Spoken by
a man immediately Inspired; and that the former has the more advantages. And
whereas he talks of the discrepancy of men's judgments, as to the meaning of
the Scriptures; is he so blind, as not to see, that the very words of
immediately Inspired High Priests and Prophets, were obnoxious to the same
mistakes, and more? Is a Set, Long, Continued Discouse more intelligible to
judgments of all syzes, than the same discourse Written, and put into every man's
hand to Read, and Meditate upon, to Ponder and Consider all its Parts,
Coherence, etc? What shall we then say of this Man, who reasons thus, against
Truth and common Sense?

31. His third and last Reason is from, 1 Ioh. 2:27. which place, together
with, Ier. 31:34. has been always perverted by the Phanaticks, as also by the
Author of Theologia Germanica, Cap. 18. thereby turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness; and turning his goodness into licentiousness; for ordinarily
these and the like places are adduced, to Countenance their Despiseing and
Rejecting of the Ordinances of Christ and of Teaching, while yet
notwith^tanding hereof, themselves are as busy, as possible, to pervert with
teaching and scriblings; as if all this Unction could not take away the
necessity of their Teaching, albeit it may take away the necessity of all other
Teaching whatsomever. But is it not strange, that if this were the meaning of
the words, that John should not know it; or if he know it, that notwithstanding
thereof, he should write thus unto them, and acquant them with what he judged
necessary; and particularly should decyphre by so many marks the Antichrist's
and Seducers? Strange it is, that this Unction, that teaches all things, could
not teach them to know the usefulness of it, until John did thus signify it
unto them: and yet more strange, that if matters be thus, the Spirit of God
should have Inspired and Acted John, unto the writing of this Epistle, and
other holy Men of God to have written Scripture; for by their Interpretation,
this Unction makes the whole Scripture useless: And indeed this Man is not
a^hamed to tell us, that this Unction is a more sure Rule, for finding out and
discerning Seducers, than John's writings: which not only has no shadow of
countenance from the text, but does also render the whole Ministry of the
Apostles, in teaching, Useless and Unnecessary; and so destroys, at one blow,
all Gospel Dispensations. But were not believers under the law made partakers
of his Unction? if not, what do all the Immediate Revelations which they had
import? where is the Oneness or sameness of the formal Object of their faith,
and ours under the New Test? And then, what is become of all his former
reasonings? But if even believers under the Law were made partakers of this
Unction, in some measure, why did the Lord raise up Prophets? Why might not
they have examined and tried all their Prophecies by this Unction? What
advantage had they by the Immediate Revelations made unto the High Priests? Why
were they commanded to go to the Law and to the Testimony? Why does Christ send
them to the Scriptures, and not to this Inward Unction? These things cannot
well hang together. Moreover, what understands he by this Unction? Will he
say, that by it must be understood Immediate Objective Revelation? How can this
be more sure and certane than the Immediate Objective Revelations, which the
Apostles had, and are set down in Scriptures? Is one Immediate Objective Divine
Revelation more sure and certane, than Another? But it may be, that by this
Unction, he means the Light within. Yet neither can this hold; for the Light
within is common to all men; but this Unction he makes common only to the
Saints. Enough of this, which has been abundantly answered by others; and else
where, to wit, in the book against Velthusius, I had occasion to speak to it,
and shall not here repeat what is there said.

32. Having thus proved, as well as he could, what he thought convenient for
his purpose, he tells us, that he will now answer Objections: and the first and
only objection, which he takes notice of. 13. is That these Revelations are
uncertane. And when he has thus ignorantly, or unfairely proposed the
Objection, he cries out of the Ignorance of his Adversaries: and very
learnedly tells us, that he distinguishes betwixt the Thesis and Hypothesis;
and that it is one thing to say, that the true and undoubted revelations of the
Spirit of God are certane and infallible; and another thing to say, that this
or that man has infallible revelations: and that he affirmed the first. (Which
his adversaries will affirm, as well as he) and that the last may be
questioned. But, with his leave, I shall frame the Objection thus. If since the
Apostles, and the extraordinary Officers, whom God was pleased to employ, at
the laying the foundation of the Gospel Administration, fell asleep; and after
the canon of the Scriptures was completed, all that ever pretended to these
Immediate Revelations and Inspirations, as a ground of Faith and Obedience, have
borne the signal marks of the displeasure of God, and given, by their
Practices, or by their Opinions, or Both, evident toakens of their being acted
and led by a Spirit of Error and Wickedness, and of their being given up of
God to strong delusions; then we may saifly infer, that this is not the way
of Christ, now the Gospel is clearly and fully revealed, the canon of the
Scriptures is perfected, whereby He teaches and leads His people; nor ought
to be owned as such. But the former is true. Therefore so is the other. The
connection or Major Proposition, is such, I think, as no man can except against,
who regairdeth the Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his hands: And who
can imagine, that if such a way of God's manifesting of his mind now were the
only way of God's leading of all his own, he should put such Open, Manifest,
and Undoubted Marks of his displeasure upon those men, who, of all the rest of
the world, were most giving up themselves to the only, saife and Christian Way
of understanding God's mind? Or that these should be specially given up to
cross and contradict the Immediate, Objective and Infallible Revelation of the
Spirit of truth, declared in the Scriptures, written by men infallibly acted by
the holy Spirit of God; and to believe and follow the dictats of the Father of
lies? As for the second Proposition. It is unquestionable from history of all
such Persons; from the Montanists, Circumcelliones, Donatists, Euchites, and
the like Enthusiasts of old; from Mahomet, that great Impostor, and pretender
to Revelations; from the many Enthusiasts, in the Church of Rome, of which read
D. Stillingfleet, in his book above cited; Especially Ignatius Loyola, the
Father and founder of the Jesuits, our Quakers great Friends, if not Fathers;
from the Enthusiasts in Germany, the Swenckfeldians, Weigelians, and
particularly John of Leyden and his accomplices, in and about Munster, etc. to
the Quakers this very day. All which have given undoubted evidences of their
delusions, by their Errors, Heresies, and sometimes Scandalous Actings. Nay,
it has been found, that these desperate Adventures have pretended to these
Revelations, of purpose, to put off with more cunning their desperate Errors;
and cheat souls unto the market of their pernicious Wares. If this man be of
another judgment. I challenge him and all the Quakers, this day, to name to me
a Seck of such Pretenders, of whom this may not be verified. And as for himself
and the rest of the Quakers; if the Scriptures be the word of truth, and given
out by Infallible Inspiration (which he dar not deny) they bear as manifest
Marks, and give out as palpable Evidences of their being led and acted by a
Spirit of Error, as any of their Predecessors; as this and other of their
writings put beyond all question. Sure, the Spirit, which Christ promised to
lead all his people by, was a Spirit of Truth, and a Spirit that leads into
all Truth, Ioh. 16:13. But the Spirit acting them is a Spirit of Error, as the
Scriptures of truth evidence The Spirit promised, was a Spirit that would
glorify Christ, and take of his, and show it unto his People; but the Spirit
acting them is a Spirit opposite to all the Institutions of Christ, and a
Spirit seeking to debase our Lord Jesus, in his Person, Offices, and Work: all
which our following discourse will evince.

33. Having thus proposed and enforced the Objection, we need not take notice
of hi^ triffling Answers, adapted to the sha^ow, he made himself: It ^s enough
to us, that he cannot say, that such as the Spirit of ^od leads in seed, are
led into Error, seeing by this fruit, and their sinful carriage, Christ h^th
told us, that we may know false Prophets, Mat. 7:15* 20. And that he himself
confesses, that true divine Revelations are not contrare to the Scriptures;
and therefore, having Scriptures and sound Reason on our side, we value not his
brag, in saying, that by happy experince, they find hithertil, that the Spirit
has never deceived them, or led them unto any evil: seeing all such Pretenders
of old should have said the same, with as great Confidence; and they that are
given up of God to strong delusions, to believe a lie, know not that it is a
lie, which they believe. Wisdom is justified of her children. As for Munster
business, he professes. 14. his abhorrence thereof; but with all adds, that
as great evils have been practiced by such, as own the Scriptures: which does
not touch the Objection framed by me: Beside, that it is not very probable,
that God would have left these Miscreants to such acts of villainy, if the way,
to which they pretended, had been of God; considering how they were the first,
that in that age, and at that season of Reformation, did appear for it, and
openly profess it: a parallel of such, as owned any part of Truth, long under
contempt, and against so much opposition, will not, I suppose, be shown. The
rest of this paragraph, being a mere Rhapsodi^, and with all an Excreation of
much gall, and nothing to the purpose in hand, I meddle not with: It will
satisfy him, if I say; that I am none of those, who will reject the guidance
of the Spirit of God, though some profane Wreatches say, that they are led by
him: He knows our disput is not about the guidance of the Spirit; but about
the manner of this Guidance, and Teachings.

34. What he says. 15. in Vindication of the last part of his Thesis, has
been obviated already. See above. 18 and 19. only I shall take notice of a word
or two, which he has. To prove the self evidence of the Spirits working in
souls, he makes use of these words of David, Taste and see, that God is good,
and of Paul. saying I am persuaded nothing can separate me from the Love of God
and then cites 1 Ioh 4:13. and (as if it were to the same purpose) adds 1
Ioh. 5:6. and hence infers, that the Revelations, which they have, being the
Revelations of the Spirit, who is truth, must certanely be true, and not
contrary to either Scripture or Reason. Alas, does not the man know, that the
Spirit may work grace in the soul, and for a time, for holy ends, keep up the
sensation thereof; and that others, may deny, or not observe, the work of the
Spirit in their souls, through Mistakes, Prejudice, or other Corruption; as
others may imagine a work of grace without ground? Knows he no^, that we are
speaking here of Immediate and Objective Revelations, which are Extraordinary,
and which himself, in a few lines before, said the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles had, not naming any others; and not of the Ordinary workings of the
Spirit of grace? Waving these Impertinencies, I would ask only, How came it to
pass, that Others pretending as much to Immediate Revelations, as he, have been
deceived? If others have been deceived, why may not he? It is true, The Spirit
of God is always a Spirit of Truth; but a Spirit of Error and Delusion, which
some may take to be the Spirit of God, is not the Spirit of Truth. Why will he
not try by the Scriptures, and by sound Reason, what sort of Spirit, that is,
which acts him, and the rest? No; that is needless. And why so? Because their
spiritual senses are awake; so that, at the very first, they can perceive their
revelations to be of the Spirit, no less infallibly, than a wise Mathematician,
can diseerne the truth of the most clear mathematick demonstrations. Happy
they, say I, if it be so: But hereby he must needs reproach his Predessours,
the Enthusiasts and Phanaticks of former ages, as being asleep, at best, in the
midst of their Revelations; and not having their spiritual senses awake; for
they have been deceived; and yet, no doubt, were as confident of the contrary,
as this man is: But this man's testimony is of himself, and so the less to be
valued; and it is inward and invisible, and so the harder to be confuted: Only
I would know, how he will persuade us of it, a Mathematician can demonstrat the
grounds of his perceiving the truth of the most clear Mathematick
demonstrations: can he do the like, as to his sensations?

35. The parting argument, which he seteth down in the last paragraph, is
sufficient, (so he thinks) to end the whole debate. Thus he frames it. That
unto which all Professors of Christianity, of whatsoever kind, do at last
recurre, and because of which, all other grounds are commended, and accounted
worthy to be believed, must of necessity be the only most certane and immovable
ground of all Christian faith. But the Inward, Immediate, objective revelation
of the Spirit, is that. Therefore etc. Now, not to carpe at the eccentrickness
of this conclusion, for many such things must be passed over. This confirmation
of the Minor, as to Protestants, (with whom he very charitablie joyneth
Socinians, whom I cannot account Christians, notwihstanding of all the
agreement, betwixt him and them) destroys the whole Argument, and rendereth
it Useless, as to his purpose, and so concludes only his folly, and ignorance.
If we enquire (say he) at them, why they take the Scripture, for a Rule; they
answer, Because in them is declared the will of God, which was revealed
Immediately and objectively by the Spirit, unto holy men. Can any man of common
sense infer hence, that Protestants are for the Uncertanty of all Objective
and Immediate Revelation, even of that, which holy men of God had, when acted by
the Infallible Spirit to pen Scripture, as he insinuates in the following
words? or, can any man of common judgment see, what this concession, and
necessary foundation of Protestants, can make for the falsely pretended Immediate
and Objective Revelations, which Quakers boast off? Nay, does not Protestants
their owneing of this solid, and immovable foundation, sufficiently warrant
their rejecting of his Delusions? yea and necessitate them thereunto, if they
would be true to their principles?

36. As for his monitory conclusion, in the end of his vindication of this his
Second Thesis, wherein he gives us a full foretaste of his Pelagianisme,
because we will have occasion sufficient to speak to this matter afterward, we
need only tell the Reader, what he says here. His discourse, in short, is
this: If any man will assent to what he has said of Divine Revelations, though
at present he be a stranger to them himself, yet he must know, that this is the
common Privilege of all Christians, and at length shall come to know this
secret light enlighting his heart etc. and when, by relinquishing of sin, this
divine Voice in the heart shall become more known, then shall he feel, that as
the Old Natural Man is put off, the New Man and spiritual birth shall arise;
and this new birth, having Spiritual senses, can discern the things of the
Spirit, and understand the Mysteries of the kingdom of God. And therefore let
every man attend to this Spirit, in the Little Revelation of that pure light,
which at first reveals things more notoure; and afterward, as he is fitted,
he shall receive more and more, and be in case at length by quick Experience,
to refute them, who shall enquire what way he knows, that he is led by the
Spirit. That is, in short, If one will firmly believe, that Natures dim Light
is the Spirit of God, and the Holy Ghost, in him; and, in the faith of this,
give up himself, to the Teachings thereof; and thereby, shun outward acts of
sin, and put on a form of Godliness, and more and more give up himself to this
Delusion, he shall at length arive at this Perfection, that he may burn the
Bible, and with confidence assert, that he is acted by the Holy Ghost, let
Scriptures and Common Sense say to the contrary what they will. What an extract
of Pelagianisme, Enthusiasme, and dreadful Delusion, is here, every knowing
person may see.

CHAP. IV. Of the Scriptures.
1. HIs third Thesis (which I find in some things altered, and more clearly
expressed in the second edition, set down in the Apology, than was in the
single sheet) containing his judgment of the Scriptures, comes now to be
examined. The Scriptures being owned by us, as a sure Rule, whereby we should
try the Spirits; and they giving such clear and manifest Testimony against the
Delusions, and bold Assertions of the Quakers; and affording us full and
sufficient Ground whereupon to reject their Doctrine, and to look upon them as
Impostors; it is little wonder, that we hear them speak so basely of these
Scriptures of Truth, as we do. Mr Stalham, in his Reviler rebuked Page 1. tells
us, that a Quaker denied to his face, the Scriptures to be the word of truth;
or, at least, not to all, not to wicked men and unbelievers, no not
condemningly. He tells us also Page 4. that some said to him, That the Scripture
is not the word of truth, but the witness of Gods power: as if that could be
the true witness of Gods Power, which were not true, nor the word of truth. He
tells us also Page 18. sect. 2. that Francis Howgil said, The Scripture is other
men's words, that spoke them freely, and Page 20. that Richard Farnworth called
them in a way of disparagment, a printed bible. So Page 23. sect. 3. that John
Lawson said, we had nothing to try men by, but the letter, the Bible, or
written word, which is natural and carnal. So Page 244. he tells us, that some
of them, in a book called, a paper sent into the world, Page, 2. have these
words. They are such teachers, as tell people, that Matthew, Mark, Luk and John
is the Gospel, which are but the letter: we therefore do d^ny them. And Page
250. he cites these words out of Tho. Lawsons book, called an untaught teacher
Page 2. To say that the word of truth is called the Scripture, or that the
Scripture is called the word of truth, that is a lie. If this man do not
approve of these, and the like Expressions of those called Quakers, he is
concerned to give testimony against them, and that directly, that the world may
bear witness of his honesty. But we know, what account the Old and N. England
Libertines, David George, and the Familists, with whom this man and the rest
agree too well, made of the Scripturs.

2. It is commonly affirmed by the Quakers, that the Scriptures are not the
word of God, or ought not to be so called. So Fox and Hubberthorn, cited by Mr
Hicks, in his first dialogue Page 17. where he tells us also, that Nailor in his
Answer to the jews P. 22. said, That it is the devil that contends for the
Scriptures to be the word of God. And that this is their common Assertion; and
that mainly upon this ground, that Christ is called the word of God. D. Owen
also witnesses this, in his Exercit Apol. Pro. S. Script^r. Adv: Fanaticos
Exerc. 1. Sect. 3. which is no new thing for Phanaticks to allege: for I
find, that it was one of Swenckfeldius's heterodoxies, de Sacris Libris P. 27,
28. and that upon the same sandy ground; as Mr Rutherfoord witnesses, in his
Spiritual Antichrist P. 19. Richard Farnworth said to Mr Stalham (as he
reports Page 3. of his forecited book.) That the Scriptures are the word of
God, and eternal life, as thou would have them, thou can not prove, nor
all the Magicians to help thee. So P. 43. he tells us, that one of them, in a
sheet, called Christ exalted, etc. P. 4. had these words, He (Christ) is the
word, and the Scripture is not; He is the light, and the Scripture is not; He
is the Rule and Guide, and Teacher and Judge, and the Scripture is not, but a
Declaration of Him to be so. By which and the like we may see, how low an
account they have of the Scriptures; And how fond and absurd this is to debase
the Scriptures, under a pretense of exalting of Christ, who sees not? Seeing
the Lord spoke in and by the Prophets, unto the Fathers; and spoke by the Mouth
of the holy Prophets, Heb. 1:1. Luke 1:70. And the word of the Lord came unto
them, as unto Jeremiah Chap. 1:2, 4. and 2:1. and 14:1. and 29:30. unto
Ezechiel Chap. 1:3. and 3* 16. to Hosea Chap. 1:1. to Joel Chap. 1:1. to Jonah
Chapter 1:1. and 3:1. to Micab Chapter 1:1. to Zephania Chap. 1:1. to Zechariah Chap.
1:1. and 7:4. and 8:1. and by Haggai Chap. 1:1. And they declared what they
spoke, as the word of the Lord; and the Lord owned it, as His word. See
moreover 2 Chronicles. 36:21. Micah. 4:4. Act. 28:25. Esai. 1:20. Deuteronomy. 30:8 Number.
25.5. Ier. 23:28. and the like. And seeing the Scriptures contain nothing but a
Revelation of the will and good pleasure of God,; it is manifest and clear,
that they are the Word of God, and should bear that title. To speak nothing of
the Law, which the Lord spoke and gave himself immediately from mount Sinai;
what he inspired the Prophets to deliver, and spoke himself in and by them, and
moved them infallibly in the very writing thereof, cannot but be the Word of
God. That word which was given by immediate divine Inspiration, cannot but bear
the name of the Word of God. Nay, this name is expressly given unto the
Scriptures; for Mark 7. what is called the commandment of God verse. 8. spoken
and written by Moses verse. 10. is called the Word of God, verse. 13. The roll
written by Baruch Ier. 36 from the mouth of ^eremiah verse. 4. is called the
words of the Lord, verse. 6. The sword of the Spirit (which is a piece of the
Spiritual armor of Christian soldiers, wherewith they resist the devil, as
Christ their Captane did, Mat: 4:4, 7, 10. with an it is written: see also,
Mat. 22:31, 32.) is called the Word of God, Ephesians. 6:17. I shall not urge that
place, Heb. 4:12. because it seems more to be spoken of Christ, than of the
Scriptures; though several take it, as meaned of the Scriptures: But that
equivalent Expression of the Word of Christ, Col. 3:16. may confirm us in this
Truth, as also that equivalent Expression the Oracles of God, Romans 3; 2. and
that, the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2:2. and that, the word of the Lord,
1 Pet. 1:2^. what else can the Psalmist's speaking to God, and manifesting his
affection to his word, useing this expression, Thy word, above thirty times,
Psalm. 119. import, but that the Scriptures are, and are to be called, the Word
of God? So these equipollent Expressions have the same import; The word which I
command you, Deuteronomy. 4:2. I have written to him the great things of my law, Hos.
8:12. when the Spirit of the Lord, speaking of the Scriptures, uses these
expressions, well spoke the Holy Ghost saying, Act. 28:25, 26. As the Holy
Ghost says, Heb. 3:7. He spoke in a certane Place, Heb. 4:4. He said in David,
verse 7. See Heb. 5:6. Exodus 20:1. Deuteronomy. ^:6. Heb. 13:5. Gal. 3:16. Romans 10:21.
and 15:10. 1 Cor. 9:10. Others of this kind might be cited. If this man be of
another judgment herein, he should clearly express himself, howbeit he thereby
dissatisfie some of his Brethren: But instead of this, in his Apology P. 36. he
alleigeth, that we but calumniate them; and, speaking in the name of all the
rest, he says, they account them the most excellent writings in the world: but
how will he make this agree with their sayings, formerly cited, and afterward
to be adduced? He would do well to endeavor some reconciliation; but I see not
how he can do it.

3. As for us, we assert, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation: For they were not conceived by the minds, nor framed and
formed by the Understandings and Reasonings of men; nor were they the product
of their Study and Pains, as other books are of their Authors, assisted by the
Spirit of God. Howbeit the penmen of the Scriptures studied the writtings of
others, as Daniel did understand by books Dan. 9:2. and David was much in the
meditation and study of the Law; yea they searched and made narrow enquiry
after the meaning of what was spoken and delivered by themselves, so far as
concerned their own faith and Practice, as Peter tells us 1 Pet. 1:10, 11. yet
the work of delivering the Scriptures, by Word and Write, was not the result of
their studious Labor, wherein their Minds, Judgments and Memories were
exercised and busied; nor did these Scriptures proceed from private phancied
Revelations and Enthusiasmes; they were not the issue of men's Dreams,
Imaginations, Conceptions of fancy, or self-Afflation, because no way of
private Interpretation, or Revelation; but on the contrary, holy men of God
spoke as they were, not only determined, but moved by the Holy Ghost; and that
in contradistinction both from the acts of men's Fancy and Imagination and the
acts of their Will 2 Pet. 1:20, 21. The Holy Ghost did Immediately and
Extraordinarily dictat what was written, Matter and Expressions, as well such
things, as they had Seen, Heard, Read, Studied and Known before, as these they
were Ignorant of, or had forgotten. Hence it is, that the Lord spoke in the
Prophets, by the mouth of the holy Prophets; and his word came unto them and by
them, see Heb. 1:2. Mark. 14:36. Heb. 3:7. and 9:8. and 10:15. Luke 1: v. 70. 2
King. 10:10. and 21:10. 2 Samuel 23:2, 3. and hence it is, that this very word of
Prophecy, or Prophetical word, coming thus unto the Prophets, the holy men of
God, when it was to become a Prophecy of write, (...), it was also committed
to write, through the Sp^cial acting of the Spirit, singularly mov^ng these
Amanuenses; hence the Scripture, the (...) is said to be (...) given by
Inspiration of God 2 Timothy 3:16. on which place, the words of Corn: a Lapide are
remarkable: God is said (says he) to have taught the Scriptures because, 1. He
stood so by the writters, that they did not err from the truth in a point. 2.
He did excite them, and suggest to them, so as they should write these things
rather than those etc. He did so inspire them, that they set down this
conception, rather than that etc. 3. He so ordered all the conceptions and
sentences and led them so, as that this sentence was first, that next, and the
other in the third place, and thus they were set down orderly one after
another; and this is properly to write and make a book: and therefore is the
Spirit of God properly the Author of the Scriptures. Hence is it, that the word
of God, in the Old Test. is termed in the New, the Scripture, or Scriptures,
pointing out the word as written, (...) or (...), whereby we see, that as, in
the frameing of the truths, contained in the Scriptures of Prophecy, or as to
the matter and thing revealed and written, the holy men of God had the real
Inspirations of God; and spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, or as the
Holy Ghost spoke in them and by them, they giving only a concurrence of their
Rational faculties: so in the very commiting of the mind of God unto writing,
they acted as moved by the Holy Ghost, and not by any acquired Skill or
Knowledge, in the art of Grammar or Rhetorik, being herein as a Pen in the hand
of a writer, (and therefore ought not to be called the Secondary or proxime
Authors of the Scriptures, as some Papists imagine) though the Lord used One to
express his mind, in one way; and Another in another way, as he thought meet,
and each in a way suitable to his natural Enduements; as he used Esaias to
express his mind, in an High, Lofty and Court-like style; and Amos, being an
herd man, to express his mind, in a more Mean and Low style, suitable to herd
men; in all consulting the universal good of the Church, in all ages. Whence it
is manifest, that not only the Matter and Things revealed, whether as Truths to
be Believed, or as Laws to be Obeyed, are immediately of God; but also the very
Method, Expressions and Words, wherein these truths were uttered, (which even
some Papists, as Gregor. de Valentia and Estius Swarez and others confess.) And
so the Whole, and every Part, Sentence and Word is of divine Authority, and of
a divine Original. Whereby every one may see, how sure the ground and basis of
our Faith and Obedience is; how rationally we act, in adhereing to these
Scriptures of Truth, rejecting whatever is not consonant thereunto; and
especially all particular pretended divine Revelations, which are but the mere
product of men's strong Phancies and Imaginations, or of Satan's Workings in men's
minds and fantasies: And withal we hereby see the divine Original of this
Word of Prophecy, which we must take heed unto, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts, 2
Pet. 1:19. and must study and meditate upon, day and night Psalm. 1. and be well
acquanted with, They being the Oracles of God, Romans 3:2. and the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through faith, which
is in Christ Jesus, being profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction, in righteousness, that the man of God may be Perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works 2 Timothy 3:15, 16, 17. As also the unreasonableness
of those men, who would, directly or indirectly, bring us off this Ground, and
have us following the light of that Ignis Fatuus of their Imaginary and
Delusory Revelations, which, as they arise out of a mire, so they lead the Man,
that follows their guide, into one, and leave him there.

4. Before we proceed, because, this Man alle^dged, that it was a calumny to
say, that either they denied or undervalued the Scriptures; what Apology will
he make for his brethren, who own the Scriptures only as a declaration of the
Saints conditions, witness G. Fox the younger, in the collection of his books
P. 59. cited by Mr Hicks dial. 1. P. 19. and account them no better than an old
almanac, witness Holbrow cited by Mr Hicks P. 29. and look upon it as inck and
paper. See Mr Hicks Page 41. and say, that it is dangerous for ignorant people
to read them witness Fox and Hubberthorn, in Truths defense P. 101 S^e Mr Hicks
ibid. who also in his 2 Dial. Page 5. tells us that White head expressly says in
his D. P. Page 13. that it is idolatry to call the Bible a means; and that
faith grounded on the Scriptures, is but an empty and implicit faith, and
bespeaks such persons void of the knowledge of God, Christ, Salvation, and to
be yet in their sin; and that such men walk by their own fancies and
imaginations. Christ Ascend. Page 11. Do such expressions ^avoure of any high
Esteem, which they have of the Holy Scriptures? if not, let him see to it. But
moreover George Whitehead, in his Apology P. 49. said, that that which is
spoken from the Spirit of truth in any (viz. of them) is of as great authority
as the Scriptures, yea and greater. See for this Mr Hicks 1 dial. P. 28. Will.
Pen in his Raise. against Rail. P. 40. cited by Mr Hicks 3. Dial. said That the
Scriptures at most, are but a kind of declaratory and secondary Rule. (This
man says the same, as we shall hear) and further, The Scripture is the R^le
of historical faith; but the light, and Spirit of God, can only be the Rule of
saving faith: and again Page 55. That which is more ancient, more universal,
and more able to inform, rule and guide, that must eminently be the rule; but
that has been and is the Light within. Therefore, that has been and ought to
be the Rule of faith and practice. So P. 48. Because we deny the Scriptures to
be the rule of faith and practice in honor to that divine light, that gave
them forth; that we should therefore etc. If this man, think that we calumniat
them upon this account, he should tell us, at least, what high and honorable
thoughts he and the rest have of them.

5. But what if we find him upon the matter, saying little less than they,
though in more mod^st expressions? He says, I confess, in his Thesis, That the
Scriptures of truth did proceed from the holy Revelations of the Spirit of God:
and one would think this a fair acknowledgment; But in his Apology Page 36* he
tells us, that they do not think, that the Authority of the Scriptures does
depend on any Efficacy or Virtue, placed in these Writings, but ascribe it
wholly unto that Spirit, from whom they came. What confusion and self
contradiction is here? To say, that the Scriptures of Truth are the Revelations
of the Spirit of God, and yet they carry no Authority impressed upon them? What
shall carry the Impressions of a divine Authority, if divine Revelations do
not? why did he assert, in the preceding Thesis, that divine Revelation was
the formal Object and ground of divine Faith? How can they believe, with a
divine Faith, the divine Revelations, which they pretend unto? why does he
plead so much for looking after divine Revelations, if divine Revelations have
not the stamp of divine Authority upon them* But he says, they ascribe the
authority wholly unto the Spirit: And do not we so also, when we stoop unto the
Authority of the Scriptures of Truth, because delivered by the Inspiration of
God? when we say, the Acts and Statutes of Parliament have the authority of
Laws, and we obey and receive them, as authenticque Laws, do we not ascribe
the Legislative Authority unto the Parliament? what a fancyful distinction must
this them be? and what a Notional difference does he here imagine? But it may
be, by these writings, he means the Paper and Ink? But can he call the Paper
and Inck the Scriptures of Truth? or say, that they did proceed from the holy
Revelations of the Spirit of God?

6. He reduces all the contents of the Scripture unto three heads, telling us,
that they contain first, an historical narration of the acts of the people of
God, in not a few ages, and of several rare testimonies of the providence of
God toward them: Forgetting that we have here also a true and faithful
Narration of the first creation; and that these examples are instructive.
Secondly a Prophetical narration of many things, of which some are past, and
some are yet to come: Making no mention of the great and many Promises, nor yet
of the threatenings. Thirdly a full and large testimony to the chief doctrines
of the Christian faith, and that in certane excellent declarations,
exhortations and sentences; which by the afflatus of the Spirit were said and
written, at diverse times, to diverse churches and pastors, according to
various occasions, that fell out. And here is the whole of the high account he
has of the Scriptures, and of their perfection. Not to Meddle much with that
here, which he will give us occasion largely to disput of hereafter, I would
only enquire, where or in what book, beside the Scriptures, shall we find the
whole doctrine of the Christian Faith laid down? The Scriptures, as he says,
only give testimony to the chief Doctrines of Christianity: Therefore there
must be other Doctrines of Christianity, that must be found out and searched
for elsewhere: but where, I pray, shall we find these? Again I would know of
him, how we shall know, what belongs to the chief Heads of Christianity: and
what not? we cannot know this by the Scriptures; for they are supposed by him,
to be chief heads of Christianity, to us, before the Scriptures come, which
only, as he says. bears testimony to some of them.

7. Further, when he says, the Scripture gives this Testimony, only in
certain declarations etc. It would seem, we have not our Christian faith from
the Scriptures; but all the Articles thereof flow to us from some other
Immediate Fountain; and are founded, as to us, upon some other Immediate Ground;
and the Scriptures only give some testimony thereto, and that, as it were, on
the bye, in some certane Declarations, Exhortations, and Sentences. Hence it
would appear by him, that it is not the maine intendment, and principal
design of the Scriptures, to set down, delineat and explain to us, the
articles of our Christian Faith, and the doctrine of our Religion; and so John
was, it seems, in a mistake, when he said John. 20: verse. 31. These are
written, that we might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and
that believing we might have life, through his name. Why has the Lord thus
made known, and written unto us excellent things, in counsel and knowledge? Is
it not, that our trust might be in the Lord? and that he might make us know,
the certanty of the Words of Truth? Prove. 22: verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. See Luke 1:
verse. 2, 3, 4. Why says Paul Rom 15: verse. 4. that whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope? For what end, did the Spirit inspire
these Holy men, and by or in them speak to us in the Scriptures, if not to give
us a solid ground for our Faith to stand upon, in receiving and believing the
articles of Salvation? Is not the whole of the Scripture given by the
Inspiration of God, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works 2 Timothy 3:16, 17? Why does the Apostle Peter say 2 Pet.
1:19. that we do well to take heed unto this more sure word of prophecy? If
they be not the ground of our Faith, why are we desired thus to take heed unto
them; and to desire the sincere milk of word, that we may grow thereby? 1 Pet
2:2. Are we not said to be built upon that foundation, which the Prophets and
Apostles did ministerially lay, by Word and Write? Ephesians. 2:20. Thus we see, he
lays no more weight upon the Scriptures, as to the bottoming of our Faith,
than he would do upon any good Book, wherein testimony were given unto the
chief Doctrines of the Christian Faith, by some excellent Declarations,
Exhortations and Sentences.

8. In this account he gives us of his conceptions of the fullness and
perfection of the Scriptures, It is observable, that he does not so much as
give the least hint, of any Authority, wherewith the Scripture is clothed, to
lay obligations on our Consciences, to yield Faith and Obedience to it, as the
signification of the Sovereign Will and pleasure of the great God and
Lawgiver; (and in this is more injurious to the Scriptures, then Papists are,
who grant it to be a Rule of Faith) Hos. 8:12. See Psalm. 119. throughout, with
infinite more places, and this is in effect to destroy the Scriptures, which are
given to us as the Law of God, and must be received as such, with Faith and
Obedience. As if they had not been inspired by the Holy Ghost, for this end and
purpose, that we might thereby understand and prove what is that good, that
acceptable and perfect will of God. Is it not called a Law, disobedience unto
and transgression of which is sin? 1 Ioh. 3:4. Iam. 2:8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and
4:11.

9. What he says of the Scriptures being written to certane Churches and
Pastors, upon certane Occasions, which is an old Popish argument, neither will
quadrate with the whole of the Scriptures; nor, though it did, will it ground
any such inference, that we have little or no interest therein, as our Law and
Rule, as Quakers say: and lest, he think I caluminate, let him take notice of
these few Instances, Edw. Borroughs Page 47. of his works, says (as Mr Hicks
cites him Dial. 3. Page 58, 59.) That is no command to me, which is a command
to another; neither did any of the saints act by a command, that was given to
another. And again, Such as go to duty by imitation from the letter, which was
commands to others, their sacrifice is an abomination to the Lord. And again
Page 105. he hence infers, that they who take up a command from the
Scriptures, are in the witchcraft. This is a sufficient proof: And, that that
inference of his Brethren is naught, we shall show afterward.

10. In the following words of his Thesis, he comes nearer to that, which is
the core of the whole of his design, which is to set up Immediate Revelations
and Enthusiasmes, as the ground and adequate Rule of Faith and Manners; and to
lay aside the Scriptur^s, as incompetent thereunto: for he tells us, that the
Scriptures are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it
self: and thence infers, that therefore they are not to be accounted the
Principal Original of all Truth and Knowledge, nor the adequate primary Rule of
Faith and Manners. But what ridiculous folly is this? did ever man dream, that
the Scriptures were God, or the Spirit of God? So he reasons, as if one
should say, The acts of Parliament, or the Laws made by the Supreme Legislator
of a Kingdom or Common wealth, are but only declarations of the mind of the
Lawgivers, and not the Lawmakers themselves, therefore they are not the
principal Original of civility, or municipality; nor the adequate and primary
Rule of government: And who would not smile at this? The Jews, when they heard
the law given by God upon mount Si^ai, might have said likewise; This Law is
not God himself, nor the fountain it self, but only a Declaration of the
Fountain; and therefore cannot be accounted our adequate and primary Rule of
Faith and Manners; but we must look after something else, as our Adequate and
Primary Rule. ^ut I wonder, that the man does not observe, that this manner of
argueing, makes nothing for his maine design; for he will not, I suppose,
say, (though others speak little less) that the Revelations, which he
pretends unto, or the light within, which he would have regarded as the Rule,
is God himself, or the Fountain and principal Original it self of all Truth
and Knowledge; but only, at most, a Beam of Light and Truth streaming out from
the Fountain: And so the question will only come to this; whether the
Revelations or Light within, which he cries up; or the Scriptures of Truth,
which we plead for, be the Adequate and Principal Rule of Faith and Manners:
And if he speak any thing to this question, in his Apology, we shall examine
it. One thing I would say here, viz. That this Prime and Principal Original of
all Truth and Knowledge, is no Rule of Faith and Manners to us, let be the
Adequate and Primary Rule, being considered in it self; but only as declared
and manifested to us* in manner of a Law, whether written and made legible upon
the Nature of Man, and his Relation to the Creator, and to the rest of the
creatures; or imprinted upon the Mind of Man; or delivered by Vive Voice, as
on mount Sinai; or by writing, as in the Scriptures. God's being the Fountain
and prime Original of all Truth, etc. did lay no bands on Adam to forbear to
eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; but there was an express Command
given, and Law made thereanent God is, in Himself, and from all Eternity, was
the prime Fountain and Original of all Truth and Knowledge; yet was not that a
Law or Rule: for a Law or Rule is a relative thing, and supposes Subjects to
be Ruled and Governed thereby, which were not in being from eternity.

11. He talks further, at the same rate of absurdity, granting that the
Scriptures are, and may be accounted a secondary Rule, subordinate to the
Spirit, from whom they derive all their excellency and Certainty. But what
means he by a Secondary Subordinate Rule? This would import, that the
Testimony of the Spirit, which he, and others of his persuasion, do pretend
unto, and plead for, is a Rule above the Scriptures: But, how can the Testimony
of the Spirit, which they say, they receive, be preferred unto the Testimony of
the Scriptures; seeing by his own confession, the Scriptures were written by a
divine Afflatus; Is the Spirits speaking unto them more an Afflatus, and so a
more Primary Rule, than the Spirits speaking in the Scriptures? This cannot be;
for sure, the Scriptures, or Verity declared therein, or the Declaration of
Gods mind thereby expressed, is as Immediate an Emanation from the Prime
Original Truth, as any which they can receive; for the holy Men of God were as
Really and as Immediately Inspired by the Spirit, in Speaking, Dictating and
Writing the Scriptures (we are not here speaking of transumpts, or of
translations) as they can suppose themselves to be; if not more. And so all the
difference is; that the Inspiration, which they receive, is to them Immediate,
but the Inspiration, in the Scriptures, is but Mediate to us: yet sure, when
they come to dictate their Inspirations to others, the case cannot much differ.
And further, we are taught, that the Inspirations and Revelations, which the
Holy-men of God, who were his Penmen in writing the Scriptures, did receive,
were not for themselves; for the Lord spoke by them, or in them, to the
Fathers, Heb. 1:^. And Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 1:10, 12. that the Prophets, when
they prophesied of the grace that should come, had it revealed unto them, that
not unto themselves, but unto us they did Minister the things, which are now
reported: It is confessed, that the Scriptures were given out by the Infallible
Inspiration of the Spirit, and that they were given for a Rule; and Paul tells
us, 2 Timothy 3:16, 17. that they are able to make us wise unto Salvation, and to
make the man of God perfect, thoroughly fournished unto all good works; whence
it is manife^t, that they are a Sure and Alsufficient Rule, and therefore
Complete and Adequate, as to what we are to Know and Believe, in reference to
Eternal Salvation. But as for their Revelations and Inspirations, whatever they
make of them, we are concerned to enquire, whence they come, and whither they
go; e^pecially seeing they are set up cheek by chole, with the Scriptures; yea
and preferred thereto. Nay, when the Scriptures command us, not to believe
every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 Ioh. 4:^. I judge it the saifest
course, both for them and us, to examine these supposed Inspirations. And
howbeit they may imagine, that the Inspirations, which they have now and then
received, or are receiving, are undoubtedly Divine; Yet, because the false
Prophets, whereof John speaks, might have imagined the same of their
Inspirations, and Prophecies, it is, at least, possible that they may be
deceived also: And if so, is it not every way saifest, to try all by the
unerring touch stone? And does it not hence appear, that if we speak in
reference to their Revelations, the Scriptures are unquestionably the Primary
and Adequate rule.

12. He adds a reason in his Thesis, which he prosecuteth at large in his
Apology, viz. That we know the certanty of the Scriptures only by the inward
testimony of the Spirit. But this reason is ambiguously expressed, for it may
either have this meaning; That we know the certainty of the matter contained in
the Scriptures, only by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit: Or this may be the
meaning, That only by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit, we know certanely,
that the Scriptures are the word of God, or that book, which contains the
revealed will of God. If he take this Reason in the first sense, we may then in
part know, what he understands by a Secondary and Subordinate Rule, which
title, he is pleased, as we heard, to allow unto the Scriptures; and that his
meaning is consonant to what Will. Pen says P. 47. of that book of his, which
Mr Hicks cites Dial. 3. Page 48. viz. We dar boldly affirm, that the greatest
reason of our belief, concerning the prophecies and promises recorded in the
Scriptures, is not from any outward thing; but that inward testimony, that we
have received from that holy Light within us, to the truth and faithfulness of
those sayings: And again Page 48. (cited by Mr Hicks Page 50, 51.) Though we
do say, men ought to live up to these h^ly Rules, contained in the Scriptures;
yet the reason why, is that conviction they meet with from the light of their
own consciences. Therefore the light within is both our warrant for Faith in,
and Obedience to them: And this upon the matter is the same that Benj. Furley a
known Quaker in Rotterdam, says most plainly in his letter (cited by Mr Hicks,
in his Quakers appeal answered, Page 16.) There is nothing in the Scripture,
that is a duty upon me, or which I am obliged to obey, because there recorded;
whatsoever is a command to me, I must not receive from any man or thing without
me; Nay, not the Scripture it self: Yea, it is the greatest error in the world,
that ever was invented, and the ground of all error, to affirm, that the
Scripture ought to be a Rule to Christians. This is plain dealing, and so is
that of Edward Burrowes, Page 62. cited by Mr Hicks ibid. He that persuades
people to let the Scr^ptures be the rule of faith and practice, would keep
people in darkness; for who ever walks by the rule without them, and teach men
so to do, would make void the Covenant of life and peace. Now, if this be his
meaning, the Scriptures shall be no Rule at all, not so much as a Subordinate
Rule; for it shall hold forth no Truth, calling for divine Faith from me; nor
shall it hold forth any Law or Command, obligeing me to Obedience, unless a new
Revelation come, or the Light with in me tell me, that such a point is Truth,
and so to be believed; and such an Exhortation is a divine Command, and so to
be Obeyed: And if the Light within me say, that such an Assertion, contained in
the Scriptures, is not Truth, I must not be^e^ve it; or if it say, that such a
word of Command is not to be Obeyed, there sh^^l be no force of a command in
the word. So that, as with Papists, the Scriptures are beholden to their Pope,
or to their Church, for its authority, so as it has no canonick authority, but
what is given to it, by the Pope, or the Church; So with Quakers, the
Scriptures are beholden to the Light within for its authority; and no more is
Scripture, to be Believed and Obeyed as Scripture, but what the Light within
says is to be believed and Obeyed: And thus in effect it is not the Scripture,
nor the Spirit of God speaking to us in the Scripture, that lays any
obligation on us to believe and obey; but only the Light within; so that if the
Light within will, any other book, possibly the Turks Alcoran, shall have as
much authority to Command our Faith and Obedience, as the Scripture has Yet I
must needs say, we have much more advantage in dealing with Papists, than in
dealing with these Quakers; for the Papists have but one Pope, to whose
determination they submit; But here every Quaker has a Pope within his breast
And next, we can know, read and understand, what the Pop's determinations are,
and how founded, when he is pleased to condescend to give reasons; at least, we
can know, what truths he determines, and what not. But we cannot know, what
the Spirit or Light within the Quakers says; we hear not, and see not, and
understand not what it says; whether it be a white or a blake Spirit, we know
not; It may say One thing this hour, and the contrary the next, and where are
we then? And what ever it says, we cannot know, but as they report; and
whether their report be true, or not, we know not: Nor can we know; when we
have used our utmost diligence to know it To this then are we come at length;
That every Quaker has the Supreme judge of all controversies within his
breast, and the supreme Law to regulate all duties. So that it is impossible to
convince them of an Error, either in Faith or Practice, out of the Scriptures;
because the clearest Assertions of truth, and the most manifest Commands, have
no au^hority, but from the Light within them And what that Light says, we
cannot judge, because we neither hear it, nor see it; nor have we ground to
believe, that they cannot give us a false report of the testimony of that
Light. This is, ^ confess, a master piece of Invention of the grand Impostor,
to keep these deluded souls out of the reach of conviction; but such as all
sober persons will judge ground sufficient, to look upon that, with a more than
ordinary piece of abhorrence; and to flee from these deluded and self deluding
creatures. But one thing more I would know of this man, if this be his meaning:
Is it any otherways with us, than it was with the people of God, of old? He
must say no; seeing he has formerly pleaded for the same formal Object, and
Ground to their faith and ours: and then I enquire, might not the people of God
of old have put off thus, all the Prophecies, Exhortations, Rebuikes, and
Commands, which the Prophets, immediately inspired, declared unto them, from and
in the name of the Lord, by saying, till they had Revelations immediate
themselves, concerning these things to be believed, or obeyed, they were not
under any obligation to notice them? And if so, how could they be charged with
Disobedience, Obstinacy, Unbeleef and Wickedness, as we oftentimes find they
were? Again, how could Christ and his Apostles confirm their doctrine by the
Scriptures, Press to a study and search of them, Convince persons of error by
them, and the like; seeing still this shift was as ready at hand for them to
use, as it is for the Quakers today? I pray him to clear me, in these
particulars, if he can.

13. But if the meaning of his Assertion be, That we know only by the inward
Testimo^y of the Spirit, that the book of the Scriptures, is indeed the word of
God: what will this help his cause? Nothing at all; for the Testimony of the
Spirit is a true Testimony; and if the Spirit testify, that that book is the
Word of God, that book must indeed be the Word of God; and it must be the Word
of God, before that testimony be given to it; for the Testimony does not make
it such, but witnesses it to be such: and so, before that Testimony of the
Spirit come, the will of God contained in that book must oblige us to Believe
it and Obey it: for what is the revealed will of God, cannot but oblige such
unto whom it is revealed. But if it be said, That even the will of God,
contained in the Scriptures, cannot oblige us, until a new Revelation come to
persuade us of the certainty, that it is the will of God. I answer. Then 1.
The Assertions of the God of truth, and the Laws and Commands of the Supreme
Lawgiver, have no obleiging force upon us to Believe and Obey, until we be
persuaded, these Truths and Laws are Divine; and so the authority of the Laws
depends upon, and is derived from the mind of the Subject, and no more shall
be law, than he will. 2. Then the Revelation of the mind of God, does not
carry alongs with it its own Evidence. 3. Then the Second Revelation can as
little carry alongs with it its own evidence, as the First, and we must have a
Third to give us the persuasion of its certanety; and the Third will stand in
need of a Fourth, and so in infinitum; and hereby we shall never come to any
certanty, but still fluctuate, notwithstanding of Revelations upon Revelations.

14. He adduceth ( Apol. P. 36, 37.) Calv. Instit. Lib. 1. c. 7. s. 4, 5. The
French Confession of faith Art. 4. The Belgic Confess. Art. 5. And the
Confession framed at Westminster Cap. 1. S. 5. which last he cannot cite
without a jibe at these worthy Divines, thereby evidenceing what a Spirit
acts him. But to the point, I say, 1. What is spoken here of the Spirit, is
in Opposition to the Testimony of Men, or of the Church, which the Romanists
alleiged. 2. They speak not of an Objective certanty, as if before this
persuasion wrought by the Spirit, there was no ground to believe and receive
these for the Scriptures of truth; or as if indeed before this, they had not
been the Scriptures of truth: but of a Subjective certanty, and therefore they
call it Persuasion and Assurance: now, this does not create an Objective
certainty, but pre^upposeth it, and only helps the soul to see that Objective
certainty, and rest upon it with full Conviction and Assurance. 3. They speak
not of any Immediate Revelation, or Inspiration; but of an ordinary work of the
Spirit efficiently effectuating this Persuasion and Assurance. 4. They expressly
tell us, that this work of the Spirit is by and with the word, and not an
Inspiration distinct and separated from it; an^ by the gracious effects of the
word, in and upon the hearts of People, which evidently demonstrate the cause
to be divine; and that Word, which has such Powerful. Noble and Divine Effects
upon the soul, to to be of a divine Original, flowing from that Supreme,
Verity, or Veracity, and from that Supreme Authority, and so to be purely
divine.

15. Though this be enough to discover the vanity of this man's Alleigance; yet
I shall, for the Readers satisfaction, a little further clear the matter.
There are in the Scriptures such innate marks and evidences of divine Majesty,
Power and Authority, whereby, as Light and Heat prove and demonstrate
themselves, so the Scriptures evince themselves to be of God by their Light,
Life, Power, and Majesty Divine, which is also manifested by these particulars
mentioned in our Confession of faith, to wit, The Heavenliness of the matter;
The Efficacy of the Doctrine; The Majesty of the style; The Consent of all the
parts; The Scope of the whole, which is to give all glory to God; The full
Discovery it makes of the only Way of Man's salvation; The many other
Incomparable Excellencies, and the Entire Perfection thereof. These are
arguments, which it carries alongs with it, whereby it does abundantly evince
it self to be the word of God, as the heavens declare themselves to be of God,
not by any voice or testimony, but by the Characters of Infinite Power, so
legible upon them, that all that run may read. The Spirit, in working up the
soul unto a Conviction and Persuasion, that the Scriptures are the word of God,
does those things. First, He clears up the characters of divinity, that are
in the Scriptures, formerly dark to the man, through prejudice, or other
causes; and so makes the Object plain and manifest. Next He conveyeth light
into the Mind, whereby the man is enabled to discern and perceive these
Grounds and Evidences, which are the characters of divinity: as a man, when
clouds are removed, and his eyes are opened, to see the beams of light flowing
from the body of the Sun, is convinced and persuaded that the Sun is arisen in
our horizon. Now this work of the Spirit, has its various Measures and
Degrees; not to mention that, which is truly saving, whereby the man is not
only Enabled to see the forementioned grounds to a conviction, but, through a
gracious Work of the Spirit on the whole soul, is made to close with these
grounds with joy and delights and to accept of the Scriptures upon these
Grounds with full persuasion of soul, as having this truth, that these
Scriptures are the word of God, deeply impressed o^ his spirit, and sealed by
the Holy Ghost; So that he embraces them, as the very word of God, and closes
with them, with all Reverence and cheerful Submission of soul, receiving with
faith the Truths there delivered, and submitting to the Commands thereof
heartily and cheerfully, through grace. Not to mention this, I say, which as it
respects the matter contained in the word, and the suitable improvement
thereof, is not of our present concernment; this work of the Spirit admits of
degrees, whether we consider the Object, or Evidences, which lie in the
Scripture, or the Subject, the ^llumination of the mind, to see the cleared
Evidences and Grounds; for to some the Grounds and Evidences may be more clear
and unquestionable, than to others; and some may have a larger Illumination of
understanding, and so a greater capacity to see the divine Original of the
Scriptures; than others; and hence the Persuasion, or Conviction of this truth,
may be greater in some, as more freed from Prejudices, Doubts, and Exceptions;
than in Others, in whom it may be weaker through some admixture. The impression
also may be in some deeper, than in others.

16. If any enquire, wherein this differs from the Opinion of the Quakers? I
ans. In those particulars. (1) This, which we speak of, is not the Spirits
saying by any new Revelation, Voice, or Whisper or Enthusiastic inspiration,
that this, and not that Book is the Word of God; The Quakers speak thus. (2) By
their way, the testimony of the Spirit is an Argumentative Medium, or an
Inartificial Argument, adduced to prove this conclusion to themselves, that
this or that Book is the Word of God; so that they must first Perceive and
Feel, that the Spirit says or witnesses, this book to be the Word of God; and
then they infer, that therefore it is to be received as the Word of God: But
we make no such use of the Spirits Testimony; but Assert, that He so
illuminateth the Mind to see the characters of divinity, as withal to work
the Assent or Persuasion; and that so, as the Faith, or Persuasion, shall be
felt oftentimes, before the man reflect upon the Operation of the Spirit. (3)
The testimony we speak of is that Operation of the Spirit, whereby the
characters of divine Majesty and Authority, which are natively inprinted in,
and do necessarily attend the Sayings of God, are Discovered, Received and
Acquiesced in: But the testimony, which they speak of, is distinct from, and
has no connection with the Objective evidence, which is in the Scriptures
themselves. (4) The Quakers Revelation is purely Objective, and New, and
Immediate, declaring a new Truth: The work of the Spirit which we speak of, as
it clears up the Objective Evidence, which is in the Scriptures, by removing
Grounds of Mistake and Prejudice, and the like; so it works by these
Evidences, a Subjective Conviction in the soul, and a Persuasion of the truth,
which only the man did not see before. (5) By their Revelation a person gets
no new discovery of the characters of Divinity, which the Scriptures carry
along with them, unless it may be by accident: but the Persuasion, which we
speak of, is rationally deduced from, and founded upon these Marks and
Evidences, which the soul is now made to see clearly, through the Operation of
the Spirit. (6) By our way, the Scriptures do not receive their Truth and
Authority, neither in themselves, nor as to us, from this work of the Spirit;
as they do, by the way of the Quakers: for whether this Operation of the
Spirit, whereof we speak, be, or not, the Scriptures are what they are, the
very Word of God; as the sun is a shineing sun, and light is light, whether the
blind see it, or not. The word of the Lord is clothed with Divine Light,
Majesty and Authority, whether we see it, or not; and Obliges us (though as
yet wanting this persuasion, and remaining blind, or blinded with prejudice)
to Embrace and Receive the same; as the Word of God, and to yield all due Faith
and Obedience thereunto, as to the Word and Law of the great God and Lawgiver:
it is true, without this work of the Spirit, we cannot attain to that
heart-quieting Persuasion, and soul-satisfying Assurance of the infallible
Truth and divine Authority of the Scripture; yet there is an infallible Truth,
and divine Authority, that inseparably attends whatsoever is spoken by God,
and delivered as Assertions, and Laws, whether we see it and believe it, or
not: And our blindness, though it prejudge us of the rich advantage of
Embraceing the Scriptures, as the very Word of God; yet it Endammageth not, in
the least, the word of God it self: But by the way of the Quakers, the
Scriptures have no Light, nor Authority, in themselves, or to us, until this
Second Testimony come: And thus it is supposed, that either the Scriptures have
no Characters of Light, Power, Life and Majesty divine, in themselves; or that
whatever they may have of this kind, it is of no force to Oblige us to Faith
and Obedience, (which were a contradiction) till we receive this adventious and
second Testimony; and so all, who want this, are under no Obligation to receive
the Bible by Faith and Obedience, more then the Turks Alcoran, which sure, must
be a very wild and uncouth Position. Let the Reader consult that satisfying
Piece of the learned D. Own, of the Divine Original, etc. of the Scriptures
Chap. 5. where this is more satisfyingly and clearly expressed.

1^. Now this being the very nature and native result of the judgment of the
Quakers; who s^eth not, how absurd it is? and who can be ignorant of the
dreadful Consequences thereof, which are so obvious. For if their Opinion hold,
Then (1) there was no Ground for that Challenge Hos. 8:12. I have written to
him, the great things of my Law, but they were counted, as a strange thing. (2)
Then the jews, wanting this testimony, could not be blamed for saying Ier.
43:2- Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee, to say* go not
unto Egypt, to sojourn there. (3) This might have been alleiged for an excuse
of the Unbeleef, that Christ himself did meet with; for the Jews might have
said, we have not as yet the testimony of the Spirit persuading us, that
Christ's sayings and sermons, are truly divine, or the very sayings and
testimony of God; and till we have this, we are not bound to believe. (4) This
would annul all that Authority and Truth, that is in the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unt^ Him, to show unto His Servants; and sent and
signified by his Angel unto John, who bare record of the word of God, and of
the testimony of Jesus Christ. Revel. 1:2. So (5) it makes null that saying
Revel. 1:3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those sayings which are written therein. (6) It confronteth
all these places following Deuteronomy. 11:18, 19. and 18 19. Ier. 29 19. and 35.15.
Psalm. 50:17. Prove. 4* 20. and 7 ^. Ier. 6:19. and 1^:10. and 13:10. Ezech.
3:4.10. with multitudes more, which might be cited (7) By this means, the
people of God of old, were no more Obliged to receive the Word of God,
delivered by true Prophets; than the lies and dreams of the false Prophets, who
were Prophets of the deceits of their own hearts: and there was no difference
to be put betwixt the chaff and the wheat, until this second Revelation came,
See Ier. 23:21-32. In a word, (8) This rendereth the whole Scriptures of the
Old and New Test. void and useless; as we shall manifest more, when we come to
consider, what he says to the contrary.

18. What he speaks of the difference among the Ancients, and doubtings,
concerning some Books of Scripture, which are now received, can prove nothing,
but that through Prejudice, false Grounds, and Mistakes, they were ^ot in case
to see and observe these characters of divinity, which others, and possibly
themselves afterward, were helped to see. Did ever any pretend the want of new
Immediate Revelations, as the Ground, yea and sole Ground, and Reason, why they
did not receive these books, as Canonick? or did ever any plead this as the
Ground, and sole ground of their receiving of them, as canonick, whether among
the Ancients, or Modern, excepting Quakers, and the like Phanaticks?

19. In his Apolo. Page 38. he spends many words about his Conclusion, which
he gave us in fewer words, in the end of his Thesis, thus, and seeing (said he)
we do receive and believe the Scriptures, because they did proceed from the
Spirit: Therefore is the Spirit more originally and principally the Rule: and
to make all strong he adds that philosophical axiom, propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale: and also, in summing up, what
he had in the former part of his Thesis, and we have already examined, to wit,
touching the Spirits being the Principal Original of all Truth and Knowledge;
to which conclusion, he says, he annexed that axiom: which is not true. But
passing this, and what has been answered already, let us see what truth is
here: and first I Observe, That he manifestly confounds, the prime and
principal leader, with the principal and original Rule. Here he says that the
Spirit is the Principal and Original Rule, and elsewhere, in his Thesis, as we
shall hear, he infers and that out of Scripture, that the Spirit is the
prime and principal leader; and thus, makes the Principal Cause and the Rule
all one: He reasons like one; that would prove that the wind was both the
Principal mover of the Shipe, and also the Compass by which the skipper was to
steer his course; or like one that would prove that the Master was the
principal leader of the hand of the writting Scholar, and then would prove that
he were the principal copy too, after the example of which the Scholar was to
write, and which he was to eye, while drawing and framing of the letters. Who
sees not what a vast difference is here? Supposes he that there is no
difference here? can he be so blind as not to see it? What I pray, can be
expected of such as found their fabric, upon such a ground of confusion, but a
Babel?

20. Moreover, if we consider the scope he drives at, we will find yet more,
and more intolerable Confusion: for his maine purpose is to Evince, that the
Revelations and inspirations, which he and the rest of the Quakers pretend
unto; or that light within, of which we will hear him afterward talking, is
to be preferred, as the more Primary and Principal Rule, unto the Scriptures,
which, at most, are but a Secondary, Subordinat and Inadequate Rule to him, as
we have heard. Now, if he think to prove this by what he here says, it is
obvious and palpable, that he makes the Spirit, from whom the Scriptures did
proceed, to be all one with the Revelations, which they pretend unto; or with
the Light with in, which he and they so much magnify and cry up: Otherwise all
that he here says is to no purpose, and he but reasons from the club to the
corner, as we say. Is that Light within, or are the Revelations the increated
Spirit? Then we may judge, what thoughts he must have of the Spirit; and doubt,
whether he can look upon the Spirit, as the true and living God; or clear
himself of wicked Socinianisme, when he thus makes him the same with a
creature; as the Revelation, or the Light within must needs be Or will he say,
that the Light within him is really and indeed the increated Spirit? this must
be blasphemy with a witness; and they must be looked upon, as notorious
Blasphemers and idolaters; and this must be heard with horror, and needs no
other Confutation.

21. He would do well to show us, how we shall understand the Spirits being a
Rule unto us. Can we imagine, that he is a Rule to us any other way, than by
Revealing his Will, giving us Laws, proposeing Rules, all Obligeing us to
Faith and Obedience? and is not the Rule proposed and laid down to us by the
Spirit, Inspireing Instruments to write it, our Principal and Original Rule?
was not the Law, given out by Gods own voice, on mount Sinai, a Principal and
original Rule unto the jews? How or what way is God, or can he be a Rule unto
people of Faith and Manners, but by declareing His Mind, in making or
proposeing (by vive Voice, or by Inward Inspirations, Revelations, or by
Dreams, Visions and the like, or by Writting) Laws, Ordinances, Rules and
Statutes, whereby rational creatures are to regulate both their faith and
practice? How was He a Rule to Adam, but by proposeing to him a Rule
objectively, in the Creation, in his relation to his Maker, and to the other
creatures etc. and by imprinting this Law and Rule into his mind, and writting
it in his heart; or by giving him a Law by vive voice, saying, Thou shall not
eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil? How was he a Rule to Abraham,
when He commanded him to sacrifice his son? was it not by enjoining him, by an
express Command? If he knows any other way, how the Spirit is to be looked
upon, as a Principal and Original Rule, he would do will to acquant us with it.
And if no other way be conceiveable, we see the Impertinency of his Argueing;
as if one should say The Statutes and Laws of a Land, are to be Obeyed by the
Subjects, because they proceed from the Supreme Legislator. Therefore the
Supreme Legislator himself is more their Rule and Law: for propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. Is not this nobly argued? and
is not our Quakers Philosophy very quick? and yet a person, that never learned
logic, can smile at this, and tell him, that the Supreme Legislator neither
is, nor can be any other way, a Rule to Subjects, but by making Laws; and
these Laws are a principal Rule to them, as his Subjects.

22. It might be noted, that by his latin Igitur etiam Spiritus magis
originaliter, etc. the Scriptures are acknowledged to be also Originally and
Principally a Rule; only the Spirit is more Originally and more Principally the
Rule. But to wave the darkness or ambiguity of this expression, we shall accept
what he here seems to grant, viz. That the Scripture is an Original and
Principal Rule: And hence infer; Therefore it is to be preferred to all
Inferior Revelations and Inspirations, which he and others pretend unto: But
if by the Spirit here, he means these Revelations and Inward Inspirations,
and therefore he accounts these the more Original and Principal Rule, and not
the Scriptures, he must give us some reason, why he judges the Revelations,
which he has, or pretends unto, to be more Originally and Principally the
Rule, than the Revelations, which are contained in the Scriptures, and by which
the Scriptures were given out. Again, he must show us a Reason, why the
Revelations, which he pretends unto, should be called, or accounted one with
the Spirit himself, more than these Revelations, by which the Scriptures were
dictate.

23. Before we proceed, we must take notice of one thing further, in his
Thesis. There he tells us, that the Scriptures themselves testify, that the
Spirit is that Rector or guide, who is given to the Saints, by whom they are to
be led in all truth: And then infers, that Therefore, according to the
Scriptures, the Spirit is the prime and principal leader. And this is very
true* but makes nothing for his Cause: yea it militateth against him; for I
would ask, whether he believes this testimony of the Scripture, or not? If
not, why makes he thus use of it as an Argument? Is he of the same mind with
other Quakers, who as Mr Hicks reports Dial. 1. P. 24, 25. speak thus. Thou
mistakest us, we own not the Scriptures to be our Rule: And whereas thou have
said many things to render us guilty of condemning this in others, whilst we
ourselves seemingly allow it to be so, which is but thine own imagination: for
when we make use of the Scriptures, it is only to quiet and stop their
clamours, that plead for it, as their Rule: But for us, had the Scriptures
never been, we could have known what is therein contained. And again Page
48.49. do thou deny perfection attainable in this life? Is any point more
plainly asserted then this, (NB.) in that, which thou call thy Rule, the
Scriptures? -- not because I own it to be so, but thou do, and I would
convince thee by them -- do not thou call the Scriptures the word of God, and
thy Rule -- I wonder thou should insist so much upon this, since I have told
thee, I own it not as the Rule, only I would convince thee by it. If he be of
this judgment, he could not with a good conscience adduce this Argument, where
he is thetically laying down and confirming the grounds of his Faith. But if
he be of another judgment, and believes this to be true, I would ask again.
Upon what ground? Is it because the Scriptures speak thus; or because the Light
within him, or a second Testimony or Inspiration says, that this is Truth? If
this last be his meaning, he cannot say, that the Scriptures give this
testimony, but that the Spirit, distinct from that Spirit which speaks in the
Scriptures, gives this testimony; for if this distinct testimony did not
speak, the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures should say nothing, or what he
said should be of no value. Nor can he say, that according to the Scriptures;
but according to the Spirit speaking in him, which is distinct and s^parable
from the Scriptures, or the Spirit speaking in them, The Spirit is the
Principal Leader: And thus his argueing is vain; and, according to his own
Principles, a Falsehood. But if the first be his meaning, to wit, That he
believes this to ^e true because the Scriptures speak so, then he destroys
what he has said; and oppugneth his own Principal Assertion; for then the
Scripture must be the supreme Rule of faith; and because of what the Scripture
says, we must believe what is the office and work of the Spirit of God; and a
new distinct testimony is no requisite, to ground our faith of the truth of
this, which the Scripture says, concerning the Spirits being given to lead the
Saints in all truth. This Observation may serve, once for all, both as to his
Thesis, and Apology, where he cites not a few passages of Scripture, to
confirm what he says; as we have seen, and shall see further, but with what
consonancy to his Principles, I see not. As to the thing it self, which here he
says the Scriptures confirm, we judge it a Truth, worthy of all acceptance;
But I much questione, if his and our meaning be the same, Partly because of
what is said, and partly because of what follows immediately, in his Thesis: I
shall only ask him: How does the Spirit lead his people into all truth? Is it
by new Immediate Inspirations and Revelations; or is it by clearing up the Rule
of the word, by Ministers and means by God appointed, Illuminating their eyes
to understand it, and by the Influences of his grace causing them Believe and
Obey the same? If this last be granted, we have what we desire, and his cause
is destroyed; for then the Scriptures are our Only and Primary Rule. If the
first be alleiged, then the Spirit by a new Immediate Revelation leads him
into this truth, to wit, That the Spirit leads into all truth; and
consequently, the ground of the faith of this, is not the testimony of the
Scriptures; as he seems here to say.

24. But now let us see his grounds, why he will not have the Scriptures to be
looked upon, as our Sole and Principal Rule. Page 39. he draws an Argument
from the difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel, saying, the law is written
without, brings condemnation, and kills; the Gospel is written within, and
is Spiritual, giving life etc. Ans. (1.) This is the common Objection of
phanaticks against the Scriptures. So reasoned the libertines against whom
Calvin wrote, as we see Chap. 9. But (2.) This man must be acted by a
vertiginous Spirit; for in the precee^ing Chapter, we saw with what earnestness
he labored to prove that the people of God under the Old Test. were led by
Revelations, and how we under the New Test. must be led the same way, because
faith is ay the same, and must have the same Object, however the dispensations
vary: and I pray, must not the same faith have the same Rule, under various
dispensations? (3.) If we under the New Test. must have no written Rule, why
did Christ Inspire his Apostles to write to Churches, under the New Testam. and
give them legible letters to Read, and to conform their Faith and Practice
unto? why did Luk write, that we might know the certanety Luk 1:4. Why did John
write, that we might believe, and believing might have life? Ioh. 20.31. Why
did Christ by his servant John write legible letters to the Churches in asia?
Revel 1:1, 3, 4, Were all these Killing Letters? were these Letters of
Condemnation? (4.) why does this man prove his Assertions, or at least
endeavor to prove them, by the Letter of the new Testament Scriptures? But it
is usual with him, both to Speak and to Act, contradictory to himself and his
Principles. Does he not even here cite new Testament Scriptures Romans 6:14. and
8:2. and 10:8. with act. 20:32? (5.) we know, that the Law of God, separated
from and opposed to Christ, (as several in the Apostolic days were seeking to
do) is but a killing letter, as the Gospel is also, when abused to the
excluding of Christ: and that in the New Test. there is a clearer Manifestation
of Christ, as the End of the Law, and as Life, than was under the Law; and we
know, that Christ by his Spirit writteth his Law in the hearts of his children,
by giving them a Spiritual Principle of Obedience, and this he did also to his
own, under the Law; and all this without annulling the Letter of the Law, as a
Rule; as we have shown elsewhere abundantly against the Antinomians (6.) will
he say, that all the Scripture is written in tables of stone? and yet of that
does the Apostle speak 2 Cor. 3. v. 7. the place he has in his eye. But says
he, Grace and not the external law is Christians Rule Romans 6:14. And yet the
External Law taught him this, otherwise he cites this passage, with an evil
conscience; but Grace there is not taken for a Rule; but for that Spiritual
Assistence, whereby we are enabled to withstand Corruption, and so to be more
conformed Outwardly and Inwardly unto the Law; and for the Gospel dispensation,
wherein grace is promised and secured, in and through the Mediator, to help in
time of need, to more Conformity unto the revealed will of God. But by what
authority can he take Grace, here and Act. 20:32. for Immediate Revelations? The
grace of Christ and the power of his Spirit, in regard of that Efficacy it
has, to Restrain from sin, and to Constrain sweetly unto duty, is
assimulated unto a Law, the native End and Design whereof is this, Rom 8:2.
for thereby his children are Effectually and Efficiently delivered from the
Tyranny and Power of Sin and Death. So that this man knows not what he says,
when he would reason thus against the Scriptures, as our Rule; for the Apostle
in that same Epistle Chap. 13.9. urges the very decalogue, as a binding Law,
and in several other places of the same Epistle, cites passages out of the old
Test. not only to Confirm his Doctrine, but to Enforce Duty: yea he expressly
tells us, that the very Scriptures of the Old Test. are of this use unto us.
Chap. 15:4.

25. Before we proceed, and examine what he says against the Perfection of the
Scriptures, in the following Pages, we would first vindicate some Grounds of
our owneing of it, as our Rule, which he mentions afterward; and also, in the
first place clear it to be so, from other Grounds, which he takes no notice
of: And in all this, we have this Advantage, that he has already granted the
Scriptures to be of divine Inspiration, and of Immediate Revelation, and to be
the Scriptures of Truth; and so, without manifest Retracting of what he has
said, and Contradicting of what he has granted, he cannot but assent to all,
which these Scriptures of truth say, as truth, and as unquestionable truth:
wherefore, if they shall give testimony to their being our Rule, above any
thing, that men may fancy as a Rule, the testimony must be true, and we must,
without further debate, Acquiesce therein; and while he does dispute to the
contrary, he calls in question their Truth, and in effect controleth their
Truth and Authority. Let us see then, what they say of themselves, as to this?
That parable, which Christ adduceth Luke 16. speaks fair for what we say;
for who would not think, that one riseing from the dead should be hearkened to
and believed, above all? who would doubt of the divine authority of his
Message, especially when calling for Repentance? who could think, that such an
One so comeing, and that with such a message: were not to be received, as
clothed with divine authority? And yet we see, by Abraham's answer, in the
parable; that Moses and the Prophets are to be preferred; so that if the
testimony of Moses and the Prophets, that is, of the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, could not to b^ Believed, such a testimony with a miracle, would be
Ineffectual. Shall we then think, that this word, preferable to such a
testimony, as every one would think were unquestionable, should not be rested
upon, as our Supreme Rule? will any think it reasonable, that we leave this,
and betake ourselves to private Inspirations and Revelations, as a Superior,
more Sure, and Full Rule, and Declaration of the Mind of God, concerning Faith
and Manners, when all men must see, that they come far short, in point of Light
and Certainty, unto the testimony of One risen from the dead; beside that we
know not, by any infallible toaken, out of what airth they come? Sure, this
should be Madness and Folly.

26. Further, when the Apostle is pressing Timothy 2 Timothy 3:16, etc. to
stedfastness in the truth, and to a progress and continuance in the work of the
Gospel, he assures him, that the Scriptu^es, which he had been acquanted with
from his child hood, and was the sure ground and rule of his doctrine, would
bear him through, without mentioning any superior, yea or collateral Rule, as
requisite in this case, saying, they were able to make wise unto Salvation, and
to make the man of God perfect: and further as a confirmation hereof he tells
him, that the whole Scripture was of divine Inspiration, superior to which, as
a Rule, nothing is imaginable; unless we blasphemously imagine some thing above
God. or some manner of Revelation of God's mind superior and preferable unto
that, which is by his Immediate Speaking and Inspiration: As also he tells him,
that the Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect and thoroughly
fournished unto all good works; and so he denies the Use and Necessity of the
auxiliary supply of any other, whether collateral or superior, Rule. Sure had
the Spirit been, in his judgment, a Superior and more adequate Rule, he had
never attributed all this unto the Scriptures; and that without all exeption of
one thing or other. So that place of Peter, 2 Pet. 1:18, 19, 20, 21. evinceth
the matter beyond a contradiction: for what can be more ce^taine, as to its
divine Authority, than a voice from heaven, and that from the excellent glory?
Dar this man and his fellow-confidents Aver, that their private Revelations,
whether Dreams, Visions or Inspirations, are to be preferred to such a Voice
from heaven, from the Excellent glory, saying This is my beloved Son, which
Peter, James and John did hear? If modesty will not suffer them to be so bold,
let them then forbear to prefer their Fancies, in point of Rule, unto the
Scriptures. When Peter says, we have a more sure word of Prophecy, a light
that shines in a dark place: and what was this word of Prophecy? even that
which holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, shall we not
then look upon that, as our supreme Rule, which God h^th given out with more
evidence, as to us, than a very Voice from heaven, and a Voice, which had full
Certainty in its self? And shall we be so sottish, as to prefer to this,
that which, at best, is but of private interpretation; that is, an Issue of
men's Fancies, private Conceits and Enthusiasmes, if not Satanical Illapses and
Delusions? This is also plain from 1 Cor. 4:6. above what is written: which
implies, that what is written is sufficient and full, as also from Act. 20:27,
35* comp. with Act. 26:22, 23.

27. These, and what formerly has been mentioned to this end and purpose, this
man thinks good to overlook, as if he had never heard of them. We shall now
try, what he says to others: and First, that plain Testimony Esa. 8:20. to
the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Whence we see, that, whoever they be that
come to us, pretending a divine Commission, we must try what they say, by this
word, which is called the Law and the Testimony, and if they speak not
according to it, let their pretensions be never so high, they are to be
rejected, as dark, and as coming from darkness. So that the Law and the
Testimony is the Supreme R^le. To this he says, we have not proven, that by
the Law and Testimony is meaned the Scriptures. As if any, that ever read the
Bible, could be ignorant, what is all along meaned by these words. But granting
this, he has another reserve viz. That the Law was in a more special manner
given to the jews, and more principally, than to us. And hence forsooth, he
will retort the Argument against us, thus, Seeing they who were under the Old
Covenant were to try all by the outward Law, we, who are under the new
Covenant, are to try all by the word of faith, which is within us. And thus the
man rants in his reaving, contradicting what was the great pillar of his
discourse, upon the preceding Thesis; and making differences without ground,
as we lately manifested; and with all destroying by his own expressions, what
he mainly intends: For the Word of Faith, that he speaks of, is distinct
from Immediate Revelations, and these words, which he eyeth, cited by Paul Romans
10. were spoken to the people under the Law by Moses Deuteronomy. 30. v. 14. and so
were true of them even then. Hereby also he proves more than he ought; for if
this Argument hold, the Scriptures shall not be so much as a Less Principal
and Subordinat Rule, which yet he granted it to be; or he must say, the case is
so altered under the New Testament, that what was a Principal Rule then, is now
only subordinat: but whence will this be Evinced? And will it not hence appear
probable, that what is now Principal to us was Less Principal to them, that is,
the Immemediat Testimony of the Spirit? Let the man rid his feet here, if he
can: as for the 70 Version, we have nothing to do with it. if he will lay any
weight upon such a corrupt Version, he should not challenge other versions,
that agree better with the Original. But I wonder how the Man can think, that
that Version, which says, the law was given for an help, should confirm his
Opinion, which is that the Law was given them as a Principal Rule, even above
the Spirits Revelations?

27. Another argument to prove the Scriptures our supreme Rule, is usually
taken from Christ's saying to the Jews Ioh. 5:39 search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think, ye have eternal life, and they are they, that testify of me.
Where C^r^st refers them to the Scriptures, that word of God, which should
have been abideing in them, verse 38. as to a Rule, whereby he was content that
his doctrine should be tried, and judged: and if even Christ's Doctrines should
be tried by the Scriptures, who will think it unreasonable, that private
Enthusiasmes should be so tried? and who can then deny, this privilege of the
Scripture to be our Rule? what says he to this passage? He imagines that
Christ reproves them for having too great a veneration for the Scriptures;
Quite contrare to verse. 38, 46, 47. and to the very word of command, search the
Scriptures, and to his own Concession granting that it was their Principal
Rule. It is laid to their charge that they would not come to Christ, and one
Reason of their Unbeleefe is given, viz. that they did not search the
Scriptures, which did testify of Him, and that notwithstanding they professed
and acknowledged that the Scriptures pointed out the way to eternal life. But
again he tells us, that (...) search, is by some taken to be in the Indicative
mode, and not in the Imperative. Which forgery of Papists the cohesion and
scope of the words does abun^antly redargue, and Tolet and Maldonat both
confess that Chrysostom, Theoph. August. and all weighty Authors, except
Cyril. understand it imperatively. To ^^is passage of Christ's here we might
add others, where he confirms his doctrine by the Scriptures, elsewhere
cited, and the following verses where he tells them, that Moses by his writings
should accuse them, and that their not believing of Moses's writings was a
cause why they did not believe Christ's words verse 45, 46, 47. we might add
also Paul and other Apostles proving their doctrine from the Scriptures, and
Paul's affirming that he spoke nothing but what Moses the Prophets said. But
these, and the like, have been cited already: let us take notice but of what
the Apostle James speaks concerning this. He accounts the Word of Truth,
that, by which we are begotten Chap. 1:18. and Would have us doers of it, and
not hearers only, otherwise we shall but deceive our selves verse 2^, 23. and
then verse 25. calls it the Perfect Law of liberty, wherein we continueing,
and being not forgetful hearers, but doers of the work, we shall be blessed in
our deed. So Chap. 2:8. He calls it the Royal law, according to the
Scriptures, which say, we should Love our Nieghbour, as our selves; and if we
do otherwise, we commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors:
and verse. 10:11. he shows us, that by the Law, he means the decalogue, See
also Chap. 4:11:12:

28. Another passage of Scripture confirming our point is Act. 17:11. where it
is spoken to the commendation of the Beroans, that they searched the
Scriptures, to see if Paul's doctrine did accord therewith: which clearly
expressed the Scriptures to be that Rule, by which even the sayings of such, as
pretend Immediate Revelations, ought to b^ tried; though he thinks, that hence
it will not follow, that they are our Only and Supreme Rule: But he thinks
best to chant over again his old Song, viz. That these were Jews, to whom the
Law and the Prophets were a Rule, in a more special manner: The uselesness of
which Evasion has been shown: And further, he must grant, that these
Christians were under the New Testament or Covenant; and so cannot say, that it
is the Privilege of Christians under the New Testament to be from under the
Law of God, as their Supreme Law and Rule; for notwithstanding that these here
had received the word spoken by Paul, yet they went to their Supreme Rule to
have full Confirmation and Persuasion: and upon this account are highly
commended, and hereby became believers verse. 12. What he speaks Page 50 of
Heathens, and particularly of the Athenians, who received not the Scriptures,
and therefore were not dealt with by the Apostle upon that ground, is
Impertinent; for he granted that the Law was a Principal Rule to the Jews; and
yet he knows, that all other Nations did not submit unto it: and he cannot
say, that the Chief and Only Rule was more different than, nor now. But he
supposes, that when we speak of the Scriptures as our Rule, we do wholly
exclude the Law of Nature, and the Revelation of God's mind written on the
works of Creation and Providence, and imprinted into the heart and mind of
man: as if the Scriptures did not comprehend the other, and give a more clear
and distinct Explication thereof? Does not the Scripture tell us, that Gods
works reveal ^omething of Him Psalm. 19:2, 3, 4, 5. and 147:10. etc Job 37. and
38. and 39. Act. 14:15, 16, 1^. Romans 1:18, 19, 20. and 2:14, 15? And hence also
we see that the very Law and Light of Nature, has the Authority of God with
it, as being a Revelation of his will, though dim, and but in part; so that
such as had no other, are judged and condemned as trangressours thereof: But
this is without any prejudice to that Word, which God has magnified above all
his name, or what declares Him Psalm. 138:2. and wherein, what was but darkly
held forth in nature, is more clearly and distinctly expressed; beside the many
other Revelations concerning the Institute worshipe of God, and the way of
Reconciliation, and many other things concerning God, and his Relations to us,
and our Duty to him, which Nature could never have discovered, and which are
fully, and clearly held forth in the written Word. What argueing is this?
Because the Gentiles have not the Scriptures, which are the Full, Clear and
Comprehensive Revelation of the mind of God: therefore they are not our
Supreme and Only Rule? It is observable, how this Man, in the end of this. 8.
will no more have the Scrip^ures to be our Rule, then the heathen Poets, a
sentence out of whom Paul adduced, to convince the Athenians; and so
contradicts all that he has said, both as touching the Law and Word of God
its being a Principal Rule to the Jews, and among the rest, to the Bereans;
and a Subordinat Rule to us. We should have work enough, should we do no more,
but observe this Man's inconsistencies and self contradictions.

29. We return now to examine what he says against the Perfection of the
Scriptures, whereby he would prove it to be no Canon to us. 3. etc. Page 40.
etc. And here he must give us leave, to improve the advantage we have of his
Concessions: for while he grants the Scriptures to be Truth, he must needs
grant, that what testimony they give of themselves, must be true; and if they
assert their own Fullness and Perfection, as to the ends, for which they were
appointed, as we shall now show they do, he is as much concerned, as we, to
answer the Objections to the contrary, and to vindicate the Scriptures to be
Perfect, according to the testimony they give of themselves. But it is
obser^able, how these Quakers join with Papists to decry the Scriptures, and
their Perf^ction; and with the Jews also, who, in their corrupted stated,
cried up an Oral Law, as they called it, above the written Word: It is true,
their Faces seem to look to distinct airths; but with Samsons foxes their
tails are tied together, to consume the Scriptures of truth. Our Quakers cry up
their, Inward Revelations, or the Spirit within them, as above the Scriptures;
So do the Papists cry up the Spirit in their Church. See Mich. le jay praef. ad
opus biblic. and Morinus. ^ut let us see by what Arguments the Scriptures prove
themselves to be a Perfect Canon and Rule. That place of Paul 2 Timothy 3:16, 17,
is enough to confront all that this Man can say against their Perfection. For
what is able to make wise unto salvation, to make the man of God perfect
thoroughly fournished for all good works, is, and cannot but be, a Compleet and
Perfect Rule. But Paul positively and expressly asserteth this of the
Scriptures: nay moreover, he clears and confirms it by enumeratin^ all the
necessary and useful Effects of the Scripture, which he reduces to four
heads, to doctrine and Reproof, in reference to matters of Faith; the one
concerns the declaration and confirmation of Truth; the other the rejection
and confutation of Error: and then to Correction and Instruction, in reference
to Manners; the one concerns Evil actions, for which men are to be reproved
and corrected, the other concerns Good actions, wherein we are to be
instructed. Against this place, t^is man has not a face to speak; only in the
end of Page 46. he hinteth, that by the Man of God here is meaned the Spiritual
Man, and not a Carnal Man: Which is nothing to the matter, for though none but
a Spiritual Man can improve the Scriptures aright, yet they remain in
themselves, a Compleet and Perfect Rule; yea this confirms their Perfection
and Necessity, that even the Spiritual Man, and he, that is most advanced, is
made perfect by them, and stands in need of them, as his Rule. And sure in
this man's judgment, they must be more a Rule to Quakers, then to any others;
for these only are men of God, with him. The same may be cleared from Ioh.
5:39. of which before, and Ioh. 20:31. But these are written, that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing ye might have life;
through his name. So that the Sufficiency of what is written, concerning Christ's
Doctrine and Actions, unto salvation, clearly confirms the Perfection of the
Scriptures; nothing needs be added to that Rule, which is a Sufficient Ground
for our faith, that we may come to life, But the Scriptures are a Sufficient
Ground for our faith, that we thereby may be saved. For this end also compare
these following passages, Luke 1:3, 4. and 16:29. Act. 1.1. Romans 10:17. Ephesians
2:19, 20.

30. Nay, not only so, but the Scriptures do in express terms Assert their
own Perfection Psalm. 19:7. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul:
must no^ this man be effronted, that with Papists dar openly say, the Law of
the Lord is not perfect; and, as if it were not enough to contradict Scripture,
will go about to prove, that the Scriptures of truth do not speak truth? Add
to this, these passages, wherein men are expressly prohibited, to add to this
law; such as Deuteronomy. 4:2. and 12:32. Prove. 30:5, 6. Rev. 22:18. and others of the
same import, as Gal. 1:8. Mat. 15:6. So that it is hence clear, that the
Doctrine, contained in the Scriptures, is full and Compleet, for to it nothing
must be added, not must any thing be diminished therefrom. Now to these, this
Man replyeth with Bellarmine, That John in the Revelation means only, that
particular book, That notwithstanding thereof, the Pr^phe^s of old did add
their Prophecies. But how vain these shifts are, who sees not? Seeing what is
spoken of that Book, and elsewhere of the Commands of God, is consequently to
be understood of all: and as none might add to the law delivered by Moses, nor
to the Word held forth by the Prophets, so the Canon being closed, and the same
prohibition renewed at the close thereof, we are assured hence, that the Canon
is Perfected: as for the Prophecies of the Prophets, these were properly no
Additions to, but Explications of the law of God: and beside, the Lord did not
bind up his own hand, when he tied up man's, from adding or diminishing. But
he tells us further, that there were Prophets even after John's days, and at the
Reformation, and since. Which is nothing to the purpose; for these, who
foretold events, took not upon them to prescribe thereupon doctrines to others;
nor did they make any such Revelation the Ground and Rule of Faith and Manners,
either to themselves or others; far less did they plead upon this account,
against the Perfection of the Scriptures, as our Quakers do. Wherefore it is
manifest, that the Spirit of Divination, which they plead for, is a corrupt
Antichristian Spirit. But in end, he says, that these places are to be
understood only of such as add new doctrine, contrary to the old, of such as
add humane words to God's; but not of them, who only bring a new and more
copious revelation of ancient doctrine. As if additions of new Revelations to
the canon, did not ^eclare the canon Imperfect. This is the same, which
Bellarmine and other Papists say for their Traditions, viz. That they are not
Additions, but Explications; and yet both their Traditions, and our Quakers new
Revelations, must thereby be as highly valued, as the writtings of the prophets
and Apostles, which were but further Explications and Revelations of the same
old foundamental doctrine, deliverd by Moses* and thus what our Quakers do
deliver by such Revelations, as they pretend unto, must be looked upon, as of
the same authority, with what the holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost; and with the Scriptures, which are of divine Inspiration: and
what they speak thus are not men's words, but Gods, and must be received, as
such, though they contradict what we have registrate in the Scriptures of
truth. Here is prodigious, and blasphemous Audacity, beyond what Papists,
though audacious enough, dar be guilty of; for they willingly grant, that there
is no place now left, for adding to the Scriptures, or doctrine delivered by
the Prophets and Apostles, any new Prophecies, or Revelations. But I would ask
him one thing; If he speak truth here, when shall our Canon be completed, that
no more needs be added? Sure it must never he Perfected, as long as they live*
or the time will come, when they will need no more Revelations, and
consequently, according to their doctrine, will nead no more help of the
Spirit, or of the Light within; or that the Revelations, which they shall then
have, will be useless, Let him unriddle this mystery, if the can.

31. Before I speak any more of their unreasonableness in this, I would first
see, what Grounds he has, to decry the Perfection of the Scriptures, Page 40.
etc. He tells us first, That there are innumerable things, which in reguard of
particular circumstances, are of great consequence unto Christians, and yet
there is no precise rule in the Scriptures concearning them, But did ever any
Rational man suppose, that this was necessary to a Compleet Law and Rule, to
determine particularly and precisely of all and every particular action,
considered as to all its particular and individual circumstances? Reasonable
men will say, that it is enough, if it determine of a^l specific actions, and
give general rules, by which judgment may be made of all individual actions.
now this the Scripture does richly and abundantly. But he adduceth an instance
to the contrary thus, of a Minister called to preach, (the necessity of which
office and ministry himself denies, though he make use of this argument, ad
hominem) who can produce no call out of the Scriptures; nor will the
qualifications required of Min^sters, evince that this man in particular is
called nor can he be certain that he is endued with these qualifications,
without the testimony of the Spirit: and though he be endued, and called, no
Scripture can tell him, when and where he should pre^ch: Generals will not serve
here, for he may sin, when doing this or preaching here, when he should be
doing that, and preaching in another place. Answer. (1.) I might tell him,
that by his reasoning here, he must grant, that he and the rest of the Quakers
must have a Real, New, Distinct and Particular Revelation, for every action,
every word or silence, every thought or no thought; and so for their Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, Wakeing, Walking, Sitting, Standing, Looking, Hearing, etc.
or their rule shall be as imperfect, as ours; for in all these, and in respect
of their circumstances, they may sin, and so bring condemnation on
themselves: and yet, as we will hear afterward, he dar not say so much. His
saying that the Instance, which he has adduced, is a matter of greater moment,
will not help the matter, for, if he will, I shall prove to him, that in the
least of these particulars I have hinted, he can sin against God; and that is
enough, by his own confession here, to render the matter momentous. (2) To
him, it is true, who denies the Ministry it self, its Work and Exercise, it
cannot be that the Scriptures should Regulate particular persons, in their
taking on of the Office, and in the Exercise thereof: But to us, who own this,
as an Institution of Christ, and shall in due place vindicate it from his
Exceptions, there is no Impossibility in the matter: For we can prove from
Scripture (and shall do it, in due time, and place) that there is such a
standing Ordinance in the New Testament. That there is an established Order,
whereby persons shall be duly Invested with the Office: That there are
certain Qualifications required in the Person, who is to be admitted to the
Office: That there is concurring an inward Work of the Spirit, inclineing the
man, whom the Lord calls, unto this Office, upon pure and spiritual grounds,
and motives, and for holy and heavenly ends; and this may be cleared also out
of Scripture: Ther^ are passages of providence and circumstantial Works of the
Lord, (which are great, and sought out of all them, that have pleasure therein
Psalm. 111:2.) which speak out God's mind, as to circumstantial individual
actions: There are many General Rules, which must be applied by Christian
Wisdom, Prudence and Discretion, according to exemplary instances registrated
in Scripture: so that a person, walking in the Light of the Lord, and hanging
upon Him singly for Light to understand the Rule, and Wisdom to regulate his
individual Actions thereunto, shall see and be convinced of the Perfection of
the Law of God; and abhore the thoughts of tempting of God, by looking for, or
asking New and Immediate Revelations; yea, and if any thing should occur,
that, by reason of its unusualness, should seem to be some what extraordinary,
and have some farr-resemblance unto that, which some would call a Revelation,
will not rest, till their Obedience be bottomed upon the unerring Rule, and
look upon such unusual manifestations as Confirmations, rather than Grounds,
for their Faith and Obedience. And in this, the Lord may think good to consult
the weakness of such well meaning persons, who cannot see that in the Rule of
the Scriptures, as particularly applicable to their case, which Others, more
mighty in the Scriptures, and of more spiritual sharpness, would easily
discover. All which tends to the Confirmation of the Fullness and Perfection
of the Rule; and no way to the crying-up and owneing of Inward and Immediate
Revelations, to the disparagment of the Law of the Lord, which is Perfect.
Matters than being thus, and the Scripture-Rule able to regulate, as a Rule,
when studied and wisely improven, in all the particulars by him mentioned, as
might be shown: (Nay more, might by shown, that the Scripture can sufficiently
Regulat the Christian deportment of every servant maid, as to the very
sweeping of the house) how much more shall it be sufficient, to Regulat a
Minister, the Man of God, as to all his Deportment in the house of God? What
needs more to shame this effronted man, than to recommend to his serious
thoughts, (if he will do this upon my Recommendation, without a new and
distinct Revelation) the study of these words of Paul, already cited 2 Timothy
3:16, 1 --. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable
etc. -- that the man of God may be perfect, perfected, or thoroughly furnished to
all good works. If this be true (and I doubt he has the forehead yet, to say
otherwise) he may see Paul here answering all his Instances, and telling him,
that his Allegations are not true, And if he will not believe Paul, immediately
Inspired, it were unreasonable in us, to expect, that our more particular
confronting his alleiged Instances out of Scripture, should prevail with him:
and, as for Others, who rest satisfied with the Testimony of the Apostle, it
were needless for us, upon this light occasion, to digress further unto a
scriptural discovery of these things. Thus then we might have dismissed him;
But for further satisfaction, to the Reader, we shall go on, and see what he
says more:

32. He tells us very honestly, that Paul says 1 Cor. 12. that every member
must have its own place, in the Church, (and consequently their Church must be
a monster, that has no distinct members and every member must perform its
own function, or else cause a schism in the body: and again, That the Lord
will have each of his servants do the work, which he puts him to. Which who
can deny, but Quakers, who counteract this (as is, and shall be abundantly
shown) I know not: and again to the former purpose, he cites Rom 12. And we
thank him for it: But with all he adds, that no Scripture can tell him,
whether he should attend exh^rtation, or Prophecy, or ministry, or doctrine.
And this is very true; for he is no Church Officer, of whom the Apostle there
speaks; and having none of those gifts of Office, he has nothing to do with
the Work, peculiar to these Offices: But others, whom the Lord, according to
the Order established in His house, (whereunto this man is both a stranger, and
an enemy) has called to Prophecy, and Teaching, or Exhorting, should wait upon
it, and perform their work; according to the proportion of faith; and such as
are called to Ministry and to Giving, should wait upon it, and do it with
simplicity and cheerfulness; and these who are called to Rule, should do it
with diligence. Could not the man read this in the text? But he would say. The
Scriptures say not that John, James or Peter should take on this, or that
Office, Nor (say I) is this required of a Rule, as such, But how James, John or
Peter shall know by the Scriptures, that God calls them to this or that
employment, I have shown above.

33 But the weightiest point of all is, Page 41.42* That the Scriptures cannot
give a man any certainty, that he is in the faith, and an heir of Salvaton.
And as for me, if the Scriptures, give not full Certainty, in full measure
heaped up, and running over, so far as is competent to a Rule to do, I shall
despair thereof. What, are there no marks given in Scripture, whereby this may
be known? Yes, says he, But who shall persuade me, that I have those marks?
that I believe, that I obey, etc. Is this man in his wits, that thinks, this
should be done by a Rule? Thinks he the Laws of the land must say, that Robert
Barclay is a Quaker, or that this or that man has broken this, or that Law? If
Robert Barclay had murdered a man, and were impannelled thereupon, would he
think it a defense good enough in Law, to say, that in all the Acts of
Parliament, nay nor in all the Bible too, it cannot be read that I Robert
Barclay have murdered such a person: Therefore, the inference that I must die,
is founded upon no Law? What shall a rational man think of this ridiculous
Folly? What does he next? He cites our Confession of faith, Chap. 18. Sect. 2.
showing how Assurance is had; to which I heartily subscribe: for, as I shall be
loath, with this ignorant Man, to confound the work proper to the Spirit of
God, with that which is proper to the Rule of the Scriptures; so I shall be
loath, to decry the Scriptures, and rob them of their due, as this man does,
under a pretext of setting up the Spirit: or to deny to the Spirit of God any
of his gracious works, in the souls of his own, whatever this man think, under
a pretext of maintain^ng the Scriptures Perfection. I only here assert, and
maintain, the Scriptures Perfection as a Rule, granting to the Spirit, with
all cheerfulness and readiness of soul, all that work which the Scriptures
teach me to do; and therefore, I grant, that the Spirit bears witness with
our Spirits, that we are the children of God, Romans 8:16. and what can be
rationally deduced from, 1 Ioh. 4:13. and 5:6. which he cites. I know, that it
is the Spirit that causes us know the things, that are freely given to us of
God, 1 Cor. 2:12. I assert, that He is the earnest in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1:22.
and that believers are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1:13. and
that by him they a^e sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4:30. But all
this is his peculiar work, and by no show of reason can or should be expected
of a Rule: as any man of ordinary judgment may see.

34. But. 4. Page 43. He tells us, that neither deaf persons, nor idiots, nor
Infants, can make use of it, as a Rule, and yet some of these may be saved.
That some of these may be saved, and are, I shall be loath to deny: but what
will this say, for the Imperfection of the Scriptures? Did not Paul know so
much, when he spok of their Perfection? Or did not the Spirit of the Lord know
this, when he inspired David to say, Psalm. 19 that the Law of the Lord was
perfect? What I pray will his Revelations help the matter, as to Infants and
Idiots? Are they capable of such? Were there none such among the Jews? And yet
he granted, that the Law was a Primary Rule to them, and consequently Perfect,
(for he deduc^th its not being a Principal Rule, from its being Imperfect, and
therefore, when and where so ever it was a Principal Rule, then and there, it
was also a Perfect Rule.) Thus the man, in stricking at us, wounds himself.
But what in case any of these persons kill a man, what would the Law of the
land do unto them? would it punish them? I think the Law of the Lord should
warrant them, if they did right. And shall the Law of a Land reach persons,
that cannot make use of it; and God's Law not? What use can Children, or Mad
men, or Idiots make of the Light within? As for deaf persons they have Natures
light, and that is part of God's Law; and if they have eyes, they can see many
things, that may instruct them; though they cannot read the Bible, which was
never penned for their immediate use, nor yet for the use of Infants and Idiots.
But the saying that God can, and when he will does, supply the want of
Scripture, as of other of his Appointments and Ordinances, in these
extraordinary cases, can be no impeachment either of the Usefulness or
Perfection of the Scriptures. Our Quakers will account their books and
exhortations useful, if not necessary; and yet he shall hardly persuade me,
that deaf Persons, or infants, or idiots can make any good use of them.

35. To the same end, he mentions next, such as cannot read. And can he
demonstrate that there were none such, among the Jews? and can he tell me,
what this derogateth from the Perfection of the Laws of a Land? and I pray him
tell me, if he thinks, that such as cannot read, and yet live, where the
Scriptures are, or within the Church, can violat any of the precepts contained
in the Scriptures, or not? If they can, and shall be punished of God therefore,
did not the Scriptures oblige them? will their not being learned, and able to
read, prove a sufficient plea for them in the day of accounts? If not, then the
Scriptures remain a Rule to them, and if it remain a Rule, it must remain a
Perfect Rule, for all that this argument concludes; which, if it conclude any
thing, will conclude, that the Scriptures are no Rule at all to such. And as
for the disadvantage such are at, in the knowledge of the Rule, they must blame
themselves, the Scriptures cannot bear the blame, that they will not learn to
read them; no more than it can bear the blame of such as can read them, and
will not.

36. After this he ^aketh together a number of things. Such as peoples
Ignorance of the Original Languages; Errors in Translations, whereof our own
is not, in his judgment, free; Various Readings in the Originals; difference
among Learned men, about the Points in the hebrew; and about the Original
authenticque of the Old Test. Some pleading for the ^o* others for the Hebrew:
and he might have added the Papists pleading for the Vulgar latin Version for
both old and New Testament. All which can plead nothing against the Rule of the
Scriptures, as every one may see: only ^t can be hence inferred, that we are at
some disadvantages, in understanding some things in the Scripture: and by this
he rather disputes against the Providence of God, and his Goodness, that did
not prevent these evils, than against the Canon it self; for he cannot deny,
that the Canon was once written by men inspired of God, in one language or
other; nor will he say (^s we shall hear shortly) that what was so written, was
written only for the good of these Persons or Churches, to whom they were
especially directed: Beside that these Exceptions have been sufficiently
removed by Learned Men, particularly, and that shortly and plainly, by the
learned D. Owen, in his book above cited. Himself calls them the Scriptures
of truth; and. 2. Page 38. he both wondereth and praises God, that they are, by
the good providence of God, kept so pure and incorrupt. Yea Page 47.. 6. he
confesses, that what errors are creept-in, through the injury of the times,
are but small, especially in substantial matters. So that notwithstanding of
all, which he has said, the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation, and what nee^s more? what would he hence infer?

37. Toward the end of Page 44. he tells us, what he would hence conclude; viz,
That Christ, who promised to be with his own, and to lead them in all truth
etc. would never leave them to be led by a Rule, obvious to so many doubts. And
yet we see, he has done so; for we know no other Rule, which Christ ha^h
given, whereby to point our unto us, the Way, and Counsel of God. But he
adds, that Christ has therefore given his Spirit; for the Principal and
chief Leader. And I say the same, and account it a saying worthy of all
acceptance. The Spirit is the Principal, Chief and Only Efficient Leader,
Giving, and implanting a new principle of life, and grace in the soul,
Reforming and Regenerating the whole man, as to his Understanding, Will and
Affections, Sending and conveying new Influences of Life, Light, Strength, and
Comfort, whereby the Ignorant and blind are made to see the way, wherein they
ought to walk; the fainting and weary get new power and increase of Strengh so
as they run and are not weary, and walk and are not faint, the Sick and
swooning christian is made to revive, and become strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might; the Dejected and sorrowful Mourner is made to sing in the
ways of the Lord, through the Consolations of the H. Ghost: but all this is
consisting with and no way derogatory to, the Use and Necessity, Fullness and
Compleetness of the Scriptures, as our Rule, and Law. Here lies the ground of
this man's gross mistakes: He confounds the Spirits work, and the work of the
Scriptures. He confounds the Leader and Gu^de, with the Way wherein the
traveller walks: and I should think a man, that could not put a difference
here, should be that wise, as to forbear to preach forth his folly to the
world, and trouble the world with his ignorant, and absurd impertinencies,
whereby he but makes himself ridiculous, not only in contradicting himself,
but likewise, in contradicting common sense; and the Scriptures also. Himself,
in that he confesse^ once and again above, though contrary to his own
assertions, that the people under the Old Test. had the Law as their principal
Rule; and yet he will not deny, but they had the Spirit also, because he said
so much, in and upon his Second Thesis: so then by his doctrine, the Spirit and
the Scriptures can consist together; and the difference betwixt the Old and New
Test. must be this, that under the Old Test. the Law was the principal Leader
and Guide, and the Spirit the less Principal and Subordinat; but now under the
Gospel, the Spirit is the More Principal and the Scriptures the less Principal.
Are not these learned notions? Do they smell either of Reason or of Religion?
He contradicts Common sense, for every one knows that the Guide, and the
Way wherein he guides differ: every Scholar knows, that his Master and his
Book, are two different things; And every Christian knows how to distinguish
betwixt the Law of the Lord, and the Spirit, that writteth that Law in his
heart. He contradicts also the Scriptures, which throughout discriminateth
these two; let him pause upon these following, Ephesians. 6:17. 1 Pet. 1:22. and
4:6. Psalm. 143.8, 10. Prove. 1:23. Esai. 59:21. Ier. 31:33, 34. Heb. 8:8. Ezech.
36:26; 27. Psalm. 119:27, 32, 33. Esai 35:8. Ier. 6:16. Esa. 42:16. and 48:17.
Psalm. 25:4, 8, 9, 12. and 85:13: and 139:24. Prove. 8:20. Psalm. 5:8. and 27:11.
and 86:11 and 119:37. and 91:11. Prove. 3:6. with many more, that might be cited.

38. He tells us Page 45. That only by the evidence and revelation of this
Spirit, they are freed from all the forementioned difficulties, about the
Scriptures. Unworthy man, why does he then envye us of this good? Why will he
not tell us, how they get these difficulties loosed by Revelation? Why will he
not acquant the world with this matter, that we may no more be perplexed with
these scruples? Or must this good and advantage reside only with them? But it
is like, we must first turn Quakers; and then, it is true, we shall have the
gordian knot, not loosed, but cut in pieces; for we shall lay aside the
Scriptures, as useless altogether, and so need not trouble ourselves with those
difficulties; but leave them as bones for dogs, to whet their teeth upon. One
instance of the benefit of their Revelations he gives, of some of their
number, who could not so much as read; and yet could discover corruptions, in
our version of the Bible. But the good luck was, that himself was judge. I
know, that a k^owing believer, that is acquanted with the work of God upon his
soul, can understand, when any thing is spoken by Ministers or Others,
contradictory, or not consonant thereunto; but that they have been able,
especially when so illiterate, as not to know a letter of the Bible, to correct
versions, or faults in the original, I have not yet seen. I have heard, it is
true, of some, that in trances and ecstacies have spoken strange languages,
that themselves understood not when in their ordinary posture. If his
Revelations be of this nature, we have reason to pray, that God would deliver
us from them.

39. But lest some should think that by this his discourse, he were utterly
decrying the Scriptures, and driving at a laying of them aside as useless, he
gives us an account of the high esteem he has of them, and of their
usefulness, in his judgment: And in this he does wisely: and hereby I perceive,
that the Quakers now have learned a little more policy, than at first; for then
they could not speak reproachfully enough of the Scriptures, so that if they
could have gained their point, ere now the Scriptures had been quite laid by,
as an old almanac: but finding that, by all their unworthy Expressions, and
Endeavors, they were so far from prevailing this way, that it turned to their
detriment, (for wise people did so much the more abhore them, and keep off from
their courses) they became at length so wise, as to speak more soberly of the
Scriptures; and not to Rail against them at such an high rate, as formerly: as
Papists also in words seem to extol the Scriptures. See Bellarm. de Verbo Dei
Lib. ^, C. 2. Yet this remains fixed among them, That the Scriptures are not
made use of in their Assemblies: It is below them, to Expound any portion of it
there, or to adduce any Testimony there from, for Confirmation of their
Assertions, whatever they do, when speaking and writing to others* who ground
their faith upon the Scriptures. And by this Man we learn, that their Opinion
yet is, That the Scriptures are not our Perfect, Sufficient, Fixed and Ordinary
Rule, whereby we shall know, what is our duty before God: But that we must be
ruled in our walk by Immediate Revelations of the Spirit, as these were who
wrote the Scriptures. And it is their constant Opinion (and if this man be of
another Judgment, we shall know, when we come to hear what he says of the
Light within) that when one comes to hearken to the Light within, he has
obtained the whole end of the Scriptures, so that they become wholly Useless to
him.

40. What says he then of the Scriptures? He says. 5. Page 45. He gives to
them, a secondary place, detracting nothing which they assume to themselves;
citeing Romans 15:2. and 2 Timoth. 3:15, 16, 17. A Secondary place he grants
they have; but in what? Will he not say as much of his own writings? We grant
that the Spirit by them, as a mean in his hand, Illuminateth, Leads and
Guides his own people: But as to a Rule and Law, we know nothing above them;
for they contain the Law of the Supreme Lawgiver; and as a Law and Rule, are
able to make us Wise unto salvation, and Perfect unto every good work; for the
whole Counsel of God, concerning all things necessary for his own Glory, man's
Salvation, Faith and Life, are either expressly set down in them, or by good
and necessary consequence may be de^uced from them; unto which nothing at any
time is to be added, whether by new Revelations of the Spirit, or Traditions of
Men. This is our doctrine contained in our Confession of Faith Chap. 1.. 6. And
this we must maintain; or say, that God's works are not Perfect, and so
reproach our Maker, and Supreme Lord Governor, for prescribeing Laws, which
are not full and compleet; and ^o unable to reach the end, for which they are
appointed. Shall we say, that God could not reveal his whole Will and Counsel?
Or that he was not so Good and Gracious as to do it? I dar say Neither. Nay
this book of the Scriptures is a called a Testament, 2 Cor. 3:6, 14. And who
dar add to God's Testament, when it is unlawful to add to a man's Testament,
Gal. 4:15? And the places, formerly cited, do clearly evince it sufficient for
the ends, for which it is designed; to which these may be added, Psalm. 119:105.
Romans 1:16. 1 Timothy 4:16. Ioh. 17:20. And if we must admit new Revelations not
only as a part completing our Rule, but as a Supreme Rule, we declare the
Scriptures useless as a Rule; for what is not an Adequate and Perfect Rule, is
no Rule at all, nor does it deserve that name: and withal, we lay ourselves
open to Satan's Delusions, and to false Revelations, wherewith the world has
been too much filled, and too long deceived; or at best, to Revelations, and
En^husiasmes, which we know neither whither they go, nor whence they come: and
let them speak never so highly of their Revelations, we judge by their
doctrine, which is, for the most part, either False, or Dubious, and not
consonant to the Scriptures of truth. We have heard of Impostors, who were the
greatest of Pretenders, as of Simon Magus, Act. 8. of Mahomet, of several in
the Church of Rome, and others; we have heard also of false Prophets, of old;
and Christ has foretold us of such, Mat. 7. and 24:24. and has bid us beware
of them. Are we assured, that the devil cannot, or shall not play his game
under these Enthusiasmes? One thing is certane, that the Lord sends us not to
these Enthusiasmes, to understand his Mind; but to the Law and to the
Testimony, and to the more sure Word of Prophecy. One thing I would know;
Whether he believes, that Christ and his Apostles did teach all that was
necessary to salvation? I suppose, he will not deny it, considering, what Paul
alone says Act. 20:20, 21, 27. If he confess it; then I would ask, whether we
have not the sum of that doctrine, faithfully set down to us in the
Scriptures? This cannot rationally be denied, seeing Paul says, he taught
nothing, but what was foretold by Moses and the Prophets, Act. 26:22. and
seeing, hence it would follow, that God was not so careful of the Church of the
New Testament, as he was of the Church of the Old Test. nor so careful of us,
as of the Primitive Church* Neither let any say, that we have Revelations now
to make up our want; For, beside that we know no warrant for us to look for
such, in the primitive times, there were Persons extraordinarily Inspired,
having Revelations, notwithstanding of which, there was a full and compleet
declaration of all that was necessary to Salvation. Again why did the Lord
commit any thing to write, seeing he would not commit his whole Counsel unto
write? Why would he not leave us wholly to Revelations? It may be, the Quakers
will say, that we are indeed left wholly to Revelations. And this is the true
tendency of this Man's doctrine. But, then, of what use are the Scriptures? Can
he loose this knot, and give satisfaction?

41. He tells us, as to this, Page 46. The Lord thinks good to comfort some by
others, whom he raises up, and inspireth for this end, to speak and write
seasonable words, and so make them perfect. And this, with him, is the whole
import of, Romans 15:2. and 2 Timothy 3:15, 16, 17. So that the Scriptures are but
like their writings one to another, tending to Comfort and Encourage one
another: who are delighted (as he speaks) with the words or writings, that
come from the same Spirit in another: Bellarmine says, They contain only some
profitable Admonitions. And both this man and Bellarmine deny them to be a Law
Compleet and Full. Bellarmine thinks, that their Traditions are of as great
authority as the Scriptures: and this Quaker thinks their own Scriblings are
of as great authority. And where are we then? And what is left us as a ground
of our Faith and Hope, by the Papists, and the Quakers? ^ut he cites as a
proof of this, 2 Pet. 1:12. which can prove nothing for him for we grant, that
the Scriptures are for Comfort and Encouragement; but we say also, They are
Profitable for Doctrine, and for Reproof, and for Correction, and for
Instruction, 2 Timothy 3:16. And that they are able to make the man of God
Perfect: Yes, says he, They make the man of God perfect, as Pastors and
Doctors do, who are ordained for this end (viz. Ephesians. 4:11, 12.) And yet as
Pastors are not to be preferred to the Spirit; so neither are the Scriptures.
Nay, but he should say, if he would speak consonantly to himself, Though Christ
has ordained Pastors, etc. for the Perfecting of the Saints, and given us
Scriptures, inspired of God, that the man of God may be perfect; yet we may lay
both aside as useless, and betake us to the Spirit for all; and thereby
declare, that we are wiser than Christ was, and that we have nothing to do
either with the fruits of his Ascension, the Ordinance of Officers, or with the
fruits of his Love and Care of the Church to the end of the world, that is,
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants But who would not pity, such a poor blinded, self-deceiving Creature!
Thinks he, that the Appointments of Jesus Christ cannot be owned, as means,
perfect in their kind, and for their end; but the Spirit as a Principal
Efficient Cause must be enjured? and that we must lay aside the Scriptures, as
a Law and Rule, that the Spirit may do all, and have all the glory; I should
then think, that he were more to be prayed for, than disputed with: and were it
not for satisfaction to Others, whom their fair speeches may deceive, I should
think it hardly worth my pains to blot so much paper, in confutation of him.

42. Then in the next place, he tells us, that the Lord would have us see in
them (that is, in the Scriptures) as in a glase, the conditions and experiences
of old saints, that observing their case and ours to agree, we may be
confirmed, comforted, instructed in righteousness; and by the Spirit within us,
observing the signature of the Spirit in them, we may see them fulfilled in us.
Hence only the Spiritual man of God can profit by them, and of such speaks
the Apostle also Romans 15. others pervert them as Peter tells us. By all which we
see, That the Scriptures are no Law, or Rule, no not a subordinate Rule, or
Law; for what is such, must have some Obligeing force with it, binding us to
conform^ty: But according to this Man, the Scriptures have no obligeing Force
at all: and so he confirms, what other Quakers (mentioned above. 9.) say viz.
That there are no commands there for them, because given to particular persons
and Churches, upon particular occasions: And thus the very Law of the Ten
Commandments (which I have vindicated, sufficiently elsewhere) which Christ
himself did interpret, and confirm, is laid aside, as having no power over us.
Thus the Quakers join hands with the Antinomians, (that they may become a
perfect Sink of all errors.) I am sure the Church of Corinth might, with
greater show of reason, have rejected that Law, which Paul urges them with 1
Cor. 9:9, 10. and Timothy also 1 Timothy 5:18. what shall we say to these Old
Testament Laws and Scriptures pressed in the New, Romans 13:8, 9.10. Ephesians. 6:2.
2 Cor. 6:17. 1 Pet. 2:13, 14. 1 Cor. 14: v. 34. What have we to do with all
Christ's commands, and the Apostles their injunctions, 2 Thessalonians. 3: v. 4, 6, 10,
12. 1 Timothy 4: v. 11. 1 Cor. 7:10. Mat. 28:20. 1 Thessalonians. 4:11. Mat. 15:4. Ioh.
15:12. 1 Ioh. 3:23. Romans 7:10; 12. and 16:26* 1 Timothy 1:5. Tit. 1:3. 2 Pet.
2:21. and 3:2. 1 Ioh. 2:7. and 3:11. 2 Ioh. 4, 6. Ioh. 13:34. 1 Ioh. 2:8. Ioh.
14:21. 1 Cor. 7:19. and 14:37. Revel. 22:14. Act. 17:30. Romans 2:12, 13, 23, 25,
26, 27. and 3:31. and 4:15. and 7:14, 16, 18, 22. 1 Timothy 1:8. Gal. 3:19, 21.
and 5:14. and 6:2. Iam. 1:25. and 2:8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 4:11. 1 Ioh. 3:4.
Romans 1:5. and 16:19, 26. 2 Cor. 7:15. and 10:5, 6. 1 Pet. 1: verse. 2: Ephesians.
6:5. Tit. 2:9. 1 Pet. 1:14. 2 Cor. 2:9. Not to mention his Ordinances, of which
afterward; and all the examples set down to us for Imitation and Instruction.
By this argueing the whole Historical part of the Bible is laid aside. Further
by this Man's doctrine, no man is a Man of God, but they; All others are
Natural; They are Spiritual and Holy: and the Scriptures are only for such and
some might think, that others had as much need of them. But the design is,
That all others, besides themselves, may look upon them selves, as not
concerned in them, and so may lay them aside as useless; and when the Quakers
are once become the sole keepers of these Oracles, we shall quickly know, what
shall be come of them. But, blessed be God, they are under another eye, and
under a surer key. Beside that by the Apostles doctrine Romans 15. Every one that
is to please his Nieghbour for good to edification verse. 2. is to look on the
Scriptures as written for his use and learning verse. 4. and 2 Timothy 3:15, 16.
every one that stands in need of Salvation, and has need to be made wise
thereunto must plye the Scriptures for this end. We see also, that the
Scripturs have attained their full end in the Quakers; and therefore they have
no more do to with them, but to observe, to their Confirmation the samenes^ of
Spirit speaking in them, and speaking in the Scripture: and so we must look
upon them all as Perfected, and thoroughly furnished for every good work. That
which he adds in end, out of the Ap. Peter; is with a witness verified in
them 2 Pet. 3:16.

43. Thereafter. 6. He seems to grant much concerning the Scriptures, when he
says They account them the most fit outward judge of controversies among
Christians, and what ever doctrine is contrary to them should be accounted
heresy etc. But, (howbeit we accept what is granted, and are content to try
their doctrine by this judge, and have done so hithertill; and accordingly must
reject their doctrine, as damnable heresy; and will find more cause
hereafter, to continue in this our judgment; yet) we cannot but take notice,
That they are driven to this necessity by urgency of their Adversaries; and
that they know of a refuge for themselves; for they are persuaded (as we may
suppose) the Spirit within them, is the very same with the Spirit speaking in
the Scriptures; and he cannot in them contradict what he has said, in the
Scriptures; And if any discrepancy or contradiction be, it is but in
appearance, and that unto the blind Understanding of a Natural Man (as he
speaks afterward) that is, it but seems so to all that are not Quakers: and
so, notwithstanding of this, it is no real contradiction, let the appearance be
never so great: So that it is not possible to convince them of any mistake, out
of the Scriptures; for the Spirit speaking within them, cannot speak contrary
thereto. And further this is to be observed, that for all this, the Scriptures
are no Rule, no Law, having any force upon our Consciences to Obedience; No man
is to learn any Truth or Doctrine out of them. And thus they take away both
Law and Gospel, the Scriptures both of the Old and New. Testament, as a Law,
upon which we are to meditate day and night; and which we are to make the men
of our counsel; and to propose to ourselves as a copy, unto which we are to
conform our way and walk: and this is to destroy their main end, which is to
make us wise unto Salvation; to convert the soul; and to hold forth to us the
whole counsel of God, concerning Faith and Manners.

44. In end. 9. Page 50. He frames an Objection against his own doctrine, to
this purpose; If the Scriptures be not our chief, only and adequate Rule, it
is no compleet canon; and men, who pretend to be acted by the Spirit, may add
new Scriptures; and so incur the curse denunced against such; and they may
introduce a new Gospel; I should rather have framed the Objection thus. If his
doctrine be true, the Scriptures are no Rule, or canon at all; and we are as
much obliged to believe and Obey the dreams and dictats of fantastic
Quakers, as the Scriptures. And how absurd this is, every one may judge But let
us see, what he Replieth. He grants that all false Revelations, which are
contrary to the Scriptures, are to be disclamed. This is well, and therefore we
reject, with his warrant, his Revelations, as false: But he will deny, that his
Revelations are false; because the Spirit within him, which is the Spirit of
Truth, and the same Spirit, that inspired the Prophets, and Apostles, says,
they are true, yea they cannot but be true, because proceeding from that
Spirit, that can reveal nothing but truth: and thus we are no more secured then
we were: yea, as I said, we are obliged to believe all that they say; and
rather to lay aside our Judgment and all Sense of Scripture truths, than once
doubt or question the truth of what they deliver, Next, he says, The doctrine
he has delivered is true, and therefore who adduce such consequences, accuse
Christ and his Apostles. This is but a manifest declaration of his Pride and
Presumption: His doctrine is tried and found light, and Contradictory to
Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles; yea and Eversive of all Christianity and
Religion. We grant, says he, that the Scriptures give ample testimony, to the
chief doctrines of christianity. And what a reproach of the Scriptures, this
concession contains, we have shown above. We are, says he, for no new
Gospel, but for new revelations of the old Gospel. The Gospel, which Christ and
his Apostles brought, was but a new Revelation of the old Gospel, and no new
Gospel essentially different from the old dispensation; Thus their Revelation,
may be as new and as far different from that of Christ and his Apostles, as
theirs was from what was under the Old dispensation; and yet it must be
received with the same Faith and Obedience, that we receive the Revelation of
Christ and his Apostles, is this tolerable? Thinks this man, that we are as
mad, as he and his brethren are? Be it known to him, we will hold by the old
foundation Christ, and the sole Revelation, which He has given us; for sad
experience has taught the world, what devilish doctrine has been vented under
the notion of New Revelations, such as these by the Enthusiasts at Munster, and
by Paracelsus, Weigelius and others, That a man might have more wives at once:
That the Eternal God has flesh: That God made to himself out of himself, a
Wife, on whom he begot a Son: That God cares not for outward sins: That the
literal sense of the Scripture is antichristian: That our Christ is the
Antichrist; and the Man of sin: That Christ was not born of Mary: our baptism
is a profane thing: adamitick flesh is not capable of remission? Hearing of
sermons, and coming to the sacraments are impediments of Regeneration: There
should be no preaching in Templos: Hell is Heaven, and Heaven is Hell, and both
are one. What thinks he of these, and of the blasphemies of David Georg, who
said. That the doctrine of Moses, of the Apostles, yea and of Christ himself,
was Imperfect, and unable to bring any to salvation; only his doctrine was
perfect and efficacious for that end. That he was the true Christ and the
Messiah, born not of flesh, but of the holy ghost, and of the Spirit of Jesus;
which Spirit of Christ, his flesh being annihilated, was wholly given to him.
That he can save and condemn, and that he shall judge the whole world, at the
last day. That he is greater than Christ, who in the flesh was borne of a
woman, but he himself was the Spiritual Christ borne of Holy Ghost? These had
as much to say for their Revelations, as he has to say for his; and if we open
the door once unto such Pretenders, we way see, what will be the issue: it may
be called at first but a New, more Glorious, more Excellent Revelation, and may
come at length to be a quite Overturning of the Old Gospel too. Therefore we
judge it the best course, to keep the door closse, which Christ has shut, and
not to receive his abominations.

45. He will not grant, that the Scriptures are a compleet Canon; and if they
be not a Compleet Canon, they are no Canon at all; for a Rule and that which is
to be Regulated thereby are Relatives, and must correspond: yet he thinks we
must confess what he says to be true: and why so? Because in all the
Scripture, we read not this necessary article of faith That these books are
only canonick Scripture. But this is no new Revelation, for it was revealed
long since to Bellarmine, de Verbo Dei Lib. 4. Cap. 4. and to other Papists:
and so this man is but playing their game: and yet neither he, nor they can
gain any thing; for this necessary article of faith, is declared by the whole
Scripture; and so needs not be set down, in so many words. The characters of
Divine Light and Power, which are peculiar to the Scriptures, do discriminate
them from all Others; and so declare themselves, and themselves only, to be the
Word and Law of God; and more is needless; for it is not a Rule to it self but
to other things; no discipline or Science prove their own principles, Act^ of
parliament need not say, that such a book, containing so many acts or laws, of
this or that nature, are the true acts of parliament: when a Husband writteth
Ten letters to his Wife, he needs not say in plain terms, that Ten letters
are his; for she knows That Ten are his, by his own hand write, and other
indicia, which agree to no other letters; and so discriminate them from all
others: and the numerus numerans is sufficiently expressed by the numerus
nu^eratus. This man possibly will not believe, that he has five fingers in one
of his hands, because he no where sees it written on his hand, that he has
five fingers in one hand. And by this he may understand, how we can prove this
or that book, in Scripture, to be Scripture; without fleeing to his senseless
and imaginary Shifts; as we have shown above, when speaking of the whole
Scriptures.

CHAP. V. Of Man's Natural State.
1. WE come now to Examine the doctrine held, forth in the 4 Thesis, which
though I find a little more clearly expressed, as to the latin, in the second
edition, than it was in the first; yet I find it not helped, as to the matter:
so that still I find several mysteries, wrapped up in his words, which will
not without some difficulty be unridled; for after the usual manner of that
Seck of the Quakers, who speak ordinarily in a dialect, peculiar to themselves,
the beginning of this Thesis is very enigmatical; and in all his discourse upon
this Thesis, in his Apology, he speaks nothing that can contribute any thing
to the clearing of his Meaning to us, who are not much acquanted with his
Mysteries; only he enlarges himself on two maine Heads, of which we shall
speak hereafter: And though he could not be offended, if we should only examine
his doctrine, as to these two Heads, leaving the rest, which he shortly touched
in his Thesis; yet, ^or the Readers satisfaction, we must take some notice of
what he says.

2. Passing that insufficient division of Mankind, or the Posterity of Adam,
which he makes, when he says, both Jews and Gentiles, whereby he excludes
from this race of Adam, all that lived, before this distinction began to take
place; that is, all that lived before Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the posterity
of whom (complexly considered) only did bear the name of Jews; and that not
so early; for the first mention we have of the word in Scripture, is Esther
2:5. and 2 King. 16:6. And all those, who lived before this issue appeared, or
were known as such, can not be called Heathens, seeing some of them, at least,
worshipped the true God: I take notice, that he acknowledges and asserteth,
that all Mankind is Fallen, Degenerated, and Dead; but how, or upon what
occasion, he expresses not, in his Thesis, and gives but a short hinte
thereof, in his Apology; of which afterward. That Man at first was living, and
in a good state, he insinuates, when he says, that he is now fallen and
degenerate; but wherein that good and happy condition consisted, he explaineth
not: i^ may be, he forbeareth to do this, lest thereby, he should discover some
secrets of their mystical Theology, which either is not fit, as yet, to be made
known* or we are not in case to understand and improve aright. Some may
possibly think* that he forbeareth to give an Explication of this, or to add
his Testimo^y to the orthodoxe Truth, in this point, because the Natural Light,
that is in every man, cannot discover, or comprehend it? Natures Light, I
grant, will never discover, without the Revelation of the word, the Time when,
the Manner how, nor the Cause and Occasion, upon which this inundation took its
original. I find, that Mr Hicks in his 3 Dial. Page 40, 41. gets no
satisfaction, as to this, from Will. Pen speaking thus in his book. Page 29.
Herein the^ contradicts thy self, abusest the Philosophers: and blasphemest the
light. Thou grants the heathens knew, there was sin: If so, how could they be
ignorant of sins coming into the world? This, I say, is no way satisfying; for
though Philosophers did see, and could not but see, that sin and misery had
overflowed all; yet by all their Common Light, they could not understand, how
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; how Adam, as a public person,
was under a covenant obligation, for himself and posterity; and how he did
violate that Covenant, by transgressing the commandment, and thus brought-in
sin and misery. And that, which Will. Pen adds Ibid. saying, If thou meanest
a clear and distinct account, that Adam and Eva were beguiled by the serpent,
who tempted them, 't is no ways to the purpose; not only helps not the
matter; but discovers also some further latent design; for who sees not,
how necessary the knowledge hereof is unto the right understanding of the fall,
and of the true cause thereof? If this were not so, as Mr Hicks well says, why
did the sacred Penmen give such a full and distinct account hereof, in the
Scriptures? But it may be, they have a Parabolical sense and meaning to put
upon that whole matter, as it is historically related, and upon all the
passages of Scripture relating thereunto. It is also observable, that Will.
Pen, in the forecited page, insinuates, that the knowledge of this is not
necessary unto salvation; for he says. That which is sufficient to that faith,
which concerns salvation, is to know that God is, and that he has given M^n
the knowledge of himself, and his will concerning him, by some inward law. Mr
St^lham also shows in his book against the Quakers Page 96, 9^, 100. that I:
Nailer and R. Farnworth deny, That Adam was under a Covenant of works; and that
he stood by the moral law written in his heart, and by the observation of the
positive branches given him in command, aco^rding to that law, as we mentioned
above. And if the matter stand thus, how can they give us a distinct account of
the manner and cause of the fall and degeneration?

3. He says, that this Death and Degeneration is befallen all the race of
mankind quoad primum Adam, seu hominem terrestrem, that is, (or I know not
what it is) concerning, or in respect of the first Adam, or earthly man. By
which words it is manifest, that he points out and declares, in what respect
it is true, that all mankind is become dead and degenerate; to wit, in respect
of the first Adam, or the Earthly man; and hereby he seems to point out the
extent of this fall, death and degeneration; or rather a restriction, and
limitation of its extent; as if he had said; It reaches all Mankind, only as
to the Earthly man, or the first Adam, But what he means by this first Adam
and terrestial man, I cannot well tell. His manner of expression will not give
us ground to think, that he means our forefather Adam, because of whose
transgression this death came upon all his posterity; but rather that he
means something in every man, going, with them, under this name and this
thing what ever it be is the only Subject of this Death and Degeneration: and
so in opposition to this, there must be some thing in man, which, with them,
will go under the name of the Sec^nd Adam, and of the heavenly man; and this
whatever it be is not obnoxious to this death, nor is it degenerated and
lapsed. This, to me, must be the native import of his words: But how we shall
come to a right uptaking of his true meaning, I wish he had shown us. If we
consider what other Quakers have said, it may be, that thereby we shall be able
to make some pro^able conjecture, concerning his meaning. Mr Hicks Dial. 1.
Page 16. tells us that Georg Fox (a man eminent among the Quakers, and accounted
by them infallible) in his book called the great mystery Page 6, 8, and 100.
affirms the soul to be part of God, and of Gods being: And that it is without
beginning Page 91. and also infinite Page 29. And when Will. Pen accuses Mr
Hicks of false dealing in this; Mr Hicks Dial. 3. vindicateth himself by
citeing Page 20. etc. George Fox's own words, thus [ Ge^rg Fox in his Great
mystery Page 90. speaks thus is not the soul without beginning, coming from
God, returning unto God again, who has it in his hand, and Christ the power
of God, the Bishop of the soul, which brings it up into God, which came out
from him; has this a beginning or ending? And is not this infinite in it
self?] Again says he [ Georg Fox tells us Page 2). that Magnus Byne says the
soul is not infinite in it self, but it is a creature; and R. Baxter says, it
is a spiritual substance. Whereunto Georg Fox, replyeth, Consider what a
condition these, called Ministers, are in: They say that, which is a Spiritual
substance, is not infinite in it self, but a creature. That which came out of
the Creator, and is in the hand of the Creator, which brings it up to the
Creator again, that is infinite in it self. The same Mr Hicks says further,
The Quakers are accused for saying, there is no Scripture that speaks of an
humane soul; and for affirming, that the soul is taken up into God. Hereunto
Georg Fox thus answers Page* 100. God breathed into the man the breath of
life, and he ^ecame a living soul; and is not this, which comes out from God,
which is in Gods hand, part of God, from God, and to God again? Which soul
Christ the power of God is the Bishop of: Is not this of his being? Yea Will.
P^n in vindication of Georg Fox Page 66. (as Mr Hicks shows Dial. 3. Page
22.) says, That all that can be concluded from Georg Fox's words is this; That
God inspired Man with some thing of his own substance, bestowed something of
his own divinity upon him, That God did inspire Man with the Holy Ghost.

4. Now, if this man be of the same judgment with these mentioned, we may
saifly conceive, or conjecture at least, that his meaning in these words now
under consideration, is this. That the Body of man, which is of the First and
Earthly Adam, was degenerat, and became dead; but not the Soul, which, being a
part of God's substance and being, and having relation to the Second and
Spiritual Adam, who is the Bishop thereof, was not obnoxious to this Death and
Degeneration; for being eternal, as well as Infinite, it could neither die, nor
degenerate, nor fall. But how blasphemous an opinion this is, every one may
see. This is the old damnable opinion of the Gnostics, Manichees and
Priscillianists, and of Cerdo, See August. Lib. de Origin Animae c. 2. and De
Haeres. c. 46. and 70. Aquin. 1. q. 90. Ar. 1. and Col. Conimb. ad 2. de Anima
q. 1. Art. 6. and was owned by that blasphemous man Servetus, and of late also
by the Author of Theologia Germanica, and of the Bright Star. See Mr Rutherf.
Survey of Spiritual Antichrist. Chap. XIV. These hold that the soul was a part
of God's essence. Though God's essence be most Pure, Simple and Indivisible,
and cannot be a part of any composed thing. If the Soul were thus of God and a
part of God, God should be the form of man; Because the soul is the f^rme of
Man; and consequently: Man should be God; for the whole may be denominated from
the form. The Scripture tells us, that God is Immutable, and that there is no
shadow of turning with Him; but by this opinion, he should be Mutable, and
change from Power to Act, from Ignorance to Knowledge, from Vice to Virtue,
etc. and back again reciprocally. Hence also it must follow, that either no
souls can go to hell, or that a part of God must be tormented in hell; And what
will they say of Devils? Either they must deny that there are any, or say that
they are a part of God; for they are Spiritual Substances, being Intelligences:
and with the Quakers forementioned, spiritual substances are parts of God, and
are Infinite in themselves, they are no Creatures, and if no Creatures, they
must be the Creator, or a part of the Creator. It is true, Man was created,
according to the Image of God, which, as to the Soul, consisted, as in the
spirituality of its substance, so chiefly in Wisdom, Righteousness and
Holiness, Eccles. 7:29. Ephesians. 4:24. Col 3:10, But the Scripture tells us, that
as to this Image, it was lost, even as to knowledge, nothing being left but some
rubbish of that once stately Fabric, of which afterward: and that thus the
soul was corrupted and damnified by the fall, all the Powers and Faculties
thereof being perverted; so that thereby Man became not only utterly
Indisposed, but also Opposite to all that is spiritually good, and wholly
Inclined to all evil and that continually, Romans 3: verse. 10 -- 20. Ehes. 2:2,
3. Romans 5:6. and 8:7, 8. Genesis 6:5: And this is confirmed by what this Man
adds, in the Thesis, and prosecuteth at large, in his Apology.

5. If this be not his true meaning, let us try another Conjecture. They
commonly speak of a Christ, within them (as Mr Hicks clears Dial. 1. Page 44.
etc.) and taunt such, as believe in a Person without them, saying Christ is
within, and that there is no other Christ, but that within every man. Mr Hicks
there tells us also, that Crisp, one of their ministry, asking, what Christ he
owned; and receiving this answer, That he did not believe any mere Principle
or Spirit in men to be the Christ; because that was not capable to suffer what
Christ suffered, returned this reply, That this was blasphemy. And when Mr
Hicks said further, that the Christ he believed was no other then that person,
the Scriptures speak of, The word made flesh -- God and man in one person.
Crisp. replied, that then he knew the beginning and date of his Christ:
Moreover he tells us Page 45, 46. that Georg Fox in the forecited Book Page 206.
says, if there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is a
false Christ: and he that has not this Christ, that was crucified within, is a
Reprobat. And Page 207. That God's Christ is not distinct from the saints, and
he that eats the flesh of Christ, has it within him. Page 201. Mr Hicks tells
us also Dial. 2. Page 10. How G. Whitehead in his Dip. Plu. Page 13. says,
Christ Jesus, a Person without us, is not Scripture language, but the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians. This language is very suitable unto the
language of the Old Libertines: against whom Famous Calvin wrote, in his
Instructio adv. Libertinos Cap 17. They made Christ's sufferings to be a mere
Histrionick Action, or Comedy; and Quintinus used to be very angry, when any
asked him, how he did? saying, How can it be ill with Christ. But yet, that
they may put a difference, betwixt themselves and others. They use to say, as
Mr Stalham informs us Page 276. That Christ is in all, but none is in Christ,
except themselves. Shall we think, that this is th^s Man's meaning; to wit, That
man is Corrupt, Fallen, Degenerated and Dead, not according to that part in
him, which is Christ, but according to that part in him, which is the Old man?
As this should contradict, what he says afterward, upon this account, that
then it were manifest, that whole man did not fall, or became dead and was
degenerate; so it could not be satisfying: for it would have but this import;
That man was Corrupted, Dead and Degenerated, in so far as he was corrupted,
dead and degenerated: and then we should be no wiser, than we were. Moreover,
if we should ask how this Christ came into every man? The answer must be, that
he was created in him; and as to this part of man, Adam did not fall. And if we
should ask, what is this Christ in every man, Will. Pen, in his Innocence with
open face P. 8. (as Mr Hick^ shows Dial. 2. Page 41.) answers, It is God
himself And He, with Nailer and Hubberthorn, in their Answer to the Phanaticque
History Page 13. will say, it is the Light in us, and Buroughs Page 9, and 149.
will say, that he that was slain upon the cross, is the ^ery Christ of God,
and the very Christ of God is in us. The same Mr Hicks in his postscript to the
Dial. 1. Page 82. tells us, that Ed. Borroughs and Franc. Howgil said in the
hearing of credible witnesses, That Christ was as really in every man, as he
was in that Flesh, which suffered at Jerusalem.

6. But as yet, we are arrived at no clear discovery of the truth, in this
matter, but rather further off from any clear understanding of his meaning,
Shall we think, that it is some thing opposite to the Light, which he means
by this first Adam, and terrestial man? But what means he, or they, by the
Light, within? Others of them have wonderful notions about this. Mr Hicks dial.
1. P. 3: etc. tells us, that they use to call this light within, some times,
Christ; sometimes, the measure of Christ; sometimes, the divine essence;
sometimes, of the divine essence: and that G. Whitehead in a discourse, urged
from Ioh. 1:4. That if the life be the divine essence, the light must be ^o
also; for such as the cause is, such the effect must be: and that he affirmed,
the light within to be God: and that to deny it to be so, is to deny the
omnipresence of God: and that the divine life is Immutable. To say then the
light within is not God, is to say God is mutable: and so concludes, that it
is blasphemy to deny the light within to be God. The same Mr Hicks in his
Quakers appeal answered. Page 4, 5. shows us, how Will. Pen in his Quakerisme
a new nickname P. 9, 10. says, that the true light in it self, is the Christ
of God, and the Savior of the World, which is God, not an effect of his power,
as a created light* And that G. Whitehead Dip. Plun. P. 13. will not have it
called a mere creature, but a divine and increated thing. That G. Fox, Great
mist. P. 10. will have it to be before conscience was, or creature was, or
created, or made light: And P. 23. That a^l things were made by it, and it was
glorified with the father before the world began. So P. 185:331. See further Mr
Hicks there, citeing at large some sentences of G. Fox younger, out of a
collection of several of his books, Page 47, 49, 50, 51, 52. all to this
purpose, concerning this Light within, This man also has so me uncouth
Notions, of which more particularly hereafter, when I come to examine his
doctrine thereanent; only now I observe that Page 84. he calls it a real
spiritual substance; and says, that it subsisteth in the heart of the ungodly,
even while they remain in their impieties: and therefore, as to this, Mankind
did not degenerate; But what is that, in respect of which, Mankind did
degenera^e? we see it not distinctly explained whether it was a Substance, or
an Accidens and if a Substance; whether it was a Real, or an Imaginary
Substance; a Spiritual or a Corporeal Substance. However this must be his
meaning, that only as to that, which is Opposite unto this Light, and bears
relation not to Christ the Second and Spiritual Adam, but to the First and
terrestial Adam, Mankind Fell, Died and was Degenerate: But does this take-in
both Soul and Body? and if it did, what can remain? if not, he would do well
to tell us, which was free. Enough of this here.

7. His expression here, in respect of the first Adam and terrestrial man,
would import, That Adam in Innocence, or in the state of Integrity, had also a
respect to the Second Adam, and Celestial man; and that as to this, he stood,
and lived, and did not become degenerate: and hence it would follow, that Adam
was under two Covenants, both under the covenant of Works, and under the
Covenant of Grace; and that he fell, as to the Covenant of works; but stood as
to the Covenant of Grace, But these things smell neither of Sense, nor of
Religion. If he thinks, that I wrong him, in deduceing such Consectaries from
his words, he must blame himself, that does not express himself more clearly,
and does not speak in a language more intelligible. His doctrine, I confess, is
strange; and his expressions are not ordinary; but it seems, an uncouth
doctrine must be expressed in an uncouth dialect: that unstable souls, that
have not their senses exercised to discern good and evil, may be taken
herewith; but such as are wise, and fear the Lord, will look about them.

8. He has told us, that Mankind is Dead and Degenerate, but as to the true
and full meaning hereof, we are left in the dark: This fall and Death seems
not to be absolute, being, as we see, restricted unto a certane particular
respect: and what that respect is, and how far it Extends, or what in Man
answers it, whether all of Man, or only a part, and if only a part, what that
Part is, we ^now not, but are left to conjecture. He has three general
expressions, whereby he would point forth unto us the nature of this Change and
Catastrophe, when he says, that Mankind is Fallen, is Degenerat, is Dead; and
a right explication of his meaning hereby, and of his sense of these words,
would give great satisfaction and clearness. It may be his following
expressions are added as a commentary; let us therefore consider them. Being
deprived (says he) of the sense or touch of this inward Testimony and Seed of
God; and subjected to the power of Nature, and Seed of Satan, which he did sow
into the hearts of men, while they remain in the natural and corrupt state.
Could we understand this commentary, we should be in better case, to judge of
his sense of the Fall: but the truth is, these words rather darken, than clear
the matter: and I fear, the words are not more uncouth and unusual, than the
thing, he understands thereby, is obstruse and hid. He speaks here of a
Testimony, saying the sense or touch of this Testimony; and the relative this,
hujus (if pertinent,) says, it is a testimony, formerly by him mentioned; but
where, or when, we are left to conjecture He calls it an Inward Testimony,
but what is this? It is true, in the foregoing Thesis, we heard him speaking of
an Inward Testimony of the Spirit, and in his second Thesis, of Inward
Revelations and Illuminations: Shall I think, that by this Testimony, whereof
he here speaks, he means the Inward Testimony of the Spirit, and the Inward
Revelations and Illuminations, of which he spoke above? If indeed he does mean
the same, and no other; I would feign know, How all Mankind, Jews and
Heathens, (as he speaks) was deprived of the sense and touch of this Inward
Testimony; seeing himself told us above Thesis 2. that by this Inward Testimony
or Revelation, and only by this, the knowledge of God was revealed to the Sons
of Men, to the Patria^chs, Prophets and Apostles: and we heard (and shall hear
more of it, out of this Man hereafter) that they make the Light within, which
is their great and only Teacher, common to all men? Is there a difference with
them, betwixt this Inward Testimony and that Light, which enlighteneth every
man, that comes into the world? But it may be, he means some special
distinct thing, by this Sense or Touch of this Inward Testimony (wherein he
would seem to come near to Plato's sensation, (...), in Th^aeat.) But what can
the touch or sensation of a Testimony import, if not the receiving the
Impression of it? and what can the receiving of the Impression, or Touch of a
Testimony be, but a receiving of information by it? And when all that knew God,
received illumination by the Testimony of the Spirit, did they not receive its
Information, and its Touch? and were they not made partakers of its Sensation?
and seeing this was common to all from the beginning, as he endeavored to prove
above, as we heard, where was this deprivation of this sense and touch, which
he speaks o^* It is true, by the fall, mankind was deprived of that sweet
and intimate Communion with God, which formerly Adam was addmitted unto, and
all the communications, which Adam after the fall, and his posterity did meet
with, were in and through the Mediator, and according to the Covenant of Grace:
But he makes the Testimony, which was before and after the fall, the same; and
that by the fall, man was deprived of the Touch of the same Testimony, which
yet he would make us believe, was common to all, from Adam to Moses, and from
Moses to Christ etc.

9. When he says, that Mankind by the fall was deprived of the sense and
touch of this Inward Testimony, He supposes that th^s Inward Testimony (which
with them is the same with the Light within, and seed of God) still remained,
even in Mankind; only man was deprived of its Sense and Touch; hence it would
appear, that, according to this Man's Theology, Man's Understanding was not hurt
by the Fall, nor his Capacity to receive impressions from the Light within, or
Inward Testimony; but only, there were not Emanations of Light and Information
from that Testimony, and great Teacher: or that th^s Light and Divine Particle
still remained in man, but was only Dormant and Overclouded, But the Scriptures
gives us another account of the Degenerat and Natural state of man, as to
Light and Knowledge, saying, that such are in darkness 1 These. 5:4. 1 Ioh. 2.9
and walk in darkness Ioh. 8:12: and 12:35. 1 Ioh. 1:6. and 2:11. and are of
darkness 1 These. 5:5. and under the power of darkness Col. 1:13. See also Act
26:18. 1 Pet. 2:9. Esa. 9:2. Mat. 4:16. But further, This Inward Testimony
being a Light within, or a Seed within, it must be seated somewhere in the
soul; and it, being Light, can no where be seated more properly, them in the
Intellect: and if there be light in the intellect, how can the man be deprived
of the Touch and Sensation, of this Light? Means he by this Touch and
Sensation a Reflective knowledge, or such a reflexive act of the Soul or of
Conscience, whereby we know that we know? But then, he still supposes, that
the Light; and Knowledge direct, is not impaired by the fall, (contrary to the
Scriptures a forecited, and many others, which might be cited; see Ephesians. 4:18.)
but only the Reflexive knowledge: and thus Adam was as understanding and
knowing after the fall, as before it, only he did not know it: And indeed the
common and first duty, which these Quakers press upon all, is that they would
lookin, and reflect upon what is within them, and so be Wise, and
Understanding: yea, in this one thing, they seem to place all Grace and Virtue,
as if they had been trained up in Plato's school, who in the place before cited
(as Mr Gale in his Court of the Gentiles part. 2. Page 291. shows) Takes all
true science, to be this Sensation, and in his Timaeus Fol. 103. he called all
prudence a good Sensation (...): and in his Alcibiad, fol. 133, 134. He says,
that he that reflects upon himself, his own soul and wisdom, thereby becomes
as it were omniscient; whereas they, who know not themselves, know not what is
good, or evil for them, nor yet what belongs to themselves, or other men. How
like this is unto the ordinary discourse of Quakers, such as hear them
ordinarily, can best know: the Scripture mentions an (...), but not as common
to all Phil. 1:9. and (...) Heb. 5:14. which are rare.

10. This to me is further confirmed by the following Expression, which he
has, and of the Seed of God; of the touch and feeling of which also, (if it be
any thing distinct from the foresaid Inward Testimony) Adams posterity was
deprived by the fall: for these men use to speak much of this Seed, and Seed of
God Mr Hicks dial. 1: Page 16. tells us, that some of them call it a measure of
God; others call it Christ, and the Spirit; Some call it that, which obeys
the light, contradicting the former, for it cannot be both the Light, or the
Spirit and Measure of God, which gives sensations and touches, and the soul,
or that which obeys and receives these touches and sensations. And Dial. 2
Page 84 he says some call it, the Witness of God in our consciences; and P. 66.
that G. Keith Immed. Revel. P. 77.78. calls it, that which the work of the
ministry is to point hearers to and P. 75, 76. he makes it Christ the light in
man: and this same Man Page 82.83, 84. makes this seed the same with Grace,
with the word of God, with the light, that enlighteneth every man, and makes it
a certane spiritual substance, and not an accident, as we shall hear afterward:
and thus it is manifest, that according to this man's doctrine, Adam by his fall
lost not Grace, nor the Word of God, nor the Light within, nor this Seed, but
only the Touches thereof: and what Scripture, I pray, teaches him this? or by
what Scripture, shall we be helped to understand this? the Scriptures, which we
have, speak far otherwise of the fall, and of the sad Consequences thereof, as
is known.

11. He adds the other part of this Degeneration, saying, that Mankind
became subject to the power of Nature, and to the seed of Satan. Neither of
which are Scriptural Expressions, and what sense to put upon them, so as they
shall agree with what he has said, and with what we shall hear out of his
Apology, I do not know: only this would seem evident, that he must hereby mean
some thing directly Opposite, or Contrary to the Testimony and Seed of God: And
so, as the Seed of God, to him, is a Substance, so this Seed of Satan must be a
Substance also: And as before the fall, man was under the Touches and
Sensations of the Seed of God; so after the fall, he came under the Touches and
Sensations of the Seed of Satan. And thus we see, that this man, among other
Errors, has drunk-in the error of Flacius Illyricus, who said, that the
image of God, and Original righteousness, was a Substance, and an Essence, in
Demonstr. Fol 21. and 38. and 40. as also that Original sin, was not an
accident but a substance: and so this man, and his party, must revive again the
old condemned opinion or error of the wicked Manichees, who affirmed that
there were two Principia. Now either this Man must say, that this Seed of
Satan, being a Substance, must be of God, or of the Devil: if of God, then God
must be the Author and Creator of sin; if of the Devil, than the Devil is the
creator of some substances. But I would enquire, whether this Substance, which
he calls the Seed of the Serpent, be one and the same thing, with the Man, or
with his Soul and Body; or not: If not: then the Man must have another
Substantial and Essential part, beside the Soul and the Body; which is contrary
both to Scripture and Reason: If it be the same thing, then Adam before the
fall had the Seed of Satan in him, for he had ^he same Substantial Soul and
Body, both before and after the fall, what will he say of Christ, who took upon
him the nature of the Seed of Abraham, and so became true man having a soul and
a body? Took he upon him Original sin? or came he under the power of the Seed
of he Serpent? And yet this must be said, or we must say he took not upon him
the Seed of Abraham: or that the soul and body of the Seed Abraham was not
original sin? and so that Original sin is not the same substance with Man's soul
and body.

12. But came this change upon the whole Nature, or Race of mankind,
immediately after the fall? Or did the posterity of Adam come under this power
of Nature, and of the Seed of Satan, so soon as they had a being, and a Soul
and a Body? He will not grant this but expressly denies it, in the end of this
same Thesis, and gives his reasons, in his Apology, which shall be examined,
in the next Chapter. When then does Satan sow this seed? It is (says he) while
they abide in the Natural and Corrupt state. But how come they into this
Natural and Corrupt state: And under the dominion of Nature, and Seed of Satan?
Come they into this state, before Satan sow this seed in their hearts? These
things seem somewhat mysterious: but what else can we expect of them but
unexplicable and untelligible fantasmes, who will not regulate their judgment,
in the matters of God, by his Word? Further I would know, whether such of the
posterity of Adam, as have not yet the seed of the Serpent sown into their
hearts, are deprived of the touches of the Testimony and Seed of God, or not?
If they be not, then the beginning of his Thesis is false, where he said that
Tota posteritas Adamica, the whole posterity of Adam, was fallen, degenerat,
dead and deprived of the sense and touch of this inward testimony and Seed of
God: If they be, then his conjunction Et, saying, and subject to the power of
nature, and of the Seed of the Serpent, is nonsense; for thereby he would tell
us, the positive part of the sad Consequences of the Fall, as conjunct with the
Negative or Privative part, and yet by this Concession, these parts are
separable, and not conjunct, in all the posterity of Adam, but in some only,
and these some must be in a distinct stare from the rest viz. under the
Privative part, but not under the Positive part of this sad consequence of the
Fall. Thus we have no clear account of his doctrine.

13. He proceeds, and tells us, that hence it is, that not only their deeds
and speeches, but all their imaginations, are perpetually evil in the sight of
God, because proceeding from this depraved and malignant seed: And from this, I
think, it is clear, that before men have Imaginations, let be Speeches and
Actions, they are possessed of this depraved and malignant Seed; for the
Efficient Cause is always in being before the Effect, and the Fountain is
before the Streams: How then can this man say afterward, that this Seed of
Satan is not imputed (that is, as he said above, sown in their hearts, else he
speaks gibberish) unto Infants, until they actually sin? For if Infants
must first actually sin, before Satan sow this seed, in their hearts, then
it is false, that all actually sin, before Satan can sow his seed in their
hearts; then it is false, that all actual sins proceed from this corrupt
seed; for the Cause cannot proceed from, nor yet follow the Effect. How he
shall reconcile this Contradiction, I see not: But his Religion, as it seems,
is made up of Contradictions: we have met with several already, and we will
have occasion to observe more, ere all be done.

14. He adds, Therefore man, in so far, as he subsisteth in this state, can
know nothing aright of God; yea his thoughts and conceptions of God and of
divine things, until he be disjoined from that evil seed, and adjoined unto the
divine light, are unprofitable both to himself, and to all others. Here are
some more mysteries: what means that, in so far as he subsisteth in this
state? This quatenus, in so far as, can not have the same import, with quamdiu,
so long as: What means he then hereby? Is a Natural man, who is dead and
degenerate, under a two fold respect, under one whereof he can know something
aright of God? But his following donec, until, clears the matter, you will
say. Well, be it so: But what means that, being disjoined from the evil Seed
etc? Is this divine Light, and evil Seed in him both at once? And is it in his
power to disjoyne himself from the one, and join himself to the other? And
what is that, to be adjoined to the divine light? And what is this evil Seed,
and divine Light? I know the Man will smile at these questions; and possibly
say, as some of the Quakers love to speak, that I manifest my own darkness,
and am in the Imagination and Witchcraft, if not worse; But I cannot help it,
and I love not to be adjoined to their Light, (though they are pleased to call
it divine) that I may come to understand these mysteries; for as these
Mysteries are Mysteries of iniquity; so their light is not spiritual, nor are
their Expressions such as the Holy G^ost teaches: And what reason I have to
propound these questions, the Reader may understand, by what I have said before.

15. Then he deduceth another Consectary from his doctrine viz. That hence the
errors of the Socinians and Pelagians are rejected, who exalt the Light of
Nature as also of Papists and many protestants, who affirm, that a man may be
a Minister of the Gospel, and do good to souls, without the true grace of God.
Good Man! As concearning this last, he promises to speak more fully to it
hereafter, and therefore we shall attend him where he is pleased to handle this
matter more fully. But as touching the first, I must needs say, that This Man
does either promise to himself none but ignorant Readers, that know not what
the Socinians and Pelagians maintain, nor what the Quakers hold; or he must
speak, he knows not what. Alas, Poor Man, does he think, that his saying he
exalts not the Light of nature, and that he rejects the Socinians and
Pelagians, will make wise men and acquanted with these controversies think
otherwise, than that he and his Fraternity are as great enemies to the grace of
God, and as great exalters of the Light of nature, as ever Pelagius or Socinus
were? Thinks he, that his calling the dim Light of corrupt Nature by, and
holding it forth to us under the name of Grace, or Light, or whatever other
name, he is pleased to name it by, will make us think, that it is in truth the
true Gospel Grace of God, and not to be what it is indeed, the mere Light of
Corrupt Nature? Did he never hear, how Pelagius, to escape the Anathema of a
Synod, called that which he pleaded for Grace? and was he less, what he was,
an enemy to the grace of God, for all that? never one white: and so is it with
this Man: we are confident, ere all be done, to find him as great a Pelagian
and Socinian and Jesuit, in this point, as any: and I judge it intolerable
E^trontedness or shameless Ignorance, in him, to place the Pelagians,
Semipelagians, Socinians, and some Papists, one the extreme, as to his Opinion,
as he does Page 54. of his Apology; but of this more afterward.

16. When he comes in his Apology to explain his Thesis Page 54. forbearing
to speak of the State of Adam before the Fall, because, forsooth, in his
judgment, these are but curious notions? as the Arminians thought before him
Apol. Cap. 5. and yet I judge, his plain expressing of his Opinion in this
matter, would have contributed not a little to our understanding of his
meaning, as to the Nature and Consequences of the Fall: But it is true, the
full explication of the State, of Adam's righteousness th^rein, and of the
Covenant, under which he, and man's Nature in him, stood, would have marred all
this Man's Pelagian and Socinian design; and have made him and the rest, whom
he patronizeth, too too naked.

17. But behold the (...) of ^his Impudent man just now he told us, that he was
neither Pelagian nor Socinian: and yet within a few lines he tells us, that the
death threatened Genesis 2:17. was (...) and death, or the dissolution of the (...)
Man, which is the same that Pelagian and Socinian both hold, that they may the
better maintain that Principal Error viz. the Non imputation of Adam's sin to
Infants; which is also a Cardinal point of this Man's Religion. That the
Pelagians were of this Opinion, Augustine tells us Lib. 1. contra posterior.
Response jul. c. 66. saying, you will not say, that because of sin, death
passed upon all originally* lest you be forced also to confess, that sin did
pass upon all; for you know, how iniquous it is to sa^, the punishment passed
without the merit. And though Pelagius himself as the Synod in Palestine, did
dissimulate herein, as Augustine shows Lib. 1. u^tani Operis contra jul Cap.
65. and Lib. 2: C 113. yet julianus, and others still maintained, that Adam was
so created, that though he had nor sinned, yet he would have died; not as
punished for sin, but by necessity of nature. And Orosius Apol. de Arbitrii
liberate advers. Pelag. Page ^37. tells Pelagius, that his disciples, that had
sucked poison out of his breasts, affirmed, that Adam was made mortal, and
suffered no damage herein by his transgression. See Vossij Hist. pelag. Lib.
2. par. 2. P. 188.189. That the Socinians maintain, that Man by nature was
mortal before the fall, is manifest out of their writings. See Socin. prael.
Cap. 1. and contra Puccium Cap. 5. Volkel. Lib. 3: Cap. 11. and 14. Socin. de
Servatore part. 3: c. 8. Item ad articulos Cutenj. The Arminians Apol. c. 4 so
express themselves in this matter, as not to displease the Socinians. This is
also the opinion of Anabaptists, who deny original sin. Hence already appears
one cause, why this man would not speak anything of the state of Adam before
the fall; for if he had he behoved so to have explained that excellent sta^e,
as that it might appear, how notwithstanding thereof Adam was obnoxious to
death, and dissolution, which is inconsistent with such a state of full
felicity Eccles. 9:4. But the Lord, when he came to pass sentence upon Adam,
according to the commination, because of his transgression Genesis 3:19. tells him,
that his outward man must be dissolved, and that he must return unto the
ground, and unto the dust. So the Apostle holds forth death, or this
dissolution of the outward man, as a just punishment, and as the wages of sin
Rom* 5:12, 21.806:23. 1 Cor. 15:21, 56. So does the Scripture elsewhere Hos.
13:1. Ezech. 18 4. 1 Cor 11 30. Deuteronomy. 30:15, 19. Ier. 21:8. Psalm. 49:14 and
55:15. I^m 1:15. what else imports the law for putting of so many sorts of
sinners unto death Exodus 21:29 and 35:2. Levit. 19:20. and 20:11. Numb. 1:51.
and 3:10, 38. and 18:^. and 35:30 Levit. 24:21. Deuteronomy. 13:5, 9. and 17:6, 7. and
21:22. and 24:16. Ios. 1:18:2 Chronicles. 15:13. and is not death called the last
enemy, which must be destroyed? Esa. 25:8. Hos. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 15:26, 59? Yea
nature teaches this truth Romans 1:32. See further Ier. 31:30. 2 Chronicles. 25:4.
Ezech. 18:20. Amos. 9:10. with many more.

18. what is his reason, why natural Death is not here to be understood? for
(says he) as to this death, he did not die till many years afterward. But was
he not made Obnoxious thereunto, by virtue of that Threatening? Threatenings
properly declare only the dueness of punishment; and say that the transgressour
is worthy of, or deserves the punishment threatened, or is liable and obnoxious
thereunto; and not always, the certanty of the execution, as to the event:
other wise this man must say, that by death here is not to be understood the
everlasting separation of soul and body from God, and the pains and torments
of hell; for neither was that presently executed upon Adam. And then I would
feign know, what he understands by this Death: If he s^y, that this was begun
to be executed, that same day, in testimony whereof he was cast out of
paradise, that same day. So shall I say, that the bodily death began to be
executed, that same day; for it was said to him Genesis 3:17.- in sorrow shall
thou eat of it (the ground) all the days of thy life. 19 In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground Will this Man say,
that Pains, Sicknesses, and temporal Calamities, that attend us from the womb
to the grave, in one measure or other, are not the due fruits of sin? Then he
shall contradict manifest Scripture Lam. 3:39. 1 Cor. 11:30. Deuteronomy 28. and
Levit. 26. with many more. If he dar not say this, he must yield, that Adam,
upon the fall, began to die, in being made liable to so many Miseries, which he
was to conflict with, until the day of his dissolution, and from which he was
^ee, so long as he stood, in his integrity; for he cannot be so unreasonable as
to think, that Sickness, Infirmities, Pains, Torments, Griefs etc. can be
punishments of sin to us, and yet that they were no punishment of sin to Adam,
especially, seeing these were denunced against Adam by God, the Righteous Judge,
upon conviction of his crime.

19. When he gives us his mystical Interpretation, of the Lord's thrusting man
out of paradise, and placeing at the east of the garden of Eden cherubimes, and
a flamming sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life
Page 55. he mentions the spiritual Communion and Communication, which the
sain^s enjoy with God through Jesus Christ, to whom these cherubimes give
place, and to all, that enter through him, who calls himself the Door. Now I
would ask (this coming in our way here, though we have designed the Next
Chapter for this purpose) If he thinks Infants are capable of entering in at
the door, Christ; and of enjoying Communion with God through Christ? if he say
yes, then he supposes, that they are excluded by nature from this Communion,
as well as others: and will not this prove the Imputation of Adams Guilt unto
them, seeing they share of his Punishment, and were with him, and in him, cast
out of Paradise, because of this transgression? but more of this hereafter.

20. Thereafter he comes to prove that Adam and his Posterity, after the fall,
did retain no Will nor Light capable to discern (this he should say, and not
to manifest) spiritual things; and for this cause cites Genesis 6:5 and 8:2^.
Ier. 17:9. and Romans 3:10.-19. And here who would suspect but the Man meaned
honestly to represent the deplorable Catastroph, that sin brought into the
world: But he is like the man, of whom Solomon speaks Prove. 26:25, 26. He
that hates, dissembleth with his ^ips, and lays up deceit within him. And
therefore, when he speaks fair, or, makes his voice gracious, we must not
believe him, for there are seven abominations in his heart: And in the very
entry, we have some discovery made to us of his disperat Design: for (says he)
what ever good man does in his Nature, that does not proceed from him; but from
the divine Seed in him. Whence we may see, that Man, in his nature, that is, as
I suppose, in his Natural State, can do good; and this would seem to contradict
what he is about to prove: but to prevent this he tells us, that all that good
does not proceed from him, though he does it; but from the divine seed in him:
So that, notwithstanding of the fall, there is a divine Seed, which remains
in every man, as an active principle of good. But was not this divine seed in
man before the fall? no doubt. Was not this divine seed a Principal part, at
least, of the Image of God? Sure, it could not be otherwise. Then it seems,
that man by his fall did not lose all the Image of G^d, nor the Principal part
thereof: and, if this Seed of God remained, he was not wholly dead, as to a
spiritual life, and as to Communion with God, which yet he understood by that
death threatened, upon the eating of the forbidden fruit. Hence we may have
some more clear discovery of the Mystery of this man's Religion, and of his
Conceptions concerning the fall, and of these things formerly hinted by us. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 14 for we see here clearly, that the fall was but in a
certane Respect, in respect of Nature, But not in respect of the Seed of God:
But I pray him to tell me, how Adam did any good before the fall? was it only
by Nature, or was it by the divine Seed! If only by nature, then the divine
Seed was idle and useless; and then why, and for what ends, had he this divine
Seed? If by the divine Seed, then the fall caused no change, for this divine
Seed remained, and remained Operative, and man by it did good. One thing
further I would observe. Here he grants, that persons in nature can do good,
by virtue of the seed of God, and in so far as they do good by the seed of God,
or divine seed, they are not deprived of the Sense and Touches of the Seed of
God; and yet he told us, in the beginning of his Thesis, That all the posterity
of Adam was deprived of the sense and touch of the divine seed: I know not how
he shall liberate himself of this Contradiction unless he say that, howbeit the
good, that a natural man does, proceed from the seed of God, yet the man has
no feeling nor Touch of this Seed; and so it is not the Man, but the Seed that
works, and does good; and then it will follow, that all that good, which is
done by man in nature, is purely and immediately the work of the Seed of God,
and is no Humane Action, but Divine, wherein the natural man is purely passive,
or rather as a shope, in which a Man works; and consequently they must be all
Perfect, Holy and Divine Actions; and so their actions shall be better, upon
many accounts, than the most gracious actions of the truly regenerated
children of God, Now let any judge, what this man thinks of the fall, and of
the Natural State of Man..

21. He lays down this exception, before he enlarge upon Genesis 6:5. and the
other places formerly named; But one thing he has not adverted unto, viz. That
none of those places give the least hint of this Exception; yea, That himself
commenting upon them, takes in their most large and comprehensive sense, and
interprets them absolutely, and not respectivly, telling us, that all the
thoughts of the heart of man, without exception of any, (this he tells us, and
would have us observe the emphasis) are only and always evil: now where is
that exception and limitation, (which he foisteth in here) of its own nature,
or of it self, or as it proceeds from his heart? Shall we think, that God's
controversy against the wicked world, was only this, that howbeit Man did good
and much good, by virtue of the Divine Seed that was in him; yet all that good
did not proceed from his Nature, and from his own heart? How absurd is this?
And does Jeremiah Chap. 17:9. give any hint of this Exception or Limitation?
Does he say, that the heart of man in it self is deceitful above all things;
but not the heart of natural men, as under the touches of the seed of God? Does
Paul Romans 3. speaking positively enough of man in his lapsed and corrupt state,
make any exception of actions done in them by the divine Seed? Why does this
man then obtrude his fancyful notions upon us, without all ground or show of
proof? Does he, take us all for credulous Quakers?

22. But what can be this man's design, in all this? It is indeed a most
desperate design: for it is no less, upon the matter, than to Overturne the
whole Gospel of the grace of God: why so? You will say. Because (as we will see
more fully afterward) his maine design in this, is, to Evince, that all the
good, that is found or heard of to have been, or yet to be, among Heathens,
Turks or Barbarians, who never heard of the Gospel, or of Christ revealed
therein, was as much of the Grace of God in Christ, and the fruit of Christ's
merit and intercession, and the Blessing of the New Covenant of Grace, as the
Holiness of such as are united by faith unto Christ. and crucified with Him,
and have Him living, and working in them by his Spirit: So that if we come the
length of some Heathens, who have walked more closely to the Principles of
Nature, than others; and have bin more Moral, as to some things, in their
outward carriage, than the common rabble of Men, we have attained the Gospel
Holiness and Sanctification, (at least, as to kind) which these men intend;
and to that measure thereof, which will ensure our Salvation. Now, what a
desperate design this is, to bring us no further length, than to polished
Heathenisme, let every Christian judge; and see if the title of my book be not
true, that Quakerisme is the path way to Paganism; But the sequel will more
confirm this.

23. For further manifesting of this wickedness, let us consider what he says
further, Page 56. toward the end, He bringeth-in this Objection, That the
Apostle says Romans 2:14. that the Gentiles, who had not the Law, did by nature
the things contained in the Law: the meaning of which words, as we adduce them,
is not to prove (as he falsely here insinuates, and expresses) that such by
nature can do that which is good and acceptable, in the sight of God; but to
prove, (as shall be made manifest afterward.) That there are some Notions of
God, and of Moral honesty, as relicques of that noble image of God, with which
man was endued, at the beginning, left in corrupt man, whereby he, through the
dim light of nature, may see something of the Law of nature, pointing out his
duty to God, to man, and to himself; and may do, upon the matter, something of
that, which the Law of nature requires; and yet when he has improven Nature
to its yondmost, shall never do that, which is well pleasing in the sight of
God, who, since the fall, only accepts of that, which is done in the strength
and grace of Jesus Christ and by one reconciled unto Him, in and through
Christ. Let us now see what he Answers, This nature (says he) neither may
nor can be understood, of man's proper nature, which is corrupt and fallen; but
of spiritual nature, which proceeds, from the seed of God, as he has received
a new visitation of divine love, and is thereby quickened. For answer, I would
know; whether he understands this Spiritual Nature, of that which is common
to all the Gentiles, or of that which was peculiar to some. If he understand
that, which is common to all, then, according to his divinity, every heathen,
let be, every Christian, has this Spiritual Nature, and Seed of God, in him,
and what good they do, in Natural or Moral actions, proceeth from this seed of
God, and spiritual nature; And consequently, the thoughts of their heart
concerning the being of God (which is good, because true, and according to the
Law written in every man's heart) must flow from this Principle, and from no
other; and so, the devils, who believe that there is a God, Iam. 2:19. must be
partaker of this Spiritual Nature and Seed of God, Observe, Reader, whither
this Man's Religion will bring us, and what the Grace of God, and that Spiritual
Nature, is, which this man would lead us unto: Even that, which is common to
devils. If he mean that, which is peculiar to some; I would enquire, who these
some are? Does he mean the Gentiles, who were converted by the Gospel, and
become Christians? These, we grant, have a spiritual Nature* but sure, the
Apostle is not speaking of such, as the whole scope of his discourse clears.
If he understand this of the Heathens, who did better improve the light of
nature, than others; we know no spiritual Nature, that such have, for all their
advancement in Nature: because they are yet out of Christ, whose members only
are made partakers of this new spiritual Nature, according to that Gospel,
which we hope to be saved by: And his contrary opinion confirms us of their
anti-evangelick Principles, and paganish design.

24. He adds a reason from verse. 15. where the Apostle says, that they show
the work of the Law written in their hearts: and this, says he, the Scripture
witneseth to be a great part of the dispensation of the New Covenant. Wherein
the Man, who would feign make us believe, he had no fellowshipe with the
Socinians, joineth with Smalcius the Socinian, writing against Frantzius disp.
S, Page 419. who, upon this same ground, alleges, that Paul speaks here of
Gentiles, who were under the New Covenant, and not of such who lived before
Christ came: while as it is manifest from verse. 10. that Paul is speaking of
the Gentiles, in the general, in opposition to the Jews, who made their boast
of the Law; and is hereby showing, that they will be without excuse in the day
of judgment (of which he speaks verse. 16.) howbeit they wanted that Law,
which the Jews had, because they had the Law of nature, which they
transgressed, engraven in their minds and consciences; as he further clears
by their consciences bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing,
etc. (2.) Where read we, that any do by nature the things declared in the New
Covenant? (3.) How can such, as are under the New Covenant, be said to be
without a Law, as these here? (4.) Is not the New Covenant always opposed to
the Law? See Gal. 2:16. Romans 3:27, 28. and several other places. (5.) How can
such, as are under and within the New Covenant, be said to sin, and to perish,
without Law, as here verse. 12^ (6.) How can such, as are under the New
Covenant, be a Law unto themselves, as here? (7.) Where in all the Scripture,
is the matter of the New Covenant, called the work of the Law? He would do
well, if he thought good, to consult Calvin, Pareus and other Commentators on
the place. (8.) This Man told us above, homologating with the Socinians, that
the New Covenant had no place under the Law, and yet even then, we hear of the
Law in hearts, Psalm. 40:9* and 37:31. Esa. 51:7. (9.) Had not Adam, even after
the fall* the Law in some measure fixed and written in his h^a^t, when his
conscience accused him of his transgression, and he did run to hide himself? By
this accusing of conscience, Paul proves here, that the Gentiles had the Law
in their heart. (10.) He would know, that there is a twofold writing of the
Law, in the heart: One is, whereby the knowledge of the Law is so fixed in
their minds, as that it cannot be utterly delet, howbeit their wills cannot and
will not comply therewith; and of this the Apostle is here speaking; for the
Heathens have this Law of nature so imprinted, and fixed in their Minds, as to
several things concerning God, and their carriage and walk in the world, that
they cannot but see a difference betwixt Righteousness and Iniquity, Honesty
and Dishonesty, in several particulars, and in their judgment prefer the one
to the other, though their hearts and wills be not reconciled thereunto, and
made to comply therewith, even according to the measure of their Knowledge and
Judgment. The Other is whereby the whole will of God, revealed in Law and
Gospel, is by the Spirit of God deeply imprinted in the soul of Believers, so
that, as their Minds know it, and their Judgments approve it, so their Wills
embrace it with love and desire* and their native Endeavor is after Full,
Pure, Sincere, and Spiritual conformity thereto, in the strength of the same
Spirit; and it is their grief and matter of unfaigned sorrow, when, through
the workings of a remanent body of death, they come short of what is commanded,
whether as to Matter or Manner, or End intended etc. If he shall evince, that
Paul speaks of this here, he shall do more than all the Socinians (no persons
else ever dreamed of this) ever have been able to do, to this day; But the
truth is, I apprehend, all this is a riddle to this man, who understands no
other writing of the Law in hearts, than the first: for as he is an enemy, so
is he a stranger unto the Gospel of the Grace of God: as will evidently enough
appear, ere we have done.

25. He adds a second reason for his Interpretation Page 57 saying, that if
nature here be understood of the proper nature of Man, then the Apostle should
contradict himself, who elsewhere says, that the natural man cannot perceive
the things of God; but among these things of God, the Law is comprehend, seeing
Paul Romans 7:12, 14. calls it ^oly, just and good and Spiritual, and calls
himself carnal, which must be understood, as he was unregenerat. I answer (1.)
Paul no way contradicts himself, except in this man's dreaming fancy; for
these spiritual things, whereof the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2:14 are not the
things of Nature, or of the Law or Light of Nature, But the things of the
Spirit of God, which must be spiritually understood verse. 14. which none can
know, without they have the mind of Christ verse. 16. which concern Christ and
Him Crucified verse. 2. the same which Paul preached in demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power verse. 4. which was Wisdom among such only, as were perfect
verse. 6. and which only the Spirit, which is of God, did reveal, and not the
Spirit of the world verse. 11, 12. and which eye had not seen, nor ear heard
etc. verse. 9. It was the preaching of the Cross of Christ, which even the Wise
and Understanding, and such as had not only Natures Light, but the Light of the
Law, could not know. It was that, which even to the Jews, was a stumbling
block, and to the wise Grecians was foolishness: Chap. 1:16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23. Hence we see, the Law, which was written in the hearts of the
Gentiles, is not among those things, whereof Paul speaks 1 Cor. 2. (2.) It is
tru^, the Law both that which is written in the heart of the Gentiles, and that
which was more clearly and amply declared and explained by God to the Jews,
was Good, Holy, Just, and Spiritual, yet was it not the same, with the things
of God, whereof the Apostle spoke 1 Cor. 2. (3) This man must have a strange
antipathy at truth, and against the Orthodox, for he will join with any,
before he take part with them; we heard, but just now, how he joined with
Smalcius, the Socinian* and here, in interpreting Romans 7:14. etc. he deserteth
the or^hodox, and joyneth himself with Pelagians, Arminians and Socinians, who
will have the Apostle there speaking, not of himself, but as assumeing the
person of one in nature, not yet regenerated, as if such were not wholly ^in,
and wh^l^y flesh; or had an Inward man delighting in the Law of God, or ^ad a
Law in their mind contrary to the Law in their members; or were capable of
this captivity, when they are willing slaves, or could groan under a bo^y of
death; and account themselves miserable upon that account; or thank God,
through Jesus Christ, because of the begun delivery, and certane expectation of
the full victory; or as if they with their mind could serve the Law of God.
(4.) His sole reason, viz. because the Apostle said, he was carnal, proves
nothing; for what the Apostle speaks in a certane respect, must not be
understood in an absolute sense: He was, it is true, carnal (as all ^egenerat
persons are) not absolutely, nor wholly; but in part; in so far, as the old man
remained, in which respect, the best have a Law in their members warring
against the Law of their mind, and have the flesh lusting against the Spirit,
as they have the Spirit lusting against the flesh Gal. 6.17. And the Apostle
calls even such babes in Christ, carnal, in a certane re^pect 1 Cor. 3:1.

26. Thereafter he tells us, That when we are urged with this testimony by
Pelagians an^ Socinians, and by them (so that we see, with whom he and his
party are birds of one feather) we use to answer, that there were some
remnants of the spiritual image left in Adam. But says he, this is affirmed
without probation. In which he either speaket^ against his Light; or he ^a^^
never read, what has been said upon this, by the orthodox, against Socinians
and Arminians, and such as would defend, that there were some speculative
Atheis^s, unto whom this Man's assertion does no small service as we may show
hereafter. But next he says, that hereby we contradict ourselves, and destroy
our own cause, Why so? For (says he) If by these relicques* they could fulfill
the law, then either Christ's coming was not necessary, or men could be saved
without him, or that these (th^ugh they kept the Law) were damned because
ignorant ^f Christ to come, which the Lord had made impossible for them to
know, Answer (1.) We never said, that they could fulfill the Law, by these
relicques; nor does the Apostle say so: It is true, they did and could do by
nature somethings, contained in the Law, (and this was sufficient for the
Apostles design) not all: Even Paul, though many stages above many heathens,
while in the state of nature, did not know, till the written Law told him, that
Concupiscence was sin Rom 7:7. And when they did the things contained in the
Law, they did them not perfectly; nor does the Apostle say this, but the
contrary; for he adds, that their consciences did accuse them. (2.) Though we
should suppose, that they both could and did fulfill the Law, (against all
Reason, Scripture and Experience) yet we, who do not, with this man, deny
Original sin, might assert a necessity of Christ's coming; for, all their
future obedience, make it never so perfect, being but their duty, could make no
satisfaction to divine justice for Adams sin, whereof they were guilty. (3.)
Hence he may see, that we need not say, that any can or could be saved without
Christ. (4.) Nor need we say, that such should have been damned for being
ignorant of Christ to come, but for their transgression. But absurdities
deduced from an impossible supposition, are but absurd probations* fit only for
Quakers.

27. What he says. 3. to the vindicating of 1 Cor 2:14. from the exception of
such, as would have (...) meaned of a Brutish man, an animal, not of a Natural
man, does not concern us; but therein, unawars, he contradicts himself: for
if man now, in his fallen condition, can know nothing of God, of his Being,
Nature, or Government of the world, nor nothing of the Principles of common
Honesty and Morality, nor nothing of the things of the Law, as he went about to
prove, as we heard; then let him tell me, wherein a man, in his Natural state,
differs from a Brute? And how he can then make use of this answer? Again
when he says, that the Apostle does demonstrate, through that whole chapter
(he should have added the first Chapter too) how the wisdom of Man is an
incapable judge of the things of God. Let him tell me, if he thinks that the
wise men, such as the Grecians of old were, (as he grants here) could not
judge of any of these particulars, held forth in the Law of God? If not,
wherein appeared their Wisdom? Or wherein were they to be called Wise? If they
could judge, in some matters of the Law, which was written in their heart, then
let him reconcile this, if he can, with what he said above. But, as we have
frequently alrea^y observed, this Man regairdeth so little what he says, that
may he but have occasion to contradict Truth, he cares not how often he
contradict himself, as is usual with such, who are carried away with a
prejudice against Truth, and know not well, as yet, were to settle.

28 Thus have we examined what this Quaker says, upon this Head: and because
he alleiged, we spoke without Reason, when we said, that there were some
relics of the image of God left in the natural man, whereby he may know some
things concerning God's Being and Nature, and Government of the world, his duty
toward God, his Neghbour and Himself; we shall shortly manifest the truth of
this, to the end, that it may the better appear, that this Quakers Theology,
which he pleads for and drives at, is but Paganical, borne with every
corrupt son of Adam, and far different from that, which is Saving, and is
manifest by the Gospel, which has brought life and immortality to light. The
Socinians deny, that there is any inuate knowledge of God, in man; or that by
nature, he knows any thing of God: so Socinus himself praelect cap 11 So
Ostorodus Institut. P. 1. and 10. and Smalcius contra Frantzium disp. 8. though
others, as Crellius, and Schlichtingius, be of another judgment: our Divines,
on the contrare, Maintain, that there is some Imperfect, and as to Salvation
Insufficient (though sufficient for Instruction as to several duties, and to
render the transgressors Unexcusable) knowledge of God, implanted in corrupt
nature, so that, man, even in his natural condition, coming to the use and
exercise of Reason, by a natural instinct, sense and force, comes to know,
that there is a God, that is Optimus and Maximus, Powerful, Good, Wise etc.
and Governs all the world; that we ought to Worshipe and Serve him; that we
ought to do Right to all; that Punishment abides evil doers; and several
things of this nature: and what our Divines say, they confirm by Scripture and
Reason: passages of Scripture are these Romans 1:19. because that which may be
kn^wn of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. This (...)
was not manifested unto some few of them, as to their chief Philosophers; but
in all, who were ungodly and unrighteous, and held the truth in unrighteou^ness
verse. 18. So verse. 21. it is said, that they knew God, even they, who did not
glorify him, as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations etc. So verse. 23. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God:
And therefore had some notions of this incorruptible and glorious majesty. And
verse. 25. they changed the truth of God into a lie. So verse. 32. They knew the
judgment of God, that they, which commit such things, are worthy of death: And
so could no^ be ignorant of God, of his Law, of the Equity thereof, of their
Obligation to obedience, and of God's Righteousness in Judging and Punishing
transgressors So Rom 2:14, 15. (of which we spoke above) The Gentiles, who had
not the written law, did by nature the things contained in the Law, and did
show the work of the law, written in their hearts, having their consciences
bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing, according as
they observed, or transgressed the said law. So that, having this law implanted
in their hearts, they could not be ignorant of God, whose law this is, and in
whose name, it calls for Obedience; nor of their own Obligation to obedience;
and their Consciences did preach forth the same, for it judges and accuses as
God's Deputy. See likewise Act. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 17:24, 25, 26, 27. As for
Reasons evinceing this; They adduce the Workings and Stirrings of the
Conscience, which natural men have, and which they cannot get shaken off, which
manifestly evince to them, That there is a Supreme Judge, God, in whose name,
Conscience gives sentence, and vexes and tormenteth evil doers night and day;
for as Menander said, conscience is a God to all mortals. And this took
vengeance on that monster of men* Caligula, and so haunteth evil doers, that
they always think they see their Punishment before their eyes; hence some
Great persons, without the reach of Inferiors, have been made to tremble and
quake, at thunder claps; yea and put violent hands in themselves. Philosophers,
Historians and Poets declare this at large: yea common sense and experience
confirms it, so that every rational person cannot but assent to the truth of
this, so soon as he hears it, and knows what is said, That God is. It
carries alongs with it such rays of light, that without any difficulty it is
seen and understood, and man's Mind and Judgment, of its own accord, by a
natural Impulse an Instinct, imbraceth it. The constant practice of all
Nations, setting up and maintaining some kind of Religion confirms this:
whence was this, that they thought Religion so necessary, that there could be
no Common wealth established without it, but from the innate Apprehensions of
God, and of their Obligation to serve and honor Him? How this is further
confirmed by the testimonies or Heathens themselves, and of the ancient
Fathers, see Hoornbeek against the Socinians lib. 1. cap. 7. Page 142. etc. and
D* Owen de Natura etc. Verae Theologiae Page 23, 24. etc.

29. There is another debate with the Socinians, to wit, with Socinus himself
and Ostorodiu^ (though others of them are of another mind) who deny, that any
knowledge of God can be acquired by considering the works of Creation and
Providence and so they deny that persons, strangers to the Gospel, living in
Nature, can attain to any knowledge of God, by the contemplation of nature.
But our divines manifest the contrary from Psalm. 19:1, 2. where the Psalmist
tells us, that the heavens declare the glory of God etc. That magnificent
workman shipe preaches forth the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Glory of the
great Maker, and that to all Nations, so as they cannot be ignorant thereof. So
from Romans 1:19, 20. we see, that God manifested to the Heathens, that which
might be known of him, the invisible things, his eternal Power and God head, by
the Creation of the world, and things that are made. The fond imagination of
Socinus dreaming, that the Gospel is here to be understood, is abundantly
confuted by D. Hoornbeek, in the forecited book Page 157. etc. The same is
proved also from the forecited places Act. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 17:24, 25, 26,
27. And likewise from Psalm. 8. throughout, and 104. throughout, and 145:4, 5,
6, 7. and 147:7, 8, 9 Esa 40:12. Job. 12:7, 8, 9, 10. and 38. and 39. and 40.
Chapters Psalm. 69:35. and 103:22. and 107. and 104. throughout. Other arguments
to this purpo^e may be seen, in the forecited book of D Hoornbeek Page 164-172.
which for brevities sake I pass by.

30. Our divines likewise, in dealing with such, as would assert that there are
some formal and direct speculative Atheists, are careful to assert, and
maintain these Innate and Fixed Notions of a Deity, and particularly the
learned D. Voetius de Atheismo Page 140 etc. where he asserts, that there is an
Innate Theology, Innate Notions, or a latent Natural Seed of Reason and
Religion, that is like the habit of principles, that in adults is brought
forth into act, without any previous demonstration, by the very perception of
the words and terms, without labor or study, or the force of arguments: and
that the most flagitious person that is, can not come to think, and be
persuaded directly, that there is not a God, though he could wish, there were
not a God, or that he himself had no sense or perception of a God; and that by
these reasons: for (1,) Then it would follow, that there were no (...), nothing
which might be known of God, imprinted in the heart of every man that comes
into the world, and that by nature, contrare to Romans 1:18, 19. and 2.14, 15.
that Conuate and Congenite Divinity can no more be separated from man, than his
rational Intellect. (2.) Then some men should be without the Law of Nature, and
a natural conscience, which cannot be. (3.) Then Men should be Inferior to
devils, in whom these sparks are not exstinct Iam. 2:19. (4.) This were against
the universal Experience and Consent of all Nations (5.) Then some should
really have some excuse, contrary to Romans 1:19, 20. (6.) This would much
confirm Atheists, and weaken our arguments against them (7.) It would also
gratify Socinians. By all which this our Quaker may, if he will open his eyes,
see how dangerous his opinion is, who deny^th these Inbred Innate and Imprinted
Notions of a Deity, and of his Nature and Attributes; and of his Relations to
the world, and to each in particular, as their Creator, Conservator, and
Benefactor; and of our Obligation to Love, Worshipe, Serve and Obey Him: Though
hereafter, we will find him, after his usual manner, again contradicting
himself, in this.

31. However this Quaker say and unsay the same thing, yet we stand here, and
maintain these Natural Anticipations, as Cicero calls them, and Inbred
Notions, of what is naturally goo^ an^ honest, manifested by the very Laws of
Nature an^ Nations, and the Natural Notions of the being of God, that being
true, which Cicero says 1. Tuscul. quaest. For there is no Nation so barbarous
as not to confess, there is a God, so that men would rather have and own a
false God, than none at all: so deeply does the sense of a Deity sinck into our
hearts. It is true, there was much difference among the Nations, concerning the
nature and number of the Gods, and concerning the way of Worship; yet all
agreed in this, that there was a God, and that he was to be Worshipped. Withal
let the Reader observe, that we are far from asserting, that all this
knowledge, improven to the highest pitch, that the primest of Natural
Philosophers, after all their study and diveing into Nature, could reach unto,
can prove saving to any soul: whatever discoveries may be thereby made of God's
Nature and Attributes, or of Moral Honesty, and such things, as belong to the
humane and bodily good of Mankind, within or without societies, and these
lesser or greater; Yet hereby no discoveries can be made of that, which flows
solely from the will and good plasure of God, and depends upon Immediate
Revelation; of which kind is the mystery, which was hid from generations and
ages, Col. 1:26: and kept secret since the world began, Romans 16:25. but now
is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the
commandment of the everlasting God, made known unto all Nations, for the
obedience of faith, Romans 1^:26. The mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1:9. Even the mystery of
Christ, Ephesians. 3:4. the mystery of the Gospel, by which Life and Immortality is
brought to light. But of this, we will have occasion to speak more hereafter,
when we come to see, what use this Quaker makes of these Natural Notions
common to Heathens.

CHAP. VI. Of Original sin.
1. THat Man is now fallen and lying into a State of Sin and Misery, until he
be delivered there from, cannot by any rational man be denied. The very Heathen
Philosophers have complained, as sensible of this; and vented many strange and
uncouth Notions thereanent* But as to the Rise and Cause of this Disorder,
Confusion and Misery, which was every where obvious, they remained blind: the
wisest of them, only were brought to say, that there was some hidden cause of
all these evils; but what that was, they knew not: The proud and vain glorious
Stoics thought, that all this sin and misery did proceed from every man's own
Free Will and Choice, immediately; and that there was no other cause. Hence they
thought, that every man came into the world free of any Vice or Inclination to
sin: errasti (says Seneca Epist. 94.) si existimas nobiscum vitianasci;
supervenerunt, ingesta sunt: so again ib. nulli nos vitio natura conciliat*
nos illa integros ac liberos genuit: And yet the same man must elsewhere (lib.
3. quaest. c. 30.) confess, that vice is learned without any teacher. Hence
also they thought, that man by his own Ability, Pains and Industry, might
recove^ all his losses; and that nothing more was requisite, but to live
according to nature, Senec. Epist. 41. Howbeit their very care and industry to
make laws, for bearing down of vice, and setting forward of virtue, was
sufficient to Redargue, and Confute their foolish Imagination, had they but
improven Natures light, as they might, or made use of right Reason, as they
pretended. However, we see Stoics and Quakers are nigh of kin.

2. Plato speaks more clearly concerning this Fallen and Degenerat State of
Man; but it is not improbable, as Mr Gal^ shows, in his Court of the Gentiles
part. 1. lib. 3. c. 5. that ^e had help from Scriptures, or Jewish Tradition,
when he speaks of the ^ron age; and particularly, when he says in his
Tim^e^^ Locrus fol. 103. That the cause of vitiosity is from our Parents and
first Principles* rather than from ourselves: and elsewhere. There is well nigh
in every one an ingenit^ evil and disease. And de legib. lib. 5. The greatest
evil of all is implanted in many men, and fixed in their souls: And this state
of misery he terms (Gorgias fol. 493.) a moral or spiritual death, and that
according to the opinion of the wise, saying, I have heard from the wise men,
that we are now dead, and that the body is but our sepulcher.

3. However, the generality of Philosophers were utter strangers to the Rise of
this contagion; and the hints that Plato gives, are but very dark: But when
Christianity came, and spread it self through the world, that, which the wise
Men of the world, were utterly ignorant of, became plain and notoure to every
one; for without the knowledge of this, there could be no right Improvement of
the Remedy offered in the Gospel; and therefore the knowledge of this was a
necessary part of Christianity. In causa duorum hominum, (said August. lib. de
Pecc. orig. c. 24.) quorum per unum venundati sumus sub peccato, per alterum
redimimur a peccatis -- proprie fides christian^ consistitpunc; So that the
doctrine of original sin, with the reality and manner of its ^raduction from
Adam, and downward by natural Generation, was unquestioned in the Christian
Church, until that unhappy enemy of the grace of God arose, who raised up his
heresy upon the ruins of the proud ^ottages of the Heathen Philosophers, I
mean, Pelagius; who, to strengthen himself, in his opposition and enmity to the
Grace of God in Christ Jesus, did take upon him the defense of Corrupt Nature,
and denied Original sin, saying lib. de Natura (apud August. lib. de Not. and
Great. c. 9.) that all sinned in Adam, not because of sin attracted by birth,
but because of Imitation. See more of this Vossij Histor* Pelag. lib. 2. par.
2. these. 1. And Iulianus the Pelagian (as we may see there also) said against
Augustine, that God could not impute the sin of another unto Infants, and that
no man is born with sin; And that the children cannot be guilty, until they
commit some thing by their own will. How Augustine set himself against this
Palagian cardinal error, his books declare: And how the whole Church did
appear against it, is notoure. Pelagius himself subdolously seemed to deny his
own opinions, in a Council in Pal^stine at Diopolis, condemning himself for
saying, That Adam was made mortal, and so should have died, whether he had
sinned or not. That Adams sin did only hurt himself, and not mankind, That
infants newborn are into the same condition, that Adam was in before the
fall. And again these and others of Pelagius errors were anathematized by the
Council of Milevum, in Numidia. And August. tells us lib. ^. de Bono persever.
cap. 2. that the Catholic Church defended against these Pelagians, among other
truths, this, That man is borne obnoxious to Adams sin, and bound by the bond of
damnation.

4. This same Pelagian error is maintained by the Socinians. Socin. Pral, c.
4. de Christ. Serve. part. 4. c. 6. Catech Racov. cap. 10. de Proph. Mun.
Christ. Small. de justif. disp. 4. Volkel, lib. 5. c. 18. Ostorod. Instit. c.
33. By Episcopius against Heidanus Page 116. and by the Remonst. Armin. Apol.
cap. 7. fol. 84. So is it maintained by the Anabaptists. And D. Voetius Select.
disp. part. 1. page 1079. tells us, that the Jews ordinarily this day deny
Original sin, citeing the words of one at Venice, saying that the sin of Adam
does not condemn souls, but only hurt the soul in so far as it brings in the
body of Adam whence it is, that it becomes more difficult to the Posterity of
Adam to do good, etc. Mr Stephens, in his defense of the doctrine of Original
sin, shows that one Mr Robert Everard, and D. Jeremiah Tailor, and some
Examiners of the late Assemblies Confession of faith, did appear against
Original sin: and in his preface he tells us that Anno 1654. Feb. 22. Some
Brethren of the Separation, did at a private dispute maintain, That all
Infants were-free of Original sin. To these Opposers of Original sin, This
Quaker, in the name of the rest, adjoyneth himself; and so deserteth the Truth,
maintained by the Orthodox Churches, and explained in their several
Confessions; and particularly by our Confess. of faith Chap. 6. 2.3, 4. By this
sin, they (i. e. our first Parents) fell from their Original righ^eousness, and
communion with God; and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled, in all the
faculties and parts of soul and body. They being the root of all Mankind, the
guilt of this sin was imputed, and the same death in sin, and corrupted nature
conveyed to all their posterity, descending from them by ordinary generation.
From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all
actual transgressions. And thereafter 6. Every sin, both Original and Actual,
being a transgression of the righteous Law of God, and contrary thereunto, does
in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to the
wrath of God, and curse of the Law, and so made subject to death, with all
miseries, spiritual, temporal and eternal. And more briefly in the larger and
sh^rter Catechismes, to this Question, Did all mankind fall in Adams first
transgressi^n; it is answered thus. The Covenant being made with Adam, as a
public person, not for himself only, but for his posterity, all mankind
descending from him, by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him,
in that first transgressi^n.

5. Concerning this sin, which is under various names and titles pointed forth
to us in Scripture (being called Sin by way of eminency Romans 6.12 and 7:8. the
Old Man Romans 6:6. a Law in the members Romans 7:23. the Body of sin Romans 6:6. a
Body of death Romans 7:24. In dwelling sin Rom 7:17, 20. Evil present Rom 7:21.
These are meaned of this Sin, as seated in, and derived unto the posteri^y: but
as committed first by Adam, Paul Romans 5* calls it Sin, Offense, Transgression
Diso^edience) and concerning its Propagation or Traduction unto the posterity,
many questions and doubts are moved, which we are not to meddle with: our
purpose not being to treat of this Subject; but only to vindicate the orthodox
doctrine, from the exceptions of this Quaker; and to discover his error in
this particular. For which cause, we need only take notice of two things
concerning this Original sin. First There is the Sin, disobedience, offense and
transgression of Adam, in eating of the forbidden fruit: This, though it was
the sin of our nature in Adam, yet is said to be imputed to our persons, when
we come to have a being by natural Generation, and de^cent from Adam. Secondly
There is that, which followed upon, and flowed from, that transgression of
Adam, according to the nature and tenor of the Covenant, wherein he stood, as
the head and representer of all mankind viz. The Privation or Want of that
Original righteousness, which our Nature possessed in Adam; and the
Depravation, Corruption, Deordination of the whole man, whereby he is Disabled
to all good, and wholly Inclined and disposed to evil, and all evil, and only
evil, continually till grace make a change. This cannot properly be said to be
imputed, but being a just punishment (as well as a sin) of the sin committed by
Adam, is justly inflicted, by the righteous God, and conveyed from Adam to all
his posterity, as a leprosy, and infectious disease, corrupting the whole man*
which therefore is seated and subjected in the man, so soon as he has a being
by natural generation, from his immediate parents; though both the guilt, and
this contagion, be not received immediately from our next parents, but
immediately from Adam, from whom we have our Nature, as our Personal being from
our immediate parents, who stand in no nearer relation to Adam, as the Head of
Nature, than we, but all, Father, Son and Nephew etc. stand in the same near
relation to him, in respect of Nature, as lines to the same center,

6. Having premised these things, let us now consider, what this Quaker has to
say against this: in his Fourth Thesis toward the end, he sets down his
Assertion, in few words; where, before we mentione his words, we cannot but
take notice of a piece of more than ordinary shamelesness, in this Man; for in
the words immediately before, he comes in with a triumphing parad, saying,
hence the errors of Socinians and Pelagians etc. are rejected, as if he would
make his Reader believe, that he did anathematize all the errors of Pelagians
and Socinians; when yet he licks up and hugs in his bosom, a special and
fundamental part of Pelagianisme and Socinianisme* adding (which are the words
we are now to take notice of) Yet nevertheless this seed is not imputed unto
infants, but when they join themselves to it actually, by sinning. We must
bear with this man's following the Quakers dialect; for he will speak but as
he pleases. But for understanding of what he means* we must call to mind
his foregoing words, which we took notice of, in the foregoing Chapter, and
examined, where he mentioned the Seed of God, of the touch whereof, he said,
all Adam's posterity was deprived. This cannot be the seed he here means He
mentione^ another Seed of Satan, to which Adam's posterity was subject; and
this Seed, he said, Satan did sow in the hearts of Men, etc. Now this must be
that malignant and depraved seed, whence all their Thoughts, Words and Actions
are evil, which he here means: And this Seed, he says, is not Imputed to
Infants: And we said lately, that this originated sin, or Corrup^ion of nature,
could not properly be said to be impu^ed; because it was properly inherent, as
a disease of nature: But the thing that he would say, is plainly enough
expressed in his Apology Page 54. But others (says he) go so far, in the
^ther extremity (to whom Augustine in his declineing age, moved with zeal
against the Pelagians, did first of all the Ancients open the way) as not only
to confess, that Men of themselves are unfit for good, and inclined to evil;
but also to affirm, that man, even while in his Mothers womb, and before he
commit any actual sin, is under the guilt and crime of sin, by which he
deserves eternal death. Whereby we see, that he freeth Infants from the guilt
of Adam's first sin: and again Page 55. he says, they impute nothing of
Adam's sin unto Men, until they make it their own, by such like acts of
disobedience. He is clear then for the Non-imputation of Adam's sin unto
Infants, and the Arguments, he adduceth, clear his judgment yet more.

7. Thus we have seen, what are his thoughts of the Imputation of Adam's guilt.
But what thinks he of the other particular, the Corruption of Nature? His
Thesis could mean nothing else by the Seed of the Serpent: and when he comes
to the explication of this part of the Thesis, in his Ap^logy Page 59,. 4. he
tells us, that this evil and corrupt seed is not imputed unto infants, until
they actually join themselves unto it by sin. And by this evil and corrupt
seed, he means that, which he had been speaking of, viz. the Corrupt nature
of Man. But Page 55. he would seem to c^ntradict this, when he says We cannot
conceive, how Man, who is naturally come of Adam, can have any good in his
nature pertaining to it, which he had not, from whom he is derived; if then we
may affirm, that he in his nature retained no will belonging to it, nor light,
capable of it self to manifest spiritual things; so nor his posterity. Whence
you might think, that as Adam, by his fall, lost Original righteousness, and
all aptitude, in Will, or Unde^standing, unto spiri^ual things, so ^lso his
Posterity, that came naturally of him, in this man's opinion; but his true
meaning is, that though Infants descend naturally from Adam, yet this Privation
of Righteousness, and Corruption of Will and Understanding, is not imputed to
Infants, nor do they partake thereof, until they sin actually; for in the end
of his discourse upon this head Page 62. he says, that this seed of sin, is
not imputed to any, till by sinning they actually join themselves to it: And,
this seed of sin is frequently in Scripture called death, and the body of
death: and that, this seed, and that which comes of it, is called the old man,
the old Adam. Thus then, in ^hort, his judgment is, that nothing of original
sin, neither Originans, nor Originatum, neither the Guilt of Adam's sin, nor
the Corruption of nature, is imputed to, or inherent in any man, till he commit
some actual transgression; and so sin comes not by Propagation, or Traduction,
but by Imitation, as said the Pelagians of old, and as the Socinians and
Anabaptists to day maintain. And the Arminians, with their Episcopius, deny,
that any thing that is truly sin is found in any of Adams Posterity, before
their own proper act.

8. Let us now see, what he says in defense of this Error; and let us first
take notice of what he said of Augustine, that much honored Instrument of the
Lord, against the errors, that Satan was soweing in the Church, in his time.
He would make us believe, that Augustine wrote of this subject, when under the
dottage of old age, while as it is manifest, to such as read his life, that
what he wrote against Pelagius was written, while he was in the prime of his
Vigor and Understanding; and his works themselves declare the same. But what
will this pedantick Quaker think of that singular and self-denying wo^k of that
worthy person, called his Retractations, wherein he reviewed all his former
writings, and retracted several things, asserted by him, in his younger, and
less studied years? belike this man will look upon that work, being written
after these, he now excepteth against, as containing nothing but greater
dottages; because, as he ^upposeth, the longer persons live, though not yet
comeing near the ordinary attendants of stouping or declineing old age, they
grow the greater fools; and consequently, that himself must now be a greater
fool (though I see little d^ff^rence) while become a Quaker, than he was in his
younger days, when he was a Papist. Next, the man is not ashamed to judge of
the very Though^s and Motives of that noble Instrument; yea he is so bold, as
to condemn him of acting upon corrupt motives; as if nothing had moved him to
write for O^iginal sin, but eagerness of Z^al against Pelagius; no inward
conviction of the truth not of the damnableness or danger of the Pelagian
he^esie in this; no conviction of his duty to appear for truth. Does this
Q^aker consider, that hereby he is audaciously arrogating to himself Gods
prerogative royal, of judging the secrets of the heart? Remembe^eth he that God
is a Jealous God, who will not give his glory to another? But what grounds can
he give of this his bold presumption? What evidence is there of that holy
Fathers writting against his own conscience? I ^ay no more of this, but leave
this Quaker to his judge, and take notice of a Third untruth, when he says,
that Augustine was the first, that appeared in this controversy against the
Pelagians: Had he but consulted Vossius, in his Historia Pelagianismi, a book
that sometime he cites, he should have found, that whole Councils appeared
against Pelagius himself, to speak nothing of Hierome, in this particular,
before that Augustine, wrote of it; particularly the first Synod at Carthage,
and that Synod in Palestine, where Pelagius himself was present; and hideing
his abominations, deceived the Fathers with fair words: and the Council of
Milevy, that dealt more roundly with that heresy, tells us in plain terms,
that the Truth, which they maintained, was owned by the whole Catholic Church
all the world over: and so it was indeed, and never once questioned, till that
unhappy instrument of Satan, to whom this Quaker adjoyneth himself, broached
his pernicious doctrine. It is true, the Pelagians called this Orthodox truth,
a forged device of Augustines, as this man does: but Augustine replied (as
Vossius tells us, Hist. Pelag lib. 2. part. 1. These. 6.) in these words. I did
not devise original sin, which the Ca^holick faith believed of old, but thou,
who denyest this, without doubt, art a new heretic: and lib. 1. contra.
Julian. Cap. 2. he cites no fewer then ten or twelve of the Fathers for him:
and lib. de Pecc. Merit. and Remis. he says, he never heard one that owned the
Scriptures speak otherwise. If this Quaker had perused Vossius, in the place
last cited, he would have seen, how the ^ame truth, which Augustine maintained,
was asserted by ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin, before Augustine's
days, such as Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagia, Justin Martyr, Tatianus, Ireneus
(whom Augustine himself cites) Origin, Methodius, Macarius Hierosol., Macarius
Aegyptius, Athanasius, Cyrillus, Nazianzenus, Chrysostom, and others: of the
latin Fathers he cites Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, Reticius, Olympius,
Hilarious, Ambrosius, (whom Augustine cites) Hilarious Diaconus, Hieronimus,
(whom he also cites.) And moreover, he should have found Page 179. that
Augustine did not assert this truth merely out of ze^l against the Pelagians (as
he ignorantly and boldly affirms) for he had asserted it, in h^s books de
Libero Arbitrio, written before Pelagianisme appeared: and how, in his 6. book
against Iulianus the Pelagian Cap. 4. he says expressly, that he was in that
judgment from the very beginning of his conversion, and that he had said
nothing through heat of disput, which was not the ancient doctrine of the whole
Church, Ego (says he) per unum hominem in mundum intrasse peccatum, and per
peccatum mortem, and ita in omnes homines pertransisse, in quo peccaverunt
omnes, ab initio conversionis meae sic tenui semper, ut teneo. Extant libri,
quos adhuc laicus re^entissima nea conversi^ne conscripst, et si nondum sicut
postea sacris literis eruditus, tamen nihil de hac re jam nunc sentiens, and
ubi disputandi ratio poposcerat, dicens, nisi quod antiquitus discit and docet
omnis Ecclesia. Let this Q^aker read these words, and if he be not above
measure effronted, let him blush at his shameless boldness. Let hi^ read also
August. lib 4 ad Boni^ac. c. 8. contra dua^ Pelagianorum E^istolas, and lib. 3.
de Pecc. Mer. and remiss. cap. 6. and 7. and lib. 1. adv. jul, resp. poster Page
5.8. and 125. and he will see further cause of repenting of his groundless
confidence and audacity; if his conscience be not feared.

9. We have had one great proof of this Quakers confident boldness; now the^e
follows another; for the only confirmation, which he adduceth, of his
He^esie, in his Thesis, and that, which he first speaks to in his Apology
Page 59. is brought from Ephesians. 2:1, 2, 3. a passage out of which the old
Fathers proved Or^ginal sin, against the Pelagians, as August. lib. 6. c. 12.
cont. jul. Scriptor Hypognost. lib. 2. Fulgent. and fourteen Bishops with him,
ad Petrum diaconum. c. 26. Theodoret on the place, also Primasius and Haimo,
commenting on the place, and others cited by Vossius, ubi Supra Page 150.
taking that by nature, etc. to import (as none with any show of reason can
otherwise think) all carnally borne, and partaking of the nature of Adam, and
so to be verified of all borne by the conjunction of man and woman: so that by
nature is as much as naturally: And Calvin on the place says, that it is a
notable passage against the Pelagians; for says he, what is naturally in
every one, is in them from their very original; and therefore if all be
children of wrath, or obnoxious to wrath, by nature, they are so from their
very original. But what way does this Man evade? The Apostle (says he)
assigns evil actions, not any thing, that is not yet reduced into act, for an
argument proveing them to be children of wrath. By which we see how backwardly
this man reads the Scriptures; for the Apostle, to commend the riches and
power of the grace of God, toward these. Ephesians, whom the Lord had
quickened, shows what persons they were, and all are, before grace take hold
of them: He says not that these Ephesians were children of wrath, because
walking according to the course of this world, etc. but that they had so
walked, and were, moreover, children of wrath by nature: and it is observable
(though this Man puts out his own eyes, that he may not see it) how the
Apostle changes the person from the second to the first, verse. 3. saying,
among whom also we all had our conversation, in times past, -- and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others: And thereby shows, that this
was not the condition of the Ephesians, and other Gentiles, only; but of the
Jews also, himself not excepted, because nature corrupted in Adam is one and
the same, common to all, both Jews and Gentiles; so that all, as soon as they
partake of Nature, come under this guilt, and are Children of wrath. He himself
immediately before told us, that the (...) mentioned, 1 Cor. 2. the Carnal man,
was not the Animal man, but the Rational man, so that this is true, not only of
the beastly man; who by his actual sins b^utifieth himself, and makes
himself a mere Animal, but even of the Rational man; who has a rational soul,
and so soon as he has a rational soul. The usual import of the word Nature and
Natural in Scripture confirms this, Romans 2:27. and 11:24. Gal. 2:15. and 4:8.
1 Cor. 15* 44, 46.

10. We need not then regaird what he adds, saying, that the Gospel
condemns nor threatens no man, but him, that has actually sinned; for in
some sense the Gospel condemns no man that hears it, but the final
unbeleever; but offers life and pardon to all, to whom it is preached, of all
their sins actual and original, upon condition of accepting of Christ offered
therein: And as for the New Test. we have seen enough in it already, and will
see more, to evince our point, and albeit this were not, we Judge that the Old
Test. could prove the point, as we shall also see. The Gospel moreover tells us,
that except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and
so, that as long as he has but the first birth, of the flesh, he is under the
wrath of God. Infants are not capable of threatenings, but they are capable of
death, which we proved, in the preceding Chapter, to be the punishment of sin.

11. Nor is that, which follows, much worth the noticeing, when he says God
will visit the iniquities of the fathers, upon their childeren, who abide in
sin, and so homologate and follow their fathers iniquities: For there is a vast
difference betwixt Adam's first sin, and the sins of other Parents: Adam's
first sin, or breach of the Covenant, was not a personal sin, as the sins of
other Parents are, and his after sins were; but the sin of the whole Nature,
whereof he was the Head and Representative; therefore all that partake of that
Nature participate of the guilt of Nature; when Infants have a being, they
partake of the nature of Adam, immediately: and though they have this nature by
means of generation of their immediate parents, yet they have not this nature
from them, but from Adam, as I said: And though they have their personality
from their immediate parents; yet they do not partake of their Fathers
personality, but have their own; humane personality not being a thing
propagable; and therefore they cannot in strick sense be guilty of their
parents personal sins: And yet, if it were of moment to debate the matter, we
might show from Scripture, how the holy Lord, who is Just and Righteous,
punishes even children for their Fathers faults: and though the children be
sometimes found guilty of actual sins, and so homologate their Fathers
transgression; yet it is not found always to be so. It was not so, I suppose,
with the infants of Careh, Dathan and Abiram, and the rest of that conspiracy,
nor with the Children of Achan, nor with the Infants of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and of the Old world; nor with these that were carried away captive by the
Assyrians and Babylonians, and several other instances; to speak nothing of the
Children of Cain, Ismael, Esau, and of the Jews, when cut off the Old and
Natural stock, Romans 11. And further the very expression of God, Command, 2. of
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the Children, shows, that
whatever sins they may have of their own; yet it is the fathers guilt, that
brings on that punishment; else it could not be a visiting of their fathers
iniquities; but only of their own.

12. It seems more considerable, that he says, our opinion is contrary both
to the mercy and justice of God, if he had given any proof; But he must follow
the footsteps of Socinians and Arminians, who Assert this also, but will not
much trouble us with their probations. He told us just now himself, That God
can and does visit the Iniquities of Fathers on their Children: and how can
this comport with his goodness and justice, seeing their fathers sins are not
properly their own, because they were personal; when he thinks it
Incongruous to God's Justice and Goodness to impute the sin of Nature, to all
that partake of that nature, though it be their own, by virtue of their
partaking of Nature? And strange it is, that men will be that bold, as to call
God to their bar, and accuse him, as Unrighteous, because he takes vengeance*
when upon a far unlike account, they will not impute iniquity unto Men* we see
that for crimes of ^ese Majesty, or the like, one man is not only punished; but
all his posterity after him, though not yet borne, are forfeited. When a person
representing others (which comes neare^ to our case) commits any fault, as
such a person representing, all whom ^e represents must bear the guilt, and
the inconvenience following there upon; and no man will account this unjust, or
iniquous. and yet behold the Righteous God cannot be acquit in that, which is
every way more justifiable, though He has absolute dominion over us, and may
dispose of us, as He will; which no man has over another. The truth is, this
dissatisfaction with God, in all his ways, is an argument, beyond all denial,
of our Rebellious, Natural, Inbred Corruption, and Wickedness of heart: what,
would they not have said, that it had been Goodness and Equity both in God, if
Adam had stood, to have made us all partakers of the Benefit thereof? and
shall it now be against both Goodness and Equity, if by reason of his Fall, we
be deprived thereof, and be Obnoxious to the evils threatened? what unequal
dealing is this? In fine, This is the old c^ant of the Palagians, as Vossius
shows us Hist. Pelag. Page 206. And what Augustine replied, he way see Ibid.
Page 20^.

13. He adds a rhapsody of nonsense telling his readers, our opinion flows
from our self l^ve, because we maintain an absolute decree of election for
ourselves and ours, and so care not to send all the rest to hell, and leave
them into inextricable difficulties. The reading of which might indee^ excite
any man of Understanding to commiserate this man's case, who is thus so
transported with pa^sion, as he knows not what he is saying: only we see,
that he mu^t spew out his gall against the Ortho^^x doctrine of Election,
before the fit time come; but when he comes to the right place of speaking to
this (as we shall see in the next Chapter) he dar not meddle with Election, but
contents himself with Reprobation: But what an evident demonstration of Corrupt
Self love and Pride against God, is in his Pelagian heresy, he is blind that
sees not. These Quakers, with other Pelagians, will not be beholden to the
Grace of God, but as little as may be; and therefore so frame their doctrine,
that themselves, and not the grace of God, may have all the praise of their
Salvation; as we will have occasion frequently to show, ere all be done. When
he has deluded himself and other Quakers, and made some others believe, that
they have no Original sin to mourn for, and thereby has brought them under
the dominion of Satan, more than before, has he done them any good service? Is
it good service to poor souls, to hoodwinke them, that they may post to the
pit, wit^ a lie in their right hand? Woe, I say, and thrice woe to such, as
drink-in this man's doctrine, and live and die accordingly.

14 Thereafter he is better pleased with Papists, who allow a limbus to the
Infants, dying without baptism, than with us: But we must be satis^ied, that
he look more warmly to his old friends, the Papists, among whom he drank-in, no
doubt, much of that prejudice, which now he is pleased to vo^ite fo^th, as
Quaker, rather than as a Papist: And as to this particular, whereupon now we
are, his opinion will accord better with the Papists, than with Ours for
Bellarm. will not have concupiscence to be owned as sin Formally, but only
Originally, and Effectively or Terminatively. and they say, that Adam was
created in puris naturalibus, which naturals remain whole and entire, as yet;
and will not this Quaker grant all this, as to Infants? Nay, he agrees well
with the Error of Albert-Pighius, who will have no sin propagated to us from
Adam, and says, that there is nothing in us, when newborn, but what is
good, and that death comes not upon Infants because of sin, but flows from
the constitution of the body: But whether he will say with him, that because of
Adam's sin, all his posterity are banished out of Heaven, though not obnoxious
to eternal Death, I know not. It may be he will allow them a limbus; or else
make them all sure of heaven* if he will grant a heaven to any. But how come
they thither, seeing they have nothing to do with Christ? all tha^ come to
heaven must be beholden to Christ the Redeemer, and hold their crown of Him:
But this Qvakers Religion, will teach old persons, let be Infants, to be little
beholden to Christ, as we shall hear.

15. He is so bold, as to tell us next, that our opinion is contrary to
Scripture: Because the Apostle says Romans 4:15 that where there is no Law,
there is no transgression, and 5:13. but sin is not imputed, when there is no
Law. And he, like a man, proves that Infants are under no Law. But is the man
such a stranger to the common practices among men, who forfeite the Children,
yea Infants, yea such as are not borne, with their Fathers, for great crimes;
and yet they know, that Infants are not obnoxious to their Laws, especially if
as yet unborne. But our plain answer is, That the Nature of Mankind was
under the Law, proposed unto Adam as the Head; and when he, as the Head and
Representative, broke that Law, the whole nature of Mankind became guilty; and
consequently, every Infant becomes guilty, when they partake of that guilty
nature. And that thus it was with all the posterity of Ad^m, the Apostle
expressly asserts, in the last place cited viz. Rom: 5:12, 13, 14. even
notwithstanding of this very O^jection, which he proleptically bringeth-in
there, as the cohes^on clears, and we shall evince afterward.

16. His last reason is from Ezechiel 18:20. which Socinians also urge, and it
receives a quick dispatch: for he himself must loose this doubt, if there b^
any, as well as we; for he said before, that God punishes the sins of the
Fathers on the children, when guilty of actual sins, whereby they homologate
their Fathers wickedness: And Ezechiel does plainly and frequently enough make
it out, that t^ese children were as wicked, as their fathers; if not more; and
so the Lord might, according to this Man's own concession, visit the
iniquities of their Fathers upon them: But the scope of the place being clearly
this, That so little ground had these people to alleige, that they were
innocent, and that God had no quarrel against them, but for their fathers
transgressions, so that their fathers did eat the sour ^rapes, and their teeth
were therefore set on edge, though they themselves did eat no sour grape,
being inn^c^nt* that on the contrary the Lord tells them by the Prophet, that
though he should not visit one iniquity of their Fathers upon them, as h^
might do in justice, and had one with others; but should follow a way with
them, more suitable to their own mind viz. only take notice of their own
guilt personal; yet they could not escape, because their own personal
iniquities were so many, and so great; This, I say, being the scope of the
place, it is obvious, how impertinent it is for him, here to alleidge it. And
beside, let him make of it what he will, it cannot reach us; for we have told
him, that this original sin is not the sin of another Person, as Adam's after
sins were, and the sins of other parents are; but it is the proper sin of all
Mankind, who are partakers of that Nature by ordinary generation, and so it is
the proper sin of every infant, so descended of Adam, as well as it was Adam's;
for it was not Adam's sin, as a Particular Person, but a sin committed by the
Head and Representative of ^umane Nature, to be propagated by ordinary
generation.

17. He comes. 5. etc. to consider what are our Arguments: and first he
mentions our saying, that Adam was a public person, and therefore all sinned
in him, when he sinned. He replyeth thus, That Adam was a public person, I
deny not; and that by hi^, the seed of sin was propagated to all men, which of
its own nature is defiled, and inclines men to sin; yet it will not thence
follow, that Infants, that do not join themselves thereunto, are guilty
thereof. Excepting what must be allowed to the Quakers, as their peculiar
dialect, this is not far different from what the Arminians say Apol. Cap. 7:
Fol. 84. They own not original sin, as a proper sin, which makes Adam's
posterity obnoxious to God's ha^red; nor as an evil, which comes upon them, as
a proper punishment, but as an evil, infirmity, vice, or by what other name it
can be called, which is propagated from Adam void of original righteousness;
whence all his posterity are d^stitute of the same righteousness, and
indisposed for life eternal etc. The Socinians speak also much after this man's
dialect* for Smalcius says, We confess, that we are now corrupt, and far from
that state of Innocence, which Adam had; but this is not to be ascribed to the
fall of Adam, but to men themselves, who of their own accord corrupt
themselves: and Ostorodus says, we willingly confess, that there is a great
proclivity to sin almost in all men, but that comes not from the first sin,
but from men's corrupting of themselves, which afterward they propagate to their
children. But to return to our Quaker. (1.) In what tolerable, or intelligible
sense, can he yield that Adam was a Public Person; if what he did as such, is
not to be accounted as done by all, whom he did represent? Did ever any hear of
one stated as a public Person, whose failings could have no e^fect, until the
persons represented did testify their approbation of it? By this reasoning, if
Adam had stood, and continued in innocence, infants could have had no benefit
thereby; for if the evil that Adam did, as a Public Person, could not hurt
infants, neither could his good have advantaged them; And then I would feign
know, wherein did consist his being a Public Person? or what he thinks a
Public Person is? (2.) whether is this Seed of sin it self, sin, or not? If it
be not sin, why calls he it afterward, the Original of all sin? why calls
he it, the body of death, and the Old Adam? The Scripture speaks of these as
Master sins. If it be sin, how can it be propagated to all Men, and to
Infants among others, and they not be denominated sinful thereby? Can the seed
of sin be transmitted to ^nfants, and they be the subjects ^hereof, and yet
they not be sinful? shall the seed of all poison and venom be transmitted from
the old serpents to the young, and shall the young thereby not be accounted
poysonful and venomous? (3.) He says, this seed inclines those, in whom it
is, unto sin: But this inclination to sin, is sin, and contrary to the Law of
God. Therefore Infants, in whom is this seed inclining to sin, must have sin
within them. (4.) This, which he says is propagate by Adam to all his
posterity, is either something good, or something evil: good it cannot be,
because of what is said: If it be evil, it must either be the evil of sin, or
the evil of punishment, or both: If it be the evil of sin, than sin is
propagated: If it be the evil of punishment, than it presupposes sin, for all
punishment that is just, is the punishment of sin; poenam istam esse (said
August. lib. 2. de lib. arb. c. 18.) quis dubitet, omnis autem poena, si justa
est, peccati poena est, and supplicium nominatut. (5.) But it may be, he will
say with the Arminians, that because it is a punishment, therefore it is not a
sin: But the Scripture calls it Sin, and the Body of sin. Indwelling sin, and
several other Epithets it gets, all showing that it is sin, and contrary to
the Law of God, and so deserving death, spiritual, temporal and eternal. Let
him consider Col. 2:11. and 3:11. Ephesians 4:22. Romans 6:6 and 7:17. not to mention
Romans 7:15. etc. And himself calls it, the Fountain and Spring of all actual
transgressions: And that concupiscence, which James shows to be the spring of
evil, Iam. 1:14. Paul calls sin Romans 7:7, 18. and is prohibited by the Law
saying, thou shall not covet. (6.) Iulianus the Pelagian spoke at this rate,
saying, that the Law in our members, which is repugnant to the Law of our
mind, dwells indeed in Man, and does instigat the resisting mind, so that
the conflict, though it be not damnable, because it does not perfect sin, yet
is miserable, because it has not peace. See August. lib. 1. adv. Iul. c. 68.
To which Augustine replied, That it was madness in the man to confess, that sin
was evil, and yet say that the concupiscence of sins was good; and yet more
intolerable to say, that it did provoke to evil, and yet was not evil. And else
where, in the same book Cap. 83. he charge Manicheisme upon Iulianus, upon
this account, that he granted misery did attend the posterity, and yet would
not grant sin was imputed. Tu ergo adjutorem Manichaei te non esse, ostende si
potes, qui miserias hominum, cum quibus eos nasoi, quoniam sine dubio sentit
genus humanum, no^ens tribuere peccato vitiatae naturae nostrae, facis, ut eas
ille permixtae nobis naturae tribuat altenae. (7.) This man would feign have
fastened this sin upon us, that we made God Unrighteous and Unjust; but here he
declares himself manifestly chargeable therewith; for evil and misery, he
grants, is propagated to all men, and the seed of sin, which inclines to
sin; and yet will not have sin the procureing cause propagated. Quia ergo (said
August. lib. 2. cont. Iul. oper. posth. Cap 110.) gravi jugo, a die exitus de
ventre matris, puniti sunt parvuli, agnosce judicem justum, and confitere
originale peccatum: punire enim nullius peccati meritum habentes, sicut etiam
ipse confiteris, non potest sine eversione justitiae: and in the following
Chapt. he has these words. In illo gravi jugo, quo etiam parvuli premuntur,
quomodo est Iustus Deus, si nullus nascitur reus? (8.) He talks of Infants
joining themselves unto this Seed of sin, before they become guilty. But when
are they in capacity to join themselves to this seed of sin? Is it when they
are in capacity to commit actual sin? But of this the question may be renewed;
when may we judge them in this capacity? shall we suppose that they are not in
case to sin actually, or to adjoyn themselves to this seed, until they come to
the full use of reason? then it will follow, that Idiots can sin none at all,
and that the Envy Selfishness Pettedness and the like, that appear very early
in Infants, shall be no sins; and yet Augustine was of another m^nde. And
there were some of the Old Pelagians, who to evite the force of arguments
against them, alleiged that the Infants committed actual sin, so soon as they
were born, and therefore came under death, as a punishment; against whom
August. wrote Sermon. 7. de Verb. Apost. saying what do you think to say, and
whose ears can hear it? did they sin themselves? where, I pray, did they
sin? when? and how did they sin? They know neither good nor evil: shall they
sin that are under no command? Prove that Infants are sinners: prove what is
their sin. Is it because they weep, that they sin? do they sin, because they
take pleasure, or repel trouble by motions, as dumb ^nimals? if these motions
be sin, they beco^e greater sinners in baptism, for there they resist most
vehemently -- But I say another thing, you think, they have sinned, otherwise
they had not died, but what say you of such as die in their Mothers womb? will
you say they have sinned also* you lie, or are deceived etc. Whether this man
will be of this judgment, or not, I know not; but it is like, he will not own
it, for he looks not upon death as a punishment of sin (9) I would gladly
have him explaining to me, what that is, to join themselves to this seed of
sin; and that so much the rather, because it is a piece of their proper
dialect, and is no where else to be found, so far as I know: Is this Seed lying
within them, as a stranger, or as a tempter alluring them to sin, in which they
have no concern, until they submit to the temptation, and consent? then why
may we not suppose, that such a seed of sin might have been in Adam before he
fell, from the very minute of his creation; seeing it could not have dammaged
him, if he had not actually consented? But why should this Seed of Sin be more
looked upon, as a stranger, so as by virtue thereof they, in whom it is, shall
not be accounted sinners, than the Seed of Grace, of which the Scripture
speaks, and by virtue of which they, in whom it is, are denominated gracious,
even when they are not actually exerceing grace? But it seems this man
looks upon the seed of sin, and the seed of grace, as two contrary
solicitors, attending man, with their contrary motions and solicitations; so
that man abides still in puris naturalibus, till he hearken to the one, or
other, and yield his consent. But then (10) I would ask, if it be in man's power
to withhold his consent from the urgent soliciting of this seed of sin? If this
be in his power, than he can live all his days, and never once sin; and act
his part, better than Adam did; And how comes it, seeing this is in every ones
power, that there was never one such found, borne of a woman, and begotten of a
man, that lived and died without sin? If it be not in man's power, than his soul
has got a sinful byasse, which Adam's soul had not, when first created; and
shall this sinful byas and inclination be no Deformity, no Sin, no
Imperfection, no Contrariety to the law, which prohibiteth all inclination to
sin? (11.) Let him explain to me, how the childs actual sin, can make him
really guilty of Adam's eating of the forbidden fruit, and to deserve hell fire
upon that account: does he think, that the first actual sin of the ch^lde,
makes him really guilty of all his fathers faults? does he think, that the
first actual sin of the child makes him as guilty, and as obnoxious to the
wrath of God, for all Adam's after sins, as for his first sin? This must be
cleared by Him, who puts no difference betwixt Adam and other parents, in
this matter; and it must be cleared so, as no stain of Injustice be put upon
our Maker: and with all, he will do well to consider that maine argument of the
Socinians and Arminians against us; for, though it does not reach us, yet I see
not, how he shall evite it: It is this, one act cannot make an habit, one act
of sin could not have that force, to corrupt the whole nature of Adam: for
here, this man's judgment is, that one act of sin, consenting to the seed of
sin, corrupts that man's whole nature, which was pure before: one act of sin
can deprive a man of Integrity, and of Original Righteousness, and bring on an
Inclination to all sin; but these evils are not sinful, in this man's account,
and therefore he is concerned to loose his friends Objection (12) The ground of
this man's mistake, (though he be not that ingenuous as to declare it) is, that
no guilt can be imputed to a person, who does not actually consent thereto, by
an act of his own personal Free Will; for this was the maine Objection of the
Pelagians, and of others: But then, what will he say of sins of Ignorance and
the like? How comes it that sins are divided into Voluntary and Involuntary?
What will he say to Psalm. 19:13 14.? But we have told him, that even Originals
in was fully voluntary in our nature, and in the Fountain, when first
committed; for it was not, as to us, a personal sin, and so the personal
consent of such* as are contaminated therewith, is not requisite thereto; but a
sin of our Nature: and to this no more consent or will is required, than the
will and consent of him, who was the head of this nature, whose will was not
extrinsick to us, we being in him, as members of that Body, whereof he was
Head. Beside that this Voluntariness ^elongeth not to the Essence and Form of
sin, Scripture defines sin otherwise, calling it a transgression of the Law 1
Ioh. 3:4. and who say otherwise, join with Bellar. de Amiss. Great. C. 1.
(13.) By this means, he must say, That infants are neither Righteous nor
Unrighteous, neither Holy nor Sinful, endued neither with Good, nor Evil
qualities; and consequently neither heirs of Hell, nor of Glory: and thus make
them mere Stocks or Brutes, and not Rational, Creatures.

18. Next, he speaks to our Argument from Romans 5:12. etc. and because this
place i^ the proper seat of this doctrine, which we hold, the Apostle treating
there of it professedly, and maintaining it, we shall premise some things to
clear our Argument, and then shall examine what he says. And (1.) It is
obvious to all, that look upon the place, that the Apostle, to the end he might
clear up the way, how believers partake of the benefits of Christ's death,
makes a comparison betwixt Adam and Christ; and so clears up, how it is that
all Mankind is become Corrupt, and that in and through the first Man Adam,
from whom this corruption is derived, not by Imitation, for they cannot imitate
it, who never heard of it, and yet even they partake of this corruption;
therefore by real Participation of the guilt, saying verse 12. as by one man
sin entered into the world etc. and that in him all sinned; and afterward, that
upon this sin death passed upon all men* and reigned even over them, that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgressions, that is, over infants,
that had not yet committed any actual sin, and that judgment was by one to
condemnation; so that the fruit of this sin was Condemnation, or Obnoxiousness
to condemnation; and that because by this one sin, the posterity were made
sinners (2.) By Death here is meaned every kind of death, Temporal and Eternal
and Spiritual; for it is a death that reigned over I^fants, and is called
Condemnation (3.) we find no person, old or young, that come of this first
Adam* by ordinary generation, here excepted* nay, Infants are expressly enough
included, verse 14. (4.) So that all the posterity of Adam, young and old, being
in Adam, their Natural and Federal Head, partake of his sin, having sinned in
him; and of the miseries or just punishment of that sin. All this is so clear
and manifest, both from the very words and expressions of the Apostle, and from
his scope, that who ever speak against this, must do violence to the text, and
weaken the Apostles argueings. This same passage did the ancients, Augustine,
and others, urge against the Pelagians, as is to be seen in Vossij histor.
Pelag. Page 146, 147. By this argument. That sin, which is so described to us
by the Apostle, that he says is brought death upon all men, that men sinned
by it, and were made sinners, even they who could not as yet actually sin, that
thereby all became guilty of death and of condemnation, that sin by imputation
is the sin of the whole nature, included in Adam, and rendereth the whole
nature obnoxious to death, and to condemnation. But the first sin of Adam is
decribed to us by the Apostle etc. Ergo That sin is the sin of nature; because
Adam did sustain the person of all, who potentially were in his Ioines, and by
virtue thereof all are liable to death, the punishment thereof. Vossius tells us
moreover, that the Ancients took much notice of Paul's calling Adam a Type, and
of the particle As; and did hence gather, that as the Obedience of Christ
belongs to all such, as are spiritually begotten, not by Imitation, but by
Imputation; so the Disobedience of Adam is conveyed, not by Imitation, but by
Imputation, unto all such as corporally come of him. They took notice also, as
he shows us, of the particle By, which did denote the Efficient cause; and of
that (...) in whom, which says that the posterity did sin in Adam, or if it be
rendered because, or in as much, or for which, it will show, what is the
Adequate cause of death, and that it has also place in Infants.

19. Thus we have seen the Argument of the orthodox Church, and its ground let
us next see, what he s^ith against it, As concerning the words of the Apostle
(says he) the reason of the condemnation, in whom all did sin, that is in that
seed, or by occasion of that seed: for no man is said to sin, but in his own
person. But I pray, By what warrant may he foist-in words at his own pleasure,
into the t^xt? Is there the least mention made of seed, in all the text? Is not
this intolerable boldness, to deal so with the Scrip^ures of Truth? But if
Infants be condemned, because they sinned in, or by occasion of, that seed,
then that seed was imputed to them: Yes he will say, but that was when they
began to sin in their own persons. No, say I, that cannot be, because the text
imports no such thing: yea, it says the contrary, viz. that death, which is
included in the condemnation, passed upon all men, and reigned, even over such,
as had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, that is, had not
as yet sinned actually. So that his reason is directly against the Apostle, and
we have further above discovered its untruth. He adds, (...) aggreeth with
(...). and so shows how Adam, by his sin, gave entry to sin into the world,
and so death by sin entered (...) i. e. by which viz. occasion, or in which
viz. death, all others did sin, i. e. actually in their persons, viz. who were
capable of sinning, of which number Infants are not, who are under no Law, as
was shown, and where no Law is there is no transgression, as the Apostle
says. This upon the matter, is the same that the old Pelagians said, as
Vossius shows us Hist. Pelag. Page 182.183. For they interpreted these words
(...) in whom all have sinned, by sinning after example or Imitation; and this
man, by sinning upon that Occasion, when they become capable: and the Socinians
with Episcopius homologate with the Pelagians, and have been abundantly
answered by the orthodox, who show that (...) is the same with (...) out of
Xenophon, Aristophanes, Demosthenes, and other Greek Authors. But For Answer
unto this Quaker I would say (1.) If (...) agree with (...), then the meaning
must be this, and so death passed upon all men, in which death all men sinned:
and what sense can this make out? May not (...) agree as well to Man? If not,
let him give us the least color of reason, either from the text, or context.
(2.) If Adam by his sin gave entry unto sin into the world, this must be meaned
of his first sin, for the Apostle speaks always of one sin, or of Offense,
in the singular number. and that Verse. 18. may be read, by one offense: And so
sin entered, not by Imitation, nor yet by Occasion! for his after sins might
have laid the way for Imitation, and have given Occasion as well, as the first;
Yea more; yea only; for while the first sin was committed, there were none to
imitate him: and if this had been the Apostles meaning, he had spoken of sins
in the plural number. (3) If this had been the Apostles meaning, he had not
named One man, and One man, as a Type, and a Type of him, that was to come; for
Eva's sin, and the Devils sin, might also have been an Occasion (4.) Hence it
will follow, tha^ believers are made Righteous, only upon Occasion of Christ's
Righteousness, and have nothing of it Imputed unto them; which, though this man
may account no way absurd; yet all Orthoeox Christians will be of another mind
(5) He speaks dubiously concerning the Import of these two words, and knows
not, whether their meaning be, by which occasion, or in which death: and we
have seen, that the meaning cannot be, by which Occasion; And it will further
appear from this, that Adams sin could be no Occasion to such, as never heard
of it, and our nearest Parents sins should be a greater Occasion; and further,
what could Paul's me^tioning an Occasion, contribute to his design? (6.) Paul
asserts, that death passed upon all men, and gives this as a ground thereof,
that all men had sinned: but this Man perverteth the Apostles words and
meaning, and maket^ the Apostle speak thus; death passed upon all men, because
all men will sin actually, when they become capable, (7.) The Apostle shows,
that death passed upon all men, and reigned, even over Infants; and so
supposes, that Infants had sinned, otherwise his argument verse 12. had been
of no value for the Instance of Infants, who are a great part of Mankind, had
destroyed the Apostles reasoning, if they bad not been included under, all men
(8.) He is angry at the Orthodox (as we s^all hear afterward) for restricting
the particle all, or the words all men; though it be according to the exigence
of the context: But here he excludes a great part of Mankind, contrary to the
whole scope and disigne of the Text; yea and to the Apostles express including
of Infants, and making use of their Case, as a confirmation of his point (9) If
he exclude Infants from this sin; he must exclude them also from all benefit
in Christ's Obedience: and then where is his Universal Redemption, and his
Universal Grace, whereof he speaks in the following Theses? (10) That Infants
are capable of sinning in their Head, is as clear as they are capable of dying
for the sin of the Head: and this the Apostle proves from their death, and
from death reigneing over them (11.) But says he, Infants are under no Law.
But the Apost^e says the contrare, viz. that there was both Sin and Law,
before Moses days; because death reigned even over Infants; and consequently,
that Infants were under sin, and therefore also under a Law, for, where there
is no law, there is no transgressi^n. But this was the Law given to Adam, as
head of Mankind, which Law all transgressed, when Adam transgressed; because
the whole Nature transgressed it, Adam representing all, as their Natural Root;
and by virtue of the Covenant, in which he stood. And thus we see, how this Man
perverteth and inverteth the Words, and Arguments, and Scope and All of the
Apostle, (12) If death was inflicted on old Persons, because of their actual
sins: wherefore was death inflicted upon Infants? Sure the Apostle makes no
distinction of Deaths; nor does he speak of distinct causes of Death; but only
mentions an universal Cause of an universal Effect, sin the cause, and death
the effect; and therefore, if the effect come upon infants, the cause must also
come upon them; or the Apostle argues very loosly; and he must impute cruelty
and injustice to his Maker (13.) This addition of his to the text, viz. who
were capable of sinning, is the same that Castalio made, saying these, to wit,
who in regaird of age, could have sinned: And in this, he was no less bold
with the text, then our Quaker is; for as we have seen, and the text is clear,
it is not all these only that die, but even such, as come not to that age; and
the Apostle always speaks of death, as the wages of sin: And when he here
says of Infants, that they sinned not after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, he clearly intimates, that they sinned some other way, viz. in
Adam, which also the 19. verse manifestly proves.

20. He takes notice Next, of our argument from Psalm. 51:5. behold I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: where the Psalmist,
is exaggerating his iniquity before the Lord, (as all true penitents will do)
traceth his sin to the very Spring, and Fountain, as to him, viz. that
Original Corruption, which he brought into the world with him; and showing,
that even while he was a forming and warming (as the word imports) in the
womb, this corruption did adhere to him; so that the very mass, out of which
he was framed, was corrupt: and what greater proof could we desire of the
origina^ed part of this Original Sin, than is here? The Ancient Fathers made
use of this passage for the same end, as Vossius shows us, Hist. Pelag. Page
144.145. And some Jews, such as Aben Ezra. and Sal. Iarchi. expound it of
innate Concupiscence. Now what says this Quaker to this? He cannot see our
Inf^rence: and why so? It seems to me (says he) that this iniquity and sin
is rath^r ascribed to the parents, than to the Infants; for he says, in sin
did my mother conceive me, not, my mother conceived me sinning, Ans. Is not
this a quick observation, and worthy of a Quaker? But the misery is, it quite
crosses David's design. This man must think, that it was a great argument of
David's Sorrow and Repentance, to lay iniquity upon his Parents, now, in all
appearance, dead; but I should look upon this, as no argument of a true
penitent heart. What could his upbraiding of his Father and Mother, after this
manner, contribute to the aggravating of his own sin? And that this is David's
design, I think this Quaker will not deny, if he but look upon the place, and
read over the Psalm, or the first part of it. Is not David about the confessing
of his own sin? Read the title of the Psalm and the preeceeding verse, and
see. Is he not seeking pardon and remission of his own sin? Or shall we
suppose, that he is praying for remission to the dead? all Confession of sin to
God is in reference to Remission; and if David speak here only of his Parents
sin, he is tacitly seeking Remission. If he speak of his Parents sin in
begetting and warming him, in the womb, it must be as including himself, at
least, as shareing thereof; and this will prove that David had sin upon him,
from his very conception. And by his answer, he would seem to make marriage
duties unlawful, contrare to 1 Cor. 7:2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 13:4. He adds another
answer, thus, Such an interpretation would contradict the Scriptures formerly
cited, while it makes infants to he hurt by their immediate parents sin: And
there is no mention here of Adam. Answ. I do not prove hence, that David was
guilty of his immediate Parents sins, but that original contagion does so cleave
to every ordinary Infant (unless we could suppose some singular thing in David,
without all ground) that in his very warming in his Mothers womb, he is
corrupted; and albeit David make no mention here of Adam, the thing which we
infer is manifest viz. the originated sin, or the corruption of nature, which
here David calls Sin. And if this Quaker think, that this came from another
Original, than from Adam, let him tell us, what it is, and not join in with the
Manichees, nor make God the Author and cause of sin, if he can.

21. Another of our Arguments is from that word of Paul's the wages of sin is
death. And seeing infants die, they must have sin, as a procuring cause. That
death was and is a Punishment of sin, we cleared above, and the Apostle
asserteth it here so manifestly, calling it the Wages, and due Desert, that it
must argue wonderful impudence, in any to question it: What says this Quaker?
He grants that death is a Consequence of the fall, but denies, that hence we
can necessarily infer, iniquity to be in all those, that are subject to
death. That is in plain terms (but the man's modesty dar not speak it out) to
say, the Apostle speaks not truth; who ever imagined, that wages were no more
but a Consequent of the workmans labor? If Death be the Wages and Reward and
just Punishment of sin, it can certanely be inflicted by the Righteous Judge of
the world upon none, but such as are guilty of sin. How often does the Apostle
speak of death as the just Desert and Punishment of sin? Romans 5:12* death
entered by sin, death passed on all, for all had sinned: suppose that (...)
should not signify in whom, (as it does Marc. 2: verse. 4. Luke 5* verse. 25.2
Cor. 5: verse. 4. (...) being several times put for (...) Heb. 9:10, 15, 1^. but
did only import the Cause, as Socinians would have it, it would sufficiently
confirm this, that death is inflicted because of sin: so verse. 15. through the
offense of one, many be dead, and this is called verse. 16. judgmnt to
condemnation: and verse: 17. by one man's offense: or by one offense, death
reigned. And verse. 21. sin reigned unto death. And then again Chap. 6:23. for
the wages of sin is death. So likewise 1 Cor. 15:21.22. by man came death --
for as in Adam all die. He adds as a reason of his denial, that it might
appear, he did not contradict the Apostle without reason. For (sath he) all the
outward creation suffered detriment and ruin, in some respect, by Adam's fall;
and yet the herbs and trees etc. are not therefore sinners. Ans. Is not this a
valide reason, wherefore to reject death as a punishment of sin? Nay, seeing the
vanity, under which the world groaneth, because of sin, is a punishment to all
Mankind, to Infants, as well as to Adult persons, it is hence manifest, that
all are guilty of sin, that is, all mankind, who are capable of sin, as trees
and herbs are not. But yet more, he adds to Confront the Apostle, and
says, death is no wages of sin to the saints, but is gain Phil. 1: v. 21.
Answ. Why is death called an enemy, and the last enemy 1 Cor. 15: v. 26. what
means that, that when corruptible has put on incorruption, and mortal has
put on immortality, death shall be swallowed up in victory? 1 Cor. 15: verse.
54. Because the Lord by grace through Jesus Christ has taken the sting of
death away, and made it a passage to glory, unto his own, shall we therefore
look upon it, in it self, as no punishment of sin, or as not coming into the
world because of sin? This will tend as much to prove, that Adult persons are
not sinful, as that Infants have no sin, and that a woman's pains in child
birth, or a Man's purchaseing his bread with the sweat of his face etc. are no
punishments of sin, Original or Actual, because all these Pains, Troubles,
Afflictions, etc. work together for good, to such as love God Romans 8: verse.
28. And so the Godly have no Punishments, Chastisements, Visitations,
Corrections or the like, for sin; though the Scripture say so in hundereds of
places. Here this Quaker joineth with Antinomians.

22. He mentions another argument, which, as he thinks, fools only make use
of, which is this. If Infants have no sin, they must all be saved. Well, what
replyeth he to this argument? We will rather (says he) admit this supposed
absurdity, as a Consequent of our doctrine, then say, that innumerable Infants
perish eternally, not for their own, but only for Adams fault. But though he
should not value such Absurdities, notwithstanding he therein run wilder, than
Papists, and join with Anabaptists and some Pelagians. Yet, me thinks, he
should take heed of contradicting his own doctrine; for afterward we will
hear of his pleading for Christ's dying for all Mankind: And sure, if that be
true, he must say, that he died also for Infants; and yet here he grants,
that they will be all saved without Christ; for they have no sin, they have no
need of a Savior to save them from their sins: But how can they be all
saved, seeing they have the Seed of sin ^n them; and the Spring of all actual
sins, and that seed of sin, which in Scripture is called death and the body
of death, the old man, and the old Adam, as he himself speaks Page 62? When
Paul speaks of the body of death Romans 7:24. he looks upon it, as that from
which Christ must deliver him. How will this Quaker reconcile these things? The
old man must be put off, or we cannot enter into glory: and if Infants have the
old man, how can they enter into glory? And beside, All in glory must sing the
song of the Redeemed, and praise him, that has redeemed them by his blood
Revel. 5:9, 10. How can Infants do this, who have never been washen from their
sins in the blood of the lamb, as never having had sin? And Page 55. he told
us, that none of Adam's posterity had any good in them, which he had not, from
whom they descended: Adam then being deprived of his Original Righteousness,
none of his Posterity, no not Infants, can lay claim to that Righteousness:
how, I pray, can Infants go to heaven, who want a righteousness? The heaven
then, which they go to, must be a heaven, wherein dwells no Righteousness:
and what can this be, but some new Limbus? But, to be more plain with him; It
is not enough for him to say, he may grant such a Consequence from his
doctrine; for we must have sure Scripture grounds, ere we believe, that all
Infants, even of Turks and Heathens, shall certanely go to heaven; The
Scripture gives more ground of hope of those that are within the Covenant, I
am sure, than of those, who are without: what thinks he of the Infants of
Sodom? See Iud. verse. 7. and of Coreh and his company: not to mention the
Infants of the old world: And why does the Scripture call the children of such,
as are without the church 1 Cor. 7:14. unclean? Nither can it advantage his
Charity, to found it upon an Untruth, and that his Charity in this matter is
founded upon an Untruth, we have seen already; and shall yet make it more
evident. He supposes, that when Infants perish because of Original sin, they
perish for no ^in of their own, but only for the sin of another, of Adam. But
how groundless this mistake is, we have seen; and we have told him, that
Original sin is the proper sin of humane Nature, and so is traduced from Adam,
to all that come of him by ordinary Generation, and so partake of humane nature.

23. In end he says, that Zuinglius did deny, and refute our Opinion: But all
his proof is from the Counc^l of Trent, which has not much credit with us,
Whatever it has with him: we have more Reason to take Bullingers testimony
Decad. 3. Sermon. 10 and cont. Anabapt. lib. 1. c. 12 and Gualters in Apol. pro
Zuinglio, and Operib. ejus; than either Bellarmins, or the Council of Trent.
Nay, Zuinglius declared himself abundantly for the truth, in the conference
with Luther at Marpurg, where these words are, we believe that Original sin is
in-born in every man, from Adam, and is hereditary, and is a sin condemning
all, and that unless Jesus Christ had help^d by his life and death, we had all,
because of it, perished eternally, neither had we been partakers of happiness
and of the Kingdom of God. And if he read his confession of faith to the
Emperor Charles V at the diet at Ausburgh A. D. 1539. he will find the ground
of his mistake, for he will there see, in what sense he said original sin, was
not sin, viz. that the original sin in Infants was not their Actual sin: and
who can say that they did actually eat the apple; yet he said, that upon the
account of that, they were born Enemies to God. His words are these, as
Bullinger, where now cited, relates them. I confess Original sin to be borne
with all, who are begotten of man and woman: I know we are by nature the
children of wrath: Nor do I stick at this disease being called, after Paul's
manner, sin; yea it is such a sin, as who ever are born in it, are Enemies to
God, and unto this they are drawn by their birth, not by committing of
wickedness, but in so far, as the first father did commit it etc.

23. We have now seen all that he has said against the Orthodox doctrine about
original sin, and have vindicated such arguments, as he was pleased to take any
notice of: I shall now, ere I leave this matter, propose some more Arguments to
his Consideration. And first I shall mention that, which himself adduced, when
he was speaking of man's lapsed state, of which we heard in the ^oregoing
chapter, to wit Genesis 6:5. and 8:21. from which places the old fathers argued
against Pelagianisme. See Vossij Hist. Pelag. Page 142, 143. and indeed there
is no small force in these passages; for, though the Lord be there speaking of
the guilt and sin of Adult persons; yet he is aggravating the same, by traceing
it up to the very Root and Rise of all; saying that it was so with them from
their Infancy or Child hood, (so (...) signifies) yea from every state of
their child hood, for the word is in the plural number ((...) a pueritiis ejus)
and thus the Lord uses to aggravat the sin of people Ezech. 16:4. etc. Mat.
15:19. Ephesians. 2, 3. Does not such corrupt Fruit evidence an evil Tree with a
bitter root of wickedness? Mat. 7:16? And seeing such are the fruits and acts of
men, so soon as they begin to act and bud, who can say, that the Root is
good, and not corrupt and rotten, Chrysostoms words on Genesis 6. Hom. 22. are
remarkab^e. Neque aetas intempestiva, and alioquin inexperta, malorum expers
erat, sed statim, and ab incunabulis omnes malum hoc praelium certabant,
contendentes, ut malis operibus alter alterum superarent. And it is certane,
that the Infants of the old world perished in the ^^ood, and the Lord says
here, that it was for sin and wickedness, that this judgment came on; if then
these Infants did not perish for their immediate parents sins, as this Quaker
affirms, they must have perished for their own; and having no actual sins
of their own, they must have perished for their original sin; so that they
also must be comprehended with the rest, in the forecited places, and the evil
there spoken of must be as well habitual, as actual; as well innate as
acquired. It is observable, that Genesis 8:21. the same words are used of the new
World, that remained, to wit of Noah and his posterity.

25. We might add other Scriptures to the same purpose, such as Psalm. 14:1, 2,
and 53:1, 2, 3. Romans 3:9, 10, 23. and 11:32. Gal. 3:22. These universals, in
such a matter as this is, admit of no Exceptions; yea all Exceptions are
expressly excluded in the very text* and the scope, at which the Apostle drives
Romans 3. admits of no exception, for all have need of Christ, and of God's
mercy in Him: otherwise the Apostles argument should be Inconsequent,
concluding an Universal from a Particular: and because we dar not think thus,
therefore we must say, that all are included; and because all are not to be
charged with actual sins, original sin must be here included.

26. Origin, Cyrillus, Chrysostom, Augustine. and others of the ancients adduced
to this purpose, these words of Job Chap. 14:4. hence August. de Praedest. and
Great. Cap. 3. says Vitiatae radicis macula it a propaginis traduce per
generationum sarmenta dissusa est, ut nec infans quidem unius diei, a culpa sit
primae praevaricationis alienus, nisi per indebitam Salvatoris gratiam fuerit
liberatus: quodsi nec quidem sine peccato est, qui proprium habere non potuit,
conficitur ut illud traxerit alienum, de quo Apostolus dixit, per unum h^minem,
etc. Now that the import of this passage may be the more noticed, we would
consider, that when Job says, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one. He is speaking of an inward unclea^ness, an uncleanness of soul, by
which we are exposed to the judgment of God, of which he speaks verse. 3. and
which he points forth, as inevitable, and as such, as no man can prevent or
remedy: So is he also speaking of an uncleanne^s, which is Universal, and
therefore habitual: for wh^t is only actual is not universal, Infants being
free therefrom; and of an uncleanness, which is Permanent and Adherent; as also
of that which is Traduced, or Propagated from Father to son; and is hereditary:
all which do manifestly make it appear, that he is speaking of Original sin, in
respect of which every one is Unclean, and comes into the world unclean, and
can be no otherwise than unclean. To which words of Job we may add the words
of Eliphaz. Job 15:14. what is man, that he should be clean? and he which is
borne of a woman, that he should be righteous? Origens words Hom. 11. super
Levit. are considerable: Omnis qui ingreditur hunc mundum, in quadam
contaminatione effici dicitur, Propter quod and Scriptura dicit, Nemo mundus a
sorde, nec si unius diei suerit vitaejus (he means this place of Job, as it
is rendered by the 70.) Hoc ipso ergo, qui in vulva matris est positus, and qui
materiam corporis ab ^rigine paterni seminis sumit, in patre and in matre
contaminatus dici potest. Aut nescis, quia cum quadragint a dierum factus
fuerit puer masculus, offertur ad altar, ut ibi purificetur, tanquam qui
pollutus fuerit in ipsa conceptione vel pat^rni seminis, vel uters materni:
Omnis ergo homo in patre and in matre pollutus est.

27. An argument for our purpose may be taken also from these words, Genesis 5:3.
And Adam -- begat a son in his own likeness, after his image, compared with
verse. 1. -- In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he
him: As that Image of God, in which Adam was first created, did denote that
Original Righteousness and Integrity, which Adam had; so this likeness and
image of Adam, in which Seth was begotten, must denote Adams corrupted state,
whereof Seth in his very generation was a partaker; and this was Original sin,
which was thus traduced and propagated from Adam to his posterity. It is true,
Cain and Abel both were so also generated, but it is thus expressly said of
Seth, because Abel had no posterity, and Cains posterity was excluded from the
Covenant, and Seths was to continue within it; and therefore it is said of him,
that even his pos^erity might know their true Original, and be humble,
notwithstanding of this privilege. As also to show, that no length of time
betwixt the fall, and this generation of Seth, had worn this corruption away.

28. The ancient Fathers made use of, to this end, these words of Christ to
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3:5.6. -- Except a man be born of watter and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit: And indeed the proof hence
deduced is irrefragable; for Christ, the Amen and faithful witness, asserts
with a double asseveration, verily, verily, that a man, and every man (no
exception made of Infants) must be regenerated, before he can enter into the
Kingdom of God; so that his first generation, if there be no change, will
advantage him nothing: And the Reason is added, for by the first generation he
has a fleshly birth, which is corrupt, and not meet for the Kingdom of God,
what is borne of the flesh is flesh, and nothing else: and this probation
annexed shows, that Christ mean^th here even original, natural and habitual
corruption, and this must principally be put from its dominion, by
Regeneration. Beside that the words flesh and Spirit, opposed thus to other, in
Scripture, denote Natural Corruption, and Grace reforming Romans 7:14. and 8:1,
3. etc. Gal. 6: verse. 16:17. 1 Pet. 2: verse. 2.

29. The ancients to this purpose made use of Genesis 17:14. and said, the
Covenant, which these infants did violate, who were not circumcised by their
Fathers neglect or carelessness, was the Covenant made with Adam See Vossii
Hist. Pelag. Page 143. I shall not urge this place upon that account: only,
seeing the Text says expressly, that the uncircumcised man child was to be cut
off, because he had broken God's Covenant, we see, that they were under a
Covenant and Law, and in some sense capable of breaking it, and therefore
obnoxious to off cuting: Now, we heard above this Quaker say, that Infants were
under no Law, and therefore obnoxious to no punishment: Let him chew his cood
upon this place, and contradict Moses, as he did lately contradict Paul. They
cited also Esai. 48:8. Yea, thou heardest not; Yea, thou knew not, yea from
that time, that thine ear was not opened: for I know that thou would deal
very treacherously, and was called a transgressour from the womb. So did they
make use of Romans 7:23. I see another Law in my members: and verse. 18. for I
know, that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. As also 1 Cor.
15:22. of which we have already spoken a little. And indeed this last place
clearly points forth that we are made alive by Christ, through his merits
conveyed to us by spiritual Regeneration, as we died in Adam, through his Sin
and Corruption, made ours by Natural Generation.

30. Augustine (as the forecited Author shows us Page 151.152) made much use
of the Pains, Torments and Death, which Infants were subject to, as an
irrefragable argument for Original sin: and we have spoken something of it
already. The Fathers also made use of the initial Sacraments, as a confirmation
of this. But I know, this Quaker will regaird little any thing, we can say of
Baptism, for among the rest of his Errors, he must not want this of
Antibaptisme, of which in due place. Pelagius was much puzzled with this
perplexing Argument, and was forced to grant that Baptism to them, was not for
remission of sins; and so made it useless. And as for Infants, that died before
baptism, he knew not what became of them; quo non eant, scio; quo eant,
nescio: and he devised a mid place betwixt hell and heaven for them. And so
made two kinds of felicities, one with in the Kingdom of God, and one without
the Kingdom of God: And he said, that by baptism, they were brought out of the
middle state, into the highest. See for this the forecited Author Page 192.193.
Thus that man and his followers were miserably Entangled: But this Quaker, I
confess, takes a more consequential course, (but whether more consonant to
Truth and Piety, I doubt) when he denies all Baptism. But not to speak of
Baptism now, for which there is a proper place reserved, what will he say of
Circumcision? He cannot deny but that was an ordinance appointed of God; And
that it had reference to the body of sin, Paul tells us Col. 21 11. And
therefore it could not but presuppose sin, in the Infants. It is called by Paul
Rom 4:11. a seal of the righteousness of faith: and did point out the
circumciseing of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30:6.

31. The Fathers made much of this Argument. That by this opinion of the
Pelagians, Infants were wholly excluded from any Interest in the Death and
Merits of Christ. And how this man will evite this, I know not; nor know I,
how he will accord with himself, in asserting Universal Redemption, as we shall
hear. But to put a close to this. I would only ask this question of this
Quaker: If Infants be borne pure and free of sin, as he says; How can this be
the peculiar prerogative of Christ, to be conceived and borne without sin? And
in reference to this, what necessity was there, that he should have been
conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of a Virgin? Let him answer this, at
his own leisure.

CHAP. VII. Of Reprobation.
1. WE have heard this Man's Opinion concerning the State and condition of
fallen Man: Now his Fifth and Sixth Thesis come under consideration, wherein he
gives us an Account of the way and means, how man is delivered from this
miserable and depraved Condition: But howbeit his Theses were sufficiently
large: Yet he touches more things in his Vindication or Apology, than he gave
any hint of there: but this is no material ground of challenge, for the more
full he be, in explaining his mind, and the more the particulars be, which he
speaks to, we come to know his mind the better. Though he made no mention of
Reprobation, in his Thesis; yet he gives us, in his Apology, Page 64. etc. a
large discourse thereof; and begins his Explication of these two Theses,
with this matter; And though he spares no pains or paper, in venting his
displeasure against that, which he supposes to be the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, concerning Reprobation; yet I cannot find, that he gives us any
account of his own positive Judgment, of this matter; be like he thought it
his Wisdom to forbear that, lest he should entangle himself into inextricable
difficulties; and howbeit his Admirers may commend him for this; yet I think
his dealing the less ingenuous and upright.

2. It is observed, that since the truth of God, in the matter, of
Predestination, began first to be questioned by Pelagius, and his Followers, in
the days of Augustine, there has hardly been any Seck or Heresy, wherewith
the Church of Christ has been infested, that has not stumbled upon this
stumbling stone, and encouraged themselves thereby, to continue fixed in their
Errors; and not only to blaspheme, in their pride and audacity, the Truth of
God; when it had favored more of Christian sobriety to have been silent; and
when they could not, with their corrupt and blinded Understandings,
satisfyingly comprehend this truth, to have stooped unto God's Revelation of
the mystery, rather than to have condemned it, and that in such a petulant and
intolerable manner, as if God and his mysteries must stand at the bar of man's
Judgment, and either conform to the Apprehensions and Conceptions of M^ns
corrupted, blinded and biased Reason, or be rejected as reprobat matter, not
to be tolerated in Church, or Common wealth: so that this corrupted and blind
judge must umpire, without the remedy of an appellation, most peremptorily and
absolutely, in the sublime acts of the Great and Absolute Sovereign, Jehovah.
And therefore, it should seem less strange to us, that these Quakers, whose
chief Excellency, or rather most desperate Madness and Wickedness, lies in
this, that they rake together all the filthiest brats of other Heretics, and
therewith patch up a compleet Cento, for their Religion; and whose chief and
only rule, for faith and practice, is the dim Light of Nature, a light within
every man; which, as to the great mysteries of God, revealed in the Gospel, is
pure hellish darkness, have, following the Light of their corrupt guide, not
only Rejected, but also blasphemously Inveighed against the Truth of God, in
this particular: For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild
asses colt.

3. It is likewise observable, that the proud rebellious adversaries of the
Grace and Soveraignity of God, that they may, in their popular discourses and
scriblings, make the truth, concerning the Absolute and Free Grace of God, more
odious and hateful to such, as usually measure the Incomprehensible God and
all his ways, by their own carnal Imaginations, and not by the sure
Revelations of his will in his Word: It is, I say, usual with such, to pitch
upon this point of Reprobation, knowing that carnal self lovers are so blinded
with prejudice at any truth, that crosses their humors; and at this
especially, which, at first look, seems so repugnant unto the fixed delusory
apprehensions of God, which they satisfy themselves with all: And though the
Judicious know, and they themselves cannot be igno^ant, that what is spoken
against Reprobation, reflecteth upon Election, these being as twines, which
must die and live together: for take away Reprobation and Election is forthwith
destroyed, and grant once Election, and Reprobation is thereby established
without further disput, by such as know what they say, and whereof they
affirm; yet such is the Unmanly, let be Unchristian, yea and Unscholastick
Disingenuity of these, more enraged than rationally acted, Adversaries, that
they pass over the matter of Election, as finding it possibly too hot for
their fingers, and exaggerat the matter of Reprobation, with all the strength
of their Invention, and keenness of their Rhetoric; whereby, though they
contribute to the fixing of themselves in an Error (it may be, contrare to the
very suggestions of their more Impartial, and a little more Enlightened
Consciences) and to the raising of scruples and prejudices, in the minds of
the simple; yet they but render themselves more ridiculous unto the more
understanding and exercised persons, in these debates. And this is the whole of
the present work and design of this Quaker; for not one word has he of
Election, less or more; but runeth out in such a rage, against Reprobation,
that he runeth himself blind; so that he cannot see the most palpable and
obvious Contradictions and Inconsistencies, which himself utters; and no man,
of common sense. would ever speak; and so does his irrational rage drive him,
that to all intelligent beholders, he proclameth his own brutish Ignorance:
Take one instance which will demonstrate both: Toward the very beginning of
his discourse Page 64. and 65. he presents us, as speaking thus. That God did
predestinate to everlasting damnation the most part of men, without any respect
had to their sin, only to demonstrate the glory of his justice. Now, let all
men of common sense judge, (to speak nothing of the learned, who cannot but
look with indignation upon this ridiculously and perversely false
Representation of our meaning) if ever man in his wits did, or any, who
understood what they said, could say, That God did predestinate any man to
damnation, for the glory of his justice, without any consideration had of the
man's sin? who sees not what a palpable contradiction is here? can God have the
glory of Justice, any other way, than in punishing of sin? And can God intend
to gloryfy his Justice, and not intend to punish sin? and can he Intend to
punish sin, or men for sin, and not consider their sin?

4. This Man inveigheth much against absolute Reprobation, as he calls it,
but what sort of Reprobation he maintains, he never once acquanteth us; why,
and upon what design, himself best knows. Nor does he speak any thing of
Election, that we might thereby understand his meaning better, concerning
Reprobation. It is true Page 59. (as we took notice in the proceeding chapter)
he gave us a little taste of his humore, in giving a wipe, without any true
ground or real occasion, at absolute Election: and so we see, that he is
equally enraged against Absolute Election, and Absolute Reprobation: But what
his own true Opinion is, he leaves us to conjecture. Some might think, that
he were of one opinion, as to this, with Pelagians, Jesuits and Arminians, who
plead for Conditional decrees of Election, and Reprobation, and for
satisfaction to their own searching mind, poreing into this matter. The
Jesuits do coin a Scientia Media, through which, as a necessary pair of
spectacles, they consider God looking a far, to read what is written on the
will of man, placed in such and such circumstances, that accordingly he may
order his unchangeable decrees, either to Elect this man, who as he foreseeth,
through this prospect of Scientia Media, will be a good and holy man, and
continue in faith and obedience to the end; or to Reprobate that other man,
who, as he espyeth by the same medium, will prove a son of belial, and will not
believe, nor repent. If this man be of this opinion, I am far mistaken, if his
Election and Reprobation, howbeit he call it Conditional, be not more fatally
Inevitable, than what we say; for by this opinion, the Lord Jehovah himself is
under a Fatal necessity of Electing those that are elected, and Reprobating
such as are reprobated; for according as he sees the determination of man's
will, (which he cannot alter, matters standing in the supposed circumstances,)
so must He pass his decrees. But others may think, that he rather imbraceth
the Opinion of the Socinians (and Arminians homologate, as to several
particulars, with them) who deny all Eternal Decrees, whether of Election or
Reprobation, as concerning particular individual persons, granting only one
general decree, which they call Predestination, whereby the Lord decreed to
Elect in time all, that should be found in time to be Believers and Obedient,
and Consequently to Reprobate and reject the rest: and this Election and
Reprobation only in time they ascribe unto God; because they rob Him of all
Fore knowledge: and they make it twofold, one Infirm, Conditional and
Imperfect, which may alter, as men change their manners, so that a Reprobat to
day may be an Elect tomorrow, and an Elect today a Reprobat the next day;
another Firm, Fixed, Peremptory and Absolute, when the man has finished his
course, and ended his days: In all which the Arminians agree with them, except
in this one thing, that the Arminians grant an eternal Election of Individual
Persons upon the foresight of Faith, and Obedience, which the other grant not.
Hence the greatest of my difficulty will flow from my ignorance of this man's
true principles, for I shall not know how to vindicate truth, which we
maintain, so as to convince him, and stop his mouth, upon his own grounds; as
otherwise, I should not doubt, through the assistance of his Spirit and Grace
whose cause I plead, to do.

5. As concerning this matter, enough has been said by the Orthodox against
Pelagians, Semipelagians, Socinians, and Arminians; and this man confesses he
has brought no new accusation against our doctrine, but he has only scraped
together as it would seem what he could get out of the dunghill of Jesuits and
Arminians: And therefore we might dismiss him, by referring him to such as have
written copiously, and very far above his reach, on this subject; even to some
papists, such as the Dominicans, Alvares, Estius, Rispolis, Cajetanus, Sixtus
Senensis, and to others more ancient, such as Aegidius Romanus, Gregorius
Ariminensi^, and others cited by Estius: yet lest he should boast, we shall
view what he has said, without enlarging much upon the matter. And as to our
doctrine, the Reader may satisfy himself with what is Succinctly, Solidly,
Plainly and Satisfying set down in our Confession of faith cap. 3. sect. 3, 4.
and 7. and for cl^aring of the whole matter, he may read the whole Chapter, and
there find much in little bounds. For facilitating of our way in the f^llowing
examination, I shall only propose a few things here in the entry, for
understanding the truth, about Reprobation, without speaking to Election
particularly.

6. And (1.) No man can den^ a Reprobation, but he must withal deny an
Election, for Election, being a choosing of some, cannot but import a leaving
of others: And, I suppose, this Quaker will grant this, unless he be of the
opinion of Hilberus, who asserted, that all men were Elected in Christ to
salvation, whether they believed or not; not only contrary to the native and
proper import of the word Election, which is a choosing and separating of some
from others; but to plain Scripture Mat. 20:16. and 24:24. Ioh. 10:26. 1 Cor.
1:26. Romans 9:22, 23. and many other places. (2.) Seeing then the Scripture is so
full in proving of Election, we must assert that there is also a Reprobation:
and beside, the Scripture points forth the matter to us, Mal. 1:2. Romans
9:13.22. 1 Pet. 2:8. Iud ver. 4. Mat. 25:41. Prove. 16:4. (3.) When we speak of
Reprobation, (as opposed to Election, and as comprehended under Predestination,
as a species, or part) we consider either the Act of God Reprobating; or the
thing Decreed and Purposed by the act of Reprobation; that is, as the Schoolmen
speak, vel quoad reprobantis actum, vel quoad reprobationis terminum. When we
consider the Act of God reprobating, nothing in man can be any moving cause
thereof; nay it is impossible it should be so; for, as Aquinas 1. p. quae^t.
23. art. 5. says, there can be no cause of the will of God, a touching the act
of willing; and the reason is manifest, because that act of God's will (as all
immanent acts of God are) is Eternal: now man, and all that is in man, is of
yesterday, and could not cause an eternal act; yea that act of God's will is
God himself (unless we blasphemously say with Socinians, that the decrees of
God are accidents in God, and so destroy his Simplicity;) and therefore we can
no more imagine a cause in man of the act of Reprobation, than we can imagine,
that there is something in man, which is a cause of God himself; which were
absurd blasphemy. The will of God has no cause, no antecedent, is dependant
on, limited and determined by nothing in man, or any creature. The learned
Doct. Twisse has this argument further. If (says he) sin be the cause of
Reprobation, it is either so of its own Nature, or by the Ordinance of God:
Not the first, as all will confess. Not the second, for then God should
ordain, that upon the foresight of sin, he would ordain man to damnation, and
thus an Eternal Ordination should be the object of an Eternal Ordination. When
we consider Reprobation in respect of its terminus, or thing willed and
purposed by that act of God, we divide it into two parts, or say there are two
maine things intended and purposed; (presupposing, and not mentioning, what is
common both to Election and Reprobation, as Creation, etc.) as first the denial
of Grace, whereby they may be recovered from their state of sin: the second is
the denial of Glory, or adjudging them to eternal death. This last Being for
sin, and a just execution of a righteous sentence, is not, neither can it be,
without consideration of sin, as the meritorious procuring cause: So that, to
speak properly, God does not damn whom he will, Damnation not being an act of
mere pleasure, but an act of justice, conform to an established Law: But the
other, the denying or not giving of grace, is an act of Absolute Freedom and
Good Pleasure; for He has mercy on whom He will, and whom He will he hardens
Romans 9:15, 18. And as God's granting of grace is an absolute act of his good
pleasure, and free, and not for any merit or goodness in man; as all, except
Pelagians, will confess; (yea Pelagius himself confessed it, at the Synod in
Palestine;) so the Lord's denying of this grace and mercy must be Absolute and
not Conditional* an act of the Lords free will and good pleasure, for the
praise of his glory, there being no fixed Law constitute by God, according to
which, he bestows Grace, or bestows it not; and there being no Reason
imaginable, why the Lord should conf^rre grace upon Jacob, and not upon Esau,
upon Moses and not upon Pharaoh, upon Peter and not upon Judas, beside the good
pleasure of God: as the Lord did set his love upon the people of Israel,
because he loved them Deuteronomy. 7:6 7. so no cause can be given, why he would not
have mercy on Pharaoh, on Esau, on Judas, as well as on others, beside his God
will and Pleasure, who hardens whom He will.

7. We must therefore in this matter carefully distinguish, betwixt Gods
Decree, and the Things decreed: Things decreed may have their Causes, and one
may depend upon another, as on the meritorious procuring cause, but the Decree
of God is absolute, having no dependence upon any thing without, being the
Absolute and Free act of his Will. God may and does Decree, that this shall be
because of that; and yet because of this he cannot be said to Will that. So
when the Lord decrees to damn some persons because of their sins, though sin
be the procureing meritorious cause of damnation; yet it is not the procuring
meritorious cause of Gods willing or decreeing to damn: Therefore though it be
true, that God decrees to save none, but such as Believe and continue in Faith
and Obedience to the end; and to damn none but such as are Sinners and
Continue in sin to the end; yet we must not say, that as Faith and Obedience in
adult persons do preceed salvation, as some way disposeing causes thereunto,
and as Final Perseverance in sin preceedeth damnation, as the meritorious cause
thereof; so the Foresight of Faith, Obedience and Final Perseverance in both
preceed election, or the decree of God, as disposeing causes or prerequisites
thereunto; and the Foresight of Final Perseverance in sin preceed Reprobation,
or the decree of God, as the meritorious cause thereof: for as the purpose of
God, according to Election, is not of works, but of him that calls Romans 9:11.
so the purpose of God according to Reprobation, cannot be of works; for the
children being not yet born, neither having done good or evil, it was said, the
Elder shall serve the Younger Romans 9.11, 12. As the potter has power over the
clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor Romans 9:21. so the Lord willing to show his wrath. and to make his
power known, may endure with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted
to Destruction; and he may make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory Romans 9: verse. 22.23.

8. As the Scripture holds forth Reprobation, as we heard, and may be further
gathered, even as to the name, from Ier. 6:30. Heb. 6:8. 2 Timothy 3:8. So it
holds it forth to us, sometimes in Negative terms, sometimes in Positive
terms. Hence some speak of a Negative Reprobation, called Preterition, or
passing by; which is a real Positive act in God, and not purely Negative, as
some suppose; and of a Positive and Affirmative Reprobation, which they call
Praedamnation. By the Negative Reprobation, they understand a Positive eternal
act of God, whereby, according to the counsel of his own will, he passed by
such as he did not Elect, and resolved not to give them saving grace, whereby
they might be delivered from sin: as when Christ says Math. 7:23. I never knew
you: and Mat. 11:25, 26. I thank thee, o Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise -- Even so father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight: And when mention is made of some, in the Revel. Chap:
13:^* and 20:15. whose names were not written in the Book of Life. And when
Christ says Ioh. 10:26. Ye are not of my sheep. By the Positive or
Affirmative Reprobation, they understand the Lord's positive Resolution,
according to the unsear^hable counsel of his own will, whereby he ordains
such, as he has passed by, to dishonor and wrath for their sin. Hence such
are said to be hated Romans 9:13. to be vessels of wrath fitted for destruction
Romans 9:21, 22. to be appointed unto stumbling at the word, etc. 1 Pet. 2:8. and
ordained to condemnation Iud. verse. 4. to which also belongs the Lord's just
and judicial smiteing with blindeness, giving up to a Reproba^ mind, and to
their own hearts lusts, hardening their hearts, and the like Rom 1:24, 26, 28.
and 9:18. and 11:7. Psalm. 81:12.

9. Now, as touching that question, that this Quaker is most busied with, viz.
Whether Reprobation be absolute, and without all respect had to sin, or not;
the Reader may see, by what is said, what is to be Answered thereunto. The
Quaker, loving darkness, speaks undistinctly, either because Ignorant of the
true question; or out of a malicious Design, to render the Truth, and us for
maintaining it, odious; or both: But we shall endeavoure, in a few words, to
clear the matter. If we consider the act of Reprobation, as in God of whose will
it is an Immanent and Eternal act, there can be no more cause of it, in man, or
a^y creature, than of any other of his decrees, which are all one act, and so
one with Himself: Yet this act of Reprobating, that is, of appointing and
designing such or such individual persons, to the condemnation of hell for
their sins; can not be said to be, as to its terminus, without all respect to
sin: because, by it persons are appointed to punishment for their sins; and
whatever God does in time execute, He r^solved and determined from eternity to
do the same, in the self same manner. As for the Execution of this decree in
time, in reference to the denying or not giving of Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, or Grace to recover out of the state of sin; we say this act is
Absolute: as h^s giving of Grace, and Regeneration, upon the one hand is free,
as the Scripture richly declares; so the withho^ding of this Mercy and Grace
is an act of his Absolute Soveraignity and Free Will, who has mercy on whom he
will, and hardens whom he will: As concerning the act of inflicting spiritual
Judgments, the forerunners of hell, this being an act of Justice, is not
without respect to sin, its procureing cause, as the Scriptures lately cited
evidence. The same we say of adjudging impenitent, and wicked persons, unto
hell; for this is an act of justice, conform to the established Law of God.

10. Though what we have said might suffice upon our part, for clearing of the
truth, which we own: yet because this Quaker rages so much against Absolute
Reprobation, by which he does not mean, the actual Execution of this act, but
the Act it self, we shall in short propose somethings, which will serve for
confirmation of what we say. And (1.) There is a certane Analogy betwixt the
decree of Election, and the decree of Reprobation; so that the one gives light
unto the other; and the one cannot be conceived without the other; for where
there is an Election of some, there must be a Rejection of others, and so the
one is opposite to the other: from this it is manifest that if Election be Free
and Absolute, so must Reprobation be: for the objects of both are supposed to
be in the same state and condition, equally represented in the mind of God, or
considered, when the act passes upon them; none deserving Election more than
the rest, nor none more meriting Reprobation than the rest. If then Election be
not upon the account of any good foreseen, in the elected, more than in others,
whether it be Faith, or Obedience, or Perseverance in both to the end, or
whatever else can be imagined; as all our Divines have shown, writing against
the Arminians; it is manifest and clear, that Reprobation cannot be upon the
account of the Foresight of the contrary. Sin foreseen or considered in Judas,
could not be a cause moving God to Reprobat him, more than Peter, because the
same was to be seen in Peter. And the Apostle clears and confirms this,
when he says Romans 9:11, 12, 13. for the children being not yet born, neither
having done any good or evil -- it was said unto her, the Elder shall serve the
Younger; as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Which
place (2.) Does further confirm, what we say; for here is a Discrimination
made, one Loved, and the other Hated; that is, one Elected and the other
Reprobated and Rejected, without any consideration had of good in the one, or
evil in the other, as a procureing cause of these Acts of Gods will; for both
Jacob and Esau are considered as being in a like condition, yet unborn, neither
having done either good or evil. (3.) The supreme wheel, moving all, is here
said to be, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls; and so there can be no procureing cause of
this, in man. The one was preferred to the other, that the purpose of God,
according to Election, might stand; and the other consequently was made to
serve, that the purpose of God, according to Reprobation, might stand. (4.)
Works, both good and evil, are here in plain terms excluded, not of works;
and there are no works excepted: if Election be without foreseen works,
Reprobation must be so also; or we must say, that the Apostle argues not
acuratly; and that the Spirit of the Lord, in the Apostle, does not clear and
explain the point. (5) Verse. 17. from the instance of Pharaoh, of whom it is
said, that God even for this same purpose had raised him up, that He might show
his power in him, etc. the Apostle infers, that God hardneth whom he will,
as well, as from the instance of Jacob, preferred to his brother Esau, he
inferred verse. 15. and 18. that he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
that he has compassion on whom he will have compassion. (6.) The Objection,
which the Apostle preoccupieth, Verse. 19. Thou will say then, why does he yet
find fault; for who has resisted his will? does manifestly speak the truth, we
plead for: for if Election and Reprobation were not absolute, but upon foreseen
works, what place could this Objection have? Why would the Apostle speak to an
Objection, that were no way pertinent? Should there be any color for any to
propose this scruple, if the good and evil works of man, were the ground of
all? (7.) The Apostles reply confirms this, when he says. Nay, but O man,
who art thou, that reply, or dispurest, or it may be rendered responsats, or
carps against God? Importing, that it is high arrogance, in the Clay creature,
to call Jehovah to its bar, and to judge, or quarrel with, or disput against
God, whatever he do, according to the purpose of his own will: But what ground
were there for such a Pride-laying, Man-humbling, Mouth-stopping,
Creature-abaseing, and felling answer, if all this matter did run upon the
wheels of justice, or had its rise from man, or were ultimatly founded upon
something in him? (8.) The answer added puts the matter beyond all further
dispute: Shall the thing formed say to him, that formed it, why have thou made
me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? Where we see, That man is but
as a lump of clay in the hands of the great Potter; and as there is nothing in
one part of the same lump of clay, calling, inviteing, or moving the potter to
make of it a vessel unto honor, or a vessel unto dishonor; so is there
nothing in man, calling or moving God to make this man a vessel unto honor,
and the other a vessel unto dishonor. And next we see, That all is ultimatly
resolved into the pleasure of God, as the Potters mere pleasure is the cause of
the discrimination of vessels, which he frames out of the same lump (9.) These
words verse. 22. further confirm our point; for, says the Apostle, what if
God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much
long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted, or made up for destruction? etc.
Importing that it is so, and that man has nothing, to say against it. So we
see, That as the vessels of mercy are before prepared unto glory, so the vessels
of wrath are before prepared and made up for destruction: and that, as the first
is done, that He might make known the riches of his glory, so the last is done,
that He might show his wrath, and make his power known. (10.) Christ Mat.
11:25, 26. refers the Lords hiding of the Gospel-manifestations of life and
salvation, from some, unto the good pleasure of God! and if this part of the
execution of the decree of Reprobation be referred unto this Absolute
Soveraignity and good Pleasure of God, as its first and only spring, much more
must the Decree it self be reduced to this only Fountain. (11.) The like we may
observe from 1 Pet. 2.8. and from Iud verse. 4. and from Revel 13:8 and 17:8.
(12.) We are told, that the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be
saved Act. 2:47. and that, as many as were ordained to eternal life believed,
Act. 13:48. where we see, that the appointing some to be saved, and ordaining
them to eternal life, is given as the prime ground and cause of their being
added to the Church, and Believing: whence it follows, that the Lord did not
add others to the Church, nor give them grace to Believe, because he had not
ordained and appointed them to life: the consequence of the Negation is as
manifest, as the consequence of the Affirmation; and is clearly intimated, when
the other is expressed.

11. Thus the Scripture confirms our point: we shall add a few reasons, as
(1.) No temporal thing, such as is man's sin, can be the cause of that, which is
Eternal, as is God's act of Reprobation. If it be said, that the foresight of
what is temporal may be the cause of an Eternal Decree: I answer. This cannot
be; for how is it imaginable, That God's prescience should be the meritorious
cause of his Decree? can one eternal Act of God be the meritorious cause (and
of such a cause we speak here) of another? All the Eternal Acts of God are one,
and they are the same with himself: how absurd is it then, to imagine one to be
the meritorious cause of another? or the same act as terminated on one object,
to be the meritorious cause of it self, as terminated upon another object? If
it be said, that sin fore^een can be the cause of an Eternal act of
Reprobation. Answ. But sin can not be foreseen as a thing that shall exist,
without a previous decree concerning its existence, by the permission of God;
and so sin must first be permitted, or decreed to be by permission, before any
man can be Reprobated because of sin, by this Objection: and then, when we
suppose sin to be permitted by a decree, I ask, for what end is this decreed
permission? God decrees nothing but for a certane end; and what is His End in
this? is it that he may thereby be moved to Reprobat? Then his intention of
Reprobation is first, for the intention of the End is before the Intention of
the midss: and how absurd, and a theological is that to say, that God intended
an End, and then he Intended Means to move him to intend that end? Again, by
this Assertion, the decree of Permitting sin, should be before the decree of
Damning for sin; and so we must imagine the same order in the decrees, that we
see in the things decreed; while as, how various soever the things decreed be,
the decrees themselves are all one pure act in God, who is actus purissimus and
simplicissimus; and therefore sin foreseen can no more be the meritorious cause
of the decree of Reprobating for sin, than of the decree of Permitting sin: And
if we should imagine an order betwixt these two decrees, of Permitting of sin,
and of Reprobating for sin, it must be such an order, as is betwixt the
Intention of the End, and of the Means; and so the intention of Permitting
sin, being first, should be of the End, which is always first in intention; and
the intention of Reprobation, being the last of these two, should be of the
Means: and so, we should be damned for sin, that we might be Permitted to sin:
and that, which is first in Intention, as the End, being last in Execution, and
that, which is a Means being first, it would follow, that man should be first
damned, and then permitted to sin: which is obviously false and absurd (2.) if
sin be the meritorious cause of Reprobation, then it is so either by necessity
of Nature, or by the free Constitution of God. But neither can be said; as we
saw above (^.) The decrees of God can have no more a cause, than himself can
have: all the Acts of God's will, being his Will, and his Will being Himself,
we cannot imagine a cause in man of an act of his will, more than of himself
(4) we should reason proportionably of the decree of Election, as we do of the
decree of Reprobation (as we saw the Apostle doing) and so, if sin foreseen be
the cause of Reprobation, grace foreseen must be the cause of Election: against
the whole Scripture, and the Apostles express argueing Romans 9. (5.) That
procureing cause of Reprobation God could have prevented, or taken out of the
way, if he had pleased; else we must imagine a stoical fate, overpowering God
himself. If he might have taken it out of the way, and did not; can any reason
hereof be given beside his own good pleasure, or his design to manifest the
glory of his justice, in the just damnation of such? and does not this refer
the decree of damning for sin ultimatly unto His good pleasure? (6.) what are
those sins, which are the procuring cause of Reprobation? This man will not
say, that Original sin is the cause; for he denies it; as we saw, in the
proceeding Chapter. And what can that actual sin be? and whatever be supposed,
it must be such, as could be foreseen in no other, otherwise the foresight
thereof could not be the proper meritorious or moving cause, why this man was
Reprobated more then that man; for what is to be foreseen in an Elect, cannot
be the meritorious cause, why the other is Reprobated. Again whatever actual
sin that be, final Unbeleef, or what you will, it must either be such as God
could have prevented or taken out of the way, if he had pleased; or not: if the
first be said, then it is manifest, that the decree of Reprobation can not
ultimatly be resolved into sin, as a procuring cause, but into the good
pleasure of God; who would not take that sin out of the way, nor prevent its
being. If this Last be said, then God was under a fatal necessity of decreeing
and doing all, which he decreed and did; and could not hinder sin, nor not
create that man, nor alter any one circumstance, which did occasion that sin:
and thus God himself shall be bound by the fetters of a fatal Necessity; yea
and all this fatal Necessity shall have its rise from Man; which were most
absurd and blasphemous, (7.) if actual sins be the consequent of Reprobation,
and a mean whereby the execution thereof is brought about, they cannot be the
procureing cause thereof. This is manifest. But the former is true. Therefore
etc. That the former is true, is manifest from these words of Peter 1. Pet.
2:8. Where we see that these stumblers at the stumbling ston, and disobedient
persons, were appointed, or ordained thereunto. So Ioh. 10:26: But ye believe
not, because ye are not of my sheep: where it is manifest, that their not
believing, was a clear consequent of their not being of his sheep. So Romans
11:7..- Israel has not obtained-but the Election, and the rest were hardened.
So that it was from Election that such obtained, as did obtain, and from
Non-election that the rest obtained not, but were hardened (8) Sin is the
moving cause of Actual damnation* If sin also be the moving cause of the decree
of Reprobation; It would follow, that because of sin God decreed to damn
because of sin: which is strange language.

12. Having premised these things, we come now to take notice of what he says:
we observed before one great mistake, in his set^ing down of our judgment, as
if God had determined the demonstration of his Justice, without any resp^ct had
to sin: Then he says, (as further declaring our opinion,) that God, for
perfecting of this, did appoint, that these miserable souls should necessarily
sin. Resp. Here are more mistakes; for first we say not, that Reprobation
imposes any necessity of sinning. The decree to punish for sin, does not
impose a necessity on the sinner to sin; nor yet the decree of denying grace,
whereby they might be delivered from their sin: for that is only a decree of
not delivering them out of that state, wherein they have brought themselves
under a necessity of sinning; and so imposes no necessity. Next as to God's
Decreeing or willing that sin should exist, through his permission (which does
not properly belong to this question) neither does that impose any absolute
necessity, or take away the liberty of Man's Will, or the Contingency of events,
as to second causes. And it would seem this man knows no difference, betwixt
an Absolute necessity, and that necessity, which is merely Hypothetical, But
thirdly, there is another mistake here: for he would make his Reader believe,
that we said, that all the necessity of sinning did flow from Reprobation; as
if no necessity of sinning arose from their sinful state, wherein they are by
the transgression of Adam: Beside, that we might observe, how, in this
sentence, he contradicts what he said in the former. He adds, That by his
Justice, he might according to right, rebuke and afflict. This would import,
that according to our judgment, Sin is permitted, or decreed to exist, the Lord
permitting it, as a Mean, to the punishment, as the End; as if God intended
punishment, as an end; and therefore suffered sin, as a mean^s; while as we
look upon both the permission of sin, and the punishment thereof, as one
means, for the setting forth of the glory of divine Justice. He proceeds, as
declareing our opinion: And therefore, that God not only suffers these to be
obnoxi^us to this misery, in many parts of the World, by withdrawing the
preaching of the Gospel, and the knowledge of Christ. And here we find some
more mistakes; for we say, that all men by nature are into this state of sin
and misery, whether they hear the Gospel, or not: and so their obnoxiousness
unto that misery depends not upon their want of preaching, and of the
knowledge of Christ, though this be a necessary mean of delivering them out of
it. Again his Therefore points out another mistake; for as we speak not
thus, so far less do we infer this from what he mentioned before. Thirdly,
his word subtrahendo, withdrawing, points forth a third mistake; for it will
import, that we say, that the Gospel is once preached to every person, yea and
to every Reprobate; for how else can it be said to be withdrawn. And here is a
further mistake, when he adds, and the knowledge of Christ, for hereby the
Reader might think, that we thought every Reprobat had the knowledge of Christ,
but because he was a Reprobat, it was taken away from him, and withdrawn, He
says moreover, that we say, God, even in these places, where the Gospel is
preached, and salvation is offered by Christ, withdraws from them all grace,
whereby it was possible for them to apprehend the Gospel. Here are also several
mistakes; for his subtraxisse imports, that God has given to every one, who
hears the Gospe^, grace, whereby they may embrace the Gospel; and then
withdraws it from the Reprobate, because they are such: where reads he such
language in the writtings of our Divines? Next we say not (as he here
insinuates that we do) that the grace, which God withholdeth from the
Reprobat, is that by which faith in the Gospel is merely possible; but that
rather, without which they cannot believe, and with which they cannot but
believe: that is, He withholdeth the grace of Faith, which being his own free
gift Ephesians. 2:8. He bestows it upon w^om He will: for he blesses with all
spiritual blessings such, as he has chosen before the foundation of the world,
that they might be ^oly Ephesians. 1:3, 4. He proceeds in relating our opinion
thus; Because by his own secret will, he did decree, that they should not obey,
and that the Gospel should never be effectual to their salvation, and that
without all respect had to their sin. Where there ar^ other mistakes to be
observed, for first He no where reads, that Reprobation is a decreeing that
men should not obey. Next when our divines speak of God's decrees about sin,
they never utter their mind so bluntly, as to say, Go^ decreed that they
should not obey; but they use to speak thus, God willed, or decreed, that sin
should exist he himself permitting it: or, as some, He willed the permission of
sin. Thirdly here is another mistake: for as to some, who hear the Gospel, and
harden their hearts beyond ordinary, God in Justice gives them up to the power
of unbeleef, as a Spiritual judicial stroke, or takes away the Gospel from
them, and so Non-churcheth them, and this as a punishment: and as the Lord does
so in time, so he decreed to do so; therefore there was some consideration of
sin here, though sin was no procureing, or meritorious cause of the decree. At
length he concludes, and says further (as if it were our opinion,) that God
decreed to send the Gospel to such, as obey it not, only to accumulate their
damnation. Where is another mistake, as if this were God's End, or his only
End; and as if we affirmed it were so; while as both are most false, and
contradicted by what himself said a little before.

13. Thus have we briefly considered his Representation of our Judgment, and
have found no fewer than twelve abuses and untruths: so that, no honest man can
acknowledge this for a true declaration of the truth, which we maintain: and
with this open discovery of his unfaire dealing, might we rest satisfied,
because it is to be presumed, his following reasons can conclude only against
this, he has laid forth, as our judgment; but as we have shown, This is not
our judgment, and therefore his Ar^uments cannot touch us, if they lavel at
nothing, but at this man of straw, which he has made for himself to shoot at:
Yet, lest he boast, as if we were not able to look his Reasons in the face, we
shall view them.

14. He tells us, that this is a new opinion, there being no mention made
thereof, in the first four hundred years after Christ: and that Augustine laid
the first foundation thereof, in his later writings, out of zeal against the
Pelagians, and sowed some sayings, which some have unhappily laid h^ld on, to
strengthen this error, whereby they contradict both truth, and the sayings of
Augustine, and others. Answ (1.) This man would make us b^leeve, that he had
read all the Fathers, that wrote before Augustine: but we know, whence he has
this, for it is, the old saying of Arminians. But (2.) This can conclude
nothing against the Truth, which we have seen asserted in the Scriptures of
truth. The Fathers, in those ages, had not to do with such heretics, as were
the Pelagians. Before that Enemy of the grace of God arose, the Church was in
p^ace, as to these controversies, and the Fathers had no occ^sion to debate
such questions, as Pelagius afterward gave occasion unto. Can he evince, that
all the Fathers before Augustine, were of a contrary opinion to what we
maintain? (3.) Is this man's Religion grounded upon the authority of men? And
will he believe no more, than what the Fathers said in the first four ages?
Let him follow what cisterns he pleases, we will satisfy ourselves with the
Word, as the ground of our Faith; and we do look upon the Apostles, as more
ancient than these Fathers, and take their positive assertions as of more
authority, than the silence of these (4.) Yet Augustine de dono persever, Cap.
11. cites Ambrose, Nazianzen, and Cyprian, as concurring with him, in the
ground of his doctrine of Predestination. (5.) as concerning Augustine, what
this man groundlesly suggesteth of him, is the same he said before, when
speaking of Original sin; and there we answered it. (6.) what contradictions
are in our doctrine either unto Truth, or unto Augustine, he has not shown:
Augustine, it is true, in his later days, and after more mature deliberation,
and consideration of the matter, occasioned by his disputs with the Pelagians,
did retract somethings said by himself, in his younger years; But all this is
for the further Confirmation of the truth* which we own. The Reader, who
desires more satisfaction, concerning this matter of Antiquity, as to this
point, may consult the learned D. Twisse against Mr Hoord, Sect. 1.

15. He next tells us, that the Dominicans embraced this Opinion: And so he
gives us to understand, that he is more pleased with the doctrine of the
Jesuits. But all, except Pelagian-Arminians, confess, that in these points,
the Dominicans are preferable to the Jesuits, who are more down right Enemies
to the grace of God. And then with a crocodile tear, (as it were) in his eye,
he tells us with an Alas, that Calvin espoused this opinion, and adds that he
wronged his name much hereby; But with none of the orthodox, I am confident;
for as to what this Quaker, and his Arminians, say in this, we value it not. He
adds that hereby the Christian and Protestant Religion was defamed. And yet
the world heard of no such thing, but by Papists, Jesuits and Arminians; and
who is bound to regard their scandal, who are blind leaders of the blind?
must truth be foresaken, because these Enemies to the grace of God like it not?
He confesses that the Synod o^ Dort did defend our opinion; but adds; that
notwithstanding it is exploded by the major part of learned and pious men in
all the Churches of Protestants. We know indeed, that too many nowadayes are
turning from the truth, and imbraceing Pelagian, Iesuitical and Arminian
errors: but that they make up the major part we deny: possibly he will take in
the Lutherans: but we account them not Reformed Protestants.

16. But Page 66. he tells us, he would not much regaird all this; if our
opinion had any ground in the word: And we have shown that it has good ground,
there. Then he says, that it is most injurious unto God. If this be true, it
must certanly be an Error; but how is this made good? It makes (says he) God
the Author of sin. An heavy charge if true: yet this is so clear (thi^keth he)
as that two and one make three. But a Quakers confidence, following a blind
guide, is no strong argument to us: let us hear his reason If (says he) the
Lord decreed, that these predestinate ones should perish, having no respect
unto their evil actions, but out of his mere good pleasure; and if he also
decreed, long before they did exist, or in any capacity did either good or
evil, that they should be in these sins, by which secondarily they were to be
led unto that end: who is the first Author and cause of this our God, who so
willed and decreed it? then which there cannot be a more necessary consequence.
Answ. (1.) The word Predestinate being usually taken in a good sense, as meaned
of these Elected to glory, the man vents his gall, in thus misapplying the word
to render the truth Odious. (2.) Though no consideration of sin was, or could
be the Meritorious, Moving or Procureing cause of God's eternal decree; yet
when he decreed to puni^h everlastingly the Reprobat for their sins, he
cannot be said to have no respect to sin, in his decree (as he here alleigeth,
who considers not well what he says) (3.) Though he decreed to punish
everlastingly for sin such and such persons, and none else, merely out of his
own good will and pleasure; yet he cannot be said to have had no respect to
sin, which punishment always presupposes, and answers unto. (4) If God's
decrees be not before man exist, or do any good or evil, they cannot be
Eternal, but Temporal: and so this man is a Socinian: and the decree of God
concerning every individual person, must exist when the man has done good or
evil; and so, as many men, as many decrees* nay according to this man, the Lord
can make no decree, concerning the Everlasting state of man, so long as he
lives; and so not only we cannot, but God himself cannot say to, or of any
man, before the point of death, that he is a Reprobate or an Elect: what
Apprehensions these men have of God, I tremble to express (5.) What he means
by these words, ut in iniquitatibus illis versarentur, I know not, unless their
meaning be, as I have expressed it. And what would he then make of them? He
cannot deny, but God did permit sin; nor will he say, that God could not have
prevented sins coming into the world, if He had pleased: will he say, that God
did not foresee sins coming into the world? If he did foresee it, and might
have hindered it, if he had pleased, and did not hinder it; shall we say, that
sin came into the world, whether he would or not? And if he willed or decreed
that sin should exist, through his permission, shall we call him the author of
sin? Then he must be the author of sin, because he did not hinder sin
effectually by his Omnipotency: and then, whatever we say of Reprobation,
whether we affirm it to be Absolute, or upon sin Foreseen, there is no remedy
as to this, for God must always be the Author of sin: But hallowed be his
Name. (6.) The Decree of Reprobation puts no man into a state of sin: It is
true, the Execution the^eof presupposes sin: but hence it will no more follow,
that the decree of Reprobation places a man in sin, than that the decree of
Election does so; for the execution here presupposes also man's being in sin.
(7.) Where reads he that expression, among our divines, that by virtue of the
decree of Reprobation, the Reprobat are secondarily led or to be led to
destruction, as the end? The Lord leads no man to destruction, but every
reprobat runeth head long thither, of his own accord; and because the Lord has
designed and decreed to let them run-on, and not restrain them by saving
grace, shall he therefore be the Author of their sins? Then all the sins that
are committed, must be charged upon the Holy one of Israel: because He did not
prevent them by his grace. And thus the devils may come in play, and learn of
this man to plead Excuse for themselves, and lay the blame of all their
wickedness upon God: Sure this must be Develish doctrine. (8.) But what is it,
that God is the Author and Cause of? His hujus does not distinctly inform us.
That he is the Author and Cause of his own Act and Decree, is most true: But
that he is the Cause and Author of sin, as this man would infer, we see not
the Antecedent, from whence this Consequence can follow. Beside, that the
Author of a thing, is he by whose authority or judgment, it is done, or upon
whose testimony, it is believed; for Cicero opposes Authorem and dissuasorem,
and joineth these together, as of the same import, Hortator atque Author;
Consiliarius and Author; Suasor and Author: and Plautus said, Impero autorque
sum: Now dar this Man say, that God Exhorts, Counseleth, and persuades to
sin? Dar this Man say, that we hold* or that it follows from our ju^gment,
that by God's Authority, Sentence and Swasion, sin is committed? Let him prove
this, and then carry the cause. (9.) In a word, we refer this Man to the
Apostle Paul Romans 9:11, 12 13. to receive his answer, and let him dispute no
more against us, till he once take the boldness to confute that: and his
inferring from our doctrine, that God is the Author of sin, is but the same,
which the Apostle saw would be deduced from his doctrine, by men of corrupt
minds, when he adds by way of Objection, verse. ^4. -- Is there
unrighteousness with God? And if our answer will not satisfy him, let him
confute the Apostles answer; for we but say the same, viz. That God has mercy
on whom he will, and hardens whom he will. And if for this cause, our
doctrine be blamed, we cannot help it; but must be content to be contradicted:
and if he make use of the reply used verse. 19. we must give the return, which
the Apostle gives verse. 20, 21. And if all this will not satisfy, we must
leave him to the judgment of the great day, when that God, against whom these
proud carpers thus reply, shall answer them by himself, and put them to eternal
silence and everlasting shame.

17. Thereafter he cites some sayings of Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Pareus,
Martyr, Zuinglius, and Piscator, out of which he would infer, that they
allaiged, God was the Author of sin. All which and more, he might find
collected to his hand by Bellarmin. and answered by the learned D. Twisse, in
his Vindiciae. And therefore, as also because, this belongs to a distinct
question, we need neither spend time in searc^ing out what truth is in all
this; not yet in vindicating of them. One thing I shall say; That among them
all, he shall not find one, that says directly that God is the Author and
Culpable Cause of sin: and if he suppose, that this may be drawn from their
expressions, I shall only reply. That if there be any of them that gives more
real ground for such an Inference, than the very Expressions used in Scripture,
I shall not own them: and if they say no more, and yet are condemned by him,
as making God the Author of sin, though they expressly deny it; let him see, how
he shall vindicate the Spirit of Go^ from the same charge, or rather how in his
blind boldness he charges the Spirit of God. As for these passages of
Scripture, which our Divines a^duce against the Pelagians and Jesuits, who
ascribe unto God, in the mat^er of sin, an Idle Provide^c^ and Perm^ssion,
Bellarmine ranketh them up in five classes: First, Such as speak of God's
Willing and Decreeing from eternity, that sin shall exist: such are Act. 2:23.
and 4:27. Esai. 53:10. Second, Such as import God's creating evil men, for this
end, that his righteousness might shine forth in their punishment: such are
Prove. 16:4. 1 Samuel 2:25. Exodus 9:16. Romans 9:17, 21. Third, Such as import God's
setting of Satan and men to evil, and useing of them, as instruments, to do
that which could not be done, without sin: such are 1 King. 22:20, 23. Job.
1:12. and 2:6. 2 Samuel 16.10. and 24:1. Esai. 5:26. and 10:5, 15. and ^3:17. and
19:2, 4. Ier. 50:24, 25. and 51:11. Ezech. 12, 13. Psalm. 105* 25. etc. Fourth,
Such as speak of God's blinding, hardening, etc. as Exodus 4.21, and 7:3, 13.
and 9.12. and 10:1, 20, 27. and 1^:10. and 14:4, 8. Deuteronomy. 2:30. Iosu. 1^:20. 1 Samuel 2:25. Job. 12:16, 20, 24. Esai. 19:14. and 63:17. Ier. 20:7. Ioh. 12:3^,
40. Romans 1:24, 26, 28. and 9:18. 2 These. 2:11. etc. Fifth, Such as import God's
doing of those things, which are evil; as 2 Samuel 12 11. Luke 2:34. Romans 9:33.
Esai. 8:14. and 28:16. Genesis 45 8. 1 King. 11:31, 37. and 12:15, 24. 2 King.
9:3. and 10:30. etc. Now, if he can adduce any testimony of our Divines, whence
he can with more probability infer, that God is the Author of sin, I shall
not, as I said, own it. And if such as are but consonant to the Scriptures, do
not please him, the next time he must disput against the Scriptures of truth,
and not against us.

18. ^^e inveigeth next Page 67. against that monstrous (as he calls it) and
twofold will, which they (he means the orthodox) feign of God, one by which
he openly and manifestly declares his sentence, the other plain contrary,
more secret and obscure. But to what purpose is this brought in here? And what
would he make of it? He says we seem to assume this distinction; and hereby,
he seems to reject it. But not to run out into a debate with him, upon every
light occasion. I would only enquire, if he acknowledges any Decrees of God,
at all? If he do, what are these Decrees else, than acts of God^s will? If they
be nothing else; than, we may say, God wills what he decrees: for, sure, we
cannot say, God nilleth, or wills not, what he decrees to be. Again I would
ask, whether the Commands and Law of God be signs of his will? If they be, as,
I suppose, he will grant: then I would ask, if he thinks, that God Decrees
the same thing, which He Commands, and nothing else; and so that God's Decree
and Command are all one? If he say that they are one; than the decrees of God
may be Resisted, Opposed, Contradicted, Contraveened, and have no effect, for
it is often so with his Commands; But all Divines will hiss at this: If he say
that they are not one: where is then the Monstrosity or Absurdity of this
saying? He must also assume this distinction. The truth is, This man speaks
he knows not what. The Scriptures often give the name of will unto God's
Purposes and D^crees, as Act. 21:14. Romans 1:10. 1 Pet. 3:17. Romans 9:15, 18, 19.
Ephesians. 1:5. Revel. 17:17. Luke 22:42. Mat. 26.42. So does it often times give
this title unto his Commands, as is every where manifest. And though these two,
the Purpose of God, and the Will of Command, do not always agree, as to the
same event; Yet there is no monstrosity here of a twofold contrary Will; for
the Purpose of God is not of the same nature, with his Command: His Purpose,
(which Divines commonly call his Will in proper sense) is purely concerning the
Event, and respectet^ God as the first Cause and Prime disposer of all Events
in the world; but his Command, or Law, touches not the Events of actions, but
only points forth man's Duty, and respects God, as the supreme Lawgiver,
prescribing the duty of his Subjects. These both are cleared by that one
Instance (to adduce no more) of Abraham, whom God commanded to offer up his Son,
and so made it Abraham's duty to ^et about this; and to endeavor it, But as to
the event, the Lord had decreed, that Isaak should not be offered, nor Abraham
get leave to offer him up indeed, where is this contrariety then the man talks
of?

19. Next he tells us that it avails nothing to say, that man does willingly
and of his own accord sin, for this proclivity and propensity to sin,
according to us, (says he) is necessarily imposed upon him, because God did
decree it should be so. Ans. Not to debate these questions, with this man, who
seems not to understand the matter, I shall only tell him, that his Objection
here is very near of kin with that Romans 9:19. Thou will say unto me, why does
he yet find fault; for who has resisted his will? If this be not the very
compend of his following words, let any that read them judge: It is the same
(says he) as if I should take an infant, that cannot resist, and cast him
d^wne from an high place, though his weigh^ cause him descend, yet I am the
cause of his death etc. Now, what says the Apostle to this? Nay O man (take
heed to this O Quaker) who art thou that reply, or disputest against God?
etc. Thus the proud Quaker forgeteth that he is a thing formed of God: or he is
so unreasonable* as to debate the matter with God; and say, Why have thou
formed me thus? Can we think to satisfy this Quaker, who will not be satisfied
with this? What says he to that word 1 Samuel 2:25. notwithstanding they
h^rkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would stay them?
will this man advocate the ill cause of these wicked sons of Eli, and lay all
the blame upon the Lord? He must plead also for Pharaoh; and say he did no
wrong, in refusing to let the people of Israel go; for he could no otherwise
do, because the Lord had hardened his heart. But it is little, that this man
should plead the cause of these wicked ones; and of the King of Assyria, the
rode of God's anger, and the staff in his hand, Esai 10:5. yea and of all the
wicked, whom God has made for the day of evil, and that for himself Prove.
16:4. seeing he takes upon him, to agent and plead the Devils cause, against
Jehovah; because, when God decreed, that he should affl^ct Job, he was free of
sin; all the blame lay up on the Lord: for Satan could do no other wise, an
inevitable necessity was put upon him* by the decree of God, according to this
man's doctrine. Is not the Devil much beholden to this Quaker, for his good will
to learn him how to speak, in his own defense against the Lord. But I am
afraid, his reward shall not quite his cost. We have told him already, that
the decree of Reprobation imposes no necessity upon man to sin; but this
necessity comes from man's natural corrupted state: Yea Corvinus himself at
knowledgeth, that it was Arminius his doctrine, that all men naturally are cast
upon a necessity o^ sinning. See D. Twisse against Mr Mason. Page 18. It is all
one thing with this man, whether a thing come to pass by the free will of the
second cause; or by Necessity of nature, as the sun shines; if there be a
decree past, all the guilt must lie upon Jehovah: and thus either God has made
no decrees at all, touching the actions of free agents, good or evil: or all
their actions must be acts of Necessity, yea Pure and Absolute Necessity; and
so all contingency is taken away, and all Freedom, from second causes; or men
and angels must be Absolute and independent Agents, over whom and whose
actions, God must pass no decree: let every one judge, whither this doctrine
tends: and what an exalter of Free will into the very throne of God, this
Quaker is.

20 Next he says, our doctrine is injurious to God, because it makes him to
delight in the death of the wicked, and to will, that many should die in their
sins, contrare to Ezech, 33:11. 1 Timothy 2:3. 2 Pet. 3:9. Answ. (1) If he think
to prove hence, that God did not decree absolutely to suffer any to lie in sin,
and to punish them at length because of sin, he must think from this
effectually to prove, that God did Absolutely Decree, that all men should be
saved: and so, either all men must be saved, or else God's decree is null: and
if all men must be saved, then indeed there is no Election: if all men shall
not be saved, but some damned, how then wills God, that all men should be
saved? Or how is his Will Efficacious and Irresistible? (2.) It is true, the
Lord, to speak of Him, after the manner of men, for in God there are no
Passions, of Joy, Delight, or Sorrow etc. is not a God that takes delight in
the death of sinners, yea such delight in their hurt and destruction, that
whether they repented and amended, or not, he would notwithstanding destroy
them: as these wicked Jews, to whom this was said, did wickedly alleige. See
and consider verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20. so that the whole scope clears
this to be the proper meaning; as also the parallel place Ezech. 18. from Verse.
19. to 30. Now will any hence gather, that the Lord has no delight in the just
punishment of impenitent sinners? If they do, their Conclusion will be
contradictory to Scripture Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Ier. 9:24. Esai. 1:24. Ezech.
6:13. (3.) The thing that he would infer from hence is, that God does not
Reprobate any Absolutely; that is, does not purpose to punish them, out of his
mere pleasure, and not for their sins: And say we, that he punishes, or
purposes to punish any not for their sins, but to satisfy his own
pleasure? No, we say no such thing: His Conclusion then can make nothing
against us: nor does his Argument hence reach this, which we say, that God of
his mere pleasure, without any thing to move him from without, decrees to
punish, or to inflict Death and Damnation, for sin: and if he think, that the
one follows the other, he must lay this down for a ground, that the Decree,
and the Execution of the decree are all one thing, or that the decree to damn
for sin, and damnation for sin is all one thing: But he, nor any man, shall
never evince this: or that every thing, which is the cause of of Damnation,
must also be a cause of the Decree to damn.

21. He proceeds. 4. and tells us, that this doctrine is injurious unto Christ
the Mediator. And why so? Because it makes his mediation ineffectual. Answ.
Not at all, as to these, for whom it was intended and appointed; that is, the
Elect. As if he hy his Passions had not broken down the middle wall of
partition Ans. That middle wall of partition, that was betwixt jew and gentile,
was quite taken away: But the middle wall betwixt the Elect and Reprobat, was
never Intended to be taken down. Nor had pacified the anger of God toward all
men. Ans. Nor was that the End of Christ's coming and dying. How he pacified the
anger of God toward such, as perish eternally, and were already in hell, we
understand not. He carps at that which some say viz. That Christ's death was
sufficient for all (of which saying I seee little use, seeing Christ's death was
a price, upon a compact, and so its sufficiency and value is truly and
properly commensurable with the compact, and is so to be considered) and
says, that it cannot help, if the virtue thereof be not extended to all, s^
as all may be made capable of salvation; or if salvation be not thereby made
possible unto all. And as to this, I am not far from his judgment; But yet, if
there be not another way laid down, than he yet mentions, I see not but
Christ's death might have been only Sufficient for all; and not Effectual for
any one; for as he is against Reprobation; he must be against Election also;
and so must say, that Christ laid down his life for all; though he knew not if
any one should be saved by it; yea that he might have had all he died for,
though not one should have been saved; and how injurious this is unto the death
and mediation of Christ, let any judge; and we will have more occasion to speak
of this, in the f^llowing Chapter.

22. In the fourth place Page 78. he says. The preaching of the Gospel is, by
this doctrine, made a mere mock and illusion, if many of them, to whom it is
preached, be secluded from receiving any good thereby, by an irrevocable
decree^ the preaching of faith and repentance is vain; and so is all the scope
of the promises and tbreatnings; seeing all is referred to the foresaid decree
etc. Ans. (1.) The preaching of the Gospel cannot be said to be in vain, when
the end for which it was mainly sent, is gained, viz. the Elect are converted
and established thereby: and the decree of Reprobation cannot hinder this. But
as to the Reprobat, he will say, it is fruitless and vain. Then he should not
have spoken so generally, but should have restricked his discourse. But (2.)
even as to the Reprobat, it may gain the end, for which it was sent of the
Lord, notwithstanding of the decree of Reprobation, even as the Command of God
by Moses to Pharaoh had its end, and was no Illusion, notwithstanding that the
Lord hardened his heart, that he should not obey, till the Lord had brought all
the plagues upon Egypt, that he resolved to bring: And as the commission which
Esai got, Chap. 6. was no cheat, or moke, though it was to make the heart of
that people fat, and their ears heavy, and to shut their eyes, lest they see
with their eyes, hear with tbeir ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert and be healed verse. 10. Will this man say, that the Lord was but
mocking the people of Israel* when he made them see all that he did before
their eyes, in the land of Egypt, unto pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and
unto all his land; the great temptations, which their eyes had seen, and the
signs, and the great miracles, because the Lord did not give unto them an
heart to perceive and ears to hear and eyes to see, unto that day Deuteronomy 29* 2,
3, 4? was it were mo^king that God sent Ezechiel, whether the people would
hear, or whether they would forbear, when yet they should know, there had been
a Prophet among them, notwithstanding that the Lord told the Prophet, that the
house of Israel would not hearken unto him, for they were impudent and hard
hearted, Ezech. 3:7, 11: and 2:5. and 33:33? Did not Christ know, that his word
should not do good to many, that did hear it? Shall we therefore think, that
he but mocked, when he preached the word unto them? (3.) The Apostle tells us,
that he made himself a servant unto all, not as thinking to gain all, but that
he might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9:19. And again verse. 22. He became all things
to all men, that he might by any means save some. And who were these some? See
2 Timothy 2:10. Therefore I endure all things, for the Elects sake, that they may
also obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. And
shall we think, that the Lord cannot send out his servants, to call-in the
Elect, but he must point them out unto them, by name and surname? What if God,
willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, shall endure with much
long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? Romans 9:22. Shall we
quarrel with the Most High? If God make the chief Corner stone, that is Elect
and Precious unto Believers, a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even
to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
ordained, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. must we impute folly unto our God, and say, that He
is mocking? (4.) The whole of this discourse is founded upon this grand Error,
that Faith and Repentance is not the free gift of God, contrare to Ephesians. 2:8.
and 6:23. Phil. 1:29. 1 Cor. 4:7. Act. 5:31. and 11:18. 2 Timothy 2:25. For, if
Paul may plant and Apollos water, but God only must give the increase, 1 Cor.
3:5, 6.7. Then the giving of success unto the preaching of the Gospel, must be
Gods free gift; otherwise what can Quakers pray for; or Ministers say, when
they are praying to God for a blessing on their labors? Nay, it seems
Quakers are against all such prayers, being pure Pelagians; and so asserte,
that Man of himself may Believe and Repent. If not, will they not grant God
liberty to distribute his own gifts as he will, 1 Cor. 12:11? Is God under any
Obligation to give grace to all, that hear the Gospel? This were pure
Pelagianisme, to say that grace is conferred according to works. (5.) This man's
own doctrine is exposed to the same Inconvenience; for he tells us
afterward, as we shall hear, that there is a time and date prescribed to every
man, after which their salvation is not possible: now I suppose he will grant
that the Word, or at least the Light within, may continue exhorting such to
repent and return, and yet all is in vain, for the door is shut: will he say,
that God thereby is but mocking them? Let him first liberate his own doctrine,
and then return upon us.

23. In the fifth place he tells us, that our doctrine is injurious to the coming
and propitiatory sacrifice of Christ. Why so? Because it makes it a great
judgment and plague unto many, etc. Ans. And must not Christ be for the fall of
many in Israel? Luke 2:34. Why else is he called a stone of stumbling? Esai.
8:14. Romans 9* 33. 1 Pet. 2:6. Why does Christ say, that it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of judgment, then for Chorazin and
Bethsaida? And for the land of Sodom, than for Capernaum, Mat. 11:21, 22, 23,
24. And why says he Ioh 15:22, 24, 25 If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. If I had not
done among them the works, which no other man did, they had not had sin -- but
this comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled, that is written in
their Law, they hated me without a cause? Why says he Ioh. 9:39 -- for
judgment I am come into this world -- that they which see might be made blind?
Let the Quaker answer these passages, and then rant, according to his own
mind: And let him tell me, how it will fare with those, that do not repent
before their day of visitation goes over? It is this man's had to wound
himself, out of a keenness in pursueing us.

24. In the Sixth place, he says, that it is injurious to mankind, making man's
condition worse then the Devils. Ans. This were an injury indeed; but the
Challenge is neither True nor Honest; for we look upon Devils as already under
the Execution of the decree of Reprobation, and in the same state, as to this
matter, that Reprobates are into, after death; and we suppose it is far
otherwise with men, though Reprobate, before death, than it is with Devils:
Devils are under no offer of mercy now, Men are: Devils know themselves to be
damned; men do not: Devils are damned irrecoverably, for their first sin; man
that comes to age, sins himself more and more unto damnation: Man that
hears the Gospel is punished because he will not accept of the offer, but
does willingly reject it; He does not believe, and he will not believe; can
this be said of Devils? Devils are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness unto the judgment of the great day Iud. 6. This cannot be said of the
Reprobat yet alive: Many of the Reprobats have common graces, and favors of
God, and are restrained from many sins: which cannot be said of Devils. But
what is the matter? The Devils had once a possibility of standing: But many
millions of men had never any opportunity of salvation; but because of Adams
sin, of whom they never knew any thing, were to be perpetually tormented. But
did not all mankind, by our doctrine, stand in Adam, and fall with him? They
are not then punished for another sin, but for their own; as we manifested,
in the foregoing Chapter. How does this reach all mankind, when God, according
to his everlasting good pleasure has chosen a goodly number, whom he will
glorify for ever: will the Lord do so with any of the Devils? Belike, that
their condition may not be every way worse then man's, this Quaker will give
them hopes, that some of them, at least, may be saved, provideing they hearken
well to the Light within, and they have the conviction and faith of a God, and
know that he is Merciful, Holy, Just, etc. as well as men; and Are of as sharp
Understanding and in knowing what is right and wrong, as many men are. But if
all this will not satisfy this Quaker, let me speak to him, in the words of the
Apostle; for it may be, he will carry some respect to them, the words are to be
found Romans 9:20. Nay, but O man, who art thou, that replyest against God? Shall
the thing formed say to him, that formed it, why have thou made me thus? etc.
But he adds, that we put man in a worse condition, than the beasts are in.
Why so? Because their owners require no more of them, than they are able to do;
and when they are dead, there is an end of their misery: but by our doctrine,
man is perpetually tormented, because he does not that, which he cannot: and
thus God deals with man, worse than Pharaoh did with the Israelites; for
though he withheld straw from them, they could get it with a little more
industry. Answ. What shall we say unto this Man, who thus barketh and belcheth
out against God: He supposes, that he is spewing out this gall against us;
alas what are we, that he should thus bark against us? His barkings will be
found against the Lord; and therefore I shall say again, O man, who art thou,
that reply against God etc. Art thou also offended, that God has given thee
an immortal soul, and made thee a man, out of the same lump of clay, out of
which he made the beast? Why art thou then angry that God, out of the same
lump, makes one, a vessel of honor, and another, a vessel of wrath fitted to
destruction? But next, will he say, that all men naturally can Believe and
Repent and fulfill the conditions, upon which salvation is offered? Yes, this
he must say, or he says nothing against us here; and then he must be as much a
Pelagian, as ever Pelagius was himself. Then Faith is not the gift of God, but
of ourselves, contrare to Ephesians. 2. v. 9. and other Scriptures above cited.
Then Faith is not the faith of God's elect, contrare to Tit. 1:1. Then a
natural man, and he that is in the flesh, can please, God, contrare to Romans
8:8. Then the natural man can receive the things of the Spirit of God, contrare
to 1 Cor. 2:14 Then he contradicts all his own doctrine formerly examined
Chap. v. Then we need not pray for faith and Repentance, or a Circumcised
heart, or Regeneration, or a New heart, or an heart of flesh; nor give God
thanks for any of these things, because they are all in our own power, and
then the Believer makes himself to differ, contrare to 1 Cor. 4:7. What a
contradiction this is to the whole Gospel, and to the whole tenor thereof, no
man, that has once read it, can be ignorant. We thank him this once, for this
plain and ingenuous insinuation. This may help us to understand him better in
what is following. But if he say, that they can do, what is required, by the
help of the grace of God. He knows, that we say so; but his Aggravations here
have a far other tendency; for his instance of the beasts and of Pharaohs
carriage, were else utterly impertinent. Nay, what means the man to compare
the matter, unto Pharaoh's withdrawing of straw; yea and make it worse? Say we
that God takes away that Grace to believe and Repent, that wicked men would as
feign have, as the Israelites would have had straw? or that Reprobation makes
men unbeleevers against their will, and takes away the Power and Grace to
believe, which they had? It is little wonder, that this man, who dar thus open
his mouth against heaven, spew out lies and calumnies against us. We must bear
it, knowing that he will come to Judgment; and that our Doctrine is consonant
to that Rev. 22:17. -- and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life
freely; and to that Ioh. 6:37. -- and him that comes to me, I will in no ways
cast out.

25. He proceeds in his calumnies and says P. 69. That by our doctrine, we
place Mankind in the same state, that the Poets feigned Tantalus to be in, who
being thirsty was placed in water to his chinne, so that he could not drink:
And why? because we say, that the works of creation and providence among
heathens, are not to bring them to salvation, but only to convince them of sin,
and so serve for their condemnation. Answ. (1.) But what has this to do with
Reprobation? The man in his rage runs himself blind, that he knows not
what he says (2) Do Heathens make up all mankind? (3.) Are the Heathen as
desirous of Salvation and of the Crown of Glory, (of which they never once
heard,) and of the Grace of Faith in Christ, (of whom they never heard a
report,) as Tantalus was of drinking the water, that did run by his lip; as the
verse might have minded him, Tantalusa labris sitiens fugientia captat --
pocula -- If not, is the man so transported with passion, that he sees not his
palpable impertinency? (4.) we see then, that according to his Opinion, the
works of Creation, and Providence, are as effectual means to save the Heathen,
as the Gospel is to save such as hear it; and by these may Heathens come as
soon to glory, as such as live under the Gospel by it: why then came Christ
into the world? Was it that the works of Creation and Providence might become
preachers of the Gospel and of Salvation? but we will possibly hear more of
this afterward. He adds, that we say the preaching of the Gospel, the use of
sacraments, prayers etc. suffice to condemn Reprobats, that live within the
visible church, and that they are all ineffectual unto them by reason of a
secret impotency, which they had from their infancy etc. Ans. (1.) Here still
more Pelagianisme; for he would say, that all within the visible Church are
borne able to believe the Gospel, and do duties required therein (2.) That the
peaching of the Gospel is to many the favor of death, we are told by Paul 2.
Cor. 2:16. and that it tends to the aggravation of their guilt, and
condemnation, we heard lately out of Christ's own mouth (3.) Is he angry with
us, because we will not say, that every mothers son, that hears the Gospel,
can believe and obey the same, without the grace of God; or because we will not
say, that Christ has given sufficient grace to all that hear the Gospel, to
Believe and Obey? Let him be angry with the Scriptures, if he dar; for we speak
according to them, that ^els us, all men have not faith 2 These. 3:2. and that
faith is of God's elect. Tit. 1:1. and that no man can come unto the Son, but
whom the Father draws Ioh 6:44. That many beleev not, because they are not of
Christ's sheep Ioh. 10:26. That there is a necessity of regeneration Ioh. 3:3,
5, 6. and that the carnal mind is enmity against God, f^r it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be Romans 8:7. And many more such things; see
Ioh. 12:39. Act. 13:48. and 28:24, 25, 26, 27. Mat. 13:11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Romans 11:7, 8, 9. (4.) As for his making the case of the wicked, that hear the
Gospel, the same with Tantalus's, we shall only tell him, that if he can prove,
that any Reprobat has as great, and vehement a desire unto salvation by
Christ, as it is offered in the Gospel, as Tantalus had to drink, and yet it is
denied unto them, merely upon the account of their being Reprobate; then his
comparison is apposite; But if that be an untruth, as it is, his argueing from
Tantalus's case, is a mere forged calumny. We openly declare, according to the
tenor of the Gospel, that he who is a thirst, may come and drink of the water
of life freely Revel. 22: verse. 17. Esai. 55: verse. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 11. verse 28.
Ioh. 7: verse 37.

26. Thus we have examined all, which this Man has thought fit to cull out of
the writings of Pelagians and Arminians, and present his Reader with, for no
other end, but to render the Truth we own, odious; for neither does he tell us
his own Judgment, concerning this; nor would he on^e consider what grounds we
walk upon, or speak one word to the passages of Scripture, upon which we ground
our Opinion; Thought he that his Readers would not be in case to take notice of
his fraudulent and unfaithful dealing? It is well, that he has written this in
latin, for the world is no stranger unto the debates betwixt the Orthodox on
the one hand, and Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians, and Jesuits, on the other;
But we proceed unto the examination of his following Thesis.

CHAP. VIII. Of Universal Redemption.
1. Our Quaker having, as we heard, laid by, and taken out of the way, so far
as he could, the Principal and Fundamental discriminating Purpose of God, in
denying, for any thing we could observe, all Eternal Electi^n, and Reprobation;
and having thereby homologated with Arminians (as also with Socinians) who run
upon Universalities, as abhoring all Specialities, and Discriminating Acts
exclusive of any, except what Lord Free will does, and of which this Absolute
and Supreme Lord is master and disposer; and therefore Assert in the first
place, An Universal Love and good will in God to all and every mothers son of
the race of Mankind; He proceeds, in showing us, how, in the rest of their
Universalities, he is their friend; and therefore talks not only of an
Universal Ransom and Price paid for all Adam's posterity by Christ, of which
he speaks next, but proceeds, as we shall hear, to hold forth an Universal
Covenant of free grace, made with all the sons of Adam, though he be pleased
to give us it in other terms: and an Universal Call, and Gospel: as also
Universal Grace: by which every one may, if he will, lay hold on the offer and
be saved: and withal he gives us a Salvation among Heathens, as we shall
hear.

2. When he rejected Election and Reprobation Absolute, he made way, and laid a
good foundation, for this other Error of Universal Redemption; for these two
cannot well be separated; however some of late would maintain this Universal
Redemption, and withal assert an Election of grace, whereby the Lord made
choice of so many, as pleased him, whom he would certainly redeem, and bring to
glory; which I cannot see how they can consonantly, and satisfyingly hold,
unless they can prove out of Scripture two distinct Covenants betwixt Jehovah,
and the Mediator; two distinct and different Ends of Christ's death; Two
distinct Prices laid down, and Two distinct Purchases made; (if the one could
well be called a purchase) Two Satisfactions; Christ a Cautioner, and
no-Cautioner; a Redeemer and no-Redeemer; an absolute Savior and a Conditional
Savior, etc. But the Scripture clears no such thing to us, for any thing I
see.

3. As concerning the point of Universal Redemption, we find various
sentiments, or various explications of the matter, given to us by Adversaries;
for they do not all agree in their apprehensions of the thing. Some explain
the mat^er thus, God sent his only begotten Son to be a Redeemer and
Propitiator for Adam and all his Posterity; who by his death did pacify an
angry God, and restore Mankind to their lost inheritance; so as all, who are
now condemned, are not condemned for their former sins and guilt; for Christ
has abundantly satisfied for these; but for their Unbeleef, for not believing
in the Redeemer of the world, and for rejecting the Reconciliation made, and
the grace of God declared in the word. And thus, they must say, that Christ
has died for all sins, but Unbeleefe; and that salvation does not certainly
follow upon this Reconciliation; and so that it is rather a Reconciliableness,
than a Reconciliation; and they must necessarily maintain, that this matter is
revealed unto all and every son of Adam, who otherwise cannot be guilty of
Rejecting this reconciliation, other ways it shall be of no advantage to them;
unless they say, that the want of the Revelation puts them out of a capacity
of being guilty of Unbeleefe; and so they must necessarily be saved; and thus
their condition shall be undoubtedly better, than is the condition of such as
hear the Gospel; and then the revelation of the Gospel shall be no Favor, but
a Prejudice rather. And in reference to this, they devise an Universal and
Antecedanious Love, whereby God, out of his Infinite Goodness, was inclined to
desire the happiness and salvation of every mothers son; and therefore to send
his Son to die for all: as if God had such Natural and Necessary Inclinations;
and as if all his Love to Mankind, and every appointment of his concerning us,
were not the free act of his good pleasure; and as if there were any such
Antecedent and Conditional will in God, that could or might have no issue or
accomplishment, but as Lord Free will would; and as if the Love that sent
Christ were only such a Poor Conditional Inclination toward all Mankind,
which the Scripture holds forth, as the greatest of Loves, and as the ground
of all the Effects and Grants, which man's full Salvation calls for. But why
could not this Love effectuat the good of all? Therefore, they tell us, that
Justice being injured by sin, unless it were satisfied, that Love of God,
whereby he wishes well to all sinners, could effectuat nothing, as to the
recovery of any: and upon this ground they imagine, Christ was sent to make an
Universal Atonement; and so, Justice, being satisfied, might not obstruct the
salvation of any, whose Free will would consent unto terms of new to be
proposed.

4. Others hold forth the matter thus [Christ, according to the eternal Counsel
of God, did properly die for this end, and by his propitiatory sacrifice
obtain, that all and every man, who believe in Him, should for his sake
actually obtain Remission of sins, and Life Eternal, but others, in case they
would Repent and Believe, might obtain it] But thus we hear no word of Christ's
obtaining any thing to any in particular; no word of his obtaining Faith and
Repantence: and what Counsel of God can this be to send Christ to die for
persons, upon that condition, which he knew they would not and could not
perform? And what by this means has Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice obtained
more, than a mere possibility of salvation, to either one or other? Shall we
imagine, that God designeth good to persons, who shall never enjoy it? Or that
God has Conditional Intentions and Designs? By this means, Christ's death was
designed, and no person designed thereby to be saved; yea Christ should be
designed to die, and that for no certain end, unless to procure a mere
possibility, by stopping the mouth of justice, that it should not stand in the
way: but then we can not say, that God sent Christ to die, for Any man, much
less for All.

5. Others express the matter thus [Christ, out of the gracious Decree and
Purpose of God, did undergo death, that he might procure and obtain
Reconciliation with God for all sinners whatsomever, without any difference,
before that God would open again the door of salvation, and enter into a new
Covenant of grace with sinners.] But this Reconciliation has no more force, or
import, but that God might enter again into a Covenant with sinners: and so
there is no Actual Reconciliation of sinners unto God. And all that is
obtained* is for God, and nothing for man, save a Possibility of Salvation by a
new Covenant, nor are we told, whether Christ has satisfied for the breach of
the First Covenant, so that sin is fully pardoned unto all; or not, until the
condition of the second Covenant be performed: nor are we told, upon what
account the sins against the second Covenant are pardoned; Or if they be
unpardonable.

6. Others explain the matter thus [Christ died for all and every man, not
only that God might, without any violation of Justice, enter into a new
Covenant with sinners, upon what condition he pleased; but that it should be
upon this Condition, that man should be united with Christ the Cautioner: and
not only, that Redemption and Salvation should be possible to all, but that
really and most certanly Salvation should be bestowed on such, as Christ
thought good] But seeing Christ knew, that his death would profit none, but
these few, whom he had designed, to what purpose should he have laid down his
life for the rest? And how can his death be a price of Redemption for the rest?
How can Christ he said to satisfy for the rest? Did he purchase Faith to these
few; and would he not purchase Faith to the rest, and yet lay down the great
price for them? What was the end obtained for the rest? was it only a Possible
Call of all, Justice being satisfied? But of what import could that Possible
Call be, if Salvation was not also possible unto them? And whereunto is that
Call? They will not say, it is unto Salvation, but to Faith: But did not Christ
know, that this call would not be obeyed by them? Did He procure Grace unto
them, to obey it? then he procured Faith, and if he procured Faith, than he
procured Salvation. Again, if Justice be satisfied for these others, why are
they not liberat? If they say, the new condition is not fulfilled. Then it
cannot be simply said, that Christ satisfied Justice on their behalf, for he
knew before hand, that these would not perform the new Condition; how can he
then be supposed to die for them notwithstanding?

7. Thus we see what Difference is among men, that hold Universal Redemption,
about the Proper and Immediate End and Aim, of the purpose of God, in sending
Christ to die; and of Christ in comeing to die: and how, for the most part, it
comes all to little, or nothing, for it was, says Arminius, That God might
save sinners, what way it pleased Him, his Justice, which stood in the way,
being satisfied* or as Corvinus: That God might will to save sinners, and That
Christ intended by his death, to make such satisfaction to justice, as that he
might obtain to himself power of saving upon what conditions the Father
pleased. And thus Christ is said to have obtained Reconciliation and Redemption
to all, not that they should actually be partakers thereof, but that God, his
justice now being satisfied, might prescribe a condition, which when they had
preformed, he might and would actually make them partakers thereof: Some say,
that all men are put into a new Covenant, in which Adam was a common person, as
well, as in the old, by virtue whereof, none shall be damned that do not sin
actually against the condition, and fall thereby from that new state, whereunto
they are borne. And this opinion differs not much from that of Iacobus
Andreae at the conference at M^mpelgard, which afterward Huberus maintained (as
Kimedoncius shows, in his refutation of the same) which was this in short,
[That Christ suffered an^ died for all, none excepted, Effectually, and
obtained for all a Reconciliation, without any respect to Faith, or Unbeleefe;
so that all who receive this Reconciliation and continue in it, shall be saved,
but as to those who refuse it by unbeleef, it is made null, and they perish.]
Others say, [That Christ by his satisfaction removed Original sin in all, so
that all Infants, dying in infancy, are undoubtedly saved.] Others [that He
died for all sins alike, but conditionally.] Some say, [that after the price
was paid, it was absolutely undetermined, what condition should be prescribed;
so as God might have re-established the Covenant of works:] Others, [that the
procuring of a new way was part of the fruit of Christ's death.] As for this
condition, some say, [that man can perform it with the help of such means, as
God affords to all] and thus establish the Diana of Freewill. But others
[assert the necessity of grace flowing from election hereunto,] and so destroy
Universal Redemption, which yet they assert. So that some say [Christ died for
all Conditionally, if they beleeve] making the Act the cause of its own Object;
for Faith with them is a believing that Christ died for them. Some say [that he
died for all Absolutely; Yet so as they partake not of the benefit, until they
perform the condition, which was to be prescribed; and thus they affirm, that
Christ did no more sustain the persons of the Elect, than of the Reprobat, but
of all alike. If we enquire therefore, what was the Immediate Result and Product
of the death of Christ, they agree not to tell us, whether it was a Power, or a
Will, or a Right, to God, to save any he pleased.

8. However all the Arminians and Camero with them agree in this, That Christ
did not purchase faith for any: and that as to all (say some) or as to the most
part (say others) Christ has only procured a Possibility of salvation: And
what is this Possibility? Some call it an Exemption from that necessity of
perishing, under which they came by the violation of the former Covenant, if a
satisfaction had not interveened; and by this Exemption, the say, it co^^th to
pass, that Christ, if he will, justice being now satisfied, may bring all to
life: And hereby also, say they, all may be saved, if they will: But what is
this else then a mere Possibility? What effica^y has it, seeing notwithstanding
thereof, all may perish again? They say, it is really Efficacious as to this
Possibility, which was not before Justice was satisfied: But yet
notwithstanding of this Efficacious Possibility, it might come to pass, that
not one should have been saved: for how can salvation be possible without
faith? So that if faith be not hereby purchased, it would seem, that Salvation
is not possible. And further, it does hereby appear, that all which is procured
is but some power to God and to Christ; But what is man's advantage? They say,
That a way to life is opened unto man, that so he may now come to God by Faith
and Repentance. But how can he come, who has no power to Believe or Repent,
without grace? Or is it in corrupt man's power to Believe or Repent?

9. As for this Quaker, with whom we are dealing, He is not pleased to give us
a full a^count of his judgment, in this particular: only two things I find he
harpeth upon, and repeateth, as the conclusion of his pretended proofs and
allegations, viz. 1. That Christ died for all and every man, and not for all
kinds of men, only; non pro generibus singulorum, sed pro singulis generum, as
he says. And 2. That what he procured was only a Possibility of salvation: but
what he understands hereby, we are left to conjecture: Yet it is manifest,
that with him this was all and sum, that was procured; and that it was
procured for all equally: But what says he, as to the Conditions of the new
Covenant? we must attend him, in what follows, ere we know his judgment
herein: Where, albeit he says that what he, with the rest of the Quakers,
maintain therein, is different from what others say, and peculiar to
themselves; Yet we will find to be nothing but Pelagianisme and Arminianisme
put in a new dress of words, not usual with others.

10. Though it might be sufficient for us, to consider what this man says, and
only answer his Reasons; Yet to give the Reader some satisfaction in this
matter, which others than Quakers are pleading for, now a days, it will not be
amiss to give in short the grounds of our contrary judgment, which we
maintain, with the orthodox: wherein I intend not a full handling of that
Controversy; But only a short proposal of the truth with the grounds thereof,
whereby all our Adversaries assertions will be rejected, and our way, in
answering what this Quaker alleigeth, facilitated, and withal the two
Assertions, which he insisteth upon, viz. the Universality of the Redemption,
and the mere Possibility, which was procured, abundantly confuted.

11. What that truth is, which we stand for, is plainly and fully enough set
down in several places of Our Confession of Faith: as Chap. 3. 6. As God has
appointed the elect unto glory; so has he by the Eternal and most free purpose
of his Will, fore ordained all the means thereunto. Wherefore they who are
Elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually called
unto faith in Christ by his Spirit, working in due season; are Justified,
Adopted, Sanctified, and Kept by his power through faith unto salvation.
Neither are any other Redeemed by Christ, effectually Called, Justified,
Adopted, Sanctified and Saved; but the Elect only. So Chap. 8.. 1. It pleased
God, in his eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus, his only
begotten Son, to be the mediator between God and man. -- Unto whom he did from
all eternity give a people to be his seed, and to be by him in time Redeemed,
Called, Justified, Sanctified and Glorified. And ibid.. 5. The Lord Jesus by
his perfect obedience, and sacrifice ^f himself; which he through the eternal
Spirit, once offered up unto God, has ^ully satisfied the Justice of his
Father, and purchased, not only R^conciliation, but a^ Everlasti^g inheritance
in the Kingdom of heaven, for all those, whom the Father has given unto him.
So ibid last, To all those, for whom Christ has pur^hased Redemption, he does
certanely and effectually apply and communicate the same, making intercession
for them, and revealing unto them, in and by the word, the mysteries of
salvation, effectually persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey; and
governing their hearts by his word and Spirit, overcoming all their enemies by
his Almighty power and wisdom, in such manner and ways, as are most consonant
to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensations. Our judgment is this, in
short, That Christ, according to the good pleasure of his Father, laid down
his life a Ransom for the Elect only, who were given to him to save from
Wrath, and Destruction; and by that price purchased Salvation, and all the
Means necessary thereunto, for them only to whom in due time, and after the
method, which he thinks best, does effectually apply the same unto them, and
actually save them.

12. Though grounds sufficient, considering the places of Scripture, annexed in
the margin of the Confession, confirming all, are clearly hinted and laid
down, in these passages cited; yet I shall, with what brevity is possible,
point forth our grounds in plain terms. And (1.) The Scripture is full and
plain, in holding forth a Covenant betwixt Jehovah, and the Mediator, a
transaction concerning man; or the purposes of God concerning the Salvation of
Man, in way of a mutual Compact; both for our better understanding of that
solid ground of our Peace and Hope, and for the confirming of our staggering
and weak Faith. And though the full explication and confirmation hereof, would,
I judge, fully undermine and destroy the rotten grounds of Socinians and
Arminians, and of all, who are for the Diana of Free will, and enemies to the
Grace of God; yet I cannot digress thereunto here; and shall only refer
such, as would see the same confirmed, unto Mr. Dicksons Therapeutica sacra,
and Mr Rutherfords book upon the Covenant. Taking it therefore for granted,
till what is by these Worthies said anent it be confuted; and finding that
Arminius himself in his Orat. de Sacerdotio Christi, says, there was a
Covenant betwixt the Lord and Christ, I shall but shortly infer therefrom,
That it is repugnant to reason, to say, that the result of that Eternal
Transaction: and the whole intended by it, was only to procure a mere
Possibility of Salvation; and that such a Possibility, as that though it was
equally for all; yet it might so fall out, that not one person should be saved,
among all the sons of Adam. How unreasonable is it to imagine such a bargane
betwixt the Father and the Son, as among men, considering what they are doing,
can have no place? If Christ was to see his seed, by virtue of this Contract,
then certainly God had a special eye and respect unto that seed; and that seed
must be distinguished from all the rest, for it cannot be All, else all should
be saved: and so Christ did not undertake to buy all, nor did the Father give
him All, for his seed: and in reference to that seed, the Redemption purchased
must be an Actual, and not a mere Potential, or Possible Redemption; and the
Lord must have full Power and Dominion over the Will of that Seed, whereby he
may determine their hearts unto a following of the Method, which he was to
prescribe; and all these means, whereby this actual Closeing with the
Conditions was to be effectually wrought, must have been secured: for a
transaction betwixt persons, infinite in Wisdom, must of necessity be, in all
things, contrived in deep Wisdom. So then, if by virtue of this Covenant, a
seed was ensured to Christ, it was these concerning whom the transaction was
made; for what interest could others have in this, or advantage by it? And so
the Redemption was neither Universal; nor yet merely Possible, and no more.

13. Again (2.) The Scripture every where points out the end of Christ's
coming and dying, to have been, to Procure and Obtain some good to man; it
were endless to cite the Scriptures speaking this out plainly: But if it had
been only to have procured a Possibility, then the proper and immediate end of
his dying, had been only to have procured something to God, viz. a Power to
Him, that he might, without hurt to his Justice, prescribe a possible way of
salvation. Now, not to discuss that question, agitated among Orthodox Divines,
viz. whether it was impossible for God to have pardoned the sins of man,
without a satisfaction made by his Son, or not; meaning antecedently to a
decree, determineing this way of manifestation of the Justice of God; only I
must say, that as yet I can see nothing from Scripture, determineing the
egresses of the Relative Justice of God, to be more essential to God, and less
subject to the free determinations of his good will and pleasure, than are the
egresses of his Mercy; nor do I see any necessity for asserting this against
the Socinians, seeing our ground, walking upon a decree, is proof against all
their Assaults; far less see I any necessity of founding our whole debate with
the Socinians, upon that ground; yea I cannot but judge it the result of great
imprudence so to do, seeing the Socinians may reply, that the sole ground of
that Opposition to them is not only questioned, but plainly denied, by such as
we account Orthodox and learned; and may hence gather, that we have no other
solid ground, whereupon to debate with them, but such as the learned of our
own side overthrow. The depths of God's Counsel are beyond our fathoming; and
it is hard for us to say, hithertil the omnipotent can come, but not one ince
further. I da^ not be wise above what is written; and I would gladly see one
passage of Scripture, declareing this to have been in itself utterly
impossible, and inconsistent with God. But whatever may be said of this, what
Scripture tells us, that Christ was sent to die, that he might obtean this Power
unto God? And further, what was this power? Was it a mere Power and Liberty,
that should never have any Effect? If it was to have an Effect, what was that?
Was it only to make a new Transaction with man, in order to his salvation? If
that was all, notwithstanding of all this Power and Ability, not one man might
have been saved. Was it certanely to save some? Then, the Redemption cannot be
called Universal, nor yet merely Possible. Nay, if by the death of Christ a
Right and Power only was obtained to God, God was at full liberty to have
exerced that Right and Power, or not, as he pleased; and so notwithstanding
thereof man might have remained in the same condition, whereinto he was, and
never so much as have had one offer of life, upon any terms what ever; or only
upon the old terms of the Covenant of works; and what then should the
advantage of this have been? The whole Scripture, speaking of the death of
Christ, mentions far other Ends, respecting man.

14. If we (3.) Consider how the Scripture mentions, a number given of the
Father to Christ, to be Redeemed and Saved, we shall see, that there is neither
an Universal, nor yet a mere Possible Redemption: for this gift is utterly
repugnant to, and destructive of both: for if, conform to the Covenant be^wixt
the Father and the Son, there were some given to Christ to save and redeem,
these He must actually save and redeem; and for these only, was Christ ordained
and designed of the Father to be a Redeemer; and upon the account of these
only, did he undertake the work, and lay down the ransome-money: for it is not
rational to suppose, that, the design of Father and Son being to sa^e actually
these gifted ones, Christ would shed his blood for others, who were not given
to him, and who should receive no salvation by his blood; for cui bono? what
could be the design of Father and Son in this? The matter goes not so in
humane transactions, where the price is considerable. Now, that the Scripture
mentions some given to Christ, and that in distinction from others, is clear
Ioh. 17:2. -- that he should give eternal life to as many, as thou have given
him. So verse. 12. Those that thou gave me, I have keept, and none of them are
l^st, etc. So Ioh. 6:37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me,
and verse. 30. And this is the Fathers will, that has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing Ioh. 17:9. I pray for them, I
pray not for the world, but for them, which thou have given me; for they are
thine. 10. And all thine are mine and mine are thine, and I am glorified in
them. 11. -- Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me.
24. Father I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, etc. Whence we see, that Christ had no charge of the rest; was under no tie
to save them, nor would he so much as pray for them: but as for the given ones,
Ioh. 10. called his sheep, for these he, laid down his life, and prayed; and
for these was he to give an account: nay, which is more, these had a special
Interest in God's heart and affection and were thereupon given to Christ. They
were the Father's, and given of the Father to the Son; and so fully
discriminated from all the rest; and both Father and Son stand engadged to
carry these through unto salvation: all which considered, it is most plain,
that the Redemption was Particular and Actual, conform to the Undertaking, and
Transaction.

15. Nay (4.) If we will consider the fountain love, from whence the sending
of Christ came, we will see how unreasonable it is to imagine an Universal mere
Possible Redemption, as the proper end and effect, of Christ's death and
merits. It is said Ioh. 9* 16. (A place, which our Universalists look upon, as
most favorable for them) that God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that all believers in him, might have eternal life. This love is
held forth as unparallelable, a love greater than which cannot be conceived,
and a a love demonstrated by the greatest effect imaginable, sending and giving
his only begotten, to give his life a r^nso^e, and to die for sinners; and it
must be contrary to all reason, to imagine, that all this was to procure a
Redemption, by which it was possible, that not one man should be Actually
Redeemed. Christ himself says, Ioh. 15:13. greater love has no man, than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends See also Romans 5.8. And shall
we think, that the effect of all this Non-such Love, both of the Father, and of
the Son, was only a Possible Salvation, and Redemption? and that all this love
should be outed; and possibly not one man saved? Either the Lord knew, that
some would get good by this fruit of wonderful love, or not? If not, then he
was not omniscient: and then the Father gave his Son, and the Son came, and
both were the effect of the greatest love imaginable, and yet neither of them
knew, that any one soul should be saved for all that. If he knew, then he knew,
that they would get good by it, either by themselves alone, without his Grace,
or not. If the first, why would he send his Son to die, and why would Christ
come to die for such, as they saw would never have a will to be saved by his
death? If the last be said, then, seeing the greatest expression of love was to
send his Son, and in the Son to come and die, how can we think, that that was
for all, when the grace to improve that death, and profit by it, was not
designed for all? Says not Paul Romans 8:32. He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all how shall he not with him also freely give us
all thing? Importing that that was Impossible. Shall we imagine that that is
the greatest love, which is common to all, and is not able to effectuate the
salvation of those upon whom it is set? and how can this be, that the greatest
effect of this greatest love shall be common to all, and smaller effects not
common also? See also 1 Ioh. 4:9, 10, 11. where this special love, by which
Christ was sent, is made peculiar unto believers; for John is speaking of none
else: So ^s this love peculiarly terminated on Christ's Wife and Church Ephesians.
5:25, 2. and has gracious and saving effects Gal. 2:20. Tit. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Epes. 2 4, 5, 6. Romans 8:36, 37. 2 These. 2.16, 17. Revel. 1:5, 6. Beside, that
this love is mentioned as an Old, Everlasting, and Unchangable Love, Ier. 31:3.
Ephesians. 1:3, 4. Romans 9:11. Ioh. 13:1. Zeph. 3:17. And is all this nothing but a
General Common thing, that cannot save one soul, if Lord Free will do not
consent, of his own accord?

16: Moreover (5.) if we consider the ends assigned to the Death of Christ,
mentioned in Scripture, we shall see that it was some other thing, than a mere
Possible Delivery and Redemption, common to all mankind, Mat. 18:11. He came
to save that which was lost; and not to make their salvation merely possible;
for if that were all, Christ's argument should have had no strength: So 1 Timothy
1:15.- Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: if it were a mere
possibility, that might never t^ke effect, h^w should this faithful saying be
worthy of all acception; So Luke 19:10. where the matter is exemplified in
Zaccheus. Mat. 1:21. the reason of the name Jesus, given to the Redeemer, is
because he shall save his people from their sins, that is, Actually and
Really, and not Potentially or Po^sibly only: and this cannot be meaned of all:
for he says no^ the Reprobat from their sins; at least, not from the sin of
unbeleef, b^ the confession of Adversaries; But here, no sin is excepted, and
therefore is his death restricted to his people, whom he saves from all their
sins. Heb. 2:14, 15. there is another end of his death mentioned, viz. that
he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil, and
deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their lif^time subject to
bondage. This was no mere Possible Deliverance, but Actual and Effectual; and
it was not common to all; for it is restricted to his Brethren verse. 11, 12,
17. and to sons 13. and to the children which God gave him verse. 13, 14. and
to the Seed of Abraham verse. 16. and again verse. 17. wherefore in all things
it behoved him to be made like unto his br^thren, that he might be a Merciful
and Faithful High priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people. Behoved Christ to be a Merciful and Faithful High
prist in things pertaining to God, only to make a Possible Reconciliation,
whereby it might be, that not one person should be reconciled? and are the
Reprobate his brethen? Ephesians. 5:25, 26. To what end did Christ give himself for
his Church? (And all the world of mankind belong not to his Church.) It was,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Is
this a mere Possibility? Then might Christ have died, and have had no Church to
present to himself fair and spotless: his Church might have remained full of
spots and wrinkles, unholy and full of blemishes, yea should have been no
Church. Tit. 2:14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Do
all the world belong to this peculiar people? does Christ redeem all the world
from all iniquity? Is all the world purified and made zealous of good works? Or
is all this a mere maybe, which may not be? 2 Corinthians. 5: verse. 21. He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be (...) the
righteousness of God in him. Was Christ made sin, or a sacrifice for sin, that
all the world might possibly be made the righteousness of God in him? that is,
that possibly not one person might be made the righteousness of God in him? who
can dream thus, that God's intentions and designs should be so loose and
frustrable, and that God should be so uncertain in his purposes? Gal. 1:4. why
did the Lord Jesus give himself for our sins? It was, that he might deliver
us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our father.
This is no mere Possible Deliverance; and it is such as was designed not for
all the world, but for the us, there mentioned. So Chap. 4:4, 5, -.- God sent
forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. This Real Benefit
is manifestly here restrick^d. Ioh. 17:19. for their sakes I sanctify any self,
that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Christ sanctified himself,
to be an oblation, not to obtain a mere may be; but that they, (for whose
sakes he did sanctify himself, that is, they that were given to him verse. 6:9.
and were his own verse 10. and were in due time to believe in him verse. 20.)
might Really and Actually be Sanctifi^d through him. Heb. 13:12. wherefore did
Jesus suffer without the gate? it was, that he might sanctify the people with
his own blood (...), this is more, than a may be* Romans 3:25, 26. Why did God
set forth Christ to be a propitiation? It was to declare his righteousness, for
the remission of sins that are past, that he might be just, and the justifi^r
of him, that ^eleeveth in Jesus: a Certain Real thing. Many more passages might
be added to this purpose, but these may suffice, to discover the absurd
falsehood of this Quakers doctrine.

17. Add (6. such passages, as mention the Actual Accomplishment and Effect of
Christ's death, where it will yet more appear, that this was no mere May be,
or Possible thing, but that which was to have a certain B^ing and Reality as
to the persons, for whom it was designed; Such as Heb. 1:3. -- when he had by
himself purged our sins. Can their sins be said to be purged, who pine away
in hell for ever, because of their sins? could this be true, if no man had
been saved? and yet, if it had been a mere possible and may be Redemption, it
might have come to pass, that not one person should have been actually saved.
So Heb. 9:12. -- by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption. Is a mere possible Redemption to be called
an Eternal Redemption? and was that all that Christ obtained? Then Christ's
blood was more ineffectual in the truth, than the type was, in its typicalness;
for the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an hiefer sprinkling the
unclean, did not obtain a possible and may be-sanctification, and purifying of
the flesh; but did actually and really sanctify to the purifying of the flesh
verse. 13. Again verse. 14. (which also confirms what is now said) how much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God. So that all such, for whom he offe^ed himself, and shed his blood, and
none else, have their consciences purged from dead works, to serve the living
God: and who dar say, that this is common to all, or is a mere may be, which
the Apostle both restricteth and asserteth, as a most certain real thing?
Again verse. 26. -- but now once in the end of the world, has he appeared, to
put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. So that he did Actually and Really,
and not Possibly and Potentially only, put away sin; the sin viz. of those, for
whom he was a sacrifice, even of them, that look for him, and to whom he shall
appear the second time, without sin unto salvation verse. 28. and sure, no man
in his wits will say, that this is the whole world. Gal. 3:13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. 24 That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we
might receive the promise of the Spirit, through faith Here are three Ends and
Effects of Christ's Redemption mentioned, which no Man will say, are common to
all viz. Redemption from the curse of the Law; and this was Really, and not
potentially only done, by Christ's being made a curse for us; the Communication
of the blessing of Abraham, and the Promise of the Spirit, which are ensured to
such as are Redeemed from the curse of the l^w, and to none else. So Ephesians.
2:13, 14, 15, 16. But now in Christ Jesus, ye, who sometimes were afar off, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ; for he is our peace, who has made both one,
and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us; having abolished
in his flesh the enmity, the Law of commandments in ordinances; for to make to
himself of twain one n^w man, so making peace; and that he might reconcile both
unto God, in one body, by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby. To
which add the parallel place Col. 1:21, 22. and 2:14, 15. was all this
delivery from Wrath, Enmity, Law of commandments and whatever was against us,
but a mere Potential thing, and a May be, common to all, in whose power it was
to cause it take effect; or not, as they pleased? Esai. 53:5. He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed with 1 Cor. 15.3. --
Christ died for our sins and 1 Pet. 2:24. who his own self bear our sins
in his own body, on the tree -- by whose stripes we are healed: How can we then
imagine, that all this was a mere May be, seeing he was so bruised for our
iniquities, so died for our sins, so bear our sins, in his own body; as that
thereby all, in whose room he stood, are healed by his stripes? The Apostle
does moreover fully clear this matter, Romans 5:6. -- Christ died for the
ungodly: was this for all? Or was it to have an uncertane End and effect? No,
verse. 9. much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him. The ungodly and the sinners, for whom he died, are such
as become justified by his blood, and shall at length be fully saved from
wrath. And again verse. 10. for if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God, by the death of his son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life: Upon his death follows Reconciliation with God, and then Salvation;
and his death is for no more than his life is for. By him also they receive an
atonement verse. 11. As the consequences and effects of Adam's sin did
Certainly, and not by a May be, redownd to all, that he represented and
engadged for; so the fruits and effects of Christ's death do as certainly come
unto such, as are his, as the Apostle clears, in the following verses, laying
the advantage on the side of Christ and his; verse. 15. -- much more the grace
of God, and the gift by grace, by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto
many, verse. 16. -- but the free gift is of many offenses, unto justification,
verse. 17. -- much more they, which receive abundance of grace and of the gift
of righteousness, shall reign in life, by one Jesus Christ, verse. 18. -- even
so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life, ver. 19. -- so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous, verse. 21 -- so might grace reign, through righteousness unto
eternal life, by Jesus Christ, our Lord. Is all this a Common thing, and a mere
May be, or Possibility? Ioh. 10:11. he gives his life for his sheep and verse.
15. But may they for all that perish? No, in no wise verse. 28. and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish. He came that they might have
life, and might have it more abundantly, verse. 10. To the same purpose he says
Ioh. 6.33. that he gives life unto the world, not such a life, sure, as may
never quicken any. Upon Christ's death does the Apostle infer Romans 8:32. that
the Elect shall have all things, and verse. 33, 34, 35. that they are free from
all Accusations, or any Hazard there from, being justified, and having Christ's
Death, Resurrection, and Intercession to secure them at all hands; and
thereupon they have assurance, that nothing shall separate them from the love
of God Act. 20:28. Christ has purchased a Church with his own blood. The whole
world is not this Church: nor is this purchase an uncertane may be; And all
this Real and Certain Effect of Christ's death, was foretold by Daniel Chap
9:24 -- to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, etc.
And who can imagine, that this is Universal, or Uncer^ane?

18. If we will (7.) Consider some other Ends of the death of Christ, which the
Scripture points forth, which are not to be found among Heathens, or any
except the few Chosen ones, Ordained to life, we shall see, how unreasonable
this Quaker is. Gal. 4:5. Christ died to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. Was this end, and fruit left at an
Uncertanty? Shall we think, that Christ might have died, and yet not one man
receive this Adoption? Was this Adoption purchased upon an uncertain condition?
Or was this purchased equally for all? Then such as received it, might have
thanked their own well natured Free will, upon that account. But let us
consider some other fruits. Gal. 1:4. who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us from this present evil world. So 1 Pet. 2:24. He bear our
sins, in his own body, on the tree: but for what end? That we being dead to
sin, should live unto righteousness: and Chap. 3:18. Christ suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust: To what end and purpose? To bring us to God. Heb.
10:10. by the which will we are sanctified. How came this to pass? Through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all, So he suffered without the
gate, that he might sanctify the people Chap. 13:12. Revel. 1:5, 6. -- he loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. But was this all? No, it is
added, And has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father. So Chapter 5:9,
10. -- thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood; and what
more? And have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, etc. So 2 Cor. 5:15: He
died for all* But for what end and purpose? That they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him, which died for them, and rose
again. See Col. 1:22. These and the like passages do clearly point forth a
special end of Christ's Death, which was designed both by the Father, that sent
him, and by himself: and shall we suppose, that this great and chief design
was made to hang upon the lubrick and uncertain will of man? Shall Christ be
beholden to man's good will for the purchase he made, at so dear a rate? If not,
why are not all these ends attained, in all, for whom he died? Did Christ fail
in laying down the Ransom? Or does not the Father keep condition? Who can say
either of these? Then surely, there can be no reason to say, that Christ made
an uncertain bargan, and purchased only a Possibility of these fruits, which
he knew not if ever he should attain, in any one; Nor to say, that he died for
all.

19. Let us further (8.) take notice: That for whom Christ died, he died to
take away their sins; And that so, as they may be fully Pardoned, and never
brought on reckoning again: that is, that they be Remitted and Pardoned; and
that the poor sinner may not suffer therefore. This sure must be the import of
that prayer, forgive us our trespasses. If then Christ by his death has taken
away sin, and purged it away, making satisfaction to justice therefore, how can
we think, that justice can punish the sinner in hell fire, for these same
sins? But let us see, what the Scripture says, 1 Ioh. 3:5. -- he was
manifested to take away our sins. Ephesians. 1:7. we have redemption in his blood:
what redemption? fo^giveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. So
likewise Col. 1:14. Now when sins are thus taken away, they are blotted ou^,
and not remembered Esai 43:25. Ier. 31:34. Heb. 8:12. Yea they are blotted out
as a cloud, and as a thick cloud Esai 44:22. So they are said to be subdued,
and casten into the depths of the sea. Mica 7:19. Shall we now say, that Christ
has died, to purchase this Redemption, the Forgiveness and blotting out, as a
thick cloud, and casting into the depths of the sea, of sin; and yet multitudes
of those, for whom this was purchased, and that by the blood of God, should
never obtain this benefit, but have all their sins charged upon their own
score? This so pincheth the Adversaries, that the best evasion they can fall
upon, is to say, that none shall have Original sin charged upon them: But the
Scripture no where estricteth this Remission to that sin only. Others therefore
say, That no sin now shall be charged upon any, but the sin of Unbeleef. Then
Judas does not suffer to day, for betraying his master: was it for this sin
only, that the Old World was drowned; or that the Cities of Sodom are suffering
the vengeance of eternal fire? Jude seems to say some other thing verse. 7. so
are there other sins there reckoned up verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. to which is
reserved the blakness of darkness for ever, verse. 13. But some say, that these
are all but pardoned upon condition. Then the Redemption is neither Actual and
Real, nor Complete, but a poor May be, and a may be may not be: and how can
such sins be said to be forgiven or blotted out, and casten behind God's back,
and into the depths of the sea? Did Christ know, whether or not this condition
would be performed? If not, then He is not the omniscient God. If he knew, that
it would not be performed by the greatest part, how can we imagine, that he
would notwithstanding lay down his life to purchase a Remission for them? And
how can we think, that He should purchase a Pardon to all, and let the event
hang upon the pendulous tottering will of a sinful creature? But as to that
condition, we shall

20. Propose (9.) this consideration. The not performance of that Condition was
no doubt a sin, and if Christ died for all the sins of the world, he died for
that too: And if he died for that too, that is taken out of the way, or there
must be another condition imagined, upon performance of which, that is to be
taken out of the way; and the nonperformance of this condition being also a
sin, our proposition will recurre upon this, and so in infinitum: but if this
sin be taken out of the way, it cannot prejudge them of the pardon of the rest:
and thus all their sins being pardoned, they must needs be saved: and yet it is
not so. But it is said, that Christ died not for the sin of Final Unbeleef yet
it seems, that it will be granted, that he died even for the sin of Unbeleefe
of all the world, and for unbeleefe continued in, until the last hour of a
man's life; but not for that last act; which yet is but the same Unbeleefe
continued in an hour longer; and shall we think, that Christ bare the Unbeleefe
of 20, 40, 60. or more years, in his body, on the cross, and not the same
Unbeleefe for one hour or half hour, yea or quarter of an hour? Who sees
not, how little ground there is for such an imagination? But the thing I would
have mainly here considered, is this. That for whose sins Christ has died,
he has died for all their sins; and therefore, if he died for the sins of
all the world, he died for the final Unbeleefe of all the world: But this will
not be granted; therefore neither can it be said, that he died for the sins
of all men. Whose sins he took upon him to make satisfaction for, he left
none for them to answer for; for he is a complete Mediator, and is sole
Mediator. If he died for all the rest of the sins of the Reprobat, and of the
whole world, why not for that also? Sure, when the Scripture speaks of
Christ's taking away of sin, and of the Redemption, that is, forgiveness of
sins, which people enjoy through him, there is no sin excepted, He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities Esa. 53:5. the Lord
laid on him the iniquity of us all verse. 6. or m^de the iniquity of us all to
meet on him; there is no ground for any exception here: when he was stricken
for transgression verse. 9. and his soul was made an offering for sin, v. 10. is
there any appearance of the exception of any one sin? when he bear their sin
and their iniquities verse 11, 12. what intimation is given of an exception of
any? Yea, if this exception was to be made, which would null and destroy all,
what consolation could the declaration of this redemption, remission of sins,
yield unto poor sinners? Col. 1:14. Ephesians. 1:7. When the Lord made him to be
sin for us, was it only in part? how then could we be made the righteousness of
God in Him 2 Cor. 5:21? was the Lord in Christ reconcileing the world unto
himself, not imputing only part of their trespasses to them? but the imputing
of one sin would mar the reconciliation for ever. Is not final unbeleef a dead
work? Doubtless: yet the blood of Christ purges consciences from dead works
Heb. 9:14. Did the blood of bulls and goats so sanctify, as to the purifying of
the flesh, as to leave the most defileing spot of all untaken away? How could
healing come by his stripes, if he bear but part of our sins, in his body on
the tree, seeing final unbeleef alone would mar all? for where that is, there is
no coming to God imaginable. But moreover the Scripture tells us, that the blood
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin 1 Ioh. 1:7. and that if any man
sin, there is an Advocat with the Father, who is a propitiation for sins, 1
Ioh. 2: verse. 1, 2. and so must be for all sins, otherwise there were little
ground of comfort here: And it was foretold by Daniel Chap. 9:24. that he
should make an end of sin, and finish the transgression, and so bring-in
everlasting righteousness. Does this admit of exceptions, and of such an
exception, as would unavoidably make all null? No certanely. But you will ask
of me, If I think, that Christ did die for final unbeleefe? I Answ. Not: for I
judge, it is the sin only of Reprobates, who hear the Gospel: and I judge that
Christ did not die for any sin of Reprobats: But this I hold, and have cleared,
That for whose sins soever Christ has died, he has died for all their sins:
And because he has not died for final Unbeleef, therefore he has not died,
for any sin of such, as shall be guilty of this: and as for his own, he died
to prevent their falling into, and to keep them from this sin; for he died to
bring them unto God, that they might have the Adoption of sons, that they might
be sanctified, and live unto righteousness, be made righteous, yea the
righteousness of God; as is clear 1 Pet. 2:24. Gal. 4:4. Heb. 10:10. 2 Cor.
5:21. 1 Pet. 3:18. Romans 5:19. what then will this Quaker say to this? Final
unbeleef is certainly a sin; and Christ either died for it, or not: if he died
for it, than it can be laid to no man's charge; or Christ's death is of no
value. If he died not for it, he died not for all the sins of al^ men; but at
most, for some sins of all men; and if that was all, no man could thereby be
saved, for one sin is enough to procure damnation.

21. Moreover (10) we find the Persons, for whom this price of blood was laid
down, designed more particularly, and the Object of this Redemption restricted;
and so it could not be for all and every one. It is said to be for Many Esai.
53:11. Math. 20:28. and 26.28. Mark 10:45. Heb. 9:28. and what these many are,
is abundantly declared in other Scriptures, where they are called Christ's
Sheep Ioh. 10:15. Christ's People Mat. 1:21. His People, whom according to the
predictions of the Prophets, which have been, since the world began, he should
save from their enemies, and from the hand of all, that hate them, to perform
the mercy promised to the Fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath,
which he swore to Father Abraham; that he would grant unto them, that being
delivered out of the hand of their enemies, they might serve him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness, before him, all the days of their life Luke
1:68, 70, 71, 72, 73* 74, 75. His Church Ephesians. 5:25 Act. 20:28. His Body
Ephesians. 5:23. The Children of God, that were scattered abroad Ioh. 11:52. Sons,
Sanctified, Brethren, the Children that God gave him, the Seed of Abraham Heb.
2:10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17. They are the Sheep, that shall infallibly
believe, because sheep Ioh. 10:26. and Whom Christ knows, and of whom he is
known verse, 14 and such as shall hear his voice verse. 16. and follow him verse.
27. to whom he will give eternal life, so that they shall never perish, and who
are given to him of his Father verse. 28.29. and the Elect 2 Timothy 2:10 He is
bread giving life unto the World of them, that the Father has given him, and
shall come to him Ioh. 6:33, 37. They are these, concerning whom the Fathers
will was, as being given of him, that he should lose nothing, but raise it up
again, at the last day ver. 38, 39, 40. The Redeemed ones that are numbered by
God 144000. and are the first fruits unto God, and the Lamb Revel. 14:3, 4, 5.
They are such as are the Lords, and whom the Lord knows for his 2 Timothy 2:19.
and are enrolled in the Lambs book, Revel 13:8. and 20:15. See other
particularities Psalm. 87:5. Esai. 43:1. and 49:12. and 19:18.24, 25. Zeph 3:10.
So are they designed to be these, for whom God is, and who shall have
unquestionably all things; the Elect who shall be justified, who shall not be
separated from the love of Christ; are in all things more then Conquerours Romans
8:31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39. These with whom the Covenant shall be confirmed
Dan. 9:27. The redeemed out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation; and made Kings and Priests Revel. 5:9, 10.

22. Further (11) if Christ died for the sins of all persons, how comes it
that they are not all actually pardoned? It cannot be said, that Christ's death
was not a satisfactory price, nor that the Father did not accept of it: If then
he shed his blood for the remission of sins, Mat. 26:28. are not all these sins
pardoned virtually and fundamentally? or shall they not all actually be
pardoned in due time? If it be said, they shall be pardoned upon condition of
their faith. But if the sins of all be equally paid for, and equally in a
virtual manner discharged, in Christ's being actually discharged from that
debt, in the day of his Resurrection; and the actual disharge depending upon
the uncertain condition of man's Will; man, who willingly performs the
condition, shall praise himself for the actual pardon, and none else; for
Christ did no more for him, as to the Actual Pardon, than for others, who never
shall be blessed with actual forgiveness: and yet forgiveness is held forth, as
a special act of free grace; forgiveness of sins is according to the riches
of his grace Ephesians. 1:7. Moreover as to that condition, whether did Christ
purchase it, or not? If he did not purchase it, than man is not beholden to
Christ, for the Condition; be it faith, or what ye will, it is no purchased
mercy, but man is beholden to his good Lord Free Will, for it, and so he may
sacrifice to his own net, and sing glory to himself, for making himself to
differ, and for obtaining to himself Actual Remission of all his sins, and
consequently blessedness Romans 4: v. 6, 7, 8. for had not his own well disposed
Lord Free Will performed that condition, all that Christ did had never more
advantaged him, than it did others that perish. If it be said, that grace to
perform the condition, though it be not purchased by the blood of Christ, yet
it is freely given by God, to whom he will. I Answer Not to insist here, on the
proof of faith's being purchased by Christ; because we shall clear it
afterward, and there is nothing else assigned for the condition, I would
enquire, whether Christ knew to whom this grace would be given, or not? if not,
then we must deny him to be God: if he knew, why shall we suppose, that he
would lay down his life equally for all, when he knew before hand, that many
should never get grace to perform the condition, upon which his death should
redound to their actual pardon and justification? what Ends, or what Advantages
can we imagine of such an Universal Redemption?

23. (12.) If the condition, upon which actual pardon and justification is
granted, in the blood of Christ, be purchased by Christ; then either all shall
certainly be Pardoned and Justified; or Christ has not purchased an Equal,
Common, and Possible Redemption, to all and every man: But the former is true,
and it is not true that all shall certainly be pardoned and actually justified;
for then all should be glorified. That the condition, to wit, Faith, and
Repentance is purchased by Christ, who can deny, seeing, he is expressly called
the Author of Faith, Heb. 12:2. and a Prince exalted to give Repentance and
forgiveness of sins Act 5.31? So that as forgiveness of sins is founded upon
his death, as the Meritorious cause; so must Repentance be; and Christ, as an
exalted Prince and Savior, has this power to dispose of his own purchased
legacy, which he has left, and ensured by his death, unto the heirs of
salvation. Upon his Death, and Satisfaction made in his death, has he got all
power in heaven and earth, a power to quicken whom he will Mat. 28:^8 Ioh.
5:21, 22, 27. Phil. ^:9, 10 Hence we are said to be complete in him Col 2:10.
and to be blessed with all spiritual blessings, in ce^estials (to which, no
doubt, faith and Repentance do belong) in him Ephesians. 1:3 Is it not from hence,
that the divine power has given unto us all things, that pertain unto life
and godliness 2 Pet. 1:3? Nay Paul tells us expressly Phil. 1:29. that it is
given to us, in the behalf of Christ, to believe on him. And certainly there
is a promise of Faith and Repentance; and all the promises are yea and amen in
Him 2 Cor. 1:20. all the Blessings contained in the Covenant, are made sure by
his death, who was the surety of this better Testament Heb. 7:2^. and this
Testament was to have force by his death Heb. 9:15, 16, 17, 18. and the New
heart and heart of flesh, is promis^d in the Covenant, and comprehends Faith
and Repentance, they being some of his laws, which he has also promised to
write in the heart Ier. 31:33. Heb. 8:10. Ezech. 11:19, 20. and 36:26, 27. We
have moreover seen that Sanctification and Holiness, from which, Faith and
Repentance cannot be separated* were purchased by Christ, and intended in his
death: whence he is made of God unto us Sanctification 1 Cor. 1* 30. If it be
not purchased by Christ, how come we by it? is it a thing in our Power, and an
act of our own Free Will? Then, as I said before, we are beholden to
ourselves, for Faith and all that follow upon it, and then farewell all Prayer
for Faith and Repentance, and all Thanksgiving to God for it. This is pure
Pelagianisme. If it be said, that it is the free gift of God Ephesians. 2:8. and a
Consequent of electing love. I Answer all the fruits of election, which are
to be wrought in us, are procured by the blood of Christ; for all are conveyed
to us in a Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator and Surety, and with Christ
he gives us all things Romans 8:32. and we are blessed in Him with all spiritual
blessings, according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world Ephesians. 1:3, 4 So we are predestinate unto the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1:5. and adoption is not had without Faith Ioh. 1* 12. can
we have Actual Redemption in Christ's blood Ephesians. 1:7. Col. 1:14. even
forgiveness of sins, and not have also in his blood Faith, without which
there is no actual redemption, or forgiveness of sins to be had? when Christ
gave himself for us, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works Tit. 2:14. did he not purchase Faith. without which we
cannot be such? when the Renewing of the holy Ghost is shed on us abundantly,
through I. C. Tit. 3:5, 6. have we not Faith also through him? May we not pray
for Faith; and can we pray for any thing, and not in Christ's name? See 2 Timothy
1:9. 1 Pet: 1:3: Romans 8:32, 39. Luke 22:32.

24. Again (13.) All that Christ died for, must certanely be Saved, But all
Men shall not be saved. That all, for whom Christ died, must certanely be
saved, is hence apparent. (1.) That all, who have Saving Faith and Repentance,
shall be saved, will not be denied; and that Christ has purchased Faith and
Repentance to all, for whom he died, we have shown above. (2.) These who shall
freely get all things from God, must get Salvation; for all things else
signify nothing without that; but all they, for whom Christ was delivered,
shall get all things, Romans 8:32. (3.) They whom nothing shall separate from the
love of Christ, and from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord,
must certainly be saved: But all they, for whom Christ has died, will in due
time have ground to say this, Romans 8:34, 35, 39. (4.) All they, to whose charge
nothing can be laid, shall be saved: But this will be true of all that Christ
died for; for Christ's death is held forth as the ground of this, Romans 8:33,
34. (5.) They, for whom Christ interceedeth, shall undoubtedly be saved: But
Christ intercedeth for all, for whom he died, Romans 8:34. (6.) All who are
sanctified shall be saved: But all that Christ died for shall in due time be
sanctified; Sanctification being, as we showed above, one principal intended
end of Christ's death. (7.) All Christ's Elected sheep shall be saved: But such
are they for whom Christ died, as was shown. (8.) All that God and Christ love
with the greatest love imaginable, shall certainly be saved: But such are they,
for whom Christ died, Ioh. 3:16. and 15:1^. Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5:25. (9.) All
that become the righteousness of God in Christ shall be saved. But that shall
be true of all, for whom he died, or was made sin, or a sacrifice for sin 2
Cor. 5:21. (10. All, that shall be blessed in having their sins pardoned, shall
be saved, Romans 4:6, 7, 8. But all for whom Christ died shall have this
redemption, Ephesians. 1:7. Col. 1:14. (11.) All they, whom Christ knows and
acknowledges, shall be saved, Mat. 7:34. But he knows all them for his
sheep, Ioh. 10:14, 1^. for whom he died. (12.) All, for whom Christ rose
again, shall be saved, seeing he rose for our justification, Romans 4:25. But he
rose again for all those, for whom he died, Rom 4:25. who was delivered for
our offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans 8:34. (13.) All
who shall be planted together with Christ, in the likeness of his resurrection,
shall be saved: But that is true of such as he died for, Romans 6:5. (14.) All
they in whom the old man shall be crucified, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth they should not serve sin, shall be saved: But that
is true of such as he died for, Romans 6:6, 7, 8. knowing this, that our old man
is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin: for he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be
dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live with him, etc. (15.) All
they, who shall be made Kings and Priests unto God, shall be saved. But all the
redeemed shall be such, Rev. 1:5, 6. and 5:10. See worthy Mr Durham on the
Revel. p. 303. (16.) If Christ must see of the travail of his soul, then these
he died for must be saved: But the former is true, Esai. 53:11. (17.) All whom
Christ shall Ju^tifie shall be saved, But he shall justify all whose iniquities
he bears, Esai. 53:11. Thus is this sufficiently proved.

25. It is also considerable (14.) That no where in Scripture, we find it
expressly said and affirmed, That Christ died for all men; Far less fin^e we it
said, that Christ died for all and every man. Why then is all th^s trouble
made? But they say, as much as all that is said by consequence. And this we
deny: if they will rationally press this matter, they should evince, that such
expressions, as they make so much work about, can be no otherwise understood,
than they suppose, in the places, where they stand: and this they shall never
be able to do. Though it be said, that Christ gave his life a Ransom for all;
yet no reason can evince, that that is necessarily to be understood of all and
every man: so nor can they conclude any thing rationally from the word world.
They may as well infer from these words all, and the world, that Christ died
for devils, beasts and senseless creatures, as that he died for all and every
man; for they are comprehended under these terms, as well as Men: And if they
will restrict these terms to men, because of other Scriptures; why may not we
restrick them also to the Elect, because of the correspondence of other
passages of Scripture? They cannot deny us the liberty; they take to
themselves. If they say, that there is a vast difference betwixt Devils an Men,
in reference to such favors. We deny it not: but shall add, that in reference
to spiritual favors, amongst which, we cannot but reckon, with the good leave
of our Adversaries, the death of Christ, being the fruit and expression of the
greatest love of God to Man, we find also a great difference in Scripture.
Some are Loved, some Hated Romans 9:11, 12. Some whom He Knows, some whom he
Knows not Ioh. 10:14. and 13:18. Mat. 7:33. 2 Timothy 2:19. Some Chosen and
Ordained to life, others Not, but to Wrath Act. 13:48. Romans 8:30. and 9:18.
etc. Ephesians. 1:4. 1 These. 5:9. Some Sheep, others Goats Mat. 25:32. Some on whom
God has Mercy, others whom he Hardens Romans 9. Some his Church, others not
Act. 20:28. Ephesians. 5:25. Some of the W^rld, others not Ioh. 17:9, 10. Some his
Brethren, others not Heb. 2:10, 12, 13. And as plainly read we, that Christ
died for his People Mat. 1:21. his Sheep Ioh. 10:11, 12, 14. his Church Act.
20:28. Ephesians. 5:25. his Elect Romans 8:32, 34. and his Children Heb. 2:12, 13.

26. If we would consider aright (15.) What Christ did undergo and suffer,
while he was made sin, or was making satisfaction for sin; we should hardly
think it probable, that Christ Jesus, God-man, who was the brightness of the
Fathers glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1:3. and thought it no
robbery to be counted equal with God, Phil. 2:6. Should have undergone what he
did undergo, and that the Father should have laid all that upon him, which he
did lay upon him, and that to purchase only a mere Possible Redemption from sin
and wrath, whereby not one person should be saved or pardoned, if so it had
seemed good to captain Free will. Not to Mention his condescending to be Born
of a woman, and to be Made under the Law, Gal. 4:4. nor his being in the Form
of a servant, Phil. 2:7. nor his Poverty and mean condition in the world, 2
Cor. 8:9* nor his Conflicting with the indignities of the world, Psalm. 22:6.
Heb. 12:2, 3. with the temptations of Satan Mat. 4:1*-12. Luke 4:15. and his
being under the infirmities, common to the nature of man, being in all things
like us, except sin Heb. 2:17. and 4* 15. Esai. 52:13, 14. Nay, nor his
sufferings in his Body, Name, Honor at death, when he was Betrayed by Judas
Mat. 2^:4. Forsaken by his disciples Mat. 26:56. Scorned and Reviled by the
world Esai. 53:2, 3. Condemned as a malefactor by Pilat, and Tormented by his
persecuters Mat. 27:26 -- 50. Ioh. 19:34. and Endured the Painful, Shameful and
Cursed death of the cross Phil. 2:8. Heb. 12:2. all which and the like being
endured by Him, who was the Son of God, could be no mean suffering, nor
undergone for an uncertain end, or for the procureing of a mere Possible and
Uncertain good: But that which we would most take notice of here, is, his Soul
sufferings, being pursued by divine justice, when that Zach. 13* 7. was
accomplished, awake, O sword, against my shepherd, against the Man, that is my
follow, says the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be
scattered, Mat. 26 31. and the Lord did bruise him, and put him to grief Esai.
53 5, 10. and he began to be sorrowful even unto death Mat. 26:37, 38. and was
sore amazed and very heavy Mark. 14:34. and was put to offer up prayers and
supplications, with strong cries and tears to him, that was able to save him
Heb. 5:7. when, notwithstanding that an angel appeared unto him from heaven,
strengthening him, yet being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his
sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood falling down to the ground Luke
22:43, 44. and at length was made to cry out, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me Psalm. 22:1. Mat. 27:46. Mark. 15:34. This was no mean business,
when the Rays and Irradiations of Divine Love were drawn-in and withheld from
him, who had such a sharp sense of the happiness in the enjoying of God's
favor, because of the Personal union with the Godhead. But that which is most
of all to be considered, is his being made a Curse Gal 3* 13. and so made to
wrestle with the Justice and Wrath of a sin-revenging God. This was the gall
and the wormwood, that made him cry Ioh. 2:27. Now is my soul troubled, and
what shall I say? Father save me from this hour. Shall we suppo^e, that all
this was about an Uncertane Bargane? Shall we think, that he died the cursed
death of the cross, and bore the weight of God's wrath Luke 22:4^. Mat. ^7:46.
and so became a sacrifice to satisfy divine justice Heb. 9 14, 18 and all to
purchase a mere Poss^bility; or a mere Possible Redemption? Shall we think,
that the Second person of the Trinity should do and suffer all these things,
for to redeem man, when possibly, if Freewill should be so ill natured, not one
man should reap any advantage thereby? Me thinks, the asserting of this should
be a great temptation to cause people turn Socinians, and deny all these soul
sufferings of Christ, and his bearing the wrath of God, and making any
satisfaction to justice.

27. Add to this (16.) That the Scriptures speak of Christ's Death and
Sufferings, as being not for himself, but for Others; and that not only for the
good and adva^tage of others (and doubtless the advantage of all this should be
but little, if it were nothing else, but a mere Possible Redemption, which Free
will might make Actual, or Not Actual, as it pleased) but in their Room and
Place: hence it is called the chastisement of our peace Esai. 53:5. and he is
said to have b^rne our griefs, and carried our sorrows verse. 4. He was wounded
for our transgressions; and bruised for our iniquities verse. 5. The Lord laid
on him the iniquity of us all verse. 6. -- for the transgression of my people
was he stricken verse 8. -- for he shall bear their iniquities verse. 11. -- he
bare the sin of many verse. 12. He bear our sins, in his body, on the tree 1
Pet. 2:24. the just suffered for the unjust 1 Pet. 3:18. Hence believers are
said to be crucified with him Gal. 2:20 -- to be baptized into his death Romans
6:3. buried with him by baptism into death verse. 4. -- planted together in the
likeness of his death verse. 5. dead with Christ verse. 8. He was cut off, but
not for himself Dan. 9:26. See also Heb. 2:9. 1 Pet. 2:21. Shall we say, that
this was merely for our good, seeing it was, in some respect, for the good of
the whole creation Romans 8:20, 21, 22, 23. Act. 3:21. and not in our Place and
Stead? Paul says 2 Cor 2:14. If one be dead for all, then were all dead. And
i^ is manifest, that he paid the Law-debt, having taken on him the seed of
Abraham for this end Heb. 2:16. and being made a curse for us, he redeemed us
from the curse of the Law Gal. 3:10. So that it was in our stead Romans 5:6, 7,
8. Ioh. 11:50. and 10:11, 15. And the Preposition (...) has clearly this
import Mat. 5:38. and 17:27. Esa. 4^:4. Exodus 21:23, 24. 1 Chronicles. 14:1. 1 King.
3:7. 2 King. 1:17. and 11:43 Prove. 11:8. Job. 16:4. and 34:^. 1 Pet. ^:9. Romans
12:17. See many other places cited by worthy Mr Rutherfoord in his book of the
Covenant Page 25.255. where both in the N. T. and to the LXX, version of the
old (...) has his imp^rt. And this t^u^h is abundantly made out by our
Orthodox Divines, writing against the Socinians; so that I need say no more of
it; only I ^hink, such as a^^ert the Re^empt^^n pu^chased by Christ to have
been a mere Gen^ral Possible R^demption, do strengthen the hands of ^he
Socinians; and join wi^h them against the Or^hodox: but these Quakers, with
their old friends the Arminians, will join with Socinians, or any, rather than
with truth; and we have seen alrea^y, in how ma^y t^ings, this man takes part
with the Socinians. But to our purp^se, ^uch as Christ did thus die for, and in
their room and place, are accounted to ^ave died in Him, and so freed: as in
Ter. Proillo te ducam. Ego prote molam*

28. Moreover (17.) If we consider the furniture, which Christ as mediator had
given to him of the Father, we shall see mo^e of the unrea^onableness of this
Opinion, which this Quaker, with the Arminians, embraces: Not to speak of what
he had as God, the Fathers Fellow and Equal, let us but take notice of that
c^mmunicated furniture, which he had as Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy
2:5. and our Immanuel, Esai. 7:14 We see He is called Wonderful, Counselor,
etc. Esai. 9:6, 7. He is that Candlestick, whence the golden pipes do empty the
golden oil, Zech. 4 12. He was full of grace and truth Ioh. 1:14. Was this
fullness for a mere Possible effect? Or had He it so, and for such an end, as
none might possibly be the better thereof? No; and of his fullness have all we
received grace for grace Ioh. 1:16. He had not the Spirit by measure Ioh 3:34.
It pl^ased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell Col. 1:9. In him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Col. 2:3. and in him
dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily verse. 9. And wherefore is all
this? Even that all his might be compleet in him verse. 10. Grace was poured
into his lips Psalm. 45:2 and he was anointed with the oil of gladness above
his fellows verse. 7. And Esai. ^1:1. Luk 4:18. etc. The Spirit of the Lord God
was upon him, because the Lord had anointed him. And for what end? To preach
glade tideings unto the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound.
See further verse. 2 ^. Sure, this was no uncertain end, nor l^st to the
discretion of Free will. So Esai 11:^. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, etc. Sh^l all this be, and
further shall righte^usness be the girdle of his ^^mes, and faithfulness the
gir^le of his reins verse 5. And ^ay it notwithstanding so come to pass, that
the Wolf shall not dwell with the Lamb, nor the Leopard lie down with the Kid,
etc nor the earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea? Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. How absurd is it to imagine this? And yet so it may be,
by the Quakers opinion. All this furniture says, that it was no Uncertain
G^neral End, which he had before his eyes, in undertaking this work; and the
Father in sending him, and granting to him this fullness

29. Add to this (18.) The Titles and Relations, which Christ took upon Him
for they cannot be mere in^igni^icant and empty Names. He is called a Redeemer
Esa. 4^:14. and 54:5. and 49:26. and 60:16. and 43* 14. and 44:6, 24. and 48:
17. and 49:7. and 47:4. and 59:20. Romans 11:26. And shall we imagine, that He
shall be a Redeemer and Deliverer, and yet no man Redeemer or delivered? No: He
has a redeemed company, whom he owneth as such Esa. 35 ^. and 43:1, 2^. and
44:22. and 48:20. Ier. 31.11. Esai. 51:11 and 52:3. and 63:4. Zach. 10:8. Luke
1.68. and 24:21. 1 Pet. 1:18. Revel. 5:9. and 14:3. He is called a Savior
Esai. 4^:3, 11. and 45:15, 21. and 63* 8. Luke 1:47. and 2:11. Ioh 4:^2. Act.
5:31. and 13:23. 2 Timothy 1:10. Tit. 1:^. Ephesians. 5:2^. Tit. 2:13. and 3:6. 2 Pet.
1:1, 11. and 2:20. and 3:2, 18. 1 Ioh. 4:14. Shall we think, that he was given
and sent for a Savior, and took upon him that title and relation, and
notwithstanding no man might be saved? No, there are also some designed, the
Saved 2 Cor. 2:15. Act. 2:4^ 1 Cor. 1:18. He is called a King Revel. 15:3. and
17:14. and 19:16. 1 Timothy 6:15. Ioh. 12:15. Luke 19:38. and 23 2. Zach. 9 9.
Mat. 21:5. Now is he an actual King, and shall have none but potential
Subjects? Shall he be a King without a Kingdom? See Ioh. 18:36. Col. 1:13. 1
Cor. 15:24. He is called an Husband 2 Cor. 11:2. Ier. 31:3^. And therefore He
must have a Wife and a Bride I^h. 3.29. Revel. 18:23. and 21:9. and 22:17. He
is called an Head Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 11:3. Ephesians. 4:15. and 1:22 Col. 1:18.
And so must have a Bo^y Ephesians. 1:23. Romans 12:5. Ephesians. ^:4. Col. 3:15. and
1:24. and 2:19. Ephesians. 4:6. and 5:23. and 3:6. He is called the Vine stock, and
shall he have no Branc^es? Ioh. 15:1, 2. etc. These things mi^ht be further
enlairged and pressed; but we s^all haste forward.

30. (^9.) Our Adversaries say, That Christ by his Death and passion did
Absolut^ly, even according to the Intention of God, purchase Remission of sins
and Reconciliation with God, and that for all and every man: Ot^ers say
conditionally: But withal as to the application of this purchase it is made to
depend upon faith: and so they distinguish betwixt Impetration and Applicati^n.
And though it is true, the purchase made is one thing, and the actual enjoyment
of the thing purchased is another thing: Yet we may not say, with our
Adversaries, that the Impetration is for more, than shall have the Application;
or as this Quaker, who in effect says, that it may so fall out that there
shall be no Application, for all this Impetration. But we assert, that both
Impetration and Application, in re^pect of the design of the Father, which is
absolute and certain, and the Intention of Christ the Mediator, which is fixed
and p^remptory, are for the same individual persons; so that for whom soever
God (...) Christ, and Christ came to purchase any good, unto these same shall
it actually, in due time, and in the Method and manner Condescended upon and
prescribed be given; and upon them, and none else, shall it actually be
bestowed. for (1.) No other thing, beside this Application, can be supposed to
have been the end of the Impetration; And sure, Christ was herein a Rational
Agent: Nay, it was the Intention and design of the Father, that the
Application of these good things should be by the means of this Impetration,
as is abundantly cleared above. (2.) We cannot suppose that either Christ, or
his Father, should fail, or come short of their end designed; but by our
Adversaries, the Impetration might have been obtained, and yet no Application
made of the good things impetrated and obtained. (3.) If no Application was
intended by the Father or by Christ, then it must be said, that both were
uncertain, as to what the Event should have been, or at least Regardless and
Unconcerned; either of which to affirm were blasphemy. (4.) The very word
Impetrate, having the same force and import with, Purchase, Procure, Obtain,
Merit, and the like, does say, that such, for whom this Impetration was made,
have a right, upon the Impetration, to the thing Acquired and Purchased: And if
they have a right thereto, that Possession should follow. (5.) Yea the word
imports, the actual conferring of the good, to be the very end of the
Purchaseing and Impetrating; and so, in this case, the very Impetration is
ground of Assurance of the Application, considering, who did impetrate, and at
whose hands, and withal, what was the ground of the Fathers sending of Christ,
and of Christ's coming to impetrate, even inconceiveably wonderful and great
Love. Nor does the intervening of a condition, required before the actual
collation of some of the good things purchased, hinder at all; for all these
Blessings, some whereof are as a condition to others, are the one good thing
Impetrated, and the very conditions are also Impetrated, as we declared above:
and so this points forth only the method of the actual bestowing of these
good things purchased. (6.) How absurd is it to say, a thing is Impetrated or
Obtained, and yet may, or may not be Bestowed; may be Possessed, or not
Possessed? Or to say, that such a good thing is Obtained by price or
petitioning, and yet the same good t^ing, may never be Bestowed, or the
Bestowing of it hangs and depends upon an Uncertain Condition, which may
never be performed? (7.) How unreasonable is it, that such should have right to
the Merits, that have no right to the thing Merited? Does not an interest in
the Merits, procureing any thing, include an interest in the thing Merited?
When a ransom is paid for captives, to the end they may be delivered, have
not these Captives a right to the deliverance, upon the payment of that
ransom? (8.) The Scriptures do so connect these two, that it argues contempt
thereof, to imagine such a separation: as Romans 4:25. Yea the one is assigned as
a certain Effect and Consequent flowing from the Other, as its Moral cause
Esai. 53:11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, this
Justification is the Application; and whence comes it? For he shall bear their
iniquities, there is the Impetration gi^en as the ground hereof: So further
verse. 5. he was wounded for our transgressions, etc. and what follows upon
this Impetration? And by his stripes are we h^aled. So R^m. 5: verse. 18. By the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification. So that
the Application reaches an all, that is, all who have interest in the
righteousness, which is the thing Impetrated see also Heb. 10:10. (9.) If
Christ's Intercession be for the same persons, for whom he Died, t^en the
Application is to the same; for this Intercession of Christ is in order to the
Application: But that Christ's Intercession is for the same persons, for whom h^
died, we shall see hereafter (10.) If all things be ensured to such, for whom
Christ died, then certanely this Application cannot fa^l: but the former is
true Romans 8 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not mark this manner of express^on, which imports the
great^st of absurdities to think otherwise) with him also freely give us all
things? (11.) And in that same place verse. 33, 34. Christ's death is given as
the certain ground of Justification, and Salvation; so that such, as he died
for, shall certanely, in due time, and after the method prescribed, be
Justified and Saved; otherwise, there were no sure ground in the Apostles
argueing; for if all the ground of this certanty, as to Application, were from
their Faith, or fulfilling of the Condition, the Apostle would have mentioned
this, as the maine ground, and not have led them to a ground common to others,
who never should partake of the Application. (12.) This matter is abundantly
confirmed from what we said above, concerning Christ's purchasing of Faith, and
dying for our sanctification, and to bring us to God, etc. so that more needs
not be added h^re.

31. (20.) For further confirmation of this, and because our Adversaries think
to salve the forementioned separation of Impetration and Application, by
telling us, that where good things are Absolutely purchased, then Application
must follow; But not where good things are purchased only Conditionally, as in
our case: we shall therefore show, how this will not hold, nor advantage their
cause: for (1.) If all be Redeemed Conditionally, that condition, whatever it
be, must in equity be revealed to all. I know this Quaker will grant this, and
say, that it is revealed to all persons, come to age; but how this is, and what
he understands hereby, we shall afterward have occasion to enquire: However,
others are put to sorry shifts here. (2.) Either God and Christ knew, who would
perform this condition, or not: If not, then they were not omniscient: If they
did know; then sure, this death was more particularly and designedly intended
for them, than for the rest: and upon what account, and to what end, should
Christ lay down his life a ransom for such, as he knew certainly should never
be the better thereof? And why would the Father send him to die for such? (3.)
This Condition is either in man's sole power, without the help of the grace of
God, to perform, or not: If it be in man's power, from what Scripture shall
this Pelagianisme be confirmed? How shall then the new Covenant of grace be
distinguished in specie from the Covenant of Works, made with Adam? If t^is
Condition be not in man's power, but the grace of God must work it, Then either
God will work it in all, or not: If not, why would God purchase good things to
people upon a Condition, which they could not perform, and which he alone
could work in them, and resolved not to work in them? If he will work it in
all, then all shall certainly be saved. Again, if this Condition be the free
gift of God, then either God will give it Absolutely to all; and so all shall
certainly be saved: or Absolutely to some, and then none but they shall be
saved, and why should Christ die for the rest? Or Conditionally to all: And if
so, the doubt will recurre concerning that Condition, which either must be
Absolutely given, and so we are where we were, or Conditionally, and so still
the doubt recurreth. (4.) This condition is either purchased by Christ, or it
is not. If not, then we owe no thanks to Christ for it, nor for what is
obtained upon that condition, more then others who perform not the condition,
and so obtain nothing: but to Ourselves only, who make ourselves to differ;
and so may we sing praises to ourselve, and put the crown upon our own heads,
and give no song of praise to the Redeemer, but what such as go to hell are
bound to give, contrary to all Christian Religion: If Christ has purchased
this Condition, then i^ is done either Absolutely, or Conditionally: If
A^so^utely, t^an all shall Absolutely have it: if Conditionally, we enquire,
what is the Condition? And whatever it be, we may move the same questions
concerning it (5.) By this means the act should creat ^ts own object; for
Faith in the death of Christ is ordinarily given as the Cond^t^on, and this
faith makes the death of Christ valide, which otherwise would not be (6.)
This makes all the virtue of Christ's death to depend upon man's act; so that if
man will, all shall be saved; if not, no man shall be saved, notwithstanding
that Christ died for them. (7.) This makes Christ but, at most, a half
Mediator, doing one part of the work; and man, coming in to compleete it, must
be the other half mediator; and so, at least, must have the half of the Praise
(8.) where says ^he Scripture, that if we believe, Christ died for us? or that
Christ died for all, or for any, Conditionally? It is true, some of the effects
of Christ's death are bestowed conditionally, (^aking the word conditionally
not properly, as it the performance of that condition, did in proper law ^ense
procure a right to these mercies; for through the merits of Ch^ist's blood
have we a right properly to al^; but improperly as denoteing nothing but the
Method and way of Go^'s bestowing the blessings purcha^ed, first this, and
th^n, upon the souls acting o^ that, another; as for exam^le, first faith, then
upon the souls acting o^ Faith, Iust^fication, then Sa^ctification etc. and
upon the souls acting of Sanctification, Glo^ification) but the death of Christ
cannot therefore be called Conditional, more than the will or purpose of God
can be called conditional, because some of the things willed, may depend upon
other, as upon a condition (9) Then by performing the Condition, man should
^rocure to himself a Legal Right* and Title not only to the d^a^h of Christ,
bu^ ^o Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, yea and to Glorification; yea
and that a more near and effectual Title and right, than what was had by
Christ's death; for the Title had by Christ's death (if it can be called a
Title) was far Remote and Common to such, as shall never have any p^ofi^e by
it; but the other is C^rtain, Particular, Proxime, and gives possession, jus
in re. (10.) Then Christ's blood, as shed upon the cross, was but a Potential
thing, h^ving no power or virtue in it self to redeem any, it was but a poor
Potential price: and all its virtue of actual purchasing and procureing is from
man's performing the Condition; this, and this only, gives it Power and
Efficacy: and so Christ is beholden to man for giving virtue unto his Blood,
and making it effectual, which before was a dead ineffectual thing. Then let
any judge, who should have the greatest share of the glory of Redemption, Man
or Christ (11.) was Christ's death Absolute in no respect; or was it, as to
some things, I mean, belonging to Grace and Glory, Absolute? if in nothing,
then Man must certanely have a great share of the glory: if it was Absolute as
to any thing, what was that? and why was it more Absolute as to that, than as
to other things? And why should it then be simply, and without limitation, said
that Christ died for all Conditionally? (12.) what will this Quaker say, as to
infants? did Christ die for them Conditionally? But he must say, that Christ
died not for them at all, because they have no sin: where is then his Universal
Redemption? Infants, sure, make a great part of mankind: and therefore the
Redemption, from which they are excluded, and of which they have no need, can
not be called Universal.

32. For Further confirmation of our 19. Argument, and confutation of our
Adversaries position, we add (21) That Christ Jesus is heard of the Father in
all that he asks Psalm. 2:8. Ioh. 11:41:42. and as an High Prist he entered
into heaven H^b. 9:11.12. ^ow to appear in the presence of God for us verse. 24
to prepare a pla^^ Job. 14:2. and to act the part of an Advocat, inte^ceding
with the Father, in the behalf of all such* for whom he died 1 Ioh. 2:1, 2 If
then Christ, whom his Father hears always, intercedeth in the behalf all
these, for whom he died, either he did not die for all, or all must certainly
be saved. That Christ's Intercession, and Death are so the same persons, will
be, and must be denied by our Adversaries: But to us it is most manifest from
these grounds 1.) To Inte^cede and pray are as Essential and Necessary Acts of
the Priestly office, as to offer sacrifice: and the Apostle Heb. 9: clears
up, how Christ did in truth, what the High priest among the Jews did in the
type; for as the High priest alone went, once every year. into the second
tabernacle, or holy of holies, notwithout blood, which he offered for himself,
and the errors of the people verse. 7. So Christ being come an High priest of
good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, by his own
blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Red^mption verse. 12. Hence he is said to Live for ever to make Intercession for
us. Heb. 7:25. and he is an Advocat with the Father 1 Ioh. 2:1 Hence then it is
manifest, that Christ must Intercede for such, as he did Offer up himself for,
or he shall not be a Perfect and Compleet High Priest; or not faithful to
perform all the O^fices of the High Priest: neither of which can be said (2.)
The ground of his Intercession, is held forth to be his Oblation: as the High
Priest went into the holy of holies with the blood of the sacrifices, which he
had offered; so Christ entered into the holy place, having first obtained by
the sacrifice of himself an Eternal Redemption. Heb. 9:12. So he is an Advocate
with the Father, being first a Propitiation for sins 1 Ioh. 2:1, 2 (3.) Both
his Death and Intercession make up one Compleet Medium, and are intended and
designed, as one Medium, for the end designed, viz the bringing of many sons
unto glory, saving to the uttermost all that come to God through him etc. (4.)
How unreasonable is it to think, that Christ would refuise to Pray for such,
whom he loved so dearly, as to lay down his life for? yet he says expressly,
that he prays not for the world, but for others, distinguished from the
world, Ioh. ^7:9. (5.) As His Death was for such as the Father had given him
(as we saw above) so his Intercession and Prayer is restricted to such Ioh.
17:9. --. I pray not for the world; but for them which thou have given me, for
they are thine. (6.) Christ's end in coming into the world, was to save his
people; Hence he got that name Jesus; but he should not be able to save them,
Perfectly, Compleetly, and to the Utermost, if he did not join his
Intercession, with his Oblation; Yea upon this account he continues ever a
Priest, having an unchangable Priesthood, Heb. ^:24, 25. But this man, because
he continues ever, has an unchangable Priesthood, wherefore he is able to
save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. (7.) The Apostle so joyneth them together Romans
8:34. that they must do manifest violence to the Apostles reasoning, who would
pull them asunder, and separate the one from the other. It is (sais he) Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. (8.) Yea, they are so joined together
here, that his death alone considered could not yield that ground of triumph
and boasting, nor security from Accusations: Yea rather that is risen again,
etc. (9.) So that the separating and taking of these asunder, is greatly
prejudicial to the consolation of his people; for though they should attain to
some apprehensions of Christ's dying for them, as an Advocate with the Father,
upon new sins 1 Ioh. 2:1, 2. Though Christ died, yet they might be condemned,
for he must also Interceed; and if he do not Intercede for them, their Hopes,
and Comforts are gone: And so there should be no force in that, who is he that
condemns, it is Christ that died? Romans 8* 34. And a poor soul might be had
saved, but not to the uttermost, contrare to Heb. 7:25. (10) And that place
Romans 8:33. restricteth both equally unto the Elect: who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? (11.) When Christ laid down his life a Ransom for
sinners, he could not but know, that by that Ransom none should be actually
saved, without his Intercession, it being accorded betwixt Father and Son, that
the mediator should mediate both by Price and by Prayer* And he could not but
know, for whom he purposed and intended to Interceed; how shall we then
suppose, that he would lay down his life for those, for whom he was purposed
not to Pray? Or that he would do the most for them, For whom he would not do
the least? (12.) Christ's intercession is really a presenting unto God the
Oblation made: Therefore says the Apostle Heb. 9:24. that Christ is entered
into heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us: And so by
appearing he Interceedeth: and his appearing is in his own blood, whereby he
obtained Eternal Redemption Heb. 5:12. and so his Intercession must be for all,
for whom the Oblation was, and the eternal Redemption was obtained. (13.) Yea
both these are so joined together by Esaias Chap. 53:12. as that they are made
one ground, and procureing cause of God's divideing him a portion with the
great, and of Christ's own divideing the spoil with the strong; Because he has
poured out his soul unto death, and he bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. (14.) This is further clear from the
reasons, we gave to confirm that fast connection betwixt Christ's Impetration
and Application, in the foregoing paragraph, for the Actual Application of the
benefit and fruit of his oblation is attributed to his Intercession* (15.)
Nay, that whole Chapter Ioh 17. confirms this; for there Christ is both
Offering himself, or sanctifying himself thereunto verse. 19. and Interceding:
and these are so lincked together, both in themselves, and as to the persons
for whom, that it must argue, at least, much incogitancy, to imagine a
divulsion, and separation of these two acts of his Priesthood. (16.) If Christ
Intercede not for the same persons, for whom he died, we ask for whom he
Intercedeth? Is it for actual believers? Then we ask a Scripture ground for
this restriction? And then it is manifest hence, that Christ Intercedeth not
for the working of faith in any: And yet Esaias tells us, that he makes
Intercession for transgressors: And we see Ioh. 17:20. that he prays not
only for those, who were already believers, but for such also, as were not yet
believers. He told us Himself also, that he would pray the Father for the
Spirit, Ioh. 14: verse. 16. And among other things, this is one work of the
Spirit, to cause a sinner believe, 2 Cor. 4:13. Ephesians. 1:17, 18, 19.

33. The point we are upon will be further clear, if we consider (22.) That
Christ's death was a Redemption, and we are said to be Redeemed thereby Gal.
4:5. and 3:13. Romans 3:24. Ephesians. 1:7. Col. 1:14. 1 Pet. 1:8. Revel. 5:9. Tit.
2:14. And therefore, all such, as he laid down this Redemption, or
Redemption-money for, must of necessity be redeemed and saved; and consequently
he died not for all, seeing all are not redeemed and saved. His Ransom, or
Price of redemption, which he laid down, viz. his blood, which he shed, is
called (...) a ransom Mat. 20:28. and (...) 1 Timothy 2:6. That all such, for
whom this Redemption-money was paid, and this Ransom was given, must be
saved, is clear; for (1.) Other ways it were no Redemption, a ransom given
for Captives does say, that these Captives, in law and justice, ought to be set
at liberty (2.) This Redemption is the same with, (as to the effect,) or has
attending it, forgiveness of sins. Col. 1:14. Ephesians. 1:7. and forgiveness of
sins, is with justification, and has blessedness attending it Romans 4:6, 7, 8.
(3.) Salvation necessarily follows upon this Ransom and Redemption, as is
clear 1 Timothy 2:4. compared with verse. 6. (4.) This redemption is from a vain
Conversation 1 Pet. 1:18. and consequently is attended with Salvation. (5.) It
is attended with justification, Romans 3:24. being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ (6.) Hence it is called the
Redemption of the transgressions Heb 9:15. that is, either of Transgressors,
by a metonimy, or of us from the evil of transgressions, and that upon a
valuable compensation and satisfaction; for (...) is a Redemption from evil by
the Interveening of a Price, a (...), a Ransom, (7.) This was a Redemption from
the law, for God sent forth his son -- made under the law, to redeem them, who
were under the law Gal. 4:4, 5. and so by this redemption, there is a
liberation had from the Law, and its Curse and Penality (8.) And it is a
Redemption of such as were under the law, for this end, that they might receive
the adoption of sons Gal. 4:5. But this Adoption of sons is not common to all
(9.) All which receives confirmation from this, that the Father, who received
this ransom, did himself send his Son to lay it down, and so it was his own
Ransom; and therefore must have been paid, upon a certain design of
actually Redeeming and delivering from Sin, Satan, Death and Hell, those, for
whom it was laid down. (10.) So is there an other end of this redemption
mentioned Gal. 3:13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law --
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.
(1.) Seeing the Lord jehovah might have refused to free the sinner, upon any
Redemption or satisfaction offered, and exacted all of the sinners themselves,
that they lay under by the law, it was a great condescendence in love of this
great Lord, and a gracious act of Soveraignity, to accept of a mediation; and
of Love and free grace to provide a Red^emer; we cannot but in reason think,
that His good pleasure did regulate this matter, as to the Persons, who should
be Redeemed, and as to the manner and method after which they should actually
partake of the Redemption. And that therefore, the persons to be redeemed were
condescended upon, and the persons condescended upon were certanely to be
^edeemed; the Lord having intended, in the contrivance of this Redemption, the
certain Salvation and Redemption of those, who were condescended upon, and of
none else; and the Intentions, Designs and Purposes of God are not vain nor
frustrable.

34. Further (23.) Christ's death had a real Merit in it, that is, a worth and
value, to procure the good things, it was given for; so that thereby there was
a Purchase made. Act. 20:28. And therefore, we cannot suppose, that all that
was Procured and Purchased hereby, was a General, Uncertane, and merely
Possible thing. If it had a value and worth in it, (as no question it had) to
purchase and procure grace and glory, unto all, for whom it was given; and was
accepted as a valuable price of the Father, why should not the thing, hereby
purchased, be given and granted, in due time? To say, that all was susp^nded
upon a condition, is to make all Uncertain: or we must say, that Christ's
death did procure that Condition also: and then all is right, for that is it,
we say.

35. (24.) Christ's death is to be considered as the death of a Testator Heb.
9:15, 16, 17. And for this cause, he is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of transgressions, that were under
the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance: for where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be
the death of the Testatour: for a Testament is of force after men are dead,
otherwise it is of no strength, at all, while the Testatour lives. So he said
himself of the cup, in the Sacrament, that it was the blood of the New
Testament Mat. 26:28. Mark. 14:24. and that it was the cup of the New Testament
in his blood Luke 22:20. and Paul calls it, the New Testament in his blood 1
Cor. 11:25. So that his Death and Bloodshed was the death of a Testatour, for
the confirmation of the New Testament, and for ascertaneing of the Legatees, of
the good things bequathed to them in legacy, by the Testament. Now a Testament
commonly is a declaration of the Testatours free, Absolute and Voluntary
Purpose of bestowing such and such benefits, to such and such friends; and so
it is the Testatours letter will, whereby he wills that this legacy be given
to this person, and that to another. It is true, men may insert some
conditions, as to some legacies, because they are but men, and know not
contingent future things, nor have they the wills and dispositions of such, they
appoint legatees, in their own hand and power; But it is otherwise with our
Testatour: and therefore we cannot think, that He left the legacies in his
Testament, at the uncertanty of conditions, to be performed by men; especially
considering, how as he died to ratify the Testament, so he rose again to
administrate the same, as the sole executor thereof by his Spirit, and that
what legacies he left to be bestowed, upon such and such conditions, he left
not the matter at an uncertanty; for the condition it self was bequathed, as
the necessary good of the Testament, without which all would have been to no
purpose. It is unreasonable then to think, that Christ died to give force to
his Testament; and yet it might come to pass, that he should have no heir, to
enjoy the goods left in legacy. Nor is it reasonable to think, that all the
world were equally his heirs, seeing the Inheritance, and Kingdom is for the
little fl^ck Luke 12:32. and a peculiar select number ^ Pet. 1:4. Ioh. 17:24.
Col. 1:12. who are heirs of the promises, of God, of salvation, of the grace
of God, of the Kingdom etc. Romans 8:17. Gal. 3:29. and 4:7, 30. Ephesians. 3:6. Heb.
1:14. and 6:1^. and 11:7. Iam. 2:5. 1 Pet. 3:7. Therefore, all whom Christ has
appointed heirs in his Testament, shall certanely enjoy the good things
tested, in due time, for his Death gave force to his Testament, as being his
Last and Unchangeable will, so that they cannot miss of the Inheritance, and
be disappointed; especially considering, that Christ by his death laid down a
valuable and rich price to purchase all these good things, which he left in
legacy to his friends and heirs.

36. Christ's death moreover (25.) is to be considered, as the death of a
Sponsor and Cautioner, and this will further confirm our point: Hence he is
called a Surety Heb. 7:22. and is said to die for the ungodly Romans 5:6. to be
made a curse for us Gal. 3:13. and to be made sin 2 Cor. 5:21. and other
expressions of the like kind have the same import: From whence it is evident,
that Christ took the debt upon him, that was justly to be charged upon the
account of sinners, that he became one person in Law, with sinners the
principal debtor; that he paid and satisfied for all the debt, and that in
their room and place* and that therefore all these, for whom he died, must
certainly be delivered from the Debt, and from the Charge and Consequences
thereof. These things are manifest of themselves, and need no further
confirmation. Now seeing all are not delivered from the debt of sin, nor from
the punishment due because of sin, we cannot say, that Christ died, as a
Cautioner, for all; for sure his death was a complete payment of all the debt
he undertook to pay, and to satisfy for. Nor can we say, that he died as a
Cautioner for he knew not whom; far less, that he died as a Cautioner, and yet
none might possibly receive advantage thereby. Nor yet can we say, that he
died, as a Cautioner, and paid for some sins of all, and not for all their
sins, for whom he died; seeing he was a Compleet Cautioner. So then, as Christ
died in their room and stead, as their Cautioner, and Sponsor, for whom he
died, wrong should be done to Him, if all these, for whom he was a Cautioner,
should not at length actually be delivered out of prison, and freed from the
accusation of the law: They, for whom he died, being in him legally, when he
died, and morally and virtually dying in him, and with him, must not, in
justice, be made to pay their own debt, and satisfy the law over again:
Christ's stricking hands (as the phrase is Prove. 22:26.) and so putting his
name in the obligation, and accordingly making satisfaction, the Principal's
name is blotted out, and he freed in the time appointed: for he bear our
griefs, and carried our sorrows etc. Esai. 53:4, 5. and by means of death, he
delivered them, who through fear of death were all their lifetime ubject to
bondage Heb. 2:14, 15.

37. This matter will be further clear, if we consider (26.) How the death of
Christ was a Satisfaction: and none can deny this, but Antichristian Socinians:
Others willingly grant, that Christ did substitute himself, in the room of
sinners, and was willing to undergo the punishment, threatened in the Law
against sin, that the sinners, for whom he undertook satisfaction, might be
freed: So he bear their sins Esai. 53:11. 1 Pet. 2:24 And he was made sin 2
Cor. 5 21. Hence he is called a Propitiation 1 Ioh. 2:3. and 4:10. Romans 3:25.
Whereby we see, that Christ took upon him the whole Punishment, that was due to
sin; and that God, whom sinners had offended, was well pleased with what he did
and suffered, according to that undertaking, yea more pleased, than he was
displeased with all the sins of those, for whom he suffered: for hereby His
Authority and justice was made to appear more glorious and excellent. How then
can we think, that many of those, and it may be all, for whom he gave that
satisfaction, may, notwithstanding, possibly be made to make satisfaction for
themselves, as they may by our Adversaries way? Was not his satisfaction full
and complete? Why should any then, for whom he gave that satisfaction, be
liable to Punishment? Is this consonant to justice? Did not the Lord Jehovah
send Christ and fit him with a body for this end Psalm. 40:6. Heb. 10:5. and
laid upon Him the iniquities of us all Esai. 53:6* that He might make full
satisfaction for them to justice, and suffer for them all that the Law could
demand of them, or they were liable unto by the broken Law? Did not Christ do
and suffer all, which he undertook to do, and suffer for this end? And did not
the Father accept of what he did and suffered, as a full Compensation, and
Satisfaction? And seeing this cannot be denied, and it is manifest that this was
done by Christ as a Cautioner Heb. 7:22. how can it be imagined, that the
Principal debtor shall not thereupon have a fundamental right to freedom and
pardon, and in due time, after the Gospel method, be actually Discharged, and
delivered from the penalty of the Law, and Redeemed by the Satisfactory Price
paid by the Cautioner, and accepted of the Creditour? Does not the denying of
this certain and infallible Effect, call in question the value and worth of
Christ's satisfaction* and give ground to say, that Jehovah was not Satisfied
with the price; or that Christ made no Satisfaction? Did not Christ make
Reconciliation for the sins of his people? Heb. 2:17? (...), that is, (...).

38. Add for a further confirmation of this (27.) That Christ's death was a
propitiating sacrifice. He gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor Ephesians. 5:2. He offered up himself once Heb.
7:27. He is a sacrifice for us, 1 Cor. 5:7. and the lamb of God, which bears,
or takes away the sin of the world Ioh. 1:29. He offered up himself without
spot to God Heb. 9:14: and he was once offered to bear the sins of many Heb.
9:28. -- we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all, -- he offered one sacrifice for sin for ever Heb. 10:10, 12. Now
as the sacrifices under the Law, which were a type of this, did not procure a
General, Possible benefit, but did procure a Real favor, only to the People
of God; for they sanctified to the purifying of the f^esh Heb. 9:13. So
certanely this Real and Perfect sacrifice must have a Peculiar and Real Effect
and sprinkle consciences from dead works, to serve the living God: Heb. 9.14.
And this is not a thing common to all, nor is it a mere Possible thing. They
must then do a great indignity unto the Sacrifice of Christ, who speak of an
Universal merely Possible Redemption.

39. Add to this (28.) How upon this Sacrifice, which Christ offered up, in
his death, we read of a Reconciliation made Ephesians 2:^6. and that he might
Reconcile both unto God, in one body, by the cross, having slain the enmity,
by it, or in himself 2 Cor 5:10. when we were enemies we were Reconciled to
God, by the death of his Son. Col. 1:20. and having made peace, through the
blood of his cross, by him to Reconcile all things unto himself. Therefore is
he called our Peace Ephesians. 2:14. and he makes Peace verse. 15. we have Peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5:1. Now this Reconciliation being
of parties, that are at varience, must be a Reconciliation of both to other,
and so a mutual Reconciliation: and Christ effectuateth both: and both are
purchased by his death: we cannot then imagine with Socinians, that all the
Reconciliation, mentioned in Scripture, is of us to God; as if God's Anger and
Wrath were not appeased and taken out of the way; nor with Arminians, that
Christ obtained an Universal Reconciliation of God to all, but no
Reconciliation of man to God: friendship betwixt enemies must be mutual, if a
Reconciliation be; and our state before this was enmity Romans 5:10. Col. 1:20,
21. and God's wrath was against us and upon us, Ephesians 2:3. Ioh. 3:36. But now,
how will this agree with Universal Redemption? Is God Reconciled to all, when
many perish under his wrath, for ever? Can God be said to be, upon the death of
Christ, Reconciled to all, when it may so fall out, that not one soul shall
have peace with God? How comes it to pass, that many, whose Reconciliation
Christ has purchased, live and die enemies to God? Sure the Apostle tells us 2
Cor. 5:19. that to whom God is reconciled, to them he does not impute sin: and
he assures us, that all such, as are reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son, shall be saved Romans 5:10.

40. Add (29.) That it seems hard to say, That Christ laid down his life a
Price, a Ransom, a Sacrifice, an Atonement and Propitiation, etc. to Purchase,
Procure, Merit Grace, and Glory, and to make Reconciliation and Peace betwixt
God, and such, as were already suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, and to
satisfy for their sins, who were already condemned to the torments of hell
fire: and yet this must be said by such, as assert Universal Redemption. Was
Christ so prodigal of his blood, as to cast it away, for such as were
irrecoverably gone? If it be said, that this is no more hard, than to say, that
Christ suffered for such, as were already glorified. Any may see, how vast the
difference is, for such as were glorified, were glorified upon the account of
Christ Death, which was to be, in the time appointed and designed by Father and
Son. When one promises a sum for redeeming of so many slaves, and the sum,
according to mutual agreement, is to be paid at such a day, the slaves may be
presently relieved, in contemplation of the price, which is accepted, and is to
be paid hereafter at the time appointed: But when one comes to lay down
Ransome-money, he cannot be said to lay it down for such as are dead, and that
he knows to be dead many years ago, and so incapable of Redemption.

41. Further (30.) If Christ died for all, then he intended to die for all;
then the Father also intended, that he should die for all; then he intended
that it should be a Redemption for all, and that thereby all should be
Redeemed: for to what end else should Christ die and redeem, if not that such,
as he died for and Redeemed, be Redeemed and Delivered? Or to what other end
should God intend that Christ should die for all, than to the ends mentioned in
Scripture, of which we have spoken? And how can we say, that God did intend the
Redemption of all, when all are not actually redeemed? Are his intentions so
fallible, and frustrable? If it be said, that he Intended only a Possible
Salvation, and not Actual. I Ans. The Scripture speaks no such thing as we
have seen: And how unsuteable is it to the wisdom of God, to send his Son,
actually to die, and bear the curse, and only intend thereby a Possible
Redemption, which might never prove Actual to any one soul? If it be said, That
he Intended an Actual Redemption, but Conditionally. I Answer Redemption upon a
condition is but a Conditional Redemption, and that is but a Potential,
Possible Redemption, unless you say, that the condition is also purchased: and
then, as to God, it is an Absolute Redemption, and intended as such: does it
suite the wisdom of God, to intend Redemption to all, and not intend also the
Condition, by which alone it must become Actual, and which he alone can work,
but will not? Must we thus ascribe such intentions to God, as must hang upon
man's will, and be subordinate thereunto? Or if he see, that the Condition will
never be performed, how can we think, that he intends any thing upon a
Condition, that shall never be? But enough of this, at present.

42. Moreover (31.) This doctrine of Universal Redemption is derogatory to the
solid consolation of the Redeemed, and Weakeneth the grounds of their long;
and therefore it is not to be admitted. This Argument is fully and solidely
prosecuted, and vindicated from what can be allaiged against it, by the learned
and solid divine Mr Durham, in his Comment on the Revelation Page 304. and
305. And to him shall I refer the Reader: only I shall crave leave to add
this: That by our Adversaries grounds, the song of the Saved shall not run, as
it does Revel. 5:9, 10. But rather thus, We have saved ourselves, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made ourselves unto God,
Kings and Priests: For whereas Christ by his blood redeemed all of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and not some only out of them; we
ourselves have, by our own free good will, made a difference betwixt ourselves,
and the rest; and we are no more beholden to Christ for all that we have
attained to, then the damned in hell are, for whom Christ shed his blood, as
well as for us, and to whom he purchased by his blood and death, as much, as
for us; as Adversaries say. So that I see not how Arminians and Quakers, can
think to join in this Song, and have any share of this Consolation, which is
solely founded upon the Redemption of Christ, as a peculiar and no common
blessing. Let them consider it, for it concerns them not a little, seeing all
that come to glory will sing to the honor of their Redeemer, upon other
grounds, as we see, then these are, which our Adversaries lay down, and plead
so earnestly for. If any say, that Christ moreover has purchased faith to
some, even to all that are actually saved. I Answer As neither the Arminians,
nor semi Arminians. I mean the followers of Camero will say this, or grant so
much; so the granting of it, will evert the other Universal Conditional
Redemption; for the Scripture speaks but of one kind of Redemption, of one
Price laid down, of one Covenant betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator; and of one
Giving unto Christ of Persons to be redeemed. Shall we think, that Christ would
lay down as great a ransom for such, as he was not to purchase faith unto, as
for the rest? Shall we think that he would lay down his life in vain, and make
no purchase thereby? And of the Reprobat, for whom he was not to purchase
faith, he knew he could make no purchase; for without faith his death would be
of no advantage unto them. And where do we read, that all were given unto him
to redeem? Yea, are not the given ones clearly distinguished from the rest?
Ioh. 17:6, 9. as we cleared above.

43. Again (32.) If the Redemption of Christ be Universal, and Conditional: it
must necessarily follow, that Christ laid down his life, and the price of his
blood, as much for Judas, and all the Reprobate, as he did for John, and all
the Elect: for the Redemption being conditionally for all, it cannot be more
for one, then for another. And yet this cannot be said, as appears from the
reasons formerly adduced. This would say, that the Fathers and Christ's love was
equal toward all; and that no more was purchased for the one, than for the
other; and that the Elect have no more benefit by Christ's death, than the
Reprobat have; and that Christ had no more an eye to Redeem the Elect by his
death, than to Redeem the Reprobat; and was no more a Cautioner for the one,
than for the other: all which and the like cannot but be looked upon, as most
absurd. Shall we think, that Christ became sin, as well, or as much, for Judas,
as for Peter? Shall we think, that He redeemed all alike from the curse of the
Law? These sound ill to Christian ears.

44. So (33.) we may thus reason: Either Christ's Redemption is Conditional and
Universal, as to the Price laid down and Satisfaction made; or as to the
Application and Actual bestowing of the benefits purchased: But neither can be
said to the advantage of the Adversaries cause; for if the last be said, we
willingly grant that some of the benefits, as Justification, Adoption, and
actual Glorification, are conferred in a manner conditionally: but some, as
faith and the New heart, are given absolutely: and this cannot help the
Adversaries cause, for they will not say, that either all have faith bestowed
upon them, or that all are by believing Justified and Adopted etc. and so this
is not Universal: and if the first be said, to wit, That Christ laid down his
life Conditionally, it must be said, that Christ did not lay down his life
Absolutely, but upon some condition; and what can that Condition be, upon which
the death of Christ was suspended? If it be said, that the faith of those, to
whom it was to be preached, was the condition: then it must be said, that
Christ did not die until these believed; or that his death was no satisfaction
or price, until they actually believed: and then the Father could not be well
pleased with the price as a satisfaction, until men's Faith came to make it an
Actual price: which is both absurd, and contrary to Scripture. If it be said
That Christ did absolutely lay down his life a satisfactory Ransom, and that
for all, yet so as none, that would not fulfill the condition, should be
redeemed. I Answer If it was an Absolute satisfactory Ransom, and accepted as
such, something must have been purchased thereby, and all behoved actually and
really to be delivered from the Law and from the curse, or from something, by
virtue of that Absolute Price; and they could not be made to pay over again
what was paid by the price of his blood; for Justice could not call for two
satisfactions. And if all were, upon this Absolute Price paid. Redeemed from
the Law, the Curse, and the Sentence of the first Covenant, no man shall now
die for that broken Covenant. If it be said, No man was Absolutely delivered
even from that, but only Conditionally. I Ans. How then was it an Absolute
Price? Or what was purchased thereby? If it be said, That a possibility of
Freedom was absolutely purchased. Ans. This was rejected above: and the
Scripture infers Actual Redemption from Christ's purchase. He shall justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquities Esai 53:11. which says, That all
whose iniquities he did bear, shall be Actually and Really Justified by him,
and not have a mere Possibility of justification.

45 Further (34.) We may thus argue, If Christ died for all and every one, He
either died for all Absolutely or Conditionally. The first cannot be said, for
the reasons already adduced militate against that. Nor can it be said, that He
died for all Conditionally: for then either he died to purchase Life and
Salvation to all upon condition of their performance of something proposed as a
Condition; or to purchase salvation, and all the means thereunto or conditions
thereof, Conditionally, But neither of these can be said. Therefore etc. The
major is clear from this, that the enumeration is full, and no other way can
this Conditional Redemption be conceived or explained. The minor may be thus
confirmed. The first way cannot be said, to wit, that life and salvation was
purchased to all, upon a condition to be by them performed, that is, upon
Condition of their believing: for either this Condition is in the power of
every son of Adam, or not: if it be not in their power (as all but Pelagians
will confess) then this Redemption is no Redemption; for a Redemption of
Captives upon a condition impossible to them, is as good as no Redemption. Nor
can the last way be said, to wit, that Redemption, and all the Conditions and
Means thereof were Conditionally purchased; for what can be assigned as the
Condition of these Conditions? And though there were a Condition of the Lords
working of faith assigned, (which yet we find not in Scripture) yet that would
not help the matter; for that Condition of faith would it self be a mean to
salvation, and so purchased Conditionally upon another Condition, and that
other Condition must be purchased upon another Condition, and so in infinitum:
which is absurd.

46. As also (35.) this is considerable, That the asserting of Universal
Redemption goes not alone; but there are several other Universalities also
affirmed, and maintained, either as Consequences, or Concomitants, or Grounds
thereof, which the Scripture knows not: such as these. (1.) An Universal Love
and Philanthropie, toward all and every one, without any difference: which
they lay down, as the ground of the Sending of Christ to die for all
indiscriminatly. (2.) An Universal Will in God to save all, which they call an
Antecedent Will; and hold forth as a Velleity, or a wish and desire, that all
might be saved; as if God could not effectuat whatever he desired, or could
have a velleity toward any thing, which either he could not, or would not
effectuat. (3.) An Universal Predestination conditional; which expression
Amerald used until the Synods in France did disswad him therefrom. (4.) An
Universal gift of all to Christ, or an Universal gift of Christ to all; that
is, a Will and purpose that Christ should lay down his life for all, and Redeem
all; at least Conditionally. (5.) An Universal Justification conditional. And
why not also an Universal Salvation conditional? (6.) An Universal Covenant of
grace made with all mankind in Adam. wherein is a free universal deed of gift
of Christ first, and of Pardon, Spirit and Glory, in and by him, to all
Mankind without exception, upon condition of acceptance; as also an offer of
Faith, Repentance, Conversion, with all the con^equ^nces thereof. (7.) An
Universal will in God to call into this Covenant, and unto the Participation of
the benefits th^reof, all and every man. (8.) An Universal execution of this
will, or promulgation of this Gospel or New Covenant, unto all and every one,
by common favors and benefits bestowed or all, whereby all are called to
believe in a merc^ful pardoning God; and all have abundance o^ Mercies and
Means of Recovery and of life; for the Lord now governs the world, only on
terms of grace (9.) Upon this follows an Universal Command to all men to use
ce^taine duties and means for their Recovery by Faith and Rep^n^ance. (10.) An
Universal pardon of the first Sin, so far, at least, that no man shall perish
for the mere Original sin of Nature alone, unless he add the rejection of
grace (11) Hence follows an Universal Judgment and Sentence on all, in the
great day, only according as they have performed the new Gospel conditions.
(12.) Some also add an ^niversal Subjective Grace, whereby all are enabled to
perform the conditions of the new covenant. (13.) Universal proper Fruits and
Effects of this death, whereby all the outward favors, that Heathens enjoy,
are said to be purchased for them by Christ: and why not also what Devils enjoy?

47. Finally (36.) This assertion of Universal Redemption laith the ground of,
and makes way to a new frame of the Covenant of Grace, quite overturning its
Nature, and transforming it into a new covenant of works, making it one and the
same with that, as to kind, and only to differ, as to the change of conditions
to be performed by man: for as, in the first covenant, Adam was to obtain
right to, and possession of life promised, in, by, for, through and upon the
account of his fulfilling the condition of perfect obedience, imposed by the
Lord; so, in the New covenant, man is to obtain and acquire to himself a right
to and possession of the Life promised, in, by, for, through and upon the
account of his performance of the Condition of Faith and new obedience, now
imposed in the Gospel; and all the difference is, that instead of perfect
obedience to the which was the condition of the first covenant, now Faith and
sincere Gospel Obedience is made the condition: And thus we can no less be said
to be justified by works of the Law, or which we do, then Adam should have been
said to have been so justified, had he stood; and this justification gives as
great ground of boasting unto man, and of making the reward of debt, and not of
grace, as justification by the first covenant would have done; for though it be
said, that Christ has made satisfaction to justice, for the breach of the
first Law, and thereby purchased to all, upon Condition, Justification and
Salvation; yet this removes not the difficulty; for what is purchased by
Christ's death is made Universal and Common to all; and so can be nothing
(according to our Adversaries) but a putting of all men, in statu quo prius, in
case to run and obtain the prize for themselves; as God's absolute free love
put Adam in that condition at first: Christ's death (though thereby, as they
say, he purchased the New Covenant, which with them is the chief, if not the
only, effect and fruit of his Death and Merits) can be no more, than a very
remote ground of Right to Life and Salvation, unto any person; for it is made
Universal and Common to all, so that all have equal share therein, and
advantage thereby; man himself, by performing the new conditions, only making
the difference; so that the immediate ground of the Right to life, which any
have, is their own Faith and Obedience, or performance of the New
Covenant-conditions. Whereby it is manifest, that as to our Particular, and
Immediate Right to Happiness, we are to plead our own works, and lean to them,
as our ground whereupon we may stand and appear before God's Tribunal; and upon
the account thereof plead for the crown, as our due debt, having now run for
it, and performed the condition, agreed upon; and so sing praises to ourselves,
instead of singing praises to our Redeemer. Hence the righteousness, wherein we
must appear before God, is not the Righteousness of Christ, but our own; for
the Righteousness of Christ, say they, is only imputed in regaird of its
effects, whereof the new Covenant is the All, or the Chief; and so that does
not become the Righteousness of any man, nor can be said to be imputed to any
man properly, (which also they assert)) but his own Faith is only imputed
properly (which also they plead for) as his Righteousness; not, as a Way,
Medium, or Method, of Gospel-Righteousness (especially when Gospel-Obedience
is adjoined) The Righteousness of Christ being hereby only accounted to be
imputed, in that it has procured, that our own Gospel Righteousness, Faith and
new Obedience, shall be imputed to us, as our Immediate Righteousness, and the
ground of our Right to Glory. What accord is betwixt this frame of the Covenant
of Grace, and that way of justification held forth by Socinians Arminians and
Papists, the learned will easily see; and how contrary it is to the Covenant of
Grace held forth in the Gospel, and hitherto professed and maintained by the
orthodox, every one acquan^ed therewith cannot be ignorant; and it is obvious,
how opposite this is unto what the Apostle says Phil. 3:8, 9. yea doubtless,
and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung; that I may win Christ, and be found i^ him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith. And Tit. 3:5, 6, 7. Not by
works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost which he
shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: that being justified
by his grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life.
And Romans 3:20, 21, 22, 24. Theref^re by the deeds of the law there shall no
flesh be justified -- but now the righteousness of God without the law is
manifested -- even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ,
unto all and upon all them that believe -- being justified freely by his grace,
through the Redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. And many other places. It is
no less clear, how hereby the true nature of justifying faith, and Gospel
obedience is perverted: and with all how dangerous this is, if put into
practice; or if men act and ilve accordingly, every serious exercised Christian
knows.

48. Having thus briefly laid down our grounds for a Particular, and against an
Universal Redemption, we come to see what our Quaker says for Universal
Redemption, which he supposes to be so clearly asserted in Scripture, that
hardly any other article of Christian Religion, can compare with it, as to
this: but the confidence of a Quaker, acted and led by a Spirit of delusion, is
no convincing argument to me. Let us see his grounds. He cites Luke 2:10. and
adds He says not to a few of the people: but if the comeing of Christ had
not brought a Possibility of Salvation unto all, it might rather have bin
called tideings of great grief to the m^st part of the people. Answ. If Christ
had only brought a Possibility of salvation with him, the Gospel had bin the
tideings of joy to no flesh: for Salvation upon a Condition Impossible, is no
salvation, 2. Did Christ bring a Possibility with him to the damned? if not,
where is his Universal Redemption? 3 It is said here, to be to all people,
because the Offer, and Means thereof, were not now to be limited to one Nation
of the Jews, as formerly; but the Lord was to have a people out of all
Kinreds, Nations, Tongues, and Languages: yet Christ was not sent to all
Universally, for he was to reign over the house of Jacob Luke 1:13. and was to
save his people from their sins Mat. 1:21. And that not Possibly only, but
Really. Luke 1:69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. Which is not verified of all
Universally, but of all his People, who are in due time, delivered Actually and
Really, out of the hands of their enemies, and made to serve him without Fear
in Holiness and Righteousness; and have Actual Remission of their sins, through
the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from on high has visited
them etc. verse. 74, 75, 77, 78, 79.

49. Nor (says he Page 70.) had the Angels had occasion to have praised and
said, on the earth peace, and goodwill toward men. Answ. Much less had they
sung thus, if all the salvation, that Christ brought with him, had been a mere
Possibility, a may be, that might never have been: but the ground of the song
is clear with us, because Christ was certainly to have a Chosen Flock, a
Redeemed Company, out of all the coasts and corners of the earth, who should
be Reconciled unto God, and enjoy the fruits of his good will toward them. He
alleigeth next Christ's commission Mark. 16* verse. 15. to preach the G^spel to
every creature, adding that of Paul Col. 1:28. But (1.) This will no more
prove, that Christ died for all men, than for Devils, and Beasts: for they are
creatures. (2.) Christ's commission now, when the partition wall was taken
away, by the death of Christ, Ephesians. 2:14. is enlarged: He formerly did limite
them to the Jews, to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and expressly
forbad them to go into the way of the Gentiles, Mat. 10:5, 6. but now he sends
them through the World, to preach to all Indefinitely, without discrimination
Mat. 28:19. because the Chosen, who were to be brought in, by preaching, were
scattered through the Nations. (3.) How will this then prove an Universal
Redemption, when the very enlarging of the commission does demonstrate the
contrary, as ^o the ages preceding the death of Christ, and the grant of this
enlarged commission? (4.) From the preaching of the Gospel to all indefinitly,
by Men, who know not the hidden Counsels and Purposes of God, to infer an
Universal Redemption, is no rational way of argueing: Men must preach to many
indefinitly, for the Elects sake, whom the Lord may have among them, as Paul
did at Corinth, where the Lord had much people Act. 18:10. And sometimes we
find the Lord would not suffer them to preach to some Act. 16:7.

50. But says he furt^er. The Gospel inviteth all, and will God m^ck any whom
he inviteth and calls to come to him? Sure, if Christ has not died for all,
and made salvation possible to all, Ministers should be sent out to mock
people, when they are sent to command all to believe, that Christ died for
them: This is the sum of what he largely discour^eth, and is to no purpose;
for it is founded upon an untruth, to wit, that the preaching of the Gospel, is
a commanding of all to believe, that Christ died for them: while as the Gospel
commands such, to whom it is preached, to flee to an alsufficient Savior, in
the sense of their sin and misery, and conviction of their impotency to save
themselves, and in the faith, that there is not another name given among men,
by which we must be saved Act. 4:12. And truly, this name is an alsufficient
name, there being herein salvation for all that will come; and none by the
preaching of the Gospel are debarred, who do not by wilful unbeleefe debar
and exclude themselves; for thus has the Lord, in his deep wisdom, contrived
the business. And this preaching of the Gospel does not properly and directly
declare the secret purposes of God; for secret things belong not to us, but
unto the Lord our God, but those things, which are revealed, belong to us,
Deuteronomy. 29: verse. 29. And the preached Gospel points forth the duty of such, to
whom it is preached, and this word of command is the only Rule of peoples duty,
and not the hidden and unseen Purposes of God. It is true, the fixed preaching
of the Gospel, in a place, may say, that it is probable, God has some people
there: and it certainly tells us, that all such, as do believe the Gospel,
and obey it, shall be saved, because of the fixed and indissoluble connection
betwixt that, which the Gospel requires, and salvation. And though the Lord
send his servants upon the same errand, that he sent Esaias Chap. 6:9, 10. and
that Christ himself was sent upon Ioh. 12:37, 38, 39, 40. and Paul Act. 28:25,
26, 27. we must not say, that the Lord is mocking, more then that he was
mocking Pharaoh, when he sent Moses to him, commanding him, to let the people
of Israel go. It would become us rather to adore and stoup. And this may
satisfy for an answer to what he adds in the end of. 6. Page 71. though it
be not to the present business. But to close this, what can all this say, for
Universal Redemption, seeing the Gospel and the Ministers thereof are not sent
to all and every person, in every corner of the world, and that in all ages?

51. He proceeds Page 71.. 7. and tells us. That he remembereth not one
passage of Scripture, where it is said, that Christ has not died for all: And
it may suffice, for answer, to tell him, that neither do we remember one place
of Scripture, where it is said, that Christ has died for all men, or for all
and every man. And if he think, that the Scripture speaks this sufficiently
by consequence: We have shown above, that the Scripture says sufficiently by
consequence, that Christ did not die for all, but for a select company. He
cites 1 Timothy 2:1, 3, 4, 6. (as did the Pelagians of old, as August. shows
lib. 4 contra. Iul. c. 8. Enchir. adlaur. c. 103. and lib. de Corrept. and
Gratia. c. 14. and all the Arminians of late. And after some discourse
hereupon, he reasons thus therefrom Page 72. For whomsoever we may pray, to
him salvation is possible. But me may pray for Salvation to every one, in the
world. Therefore salvati^n is possible to every one. The assumption (he should
have said the Proposition) I prove thus, No man is obliged to pray, nor may he
pray, for that which is impossible: But every man is commanded to pray for all.
Therefore it is not impossible. Again, No man is bound to pray but in faith:
But he who prays for what is impossible, cannot pray in faith. Therefore.
Again, what God wills, that is not impossible: But God will have all Men to
be saved. Therefore, it is not impossible. Finally, for whom Christ gave
himself a price of redemption, to them Salvation is possible: But Christ gave
himself a price of redemption for all. Therefore, etc.

52. There is no difficulty to loose all the man's Arguments, if we premit this,
that by Possible here, is meaned such a thing, as may be, not only in it self
and abstracting from the decree of God (for if this be his conclusion, he
concludes nothing, but fights with his own shadow) but such a thing as may
be in respect of the decree, that is, that is such a thing the contrare whereof
is not decreed by God. So that by a thing possible or impossible here, is not
meaned what is simply so, and in its own nature, but what is so ex hypothesi.
This presupposed. I say (1.) That his first assumption is false, viz. That we
may pray for every one: for John tells us 1 Ioh. 5:16 -- there is a sin unto
death, I do not say, says he, ye should pray for it. And the text no more
faith, that we should Pray for every Man, than that we should Give thanks for
every man verse. 1. And who will think, that we are bound to give thanks for the
happy state; and good condition, yea and for the salvation of Apostates, and
Enemies to the Gospel, and for Antichrist, and all most prodigiously flagitious
persons? And thus his whole Argument from this place concludes nothing, though
what he adds in confirmation of the Proposition were all true, for the
Assumption being false (and he says nothing to prove it) the argument is null.
Yet for further discovery of his weakness. I say (2.) The Prop^sition is false:
for the decree of God, which makes things possible, or impossible, in the
sense, wherein we take these terms here, not being revealed to us, is no rule
for our prayers, but the Revealed Will, and Law of God, that is the proper and
only ground of Obedience. (3.) His confirmation of this is no confirmation, for
it concludes not the Proposition denied, Nor does it conclude the Assumption;
but is really the first argument dressed up in equipollent terms; and so must
be satisfied with the same answer; for it is false, that every man is
commanded to pray for all. Infants are men, and yet they are not commanded to
pray for any, far less for all, No man is commanded to pray for all men, as we
showed, far less for all, devils and damned, and all dead, and all creatures;
for these come under the term all. Again, I say, it is false, that no man is
bound to pray for that which is impossible, in respect of God's decree: I may
pray for the life of my Father, or my friend, and yet it may be decreed by the
Lord, that he shall die: But I must pray therefore with submission to God's
holy will and pleasure, if he thinks fit, and have not decreed the contrary.
Christ foretold, that Peter should deny him thrice; and because it was
impossible that Christ should be a liar, it was also impossible, upon this
supposition, that Peter should not so deny his master; yet it was lawful for
Peter to pray against th^s, much more may we pray for the salvation of such, as
it is impossible not to perish, in regaird of the decree of God, seeing that
decree is not revealed to us, as to such and such particular persons, for whom
we pray. (4.) His next argument seems to be a proof of the proposition of the
second argument, for it seems to conclude; that no man is bound to pray for
what is impossible. And as to it, I say, it is true, no man is bound to pray,
but in faith, that is in confidence, that what he prays for is Lawful, and
consonant to the revealed will of God; and that if the Lord sees it good, and
good for him, being a believer, it shall be granted; and this includes, an
holy submission to the supreme will of God, as to what is not revealed, and a
submission to his wise providence and care, and to his supreme power in
disposeing and giving out the good things promised, when, or a^ what time, and
in what manner and measure, he sees meet and expedient. But that no man can
pray in faith for what the Lord has not decreed to do, or grant, I deny for
reasons already given. It was impossible, but Christ should have died, for, for
that end came he into the world, and he came to suffer the wrath of God, for
sin; and yet he prayed Ioh. 12:27. father save me from this hour. And I suppose
this Quaker dar not say, that this prayer was not in faith, But it was, it is
true, with submission, as the next words evidence, and is clear Mat. 26:39. So
should our prayers be, with submission, and if it be possible. (5.) As to his
next argument; to the proposition, I say. What God wills, with his will of
Purpose, Decree and Resolution, which is about events, is not impossible, it is
true; for it is certane, and is not only possible, but a thing that shall
certainly come to pass, for who has resisted his will? and He is of one
mind, and who can turn him? His will thus is Effectual. But the Assumption is
most false in this sense, for if God would thus have all men to be saved, they
should all be certanely saved, unless by all men he understand not all and
every individual man, but indefinitely. his own Elect, among all Nations,
Kinds, and Sorts of people, whether High or Low, Rich or Poor, Greek or
Barbarian, Jew or Gentile; and if he take it in this sense, his Conclusion will
be most sound, and we shall accept of it; yea we shall say more, to wit, That
most certanely, all these men shall be saved, yea, that it is impossible it
should be other ways. But again, as to the Proposition, we say, what God
wills, by his Command and Precept, may be and often is impossible, in respect
of God's decree, for God commands all men, (it may be devils and damned, who
remain God's creatures) to love him perfectly with their whole soul and mind
and strength, and yet this is not now possible. And so, as to the Assumption,
though God should will thus all men to be saved. (which yet is not true,
because, the Gospel, which brings salvation, is not revealed to all men) it
would not follow, that it were possible, that all men should be saved (6.) As
to his last argument, I say, for whom Christ gave himself a price of
Redemption, to them salvation is not only Possible, but Certain: And as to the
Assumption, That Christ gave himself a price of Redemption for all, is true in
this sense, that Christ gave himself for all his Own, all his Sheep, all his
People, all that were Given to him of the Father, all that shall be Saved, all
the Elect, of whatever Nation, Kindred, Tongue or Language, or whatever
Condition they be in the world, Magistrates or Subjects, Rich or Poor, Jews or
Gentiles etc. But it is not true, in this sense, that Christ gave himself a
ransom for all and every individual person, for he gave not himself for
Devils, who yet may come under all; nor for Infants (as himself must confess,
seeing he said above, that they had no sin, but must certainly be saved) and
yet Infants come under all; nor for the Reprobate (as we proved above) who yet
come under all; to say nothing of all other Creatures; Birds and Beasts, etc.
who may come under this all.

53. Thus might we dismiss this place, as making nothing for what he did adduce
it for, notwithstanding of all his improvement thereof; But yet, that we may
give him full measure, pressed down, heaped up, and running over, I shall add a
few things, which may serve not only to clear this place, but also to discover
the invalidity of his and others reasoning, from other the like passages. As
first, Though the term all. and all men, and the like, in a necessary matter,
be taken for all and every one, without exception of any man, as Act 17:26. and
1:24. Romans 3:12. and 5:12. 2 Cor. 5:10. 1 Timothy 4.10. Iam. 1:5. Phil. 2:10, 11.
yet in contingent matters, it is often taken, for all Kinds, pro generibus
singulorum, as Luke 11:52. The pharisees tythed all herbs, that is, all kinds
of herbs, Act. 10:12. all four^ooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping things, and fowls of the air; that is, all Sorts and Kinds: see
also for this Mat 5:11. Mat. 4:23. Luke 18:12. Romans 14:2 Mat. 8:53. 1 Cor. 1:5.
and several other places. And here, the very circumstances of the place
evidence, that it must be so taken; not as if it were necessary thereby to
assert, that out of every particular distinctive condition of men, God would
take some; for if such a positive sense were urged, it would follow, that some
of the damned, some of finally impenitents, and the like, should be saved: but
it must be taken in a Negative and Restricked sense, thus, That there is no
condition of men, (meaning Civil, Political, or Rational conditions) now
excepted; no Nations, no States, no Sexes, no Ages, and the like, of such as
are salvable, now excepted: And that thus it is here to be taken, is manifest,
for (1.) we cannot suppose, that the Apostle would have us praying for all and
every individual person breathing, in particular; for it is impossible, that we
should ever know many millions of persons, living in the world. (2.) Nor are we
bound to give thanks for all that we know, as was said; and yet the Apostle
urges thanksgiving for all, as well as prayers and intercessions verse. 1. (3.)
Further the Apostle adds verse. 2. a restriction to some Kinds, confirming
this, saying, for Kings and for all in authority, giving us to understand, what
he means by all men, even all Kinds, and Degrees, without exception of that
kind, which, at that time, was most opposite enemies to the Gospel. (4.) The
reason added verse. 3. confirms this, for this is good and acceptable, in the
sight of God, our Savior. Now it is elsewhere declared, that it is not good
and acceptable to pray for every individual person, as for example, for such as
have sinned unto death. (5.) Which is further strengthened by what is added
verse. 4. who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth: for neither will God (if we take this will, for God's Purpose,
Determination and Decree, as we must (in my judgment) take it here) that all
and every man shall be saved, otherwise all should be saved in effect, else we
must say, that God is not Omnipotent, or Able to do all, and effectuat all that
he wills, which who, that would nor blaspheme, dar say: Or that ^is will is
but like man's, a Raw, Uncertain, Dubious and Mutable Wish and Velleity,
frustrable by man; which would be no less blasphemous. (^.) Further, that in
the end of the verse, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, being willed
by the same will, b^ which the Salvation of all is willed, does clearly
signify, who this all men are; to wit, not all and every individual person,
but all Sorts and Kinds, without special exception of any: because, (...) that
wills all and every individual person t^ come to the knowledge of the truth,
if his will be real (as we must suppose God's will to be) must also will to
give to all and every individual person, the means, whereby this k^owl^dge of
the truth might eventually and effectually be produced; and so not only will
the granting of the Means, but also the ble^sing of them, and making of them
Effectual. And can this be said, as to all persons, that ever lived upon the
earth? Was it true, even as to Nations, under the Old Testament? See Psalm.
147:1^, ^0. And is it true, as to every individual person, under the New
Testament? Then certainly all shall be saved, for this knowledge of the truth
is saving, being here connected with Salvation, as the only mean thereunto.
But the Apostles word verse. 6. -- to be testified in due time, says that all,
in all ages had not so much as the external report of this mediator between Go^
and men, Christ Jesus; but that there was a due time appointed, wherein the
news of it should come to all people indefinitely, without exception. (7.) And
that this all men must be taken indefinitely, as pointing forth the largeness
of the Gospel Dispensation, in opposition to what it was under the Law, so that
now no Nation, no Ranks or Qualities of people are excluded, is manifest from
verse. ^. where he tells us, that he is appointed and ordained a Preacher, an
Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles; so that now the news of the Gospel are
not to stay within the confines of Judea, and to be reported only to the Jews,
sometime the only people of God, but to the Gentiles, and to the Gentiles in
general, without any limitation or restriction to country, or tongue. (8.) Not
to speak of the Necessary Restriction, to some, which we show above to be
manifestly held forth, by the word Ransom. That word, which the Apostle has
verse. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where, may contribute to clear
our sense of the word all, For this every where cannot be understood
collectively, as every one knows; for Heaven and Hell, Water, Earth and Air,
and all the places among the Antipodes, are a where, and we cannot think that
the Apostle enjoineth us, to pray in all these places: but his meaning is, that
in whatever country, or place, of the habitable world we be into, we should
pray; no place being now excepted, and no place particularly designed, as under
the Law, for our more solemn worshipe.

54. Next, the term all, etc. in multitudes of places cannot denote all and
every person without exception, but a great or a promiscuous Company (and so it
is a kind of hyperbolick expression, which the Scriptures are no strangers
unto) as Mark. 15:14. Ier. 13:19. Luke 7:2^. Exodus 9:6. Mat. 3:5. Joel. 3:28.
Act. 2:5 17. Exodus 28:15. Revel. 13* 8. 1 Timothy 4: verse. 15. Act. 4: verse. 16. 1
King. 10: verse. 23. 1 Chronicles. 14:17. and 32:23. Esth. 9:2. Luke 13:17. 1 Cor.
4:17. and 1^:30, 51. Col. 3:11. 1 Cor. 14:24. Heb. 8:11. 1 Cor. 9 19. And many
more, which might be named. There must therefore of necessity be limitations;
how else shall we expound that Romans 11:32. (to name no more) For God has
concluded them all in unbeleef, that he might have mercy upon all. And so we
must (else we shall make odd work) interpret those universals, according to
the subject matter spoken of, and the circumstances of the text, with other
Scriptures, contributing to the cleating thereof: And we are persuaded, that
there is nothing, neither in this text, nor in any other, where such particles
of Universality are used, as to the matter, about which we are now speaking, to
w^t, concerning the Special Benefits and Saving Favors of God to men, that
will enforce such an interpretation, as will include all, without exception, as
our Adversaries allege: Nay, or can rationally constrain us to suppose, that
Christ died for a Ransom for any, except the Elect people ^o God.

55. Nay thirdly, if this be not admitted, but our Adversaries will urge the
full force of these particles, and the like, as the world, and all nations,
they must grant, that Saving grace and Salvation is also Universal: for then
all men without exception must be drawn to Christ Ioh. 12:32. all must savingly
know God, and be taught of him Ier. 31:34. Heb. 8:11. all must receive grace
Ioh. 1:16. See further Esai. 12:5. Revel. 15 4. Psalm. 72:11. and 86:9. Esai.
2:2. Dan. 7:14. Hag. 2 7. Gal. 3:8. Genesis 18:18. and 22.18. and 26:4. Esa. 25:6.
Deuteronomy. 28:10. Psalm. 97:6. Romans 11:26. Esa. 40:4. Psalm. 29:9. 1 Cor. 12:13. 2
Cor. 3 18. Ephesians. 4:13. Luke 16 16. 1 These. 5:5. 1 Cor. 11:4. Psalm. 65* 2. and
22:27. and 66:0. Esa. 66:23. Mal. 1.11. Ioh. 6:33. and 12 47. Esai. 25:8. 1
Cor. 15* 22, 28. and 4* 5. Revel. 5:13. Mark. 11* 31. So must they grant on the
contrary, that all and every mothers son are Wicked, and consequ^ntly must
purish, for they are also held forth wit^ an Universality, I^r. 6:^8. and ^.2.
Mic. 1:21. Job. 2:15, 16. and 5:19. Ioh. 17:9, 25. 1. Cor. 1:21. ^sal. 14:3.
Romans 3:12. And that God works all sinful actions in his people, because he is
said to work all their works, Esai. 2^:12.

56. Fourthly, it is to be observed, That these large Universal particles, as
they are used, when the Lord is to express the great things under the Gospel,
(for no passage can be adduced pointing out an universal extent of the good
things of grace un^er the Law) so they only hold forth the largness of the
Kingdom of Christ under the Gospel dispensation, which was not to be limited to
the bounds of one Nation, or to the posterity of one Abraham; but was to be
extended to all Nations, Kinreds, Tongues, People and Languages, indefinitly,
without any discrimination or distinction: And therefore these universals are
used the more to enforce the belief of this truth, and to give it a deeper
impression: for now, under the Gospel Oeconomie, the partition wall is taken
away Ephesians 2:14. and there is now neither Greek, nor Jew, Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all, and in
all Col. 3:11. Hence the Apostle tells us, that he had received grace and
Apostleshipe for obedience to the faith, among all nations Romans 1:5. See also
Romans 15:9, 10, 11, 12. So that now, the promise made to Abraham, that he should
be heir of the world, Romans 4:13. is fulfill^d; yet is not all the world
universally so become his Children, as that all and every individual person are
take in; but the Seed, scattered through the world; for the promise that he
should be the heir of the world is through the righteousness of faith Romans
4:13, 16. and in this respect was he the Father of many nations verse. 17. Genesis
17:5. not of all and every individual person; but of the seed in many nations.
And, as I said, these general terms are used, the more to enforce this truth,
which the Jews could hardly receive, being so in love with themselves, and
acted with a deeply rooted prejudice against the Gentiles, an evil that cleave
long unto the Apostles themselves, as is manifest by their questioning of Peter
for going-in to Cornelius Act. 11. Hence we read so much of the rage of the
Jews upon this very account Act. 13:45, 50. 1 These. 2:15, 16. But when the
Lord was pleased to beare-in this truth with force upon his Apostles, and let
them see, and make known unto them the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of
the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ,
Ephesians. 1:9, 10. And to make all men see, what is the fellowshipe of the
mystery, which from the beginning of the world has bin hid in God, who created
all things by Jesus Christ Ephesians. 3:9. Then the Apostles, in their writings,
both to refute the folly of the Jews, and to encourage the Gentiles, did use
such general expressions, as we see: and particularly the Apostle John, who
lived to see wrath overtake the nation of the Jews, and the Gentiles in great
numbers brought in; but withal, to prevent any mistake, gives a rule how to
understand these phrases, when he says Ioh. 11:51, 52. And this spoke he, not
of himself, but being High priest that year, he prophesied, that Jesus should
die for that nation; and not for that nation only, but that also he should
gather together in one the children of God, that were scattered abroad.

57. There is fifthly another thing considerable here, to wit* That we must
distinguish betwixt the Gospel and the Administration thereof, as it answers
to the secret Counsel and Purpose of God; and so it is the mean, by which the
Lord effectuateth the purposed and designed end; and as it answers to the
Revealed Will of God, and is his Law. In the first sense, the promises in the
Gospel do peculiarly belong unto, and are made for the Chosen ones, the Elect
company, for whom Grace and Glory is prepared; and for whom the Kingdom is
appointed. In the second sense, they are held forth to all, to whom the Gospel
is preached, as encouragements to the doing of that which is duty: as upon the
other hand, the threatenings are held forth to all, to move the Elect to duty,
and to keep them at duty, though in the secret purpose of God, they be
appointed for the Reprobat, on whom, in end, they shall certainly be inflicted.
In the first sense and consideration, the Gospel is in the hand of God alone,
for He has made a certane and firm connection betwixt Grace and Glory, Faith
and Salvation, Justification and Sanctifi^ation, Vocation Effectual and
Justification and Adoption: and betwixt all these and Final Redemption and
Glorification. And He, in the time and manner, which please him best, works
the one for bringing the other to pass. He Calls whom h^ will, and
Justifies whom he will, and Sanctifies whom he will, that he may Glorify
whom he will; so that in this respect, we must look on all these blessings, as
ordained for the same individual persons; and look on the death of Christ, the
meriteing and procureing cause of these rich Favors and Blessings, as only
intended for them, whom he intends to glorify: and must also look on the
whole Gospel, as intended for them. But as to the Gospel, considered in the
second sense, it is the Ministry and Word of Reconciliation committed unto Men,
2 Cor, 5:18, 19. who, as Ambassadors for Christ, must pray in Christ's stead
that people would be reconciled to God verse. 20. The dispensation of the Gospel
is committed unto them 1 Cor. 9:17. Ephesians. 3:2. And because even these
dispensators, ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God 1 Cor.
4:1. being but men, and unacquanted with the secrets of the Decrees and
Counsels of God, must speak to all indefinitely, beseech all, exhort all and
every man, without exception, of those they are sent unto, and labor to
present every man perfect in Christ, and to woo them to Christ, and to espouse
them to one husband, that they may present them as a chaste virgin to Christ 2
Cor. 11:2. Col. 1:25, 28. It is then a groundless mistake, to infer the
Universality of the Purpose of God, from the Universality of the Offer; or to
think that Christ died for all and every one, because ministers must dispense
the word, and hold forth Christ as an al sufficient mediator, and command all
and every one, to whom they preach, to believe and repent. It is unreasonable
to make the will of God, as the supreme and absolute Disposer of all things;
and his will as the only supreme Lawgiver, to be of the same complexion and
latitude; or to infer the one from the other; for that were to commensurate
Duty with the Event, as if nothing could come to pass but what were duty, and
nothing duty, but what came to pass.

58. Once more sixthly, we would consider some further design, which the Lord
has, in holding forth the matter, in his Word, and in the mouth of his
Servants, in such ample terms; to wit, to encourage poor souls to approach,
and lay hold upon the offer, that is held forth, in such indefinite terms,
that none, upon any real ground, may shift themselves from under the reach of
the tender of the Gospel, who have a mind to the bargain: Hence it is not
always said, that Christ died for the elect; for poor souls, under the
conviction of guilt, and assaul^ed with the fea^es of hell, are ready enough to
conclu^e themsel^es Reprobates, and to hearken to the temptations of Satan
suggesting this; and so, to their own prejudice, reason themselves out of the
reach of Mercy, and of the Merits of the death of Christ: Therefore has the
Lord, in the depth of his Wisdom and Goodness, so contrived the letter of the
Gospel, that, though there be sufficient evidence of the truth, concern^ng the
extent of the death of Christ, as a price and a ransom to justice, for the
full comfort and establish^ng of the hea^ts of believers; yet the matter is
held forth, in its Administration and Dispensation by men, in such general
terms, as may give encouragement to such souls, and keep them from desperate
despondency of Spirit; for though they cannot see (as neither are they
warranted at the first to enquire, and be anxious about it, but to hearken to
the word of command, and obey ^he call) that they are among the number of the
Elect; yet they can see and are convin^ed, that they are sinners; and therefore
is Christ said to die for the ungodly and for sinners Rom 5:6, 8. and it is
said, that he came into the world to save sinners 1 Timothy 1:15. And if this
should not satisfy (as an awakened soul, assaul^ed with temptations of Satan,
can devise many evasions and shifts, to its own hurt and disadvantage) yet
they cannot but crowd themselves in among Men; and men and women that will
come, are not excluded; and among the World, hence the world is mentined in
this matter Ioh. 1:29. and 3:16. and 6:51. 1 Ioh. 2:2. Not that God designed,
or Christ came to die for the whole World, or to take away the sins of the
whole world, or to be a propitiation for the whole world; for this would say,
that he came to redeem Devils, and to take away the sins of Beasts and Birds
etc because they come under the word World, as well as men: but that in the
administration of the Gospe^, which is not now confined to one land, as of old
to Jury Psalm. 76:1. But is extended without restriction, indefinitely to all
nations, Ministers may be allowed to offer peace in the Gospel to all
indefinitely, to whom they are sent to preach; and people may be the more
encouraged to come over difficulties, and not to hearken to temptations, to
hold them aback from Christ the Peace maker. Thus I suppose, this difficulty is
sufficiently taken out of the way.

59. We proceed now to consider, what he says further: Together with 1 Timothy 2.
(to which passage we have spoken) he cited also Ioh. 3:16. and would have us
compare with it. 1 Ioh. 4:9. and all which he says of both is this: whosoever
here is an indefinite term, whereby none are excluded. And what can all this
say? An indefinite term is not universal, unless it be in a necessary matter,
as this is not. 1 Ioh. 4:9. we are told, that in this was manifested the love
of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten son into the world,
that we might live through him. H^re is no indefinite term; nor is the world
here the same with the world Ioh. ^:16. as every common understanding may see;
for here it denotes the Habitable World, which contains inhabitants; and in
the other place, it denotes the Inhabitants themselves; and beside, I suppose,
he will not say, that God sent his son into the habitable world, out of this
design and intentation, that all the inhabitants thereof should live through
him, that is, live the life of Grace, and of Glory; for all men have not Faith,
and al^ men will not be Saved; and what should disappo^nt God of his
Intentions? is he not able to accomplish his Designs? If it be said, that man's
unbeleefe stands in the way. I answer Though man's unbeleef stands in the
way of his own salvation; Yet as the Apostle says concerning God's
faithfulness Romans 3:3* 4. for what if some did not believe? shall their
unbeleef make the faith of God, of none effect? God forbid: yea let God be
true, and every man a liar, so say I, what if some do not believe? shall their
unbeleefe make the unchangeable Purposes and Intentions of God of none effect?
No; let God be Unchangeable, and every man a Changeling: and as for Ioh. 3:16.
On which our Adversaries build much, though this Quaker has not the wit to
improve what they have said, the meaning of the place is directly against them,
for the words run thus in the original, (...), i. e. for God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that all believing (or all
believers, or every one that believes) in him might not perish, but have
everlasting life. So that his death here is manifestly restricked unto
Believers: and if our Adversaries shall prove, that either all are, or shall be
Believers, we shall easily grant, without disput, that Christ died for them
all: And this is further manifest from the preceding verse, unto which this is
subjoyned as a Confirmation, and connected by the particle (...) for there
Christ had said, that all and every believer in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, and verse. 14. as Moses lifted up the serpent, in the
wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted up: now lest Nicodemus should
suppose, that because Christ had made mention of the brazen serpent, which
Moses lifted up in the wilderness, the benefit of which was peculiar to the
Jews, that therefore the benefit of Christ's death should re^ound only to the
advantage of the believing Jews; our Lord shows in the proof verse 16. the
large extension of the death of Christ, to wit, that God sent not his Son for
the Jews only, but for the Gentiles also whom the Jews looked upon, as
devouted to destruction, and said that they should all be destro^ed in the
days of the Messiah, and whom they ordinarily styled, the Nations of the
world, (as is observed by such as are versed in the writings of the Rabbines,
and in the Talmuds) To rectify therefore this mistake, Christ tells Nicodemus,
one of the Jews Rulers and Rabbis, that God so loved the world, (that is, the
Gentiles, whom they called the Nations of the world) that he gave his only
begotten son, that all believers even among them should not perish: and in the
next verse. adds moreover for God sent not his son into the word, to condemn
the world, (that is the Gentiles) as they foolishly imagined, but that the
world through him might be saved. See Ioh. 6: v. 33, 51. 2 Cor. 5: v. 19. Ioh.
4: v. 42. and 12 verse. 47.

60. He proceeds. 8 and brings another proof from Heb. 2:9. where it is
said, that Jesus, by the grace of God, should taste death for every man. And
thence he infers, that if he tasted death for all, then there were none for
whom he did not taste death, and therefore there is none, that may not partake
of the benefit of his death Ans. (1.) That for every man, in the original, is
(...) by an enallage for (...) for all, and this tasting of death, was no other
then dying; as Mat. 16:28. Mark 9:1. Luke 9:27. Ioh. 8.52. Shall we now think,
that Christ died for all and every man, that is, in their room and stead (as
(...) imports, Philem ^.13. 2 Cor. 15:20. and always in profane Authors,
when mention is made of one dying for another, and frequently also in the 70.
version, as when David wished to have died for Absalom, and one King is said to
have reigned in the stead and place of another,) and yet that many of these
same men shall die for themselves, and suffer in their own persons, what Christ
suffered for them? This is the import of this man's gloss: Nay, when Christ by
his death, in the room of all and every man, did procure no more, than that
they might partake of the benefit of his death, it might so have come to
pass, that not one of all these all and every one, should ever have reaped any
good of his death. (2.) What we are to look upon as the proper import of this,
and the like Universal term, we have shown above* And the Apostle here
writing unto the Hebrews, who, as was said, fondly conceited, that salvation
belonged to them alone, and that the Gentiles should reap no benefit of the
Messiah, had ground to use the same; that they might see the Messiah was not
for them alone. (3.) What these all are, for whom Christ tasted death, the text
clearly shows, when they are called Sons, who must be brought to glory, and
not have a mere may be of salvation, and of whose salvation Christ is peculiar
Captane verse. 10, the Sanctified, who are all of one with the Sanctifier, and
his Brethren verse. 11, 12, 17. that belong to his Church verse. 12. The
Children, which God had given him verse. 13. who were to be dilivered verse. 15.
and did belong to the seed of Abraham verse. 16. and for whose sins he made
reconciliation verse. 17. and whom he succoureth in temptation verse. 18. If this
context do not sufficiently confute this conceit, we need regaird the
Scriptures no more.

61. He adds Ioh. 3:17. and 12; 47. And then tells us, that by our doctrine,
Christ should rather be said to have come to condemn the world; for if he came
not to bring salvation to the most part of the world, but to augment their
comdemnation, he came of purpose not to save, but to condemn the world Ans.
Prejudice has so far blinded this man's eyes, that he sees not the beam in
his own eye: He observes not, that by his own opinion, this may be more
truly said of Christ, viz that he came to Condemn the world, and the whole
world; than of ours: for by his opinion, not one man might have been saved*
because Christ only procured a mere Possibility, and no Certanty for any one
man, as he supposes: and can he be so blind, as not to see, that this is
worse, than to say, that Christ shall certanely save some, though the greatest
part shall perish? (2.) was not Christ set for the fall of many Luke 2:34. and
for a stumbling block Esai. 8:14, 15. Romans 9:33. 1 Pet. 2:7. Esai 28:26. Says
not Christ himself Ioh. 9:39 for judgment I am come into this world, that they
-- which see might be made blind. See also Ioh. 15:22, 24. But (3.) Our
answer is this, that Christ came indeed to save the World, that is, his
People, scattered up and down the world, and especially among the Gentiles,
whom the Jews looked upon (as was said lately) as the Nations of the Gentiles,
who were to be destroyed at the coming of the Messiah: And all these he shall
certanely save. And though, his first coming was not to act the part of a judge
to any, (of which he speaks Ioh. 12:37.) yet I trow, his last coming will be
in form of a judge Mat. 24:30. and 25:31, Luke 9:26. 1 These. 4:16. Act. 17:31.

62. He cites next 2 Pet 3:9. the Lord is -- long-suffering to us ward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto repentance; and
tells us, that it is like to Ezech. 33: ver. 11. (of which place we spoke in the
preceding Chapter) and then adds. That God's will takes not effect; the
cause is from us, which could not be, if we had never been capable of
salvation, and if Christ had never died for us, but had left us under a
physical impossibility of salvation* Answer (1) If these words be taken
Universally, what will this man do with those, that outlive the day of their
visitation, (as he speaks) and are hard^ned judicially of God, and given up
to a reprobate mind? is the Lord willing, that these should come unto
Repentance? if not, what will he do with his Universality? Again, what will he
say to those, whom God cutteth off in their younger years; and of those, He
takes away in the very act of sin, as He did Nadab and Abihu, the people of
Sodom, the Bethshemites, Uzzah, Zimri and Cosbi? (2.) If we be the Cause, that
God's will takes not effect, we must be stronger then God; for this Will of
God is not his Command, but his will of Purpose: And so He must be a weak God,
that can not effectuat what he wills, but can be hindered by weak man; but
the Scriptures speak other ways of our God, and tells us that he does
whatsoever he will; and none can let, or hinder him. Dan. 4:35. Job. 9:12.
Esai. 45:9. Psalm* 135:6. And that none has resisted his will. Romans 9:20. (3.)
Free Will, I see, must be a very great and absolute Prince; for upon it hang
all the effects of God's will and Purpose, and of the death of Christ; so that
if Free will be ill disposed, none of God's gracious Purposes, Promises or
Decrees shall take effect; and Christ, for all his Death and Bloodshed, shall
not save one soul, or see a seed: and thus all the decrees of heaven are at
Man's devotion, and Christ must turn a petitioner, and supplicat Lord Free
will, that He may see of the travail of his soul. O cursed Religion? (4.) But
as to the passage in hand, the matter is clear, that Peter is not speaking of
all and every man universally: but of us, that is, of himself, and these to
whom he writes, and they are the same, he wrote his first Epistle unto 2 Pet.
3:1. and them he styles Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 1:2. Who were begotten again to a lively
hope, by the resurr^ction of Jesus Christ from the dead verse. 3. who were keep^
by the power of God, through faith unto salvation verse. 5. who were lovers of
Christ, and believing did rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory verse.
8. Such as, by Christ did believe in God verse. 20, 21. and had purified their
souls, in obeying the truth, through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
brethren. and were born again etc. verse. 22, 23. See Chap. 2:4, 5, 7, 9, 10,
25. 2 Pet. 1:1, 3, 4, and 3:1, 17, 18. Thus the impertinency of this man, in
citeing this passage, is manifest.

63. He asks, what means all the vehement Invitations, Expostulations and
Complaints in Scripture, if there be no possibility of salvation? and
supposes, that this is to make God the Author of a stage play. And thus the
man ra^teth in his reavings, at this rate, and all to dethrone the most High,
and spoil Him of his Principality, and Supreme Dominion, that base man may be
set down in the chair of State, and have the keys of heaven and hell, at his
girdle: by this Argument, the Quaker would not only make the death of Christ a
common thing, but would destroy all the Decrees of God, all Predestination and
Election, all Purposes of preventing any with mercy, and all Absolute P^omises.
But the man's attempt is vain, God will be God, whether he will or not. (2.) We
assert no Simple Impossibility of salvation to any, but Hypothetical; If God
would give grace to all, all should be saved: and if He will not give grace to
all, must we quarrel with the Almighty? Notwithstanding of God's decrees,
every one that perishes, perishes willingly and of his own f^ee choice:
God's decrees destroy not man's Free will, nor take away the liberty and
contingency of second causes, but rather establish it, as may appear from Prove.
16:33. Ioh. 19:11. Act. 2:23. and 4:27, 28. Mat. 17:12. (3.) These
Exhortations, Expostulations, etc. respect the Gospel, as it relates to Gods
will of precept; and is the word of reconciliation dispensed by men; and so
hold forth what is man's Duty, (as we cleared above) which must not be
confounded with God's Purposes, nor set up to dethrone them: our duty is our
duty, by virtue of a command, whatever God's purposes be. Though God had
purposed, that Isaac should not be killed by his Father, yet the word of
command made it Abraham's duty, to go and offer him up. (4) These Invitations
and Expostulations etc. respect only those, to whom the Gospel is preached; and
so, whatever this man can make out of them, they can prove no Universal
Redemption; for we hear of no such expostulations with such as live without the
sound of the Gospel: And there are more without the Church, than within it, not
only under the Law, but even now under the Gospel. (5.) This man, I hope, will
not deny; that God might, if he pleased, give grace to such as he expostulateth
with, whereby they might certainly be wrought up to a compliance with the word
of Command: And because it seems not good in his eyes, to do so, shall his
Dispensations, and the Ministry of his Gospel be looked upon, as a stage play
and a comoedie? O! who art thou, O man, that will thus bring God to thy bar,
and pass such a shameful sentence upon his proceedings? (6) God uses these
Expostulations, etc. as means to bring home his Own: And as for Others,
though we would think to advocat their cause, and condemn the Lord, they, and
all that will take their part, shall be found speachless, in the day of
accounts: And God shall be glorified, in his holy Justice, whether vain Man
will, or not.

64. He cites in the last place 1 I^h. 2:1, 2. where Christ is said to be a
Propitiation for the sins of the world. And then he insulteth over such, as
would have only believers understood here, by the word World; and why? because
the word World is frequently taken for Unbeleevers, for which he cites many
passages, several of which are very impertinent; for some speak of the World
containing, not of the inhabitants, as Ioh. 17:15, 18. some of the profits and
pleasures of the world, as Mat. 16:26. 1 Ioh. 2:15. some make no mention of the
World, as Mat. 18:1^. Ioh. 7.8, 26. and 18:19. and 17:20. Others speak of the
temptations and other accidents of the world as Gal. 6:14. Iam. 1:27. 2 Pet.
2:20. And then he tells us, that the World is here distinguished from believers,
who come in under the word, ours; and so the speech should be redunda^t and
superfluous. But the full commentary of the word he draws from this same
Epistle Chap. 5:10. where the same Apostle is speaking to the same persons. To
all which We Answer, Notwithstanding that enough was said above to enervate
any Argument drawn from hence. (1.) The word World can prove nothing, for it
admits of so many various acceptations, (not to mention the world
containing) signifying sometimes indefinitly men without restrictions or
enlairgements Esai 13:11. Ioh. 7:4. Sometimes Many Mat. 18.7. Ioh. 4:42. and
12:19 and 16:8 and 17:21. 1 Cor. 4:9. Revel. 13:3. Sometimes a great part of
the World Romans 1:8. and 10:18. Mat. 24:14. and 26:13. Sometimes the Roman
Impire Luke 2:1. Sometimes the wicked; and sometimes God's own scattered up
and down the world Psalm. 22:27. Ioh. 3:16. and 6:36, 51. Rom 4:13. and 11:12,
15. 2 Cor. 5:19. Col. 1:6. (2.) Nor can the phrase whole world, or all the
world, prove any thing; for that also is variously taken, and never (except
once Romans 3:19. where it is in a necessary matter) taken for all and every
individual person? See Revel. 3:10. and 12:9. and 13:3. Col. 1: verse. 6. Luke
2:1. and in other places, it does not denote men. (3.) It is but rational to
suppose, that the whole world here denotes no more, than the like expressions
elsewhere, to wit, all nations, all flesh, all the ends of the earth, all the
families of the earth etc. and we did show above, that these, used in the
matter whereof we are now speaking, could not be taken in their most
comprehensive sense, otherwise it would follow that all and every man should
have grace, and glory; see for instance Psalm. 22:27. and 72:11. and 93:3. But
Peter tells us how such ought to be interpreted, Act. 2:17. expounding that
universal Joel 2:18. (4.) That there must here be a restriction, himself must
grant, otherwise he must bring-in the Devils; and say, that Christ is a
propitiation for them, and not for us only who are men upon earth, because the
word world, in its universal extent, will comprehend them also: Especially
considering, how the second place may contribute to strengthen this
supposition, seeing the Devils lie in evil? But if he take liberty to restrick
it, to Men, he must not be offended with us, for taking the same liberty to
restrick it to a certane sort of Men: as elsewhere it is restricked to signify
Wicked men; so here it may signify Believers, or the Elect, as the like phrase
of all nations imports Esai 66:18. and 2:2. and elsewhere. (5.) And that it
must be restricked so here, is manifest, from the very word Propitiation; for
if it be taken for the actual Application of the benefits of Christ's death,
according to the parallel place Romans 3:25. where it is said to be by faith,
then it is manifest, that Believers only are intended here; and indeed the
whole discourse is intended for the comfort of Believers, against incident
sins; and not for the comfort of Others. And if it be meaned of Impetration;
even then there must be a restriction, to such as either are, or through grace
shall be made believers; for only such (as we did show above) are they, for
whom Christ is a propitiation. Shall Christ be looked upon, as an Advocate with
the Father, for the wicked Reprobate? In this word propitiation, there is an
allusion to the cover of the Ark, and Mercy seat, called (...) Heb. 9:5. which
signified the covering of the Law, as a rigide Covenant of works, importing
Reconciliation, and Acceptance with God through Christ, the true Propitiation,
or Mercy seat Romans 3:25. who propitiated for sins Heb. 2:17. and so expiated
them, for upon t^is follows remission Mat. 26:28. Romans 3:25. and 5:9. Ephesians.
1:7. Col. 1:14. Heb. 9:22. 1 Ioh. 1:7. 1 Pet. 1:2. Revel. 1:5. And shall we
say, that this is common to all the world? Or that all this imports only a
Possible Reconciliation and Remission? or that it is for such, as shall
themselves suffer the vengeance of eternal fire for ever? Let Quakers believe
this, if they will, for my part, I cannot (6.) Why the Apostle should use this
general term, in a restricted sense, we formerly gave a reason: see. 59. and
60. This Apostle conversing most with Jews Gal. 2:9. wrote this Epistle, unto
them, as is most probable, they having first had the offer made unto them,
which is hinted in this same Chapter verse. 7. And so he uses the word World,
in a sense, which they understood well, to wit as importing the Gentiles, whom
he would hereby insinuate, to be now taken-in, and no more strangers and
foreigners, the partition wall being broken down. And hereby it appears,
that there is no tautologie in the words, when he says, he is a propitiation
for our sins, who are believers of the Jews: but also for the sins of the
people of God among the Gentiles, (who are expressly called the world, in
opposition to the Jews Romans 11:15.) or of the children of God through the
world as Ioh. 11:51, 52. where this same Apostle gives us the plain meaning
of this word. (7.) As for 1 Ioh. 5:13. It is manifest, how impertinent that is
to this purpose, and if this man will urge it, in its latitude, he shall make
the Apostle contradict himself, for the whole World may take in believers; and
whereas he thinks the word world, used in one and the same Epistle, must
necessarily import one and the same thing, he shows himself a stranger in the
Scriptures, where several times an antanaclasis, or the same word having
distinct significations, is used, not only in the same Book or Epistle, but in
the same verse, pronunced with the same breath as Ioh. 1: verse. 10. and 3:
verse. 6, 17. Mat. 8: v. 22. 1 Ioh. 3: v. 16. to name no more.

65. He adds some testimonies of Antiquity, whether of his own gathering or
not, I think it not worth the while to search; but hereby he would make his
Readers believe, that what be says was the doctrine of the Church, for the
first Six hundred years; and yet the eldest, which he cites, is Ambrose, who
died An. 397. Because I do not lay much weight upon the Authority of men, in
this matter (and this man for all his fair show of respect to Antiquity, in
citing some five or six sentences, out of all their writtings, within few lines
condemns them all, pretending that the Quakers, who are but of yesterday very
late, have only found out the truth, hid from so many ages) I will not
therefore trouble my self to examine the passages adduced by him: Only I must
tell him, that whereas he cites Augustine, he bewrays much impudence, seeing
it is sufficiently known to all, that are acquainted with his writings, that he
was of a far other opinion. If this man, who will not bottom his faith upon
the Scriptures of truth, will nevertheless be fouling his fingers with these
humane writings, I pray him read August. ad art. falso impos. ad art. 1. De
Trinit. lib. 13. c. 15 Contr. Faust. Manich. lib. 11. c. 7. Enchirid. ad
Laurent. Cap. 61. in Psalm. 21. in Joan Tract 53. and 110 and 111. and 48. and
87. and Sermon. 41. de verb. Apost. and decor. and great. Cap. 11. He cites
Chrysostom. in Joan. Cap. 1. But let him read him in 1 Cor. hom. 39. He cites
Scriptor. devocatione Gentium lib. 11. Cap. 6. But let him read the same Author
lib. 1. c. 3. and ult. or rather Prosper lib. 1. Cap. 9. and lib. 2. Cap. 1. He
cites Prosper ad Gall. Cap. 9. and Resp. ad obj. Vincent. Resp. 1. In both
which places, he is express enough for us. Read him also de Ingrat Cap. 9. He
cites Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8. Let him read the same Author de fid. ad
Great. lib. 4. c. 1. and in 1 Cor. 15. and in Rom 5 He cites the same Author
lib. 2. de Cain and Abel Cap 3. Let him read also the same Book Cap. 4.

66. But if this man would have known the judgment of Antiquity, he should have
gone a little higher* And if he please let him consult Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 4. c. 15. where he will find a letter of the Church of Smirna, written
concerning the martyrdom of their Pastor Polycarpus, and in it these words,
Christ suffered for the salvation of the whole world of them, that shall be
saved. Justin. Martyr coetaneus with Polycarp. de ver. Christ. relig. says,
Christ is made an oblation for all sinners, that are willing to turn and
repent. And thereafter. Our Christ suffered, and was crucified, he lay not
under the curse of the Law, but showed clearly, that be only would deliver
them, that would not fall away. etc. And again as the blood of the Passover
delivered them that were saved in Egypt, so the blood of Christ shall deliver
them that believe from death. Ireneus, who suffered Martyrdom An. 198. lib. 2.
c. 39. says, Christ came to save all men by himself; all, I say, that by him
are borne again in God, Infants, Children, Boys, Young men, and Old men, and
lib. 5. Christ in his passion hanging on the cross alone saves all men, that
do not depart from the land of promise, that is, the faithful continueing in
grace to the end. Origenes, who died An. 254. in Levit. says, the High Priest
and advocat Christ prays for them only, that be the Lord's portion, who wait
for him without, who depart not from the temple, where they give themselves to
fasting and prayer. Ignatius, an ancient Martyr. Epist. ad Phil. says, He is
the Shepherd, the Sacrifice, the Door of Knowledge, by which entered -- the
spouse of Christ, for which, instead of a dowry, he poured out his own blood,
that he might redeem her. Clemens, a most ancient Author, of whom mention is
made Phil. 4:3 Epist. ad Corinth. says, for the love, which he (i. e. Christ)
had unto us, he gave his blood for us, according to his purpose, and his flesh
for our flesh, and his life for our lives. Cyprian martyred An. 250. ad
Demetrium says. This grace has Christ communicated, subdueing death in the
trophee of his cross, redeeming believers with the price of his blood. Others
might be cited, who speak more clearly of this matter, after Pelagianisme
arose, and was revived again by the Semipelagians, of whom Prosper in his
Epistle to Augustine complains, saying, among other things, That they would
affirm, that our Lord Christ died for whole mankind, and that no man at all is
excepted from the redemption of his blood -- because the Sacrament of Gods
mercy belongs to all men. Therefore, in respect of God, life eternal is
prepared for all: But in respect of freewill, it is laid hold on by them, that
shall willingly and of their own accord belee^e in God. And he adds (this
Quaker would do well to advert) that they are fallen to the extolling of such
gra^e, because they would avoid to confess, that God, according to the purpose
and counsel of his own will, in his secret judgment, but in his manifest work,
makes one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, neither will they assent
that the predestinate number of the elect can neither be increased, n^r
diminished. Whence we see, who have bin the first Patrons of this Quakers
doctrine; and whose breasts he has sucked. He may read also, if he will,
Prospers verses, de Ingratis contra Pelagionos Cap. 10. and 11. which I need
not here set down.

CHAP. IX. Of Universal Salvation Possible.
1. AFter a pedantick parad, wherein our Quaker discovers as much Vanity as
Ignorance, conceiting that he and his party alone are the men of understanding,
and that wisdom must die with them, and supposing, that the Opinions, which
they embrace, and which he now broacheth, were never known in the world before
they, whom he calls Page 78.79. a company of poor mechanics, were raised up
to declare the same he proceeds to declare, what these new Revelations are,
which they have received. It is not worth the pains, to spend words in
discovering this man's Ignorance, Folly, Pride and Pedantry, in all his
excursions, for these appear manifestly, in his whole discourse. He not only
falls foul upon the worthy Ancients, Augustine and Prosper (whom yet he
cited as favoring Universal Redemption) and upon Luther and Calvin; but his
dear friends the Arminians cannot escape his rode; for albeit they asserted
Universal Redemption; yet because they did not clear so fully the way, how the
benefits of this death of Christ were communicated to all, as he could have
wished, they must be censured as a company of Ignorant-Fooles, that knew not
how to speak consequent^ally to their own renent: And yet for any thing I see,
they said little less, than he says himself; for we must not think, that his
errors are as New, as his Fond Fanatical Expressions are, wherewith he sets
them off. The Devil can help to the coining of new words, and to the framing
of a new dress; for he is not so little Master of Words and Notions; nor is he
so little versed in Politiques, as not to see it of his Advantage to cloth Old
Errors with New Notions, that they may the better pass among the ignorant,
for matters never heard of before.

2. But leaving this to the ensueing trial, let us see, what is this New Light
and Gospel, the knowledge of which, he says, they have got by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ, and have it confirmed by their sensible Experience, and sealed
by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit, in their hearts. He lays down the
matter in three Propositions Page 79. 11. The first whereof (which in this
Chapter we are to examine) is this. That God, who out of his infinite love sent
his Son, who tasted death for every man, has granted to every Person, whether
Jew, o^ Gentile, or Turk, or Schithian, or Indian, or Barbarian, of whatsoever
Kind or Nation, or in whatever part of the world he live, a certain day and
time of visitation, in which day, or time, it is possible for them to be saved,
and partake of the benefit of Christ's death. This is one part of the New
Gospel, which the Quakers preach: And, ^re I proceed in the examination of the
grounds thereof, I must premise these two things, first. That all this is
founded upon the error of Universal Redemption, which we have rejected and
confuted in the preceding Chapter, and when the only pillar, on which this new
Fabric is erected, is taken away, by such force of Scripture and Reason, as
this Man, I suppose, shall be forced to yield unto, or declare himself to be
self condemned, the building settled thereupon, needs no more than its own
weight, to bring it down headlong. And when further Chap. VII. we have
vindicated the doctrine of Reprobation and free Election, (which this man
labored with all his might to take out of the way, knowing that if that should
stand, his New Religion or rather Old Pelagian and Arminian Delusion, should
find no footing, we might forbear the further examination of his following
doctrine, which is but so many native consequences, flowing from false Grounds
and Positions. But Secondly. I cannot well understand, how he can say, that he
and the rest of the Quakers have this confirmed unto them by their sensible
Experience, it not being a matter, that can come under that manner of
cognition: it seems, that their inward senses are so quick and lively, that
they can sensate what is not sensible. But I find it usual with him, to say so
much weight upon his own Experience and Feeling, as if it were the whole basis
of his new Inventions and Doctrine, that it is no wonder, he make use of it, in
all cases, pertinent, or impertinent, all is a matter, valeat quantum valere
potest, every one will not advert to its impertinency, but believe the man
speaking from his own Experience, what his own Experience can never make him
sensib^e of; for the Quakers do experience, as they say, what is not done, but
remains to be done in the world, let be what is past, as all Christ's
sufferings, etc. These thoughts and the like may possibly have moved him thus
to speak here.

3. We have seen what his Proposition is; and the meaning of it is in short
this, so far as I can take it up, That because God has an inconceivably great
love to all, and desire to save all, and for this end sent his Son to die alike
for all, and every man and mothers son, he grants to all and every man a
certain space of time, within which if they accept of the offer of peace, and
hearken to his commands it is well, they shall be saved: but if not, they must
perish: But if now we enquire; How this matter comes to the knowledge of every
son of Adam: for it is but reasonable they hear of the terms, on which they
may be saved, before they be condemned for rejecting of them? He will tell us
afterward of an Universal Gospel, making the matter known to all and every one.
But again, if we enquire, Whether or not every one of Adam's posterity has
Power in himself and gracious Ability, qualifying his Natural Faculties, to
accept of this offer? He will tell us afterward, that there is an Universal
Saving Grace and Light given to every man, whereby this may be brought to
pass, if Freewill be so kind, and tender of the man's salvation. Whence we
see, that Salvation lies equally at every man's door, be he Jew or Gentile,
Schythian or Barbarian, Turk or Christian: And every man has Power and
Ability, Moral, to lay hold on Salvation, if he be disposed to accept thereof:
This, and nothing else, must be the Possibility, whereof he speaks; so that
there is not requisite hereunto any new grant of Grace, or Divine Help, to
quicken the man, or to work Faith or any other grace requisite in him, he has
a stock, from his Mothers womb, which is sufficient, if he will but improve it,
and that notwithstanding of any thing he lost in Adam: (it was not then, we
see, for nothing, that this Quaker was so much against Original sin, as we
heard.) Now this being the proper and native face of this man's doctrine, let
any man tell me, wherein it differs from the Old Pelagian and late Popish,
Iesuitical, Arminian and Socinian Error? And yet so vain and confident is the
man, in his Ignorance and Self Admiration, that he holds these things forth,
as a New Revelation (from the lying Spirit that has bin a liar and murderer
from the beginning, no doubt) communicated only unto the Quakers, who are but a
company of ignorant mechanics, not acquanted with controversies, or read in
the writtings of Pelagians, Jesuits, Arminians and Socinians. And it may be,
this is all the ground of his concluding this, as to the unlearned and unread
Quakers, to be from Revelation, little knowing or observing, how deeply this
erroneous imagination is implanted and rooted in the corrupt heart of every son
of Adam, so that they learn it without book, or study; yea so that all the
preaching of the Gospel of truth will never be able to eradicate these Natural
errors, particularly this Natural Pelagianisme, Iesuitisme, Arminianisme and
Socinianisme, out of their minds and hearts, till the Grace of God come: and
hence is it, that the Gospel, which is the doctrine of the Grace of God,
diametrically opposite to this delusion, which is, in all points, a sworn
enemy to the grace of God, is so little embraced and closed with by many, who
live and die under the clear Manifestations thereof. And it is no wonder, that
these false imaginations, being natural and in laid in our corrupt natures,
have so deep an Impression, and be looked upon, by this Corruption, that is as
blind as self conceity, as Impressions of the Spirit, especially when the God
of this world, who is in them blinding their minds, does concur to fortify
this Prejudice against the doctrine of the true grace of God, and withal
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, for this effect: which
consideration moderateth our astonishment at the Boldness and Confidence of the
Q^akers, and particularly of this their Patron, in this matter.

4. When he comes to explain this proposition Page 82.. 12. he tells us what
he means by this day and time of visitation, that God has granted unto all
men: And negatively he says he does not mean, every man's term of life,
though as to some, as for example the penitent thief, it may extend so far.
But wherein consists this visitation? This was the chief thing that was here
to be explained: we must, it seems, wait for his meaning till a fitter season
afterward. A day of gracious visitation and invitation in the Gospel offer, we
acknowledge; But what it is, which is granted to the Heathens, that can go
under this name, I am yet to learn, knowing no dispensation of God, that can
be called a day of Visitation, in reference to Salvation, but what it is in and
through the preaching of the Gospel, which brings life and immortality to
light, and which therefore cannot be said to be granted to such, as never heard
of it.

5. Then he tells us positively, that it is only such a time, in which God is
sufficiently exonered of the condemnation of every man, which may be longer to
some, and shorter to others, as it seems good unto God, according to his
wisdom. That no flesh shall have any ground of quarrelling with God, I am past
all doubt; But if this man think, that in some cases, God is in hazard to be
impanneled by man, it concerns him to make this matter more plain to us, who
see no such hazard, and can apprehend no such danger. If he learn any thing of
this out of the Scriptures, he would do well to acquaint us therewith; if he
have it only by Revelation, I am not like to bottom my faith upon his said or
supposed Revelations. Sure, I think he should have given us some other ground
for all this difference, that God makes among men, granting to some a longer
day, and to others a shorter day of Visitation, than is the good pleasure of
God; for he cannot but know, that we lay this down for a ground, why some get
no such day of Visitation, I mean as to the preaching of the Gospel; and yet
this will not satisfy him, and others of his kind, who take upon them with no
small boldness, to tell us of Rules of Justice, of their own imagining, which
God must not transgress. What if some say, That God is not Just and Righteous
enough, if he grant not to all an equally long day of Visitation? Will he think
to satisfy them with saying, So it seems good to God according to his Wisdom?
If so, he must be very partial, who will not accept of this answer out of our
mouth, when, sure, it may sufficiently serve to stop his mouth; seeing it can
not help him, to say, that in the other case God should be less Unjust; for in
no degree, how small so ever, can God be Unjust. But all this is but what some
Papists say, who will not have this sufficient grace always at hand, but say
that some sin it away, as may be seen in Bellarmin. Lib. 2. de Great. and Lib.
Arb.

6. What becomes of them after this day? He says, they may live after it, but
there is no Possibility of salvation for them; and God suffers them to be
obdured, as a just judgment for their infidelity; and then he raises up such
as instruments of his wrath and makes them his rod against others. But (1.)
May it not come to pass that such, after that day, may hear the Gospel
preached? no doubt, he will say, yea: is not then the Lord mocking them, when
he inviteth them to Repentance and Salvation, after it is Impossible for them
to Repent and be saved? If not, why objected he this against our doctrine of
Reprobation? (2.) Why is there no Possibility of Salvation? Is it impossible
for God to give them grace? or has their Free will got such a crake, or such
a byasse, as that it is impossible for them to run right? Then they have, in
that case, lost all Free will; for his masters, the Jesuits and Arminians tell
us, that it is not Free will, which cannot either will or nill, as it please^h,
even all things requisite being present: And if there be not Free will, there
can be nothing, as they say, but Necessity, and necessity takes away all sin,
and all conscience of sin. (3.) He says, God suffers them to be obdured. And
is this all? The Scripture speaks more actively of the matter, telling us,
and that frequently too, that Go^ hardened the heart of Pharaoh See Exodus 7.
and 8. and 9. and 10. and that he hardens whom he will Romans 9:18. (4.) But
whether are they obdured, before the day of Visitation be at an end, or after?
if before, then while they are Obdured, salvation is possible: If after, then
their day of Visitation ended before they were abdured: and then I would ask,
if sin procure this finishing of the day of their visitation or not? and what
sin it is, seeing it is not Hardness of heart? Is it the sin of Infidelity? but
then, seeing persons are guilty of that, at the first hearing of the Gospel, and
not obeying and believing, eit^er this day ends with the first proclamation
of peace in the Gospel, (which is false, seeing many are and may be long
Unbeleevers under the drop of the Gospel, and after many years get grace to
believe) or not; and then we would feign know, when? (5.) By his mentioning of
Infidelity ^ere, as the sin procureing God's permission of Obduration, he
seems to import, that the day of Visitation calls for faith: an^ I wish he
had explained to us, what he understands by faith, and what is the Object,
and what are the Acts of this faith; for hithertil, I could observe nothing
said by him, that might inform me. (6.) But how can Infidelity be charged upon
such, as never heard the Gospel? Does the Scripture any where charge Infidelity
upon such, as lived without the pale of the Church? (7.) When the Lord gave up
the Gentiles to uncleanness, to vile affections, and to a reprobat mind Romans
1:24, 26, 28. Which I suppose he will think to be equivalent, unto the Lords
suffering them to be Obdured, as he speaks, we hear that it is for other
sins, than want of Faith, or for not improving the day of Visitation. (8.) what
the last clause can import, or for what end, it is adduced, I cannot well
imagine. Only I gather out of it, and the preceding words That he cannot but
say, that God punishes sin with sin, and uses sinful men, acting sin, as his
instruments, and as a rode in his hand, and so must will that sin be in the
world by his permission; which is what our Divines say, though on all
occasions, and without occasion offered, he falls soul upon them, upon this
very account; as is to be seen within two lines after this, where he would have
his Reader believe, that we say, that God does necessarily impell men to sin;
which is a manifest untruth. (9.) In this case, what becomes of God's will and
intention to save all? if he say, These are excepted. He must prove this
restriction, and withal deny his Universality. If he say, the will to save all
is antecedent; but t^is will is consequent, as do Pelag. Jesuits, and
Arminians, he must then say, that Gods will is really alterable and altered;
and so make God like unto mutable man, neither wife enough to foresee what will
be, nor powerful enough to do what he wills, or effectuat what he intends:
let him and his Patrons see to this.

7. To this purpose he applies that place already cited Romans 1. but, as we
said, we find not the sin, for which the Lord gave them up to a reprobat
mind, called a Despiseing or not receiving of the offer of the Gospel, or, not
improving of the day of Visitation; but they were other sins against the Light
of Nature; And if this man take the Light of Nature, for the Gospel, (as, it
may be, we shall find, in due time, that he does) we may know, what is the
Quakers Gospel. To prove that some may outlive this day, he adduceth the
instance of Esau Heb. 12:16, 17. and the lamentation of Christ over Jerusalem
Luke 19:42. But (not to fall upon the business yet, nor examine his g^ounds,
which he prosecuteth more fully afterward) I would only ask, what this can
prove, concerning a day of Visitation granted to all and every person, Heathen,
and Barbarian, that never heard of the promise of the Messiah, nor of his
coming in the flesh, and of salvation through Him? will he say, that all the
posterity of Esau had as fair an offer of the Inheritance, as he had himself?
and that all the Jews, these sixteen hundred years, have had as fair a day
of Visitation, as they had, concerning whom Christ takes up that lamentation?
^f not, where is the truth of his Proposition? The Apostle tells us Romans 11.
that the natural branches were broken off, because of unbeleef, and cast away,
verse. 15, 17, 19, 20, 21. etc. And that was not meant only of that generation;
for he tells us verse. 25. that blindness is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in: and as yet, concerning the Gospel, they are
enemies; for the deliverer is not yet come out of Zion, to turn away
ungodliness from Jacob verse. 26. Esai. 59:20. They lie yet under their own
doom, which their Forefathers pronunced with their own mouth, when they said,
His blood be upon us, and upon our children; and under that wrath which came
upon them to the uttermost, 1 These. 2: v. 16. Have all their posterity had as a
fair a day of Visitation, (or any thing like it) as their Forefathers had,
before that Paul and Barnabas said unto them Act 13 46. It was necessary, that
the word of God should first be spoken unto you, but seeing ye put it from you,
and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles? No,
I suppose not, what will he then do with his false proposition?

8. This is all, which he gives as an Explication of his Proposition, and
there are two maine things, which called for some Explication, and which he
has left untouched. The one thing is, what is the nature of this Visitation?
Or what is that dispensation of God toward Heathens, who are not within the
visible Church, nor never heard a distinct sound of the Gospel, or of a
crucified Christ, the Captain of Salvation, and the only Peace maker, that can
pass under the name of a day of Visitation? That we might know, whether it be
of one and the same kind, which is granted Both to those, that are within the
Church, and to those, that are without* And if not, what is the difference: For
it would seem reasonable to say, that God requires something more of those
that are within the Church, in order to salvation, than of such as are without
it: and whether faith in a crucified Christ can be required of such, as never
heard of Him? The other thing is, what is the meaning of that, Salvation is
possible? What Possibility is this, which he means, or in what respects is it
said to be Possib^e? Is his meaning, that it is possible through God's grace?
No: for then it should be possible, so long as they live: For if God would give
them grace, they should be saved. His meaning then must be, that God has laid
it down at all men's door, and they have all sufficient Power to accept of the
Conditions, or do what is requisite for salvation, if they will, without any
c^ncurrence of divine grace, or any new supply: And that this is really his
true meaning, we shall see, when we come to examine his grounds.

9. As for the truth, which we maintain, it is to be seen, in our Confession
of faith Chap. 1.. 1. [ Although the light of Nature, and the works of Creation
and Providence, do so far manifest the Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God, as to
leave men unexcusable (Romans 2:14, 15. and 1:19, 20 Psalm. 19:1, 2, 3. Romans 1:22.
with Chap 2:1. yet they are not sufficient to give that knowledge of God, and
of his Will, which is necessary unto Salvation (1 Cor. 1:11. and 2:13, 14.)
therefore it pleased the Lord at sundry times, and in diverse manners, to
reveal himself, and to declare that his will unto his Church (Heb. 1:1.) and
afterward for the better preserving and propagating of the Truth, and for the
more sure establishment and comfort of the Church, against the Corruption of
the flesh. and the malice of Satan and of the world, to commit the sa^^e wholly
unto writing (Prove. 22:19, 20.21. Luke 1:2, 4. Romans 15:4. Mat. 4: verse. 4, 7,
10. Esai. 8: v. 19, 22.) which makes the holy Scripture to be most necessary
(1 Timothy 3:15.) those former ways of God's revealing his Will unto his people
being now ceased (Heb. 1:1, 2. 2 Pet. 2:19.) And in the larger Catechism
quaest. 60. Can they who have never heard the Gospel, and so know not Jesus
Christ, nor believe in him, be saved by their living according to the light of
nature? Ans. They who have never heard the Gospel (Romans 10:14.) know not Jesus
Christ (2 These 1:8, 9. Ephesians. 2:12. Ioh. 1: verse. 10, 11, 12.) and believe not
in Him, cannot be saved (Ioh. 8:24. Mark. 16:16.) be they never so diligent to
frame their lives according to the light of Nature (1 Cor. 1:20, -- 24.) or the
Law of that Religion, which they profess (Ioh. 4: verse. 22. Romans 9:31, 32.
Phil. 3:4, -- 9.) Neither is there salvation in any other, but in Christ alone
(Act. 4* 12.) who is the Savior only of his body the Church (Ephesians. 5:23.) And
again Quaest 68. Are all the Elect only effectually called? Ans. [All the
Elect and they only are effectually called (Act 13:48.) Although others may be,
and often are, outwardly called by the ministry of the word (Mat. 2^:14.) and
have some common operations of the Spirit (Mat. 7:22. and 13:20, 21. Heb. 9:4,
5.) who, for their wilful neglect and contempt of the grace offered to them,
being justly left in their unbeleef, do never truly come to Jesus Christ (Ioh.
12:38, 39, 40. Act 28:25, 26, 27. Ioh. 6:64, 65. Psalm. 81:11, 12.)

10. When the Gospel comes to a place, there is ground of hope, that God has
some lost groat or other to find out by the light thereof, for it being the
Gospel of Salvation, and by it the Lord bringing life and immortality to light,
and it being the mean appointed and designed of God for this end, to bring in
the chosen ones, there is ground to suppose, that the Lord has some elected
ones in that place, more or fewer. And though as to the intention of God, and as
it is the means designed of Lord, whereby to effectuate the purpose he has of
saving such, as he has designed unto life, it be properly sent to gather them
in: yet considering it as containing the revealed will of God, and pointing
forth duty, and as it is put into the hands of men, who know not the secret
Counsels of God, nor whose names are written in the book of life, whose not, it
concerns all that hear it; and all are bound in obedience to the command of
the great God, in the mouth of his authorized Ambassadors, to believe and obey
the Gospel: And when obedience is not yielded thereunto, the righteous God,
because of the refusal of the offer, and the contempt done to the grace of God,
in that refusal, either takes away the Gospel, leaving that people in
darkness, and in an irremediable case, by Non-churching or Excommunicating
them, as he threatened to do to Ephesus Revel. 2: to La^dicea Rev 3: and did to
the Jews, when he cut them off, and has done to several other Churches,
sometimes ^amous for Christianity: And where he continu^th the Light of the
Gospel, after much contempt (there being of his Elect there whom he will not
want, but with much long suffering, for the glory of his Grace, wait for) he
has other spiritual judgments, wherewith, even in this side of Eternity, he
punishes such contemptuous offenders, whose life natural he may spare for a
time, by giving them up to hardness of heart, judicially blinding them, giving
them up to the power of Unbeleefe, and to spiritual Security, and Deadness, so
that no preaching can pierce them, no Means can prevail with them, no Motives
can move or persuade them, no Threatenings can awaken them, or rouse them out of
their sleep: So that the Lord deals with them, according as it is written
Esai 6:9, 10. Mat, 13:14. Mark. 4: v. 12. Luke 8:10. Ioh. 12:40. Act. 28:26.
Romans 11:8. makes their eyes heavy and shuts their eyes, etc. or as it is
written Esa. 29:10. Romans 11.8. pours out upon them the Spirit of a deep
sleep, and closes their eyes: or as it is written Psalm. 81:12. gives them up
to their own hearts lust: or as it is Psalm. 6^:22. makes their table a snare:
or as it is 2 These. 2:10, 11, 12. gives them up to all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, and sends them strong delusion, that
they shall believe a lie, that they may be damned, who believed not the truth:
or says to them, as Revel. 22:11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still;
and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still: And though such judgments may
be inflicted upon some, that live and die under the drop of the Gospel; yet it
may well be said, as to these, on whom the Lord pours out these judgments,
that the day of their Visitation, and hope is at an end: But yet, though the
consideration of this, may and should make the Faithful Labourer in the work of
the ministry, when ready to complain, and cry out, that he has labored in
vain, and has spent his strength for naught and in vain Esai 49:4. lay his
hand upon his mouth, and adore, knowing withal that his judgment is with the
Lord, and his work with his God ibid. and that he is unto God a sweet savor of
Christ even in them, that perish, and to whom he is the savoure of death unto
death 2 Cor. 2:15, 16. Yet notwithstanding because it is not certain, who are
the particular persons, who are thus judicially smitten of God, he should mind
his duty, and preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine 2 Timothy 4:2. and be patient,
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth; and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him,
at his will 2 Timothy 2:24, 25, 26. And others also, who are even in a more
private capacity, should save some with fear, pulling them out of the fire Iud
verse. 23. Not do we hereby give allowance to any to despond, or despair, who
hear the Gospel, for the Lord has his own time of coming, and the door
stands open, that whosoever will may be encouraged to come forward; for
Christ in no wise casts out any that comes Ioh. 6:37. and the invitation is
Free and Large, and whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely
Revel. 22:17. Though with all we must say, that word Heb. 6:4, 5, 6, 7. may
strick terror into the hearts of many, for it is impossible for those, that
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame; for the earth, which drinks in the rain, that comes
often upon it, and brings forth herbs, meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God, but that which bears thorns and briers is
rejected, and is near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

11. But as concerning that possibility, which this Quaker dreameth of, whereby
it is concluded, or presupposed, that every Mothers son of the Posterity of
Adam have Power and Ability Moral, (I say moral, that no man may think* I speak
here of the mere faculties of the soul, Understanding and Will,) to believe and
obey the Gospel; or can of themselves believe, without the Spirit of God, and
his mighty operation, enlightening the Understanding savingly, and renewing the
Will, and causing, by the influence of his grace, the soul lay hold on the
offered salvation, and accept of the alsufficient offered Mediator; we utterly
deny it, affirming, faith to be the pure gift of God, wrought by the exceeding
greatness of his power, according to the working of his mighty power, or
according to the working of the might of his power, Ephesians. 1:19. and 2:8. And
that this faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God Rom 10:17. So
that we see nor how any, without the Church, or the hearing of the word of God,
and of the word of the Gospel revealing Christ, the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, can believe; not how any w^thin the Church, and who hear the
sound of the Gospel daily, can believe without the grace of God, working Faith
by the Operation of his Spirit, and thus concurring with the word. And
therefore, we deny Salvation to be Possible (in this Quakers sense) to any, yea
even to the Elect; otherwise we must reject the Scriptures of truth, and
embrace the Pelagian Error, and lay aside all prayer for the Spirit of grace
to work faith, and only make our supplications to Lord Free will, and think to
batter the walls of Freewill with mere Moral Swasion, as Jesuits, Arminians and
Socinians, with the old Pelagians, imagine; and sacrifice to our own net, and
burn incense to our own drag, Free will, because by it our portion is fat, and
our meat plenteous; And so give thanks (with the damned) to God, that has made
salvation only Possible; but to ourselves alone for making it Actual, and for
obtaining the crown and prize.

12. Having thus, in short, proposed our Judgment, after hearing of his
Opinion, we come now to examine the proofs of his Proposition, which he lays
down Page 93. etc.. 19. And first, in general, he says, That it is manifest
from the complaints, which the Spirit of God uses in the Scriptures, against
such, as perish, chideing and reproving them for rejecting Gods visitation and
love, and refuseing his mercy. Ans. (1.) His Proposition is Universal, and
these Complaints an^ Reproofs are only Particular, viz. against such, as were
within the Church; and so they can prove nothing. (2.) Neither will these
Reproofs, etc. prove that such had power and ability to embrace mercy and love
offered unto them, without the grace of God, as say Jesuits and Arminians; for
the Scripture tells us, that God must give the new heart, Ier. 31:33, 34. and
32:39, 40. Ezech. 11:19, 20. and 36:26, 27* Heb. 8:10. and that none comes to
the Son, but whom the Father draws, Ioh. 6:44, 45. and that it is God, that
works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2:13. And to gather our Power and
Ability out of the Commands and measure the one by the other, is the very core
of Pelagianisme and Arminianisme; for upon this ground did Pelagius conclude,
that we could keep the whole Law perfectly, as this man also says, Hear
Pelagius himself ad Demetriadem (cited by Vossius Histor. Pelag. lib. 5. part.
1. These. 6.) [ Duplici ignorantia accusamus Deum. Inscientiae, ut videatur
nescire quod fecit, nescire quod iussit, quasi oblitus fragilitatis humanae,
cujus Author ipse est, imposuerit homini mandata, quae far non possit.
Simulque (pro-nefas!) adscribimus Iniquitatem Iusto, Pio Crudelitatem, dum
aliquid impossible praecepisse conquerimur: deinde pro his damnandum esse
hominen ob ea, quae vitare non potuit: ut (quod etiam suspicari Sacrilegium
est) videatur Deus non tam salutem nostram quaesisse, quam poenam. Itaque
Apostolus sciens, a Domino justitiae ac majestatis nihil impossible esse
praeceptum, aufert a nobis vitium murmurandi; quod tunc utique nascisolet, cum
aut iniqua sunt quae jubentur, aut jubentis minus digna persona est. Quid
tergiversamur incassum? Nemo magis novit mensuram virium nostrarum, quam qui
ipsas vires nobis dedit. Nec quisquam melius, quantum possimus, intelligit,
quam qui ipsam virtutem nobis posse donavit: nec impossible aliquid voluit
imperare, qui justus est nec damnaturus hominem fuit pro eo quod vitare non
potuit, qui pius est.] Which in short is this, That to say, that God should
command any thing, which is not in our power to do, were to accuse God of
Ignorance, as not knowing man's power; and of Iniquity, Cruelty and Sacrilege,
commanding that, which he knew we could not do, and thereafter condemning us
for not doing of it. This Quaker may see his own face in this glass.

13. He cites further the words of God to Cain Genesis 4:6, 7. and says, that
this timeous admonition, and promise of pardon upon condition he did well,
says that he bad a day of visitation, wherein it was possible for him to be
saved. That it was possible for Cain, through the grace of God, to have done
well, and obtained the excellency, we affirm; but that he had power without
this grace, all this admontion cannot prove; so that, as is said, it is pure
Pelagianisme for him to add, God could not propose that condition, to do well,
to him, if he had, not given him sufficient strength to do well. Had Pharaoh
sufficiency of strength moral to let the people of Israel go, when God had
hardened his heart, so as he should not let them go? If not, how could God send
Moses to him with a word of command? This man told us Thesis 4. That man, in
his Natural state, could know nothing aright; and that all his Imaginations,
Words and Actions were evil, and only evil continually: Now I enquire, if such
a man can be said to have sufficiency of strength to know God and things
divine, and to do well? If not, then it seems by this man's doctrine here,
that God can impose no command upon such, to know God, and to do well. We know,
that God gives the heart to perceive, eyes to see, and ears to hear Deuteronomy.
29:4. and that the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be Romans 8:7. And that the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, becauss they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2:14. He cites to the same purpose Genesis 6:3. And we deny not, that the Spirit
(speaking after the manner of men; for such expressions cannot b^ understood
properly of God) is said to contend with men, to wit, by his Word and Servants,
whom he sends forth to deal with men in his name. So did he thus strive long
with this old world by his messengers, the Patriarchs, particularly by Noah,
called a preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2:5. But what of this? This day of
Visitation, (says he) which he grants to every one, is such as therein the
Lord is said to wait, and be gracious Esa. 30:18. to be long suffering Exodus
34:6. Number. 14:18. Psalm. 86:15. Ier. 15:15: By all which, (not to mention the
impertinency of that citation Esai. 30:18. as also of that Ier. 15:15. as may
appear to any at the first view) he can only infer that which we do not
deny, viz. That God is long suffering, and patient even toward the wicked: But
can he hence conclude, that the wicked have power therefore, of themselves,
without the Spirit of regeneration and grace, to do what is commanded in
reference to life eternal? Let him essay this, and give yet fuller proof of his
Pelagianisme. That wicked persons may forbear much wickedness, and acts of
iniquity, without the special grace of God, I readily grant; and hereby turning
from their former wicked courses, may prevent their own temporal ruin, and
hold off the judgments of God that are threatened and imminent, as we see in the
people of Nineve, and in that wicked King Ahab; and so that the old world might
have prevented their destruction by turning from their evil ways, and
harkening to the counsel and command of Noah from the Lord, who waited with
patience, 1 Pet. 3:20. All this is true, but what is all this, in reference to
eternal Salvation? Is it likewise in their power, when they please, to turn to
the Lord, and serve Him with a perfect heart, and to walk before Him and b^
perfect? Ere we believe this, we must see other proofs thereof, than what is
brought from the word of Command; for that, I suppose, will reach even such,
whose day of Visitation is at end; and to whom salvation is, on this account,
impossible, as this man says.

14. He foresaw, that it would be answered, that the long suffering mentioned,
1 Pet. 3:20. was not unto salvation. And therefore cites as a parallel place,
to clear that it was unto salvation, 2 Pet. 3* 15. But the man takes no
notice to whom the Apostle Peter is speaking there, in his second Epistle, see
verse. 9. explained and vindicated in the former Chapter. They were these, whom
the Apostle looked upon, as having obtained like precious faith, with him and
others, through the righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet.
1:1. and whom he styles beloved Chap. 3:1, 8, 14, 17. and such as were looking
for the comeing of the day of God, and for new heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness verse. 12, 13, 14 and such as were in case to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ verse. 18: Now to these
only, and such as belonged to the Election of grace, whom the Lord was yet to
bring-in, the Lord's delay to destroy the world with fire (which is the long
suffering here spoken of, as verse. 9. clears) was salvation, because he would
want none of them, that his body (to which they belonged as members) might be
complete. But he tells us further, to as little purpose, that Peter in this
matter looks to Paul's writtings, insinuating that this was the Catholic and
common doctrine of the Church. And why should it not be so, as we have cleared
it. And Paul also, in his Epistle to the Hebrews (which is the writing of Paul
to them, to whom Peter is now writing, as appears 1 Pet. 1:1. 2 Pet. 1:1.)
speaks to this same purpose Heb. 10.35. to the end. So that this man is in a
fond mistake, when he supposes afterward, that in this particular Peter has
his eye toward Paul's Epistle to the Romans. Chap. 9. seeing that Epistle was
not written to them, to whom Peter is here writing; and that he means such an
Epistle, as was written to the same persons, is clear from verse. 15. Even as our
beloved brother Paul also -- has written unto you. It is true, Peter adds
other Epistles of Paul, wherein he speaks of these things, that Peter is here
treating of, which cannot be said of that place of his Epistle to the Romans.
And what he speaks of our wresting of the Scriptures, may (as is evident
enough from what is already said, and will appear more ere we end with him,)
without the hazard of a reproach, be retorted upon himself and his party: But
we have some other thing to do, than insist upon recriminations.

15. He cites next Page 95. Romans 2:4. and then asks, how these could be
called riches and bounty, unless there had been a time, wherein they might have
repented, and become partakers of these riches, which were then offered? Ans.
These might have been the riches of God's goodness and forbearance and long
suffering, calling them to turn from their wickedness, and not treasure up
wrath to themselves against the day of wrath, though nothing certanely
accompanying salvation: Nature may teach persons, that God's bounty and
goodness in spare^ng or not cutting off with remarkable judgments, as he does
some; and continueing life, and good things necessary for life, notwithstanding
they deserve to be cut off, should be otherwise improven, than by taking
encouragement therefrom, to sin the more. Shall temporal spareing favoures,
bestowed on such, as deserve nothing but hell fire, be in so small account with
us? Was it in their power, without the grace of God, upon the simple
consideration of the goodness of God, and his long suffering and patience
toward them, to repent savingly? or could they have been made partakers of
Salvation, without saving Repentance? One of these this Man must prove, ere he
can evince any thing hence, proving salvation possible, in his sense, to all
and every person. And I suppose these words of the Apostle verse. 7. To them who
by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory and honor and
immortality; Eternal life, will import some other thing. This seeking after
glory and honor and immortality and that by well doing (or, as the opposition
made verse. 8. clears, by doing the truth, and obeying righteousness, and by
working good as verse. 10.) and by continuance in well doing, and by patient
continuance in well doing, cannot sure be performed by any, by the mere
strength of Nature, and without the Grace of God. And how shall it be performed
by them, that know nothing of an Eternal life, or of Glory and Honor and
Immortality; and so cannot seek after it, and that in such a manner? Will he
say, that all the Heathens and Barbarians, the Cannibals, and Men-eaters, and
such as have little more of Men, than the outward visage, and positure of the
body, are acquainted with these things; and can by their own Industry and
Pains reach the crown of immortal glory? If he do not both affirm and
confirm this, he proves not his Universal Day of Visitation granted to every
Mothers son, in which they may, if they please, lay hold on eternal life.

16. Thereafter. 20. he cites Esai. 5:1, 2, 3, 4. (and as parallel parables
Mat* 21:33. Mark. 12:1. Luke 20:9. which yet differ in several maine points) a
passage which his predecessors, the Jesuits and Arminians, did much ^elaboure
and wrest, to give some countenance to their errors, about the Resistibility
of the grace of Conversion. All which this man deduceth from all of them is
this. That this parable could be no ways Apposite to them, to whom it was
spoken, unless these laborers might have brought forth fruit; such a
possibility had they, that Christ by the Prophet says, what was more to be
done to my vineyard, which I have not done? Answer. (1.) What can this prove
for them, who had not such pains taken upon them? had no vineyaird erected
among them? This man is good at concluding an Unlimited Universal from a
plainly Restricted Particular. (2.) That it was their duty to have brought
forth fruit, is certane; that they had power of themselves, without the grace
of God, to have brought forth saving fruit, he has not proved, neither can
reprove 3.) To say, that therefore they could not be blamed, is a Pelagian
Erour, and such as himself cannot allow of, if he will not contradict himself;
for after the day of Visitation is past with a man, that man has no more Power
or possibility of doing any good, and yet he will not say. that therefore he
cannot sin, and become blame worthy after that time. (4.) Any may see, that
the parable, mentioned by the Evangelists, reached mainly the Priests and
Rulers, and not the People, though in their hearing it was spoken; and that it
was to exaggerat their cruelty, and rage against his faithful servants, and
that, which they were shortly to exercise against himself, the true Son and
Heir. And who knows not, that even without saving grace, they might have
foreborne these acts of cruelty, and that it was really in their power? And
thence to infer a power of doing all requisite to salvation, must be such
logic, as is hateht in a distempered brain, and a clear evidence thereof (5.)
When the Lord said by his prophet, what could be more done etc. He speaks
only of external means, whereof there was no deficiency; but these they had
were sufficient in their own kind, and enough, and more than enough to
convince all of the height of the wickedness of the Jews, who under all this
plenty of means brought forth (as to the generality, and body of the people,
concerning whom he is speaking) nothing but wild grapes, yea stinking grapes,
as the word imports; so that their deeds were worse, then the deeds of the
heathens, who neither had such Means, nor outward Favoures conferred upon them
Ier. 5: ver. 28. He cites as of the same import, Prove. 1:24, 25, 26. Ier.
18:9, 10. Mat. 18:32, 33, 34. and Act 13:46. But he tells us not what use he
would make of them. That persons may and will refuse the Lords call, who
doubts? Because they can do evil, have they therefore a Power to do good? Or
because they may forbear some acts of cruelty toward others, will it thence
follow, that they have a power to do that which has a certain connection with
Salvation? These are Quaker-like Inferences, that want all solidity, and no
little of sobriety.

17. In the last place he cites Mat. 23:37. Luke 13:34. and 19:41, 42. whence
he Infers first, that there was a day, wherein the inhabitants of Jerusalem
might have known the things, that belong to their peace. Nex, that in that day,
God would have gathered their children, as an hen her chickens Thirdly, that
they would not; and because they would not, they were now hid from their eyes,
so as they could not see, that day being expired; and therefore they were
justly condemned and obdured. Ans. (1.) That the inhabitants of Jerusalem had a
fair sun shine day of the Gospel, at that time, is most certain: but had all
the world, and every city of the world, from the beginning of the world, unto
that day, and since to this day, such a fair day light? If yea, whence is it
proved? This text proves no such thing, but in the rare fancy of this Quaker,
who supposes that a Particular will prove a General: Just as if he should say,
He, and some few others are, Quakers; therefore all the world are turned
Quakers, and were Quakers from the beginning, and shall be Quakers to the end
of the world. But if not, how then does he conclude the thing, that is in
question? (2.) The text speaks nothing of this Power and Ability to know: But
Christ, as man, Pathetically expresses his vehement and earnest desire, that
they had known: And therefore there is no ground for any such conclusion, as he
would hence infer. (3.) That the Lord Jesus labored with earnestness and
love, to have gathered their children, as a hen does her chickens under her
wings, is very true; but hence he cannot prove, that God has Ineffectual
Desires and Wishes after the salvation of the damned: what is spoken of Christ,
as man, and a preacher of Righteousness, can with no show of reason be applied
to God. (4.) That the Lord punishes the contempt of the Gospel, with Darkness,
Judicial strokes, and Desolation, is true, and asserted by us above; but none
can hence infer, what this man would conclude, that knows what he says.

18. What follows Page 96.97. is but what we willingly confess, and have
asserted above, to wit, that after the Contempt of Mercy and Salvation offered,
God gives up to hardness of heart, as Esai. 6. Mat. 13:14. Mark. 4:12. Luke
8:10. Ioh. 12:40. Act 28:26. But when he speaks of the talents given Mat.
25:14 etc. he insinuates that the one talent was sufficient, being of the same
kind with the rest: But how has he proved, that by these talents is meaned
saving grace? And that by persons, or servants, to whom these talents were
given, are meant all and every man, from the beginning of the world to the end;
and that their tradeing with the same, imports power and ability in
themselves, without divine help and grace, to improve these gifts or graces to
a spiritual and saving advantage? Sure, the Scripture tells us, that without
Christ we can do nothing Ioh. 15:3, 1, 5, 7. and that it is the grace of God,
that does all in us, 1 Cor. 15:10. And that of ourselves, as of ourselves, we
are not sufficient to think anything, but our sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor.
3:5. and that it is God, that works in us, both to will and to do Phil. 2:^3.
And whatever ability be granted to improve some common gifts and advantages,
given to many, to be improven for the glory of God, and the good of others,
(which is all that is imported by these Talents) no man can hence infer,
sufficiency of saving grace granted to all, and ability to improve savingly all
gifts and advantages common to all, but such as can make ropes of sand. Thus we
have considered all that he has said on this Proposition, for which he is
beholden to his friends the Jesuits and Arminians, as might be shown, if it
were worth so much pains, let any, who will, Rea^ the Jesuit Didacus Ruiz de
Praedestinatione dispp. 39 40.41.42.43.44.45. and especially disp. 46. de
Barbaris and he shall find this Quakers doctrine, at full length.

CHAP. X. Of Universal Grace and Light.
1. We come to examine his Second Proposition containing a further piece of
their divinity, which he expresses thus Page 79.. 11. That God for this end
did comunicate and give to every man a certane measure of the Light of his Son,
a measure of grace, or some manifestation of the Spirit, which has several
names in Scripture, as the seed of the kingdom Mat 13:18, 19 light manifesting
all things Ephesians. 5:13. the word of God Romans 10:18 the manifestation of the
Spirit given to every one 1 Cor. 12.7. the talent Mat. 25.14. the Gospel
preached to every creature Col: 1:23: Ans. This must be a strange and
wonderful thing, that is both Grace and Gifts, which are inward, and placed in
the soul; and the Word of God and the Gospel, which is outward, preached and
declared to the ears of people; what can we make of this? or what can we
understand by it? Nay this, with them, is the Spirit of God, it is Christ, God
Father, Son and holy Ghost, and what not? This I take to be peculiar to the
Quakers for neither Pelagians, nor Socinians, nor Arminians, nor any of their
followers, nor Jesuit, ever spoke at this rate of nonsense, and vented to the
world such Inconsistencies, which are rather the foamings of a distracted
brain, than the discoursings of men, in their wits, how heterodox so ever. But
is it not strange, that this man should imagine these things to be common to
all mankind? The seed of the kingdom I no where read of; but of the word of
the kingdom, which is compared to seed: and was this word preached to all
nations, from the beginning of the word? Or is it to this day sown in all
nations, even amongst Heathens, in Iapan and other Regions and Territories in
the East and West Indees; or among the Turks and Cannibals? By whom I pray; and
upon whose testimony must we believe this? The word of God Romans 10:17. is the
word, that is heard, and preached by such as are sent, whose feet are
beautiful verse 15. and by which faith comes, and calling upon God verse.
13:14, 17. Is this common to all Nations? The manifestation of the Spirit
spoken of 1 Cor. 12. is concerning gifts peculiarly enumerated verse. 8:9, 10.
such as the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, gifts of healing,
working of miracles, Prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of
tongues, and interpretation of tongues. And are these common to all men? or
were they then common to all the world? Nay, does not the Apostle expressly
restrick them to the Church, of which he is there speaking, and in which the
Lord did set Officers, endued with these gifts verse. 28? and expressly say, that
they were not common even to all the members of the Church, as may be seen
through that chapter, and particularly verse. 29, 30? beside that the scope of
the whole irrefragably evinceth this. As for the talent mentioned Mat. 25. We
spoke of it in the preceding chapter. And that Gospel, whereof Paul speaks
Col. 1. Was that which he was sent to preach to all indefinitely, as
providence, (which sometimes stood in the way of his endeavoring to preach it
somewhere, as we see Act. 16:6, 7.) ordered it; and which is called verse. 26.
the mystery, which has bin hid from ages, and generations, but now is made
manifest to the saints; Was this common to all before Christ came? and is it
common to all this day? How shall it be evinced, that this Gospel is thus
Universal? will he take that word, every Creature under heaven verse. 23.
without any limitation? Then he must s^y, that Paul, preached this Gospel to
Devils, to Beasts, and all creatures without sense, as well, as to Men. But if
he will restrick it, let it be according to Reason, and we are satisfied, and
his design is crossed; for, as we cleared above Chap. VIII, these Universals
must be interpreted according to the nature of the thing spoken of, and the
circumstances of the place; and so it will here but import, an indefinite
mission among the Gentiles, and is an hyperbolick expression of the vast
extension of the tidings of salvation, now under the Gospel administration, in
comparison of what it was un^er the law, when restricked to the limits of one
kingdom, and to the posterity of Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, with a few
Proselites.

2. To keep us from startling at the nonsense of the Proposition, we have
more, and more of that kind, to meet with, in the further explication thereof,
set down in several Pages from Page 82.. 13. to Page 92. And though some may
justly blame me for wasteing words, and spending time, upon such a Nonsensical,
Self-contradictory Proposition; yet considering, that here lies the core of
their delusions, and that, which (though not as to matter, yet) as to
expressions is peculiar to the Quakers, and common to them all, the Reader must
have patience, and hear all, and then he will be better able to judge.

3. He begins then Page 82.. 13. and tells us, That this Seed, Grace, word of
God, and light, with which every man is enlightened, and a measure of which
every one has, in order to Salvation, and which by man's pertinaciousness and
the malignity of his will, may be resisted, extinguished, wounded, suppressed,
killed and crucified, is not the proper essence and nature of God, considered
in it self. Before we enter upon a particular discussion of this man's words, we
conceive, it will be of use, to help us to understand him the better, (if he
may be understood at all, in this chief part of their heretical doctrine) to
take notice of some expressions of other Quakers, concerning this Light, and
Seed, of which they speak so much; Mr Hicks in his dialogue; gives us some
account of some of their expressions in this matter Dial. 1. Page 3. G. Whitehead
said, in him was life, and the life was the light of men. If the life be the
divine essence, the light must be so also; for such as the cause, such the
effect must be. And Again Page 4. The light within must be God, because to
deny it so to be, is to deny the Omnipresence of God. Thus the light is the
Essence of God, and the Omnipr^sence of God. And again G. W. reasoned thus,
The divine life is immutable. To say then the light within is not God, is to
say God is mutable. Therefore it is blasphemy to deny the light within to be
God. Yea Page 5. he tells, that one Robert West called the denying to worship
the measure of light in every man, damnable heresy; and said, that the Spirit,
which God breathed into Adam was not man's spirit, but another, the breath of
our nostrils, the anointed Lord. This is that true light etc. And Page 6. He
tells us, that commonly, they call this light within, Christ, or a measure of
Christ. And Page 7. That Crisp said, that it was sufficient to heal, help and
save them* that take heed to it; and that because, if it ought to be obeyed,
then it must be sufficient etc. So Page 9, 10. They say, they do obey the
commands of the Living and Eternal Word in them, that is, the Light to them is
the living and eternal Word So. Page 16. He tells us, that some of them call the
seed, Christ; others, a measure of God; others say, that it is the Spirit Page
47. he tells us, that Naylor says That Christ is the election, and the elect
seed: and that Fox says, The seed, to which the promise is, is that, which
has bin laden as a Cart with sheaves by the sinner; which seed is the h^pe
Christ. And Page 82. that W. Pen says this light within was and is sufficient
to bring about remission of sins, and eternal salvation, which was the errand,
for which Christ came into the world. In his 2 Dial. Page 45. he tells us, that
Ed: Buroughs called this seed, the Church, which is Christ's body Page 46.
that he said also, that such as denied Christ to be the light in every man,
were Antichrists: and that G Whitehead said, To say the light in every man is a
mere creature, is contrary to plain Scripture -- this life and light is divine
and increated. In his 3 Dial. Page 8. He tells us, that they say, That the life
of God, is the light of men, with which every man is enlightened, is sufficient
to salvation: And that they who obey it, are the good subject; and childeren of
God, and obtain favor, l^ve, and the recompense of the reward of
righteousness: and how they speak thus, Thou confounds the light (within) and
the creature together, concluding Imbecility, Insufficiency, and Ignorance in
the light which are the imperfections of the creature. And again Page 10.) It
is impious to charge men's infirmities upon the Light, and reput that
insufficient because they are rebellious. And again p. 43. that they say, who
or what was Christ, in that manifestation it self, but that divine word, light
and life, manifested in flesh. And page 52. This argument springs in my mind,
for the divinity and sufficiency of the Light, That which in all ages has bin
the just man's path, and there where the blood of cleansing is known, and by
which fellowshipe is enjoyed, and the light of eternal life obtained, is, ever
was, and ever will be, a divine, sufficient and saving way. But such a way is
the Light etc. Mr Stalham in his book against the Quakers part 1. gives us
some others of their expressions, concerning this light, in prejudice of the
Scriptures, such as Page 60. that G. Fox said, the light was the true teacher
and the light within life, the light in Scripture is death. so p. 74. that the
same person said, It is the light that gave forth the Scriptures, and will open
the Scriptures, and is a more sure word of prophecy, yea and the grace, that
appeared unto all men. And Page 83. that I. Nayler said, that this light, if we
did know, own and obey it, would lead us out of the fall. Many such expressions
may be found. I suppose, by others, who are acquaint with their books: and by
these expressions, we may in part conjecture what they mean by this Light; and
that upon the ma^er it is the same the old Begards said to wit, that every
intellectual being has enough within it self to make it happy.

4. But to return to our Quaker, we see (1.) what various titles and epithets
he gives it, he calls it the Seed, Grace, the Word of God, and the Light,
which certanely is not to clear and explain the matter to us, but to inveagle
us and cile our eyes, and leave us more in the mist, that we should not know,
what it is, (2.) He says, this (whatever it be) is in some measure given to
every man: and sure, what is common to all men, can be nothing but Nature, or
the Pelagian grace of God, that is man's Free Will, as Vossius shows us Hist.
Pelag. Lib. 3. Part. 2 These. 1. Pelagius thought and said, that this Rational
Will, or the Possibility of Nature created by God, was the grace of God by
which all might be done; though afterward he added, to color the business
better, a supernatural grace; but this was nothing else, but the external
doctrine of the law: But whether the Quakers will come this length, I know not:
When all this addition of Pelagius, did not satisfy the orthodox, he added the
grace of remission of sins; but he thought not this necessary to all. See
Voss: ibid. These. 2. when this did not satisfy, he made another addition of
the grace of Christ, consisting only in his Doctrine and Example. At length,
when all that would not satisfy, he added the divine help of the Spirit
working in men; but restricked it wholly to the Understanding, granting no
operation of the Spirit upon the will. Now whether our Quakers will come all
this length, I doubt, seeing this grace that Pelagius acknowledge^, can not be
said to be common to all men, How much less, can that be called grace, which
they talk so much of? and how can so great things be said of it, while it
comes short of the very Pelagian grace? (3). He says, this is given in order
to Salvation. But what is the meaning of this? Is it sufficient, without any
supervenient grace of God, to effectuat salvation? and is it given of God
intentionally for this end, that it may lead unto salvation? Then we need no
more Gospel, no more Preaching, no more Grace of God, no more Help of the
Spirit. This must be the very first exscreation of Pelagianisme. And the
setting of corrupt rotten Nature on the throne (4.) where ^ead we, that that,
which is common to all men, is called the Seed, the Grace, and the word of God?
or that the Light of nature, which is in some sense common to all men, has a
native and kindly manufucture or tendency to the salvation, revealed in the
Gospel? (5.) The Scripture tells us, that the seed of God remains, and that it
is proper to such as are borne of God, 1 Ioh. 3:9. and so it is not common to
all, nor can it be exstinguished or killed (6.) I would feign know, how this
Word of God can be crucified? it may be he, with other Quakers, means hereby
the crucifying of Christ, whereof the Gospel speaks (7.) He says, this seed
etc. is not the very essence of God: and how in this, he contradicts others,
whose expressions to the contrary we mentioned just now, let all judge. But he
lenifieth the matter, by saying, that it is not the essence and nature of God
taken precisely in it self; So then it seems, that it is the Essence of God,
considered some other way; whence it appears, that all men are partakers of
the very Essence of God, though not as considered precisely in it self, but
some other way, What blasphemy is wraped up here, let any ju^ge, that will:

5. But why may not this seed and light be meaned of the Nature and Essence of
God, simply in it self considered? Because says he, that can not be divided
into parts and measures, being most pure and simple, free of all composition
and division, and so can neither be exstinguished, nor wounded, nor crucified,
nor killed by all the strength of men. Ans. Yet, it would seem by him, that the
Essence and Nature of God, though not as considered simply in it self; yet as
considered some other way, may be Divided into parts, and Compounded, and so
Exstinguished, Wounded, Killed, yea and Crucified: and I would only know of
him, in what respect we can so consider the Essence and Nature of God, as that
we may say of it, it may and can be Wounded, Killed, and Crucified, or
Exstinguished? He leaves us here in the mist.

6. We have heard, what he understands not by this Seed and Light etc. He
tells us next, what he understands by it viz. a Spiritual, heavenly, and
invisible principle (principium) and organ, in which God, as he is the Father,
the Son and the Spirit, dwells, a measure of which divine and glorious life
is in all, as a seed, which of its own nature inviteth and inlineth all to
good; and this (says he) we call the vehicle of God, the spiritual body of
Christ, the flesh and blood of Christ, which came out of heaven, and of which
all the Saints do eat, and are nourished unto eternal life. Here we have a
mysterious revelation of their mysterious conceptions, by which we can
understand as little of their meaning, as before: for (1.) What is this
Principium, this Principle? Is it a principle of Natural Actions? Or a
principle of Gracious and Saving Actions? If of Natural actions, how does it
differ from the soul, and the Faculties thereof? If of saving and gracious
actions, how is it given to and implanted in every man, how Atheistical and
wicked soever he be? The Scripture tells us of a principle of wickedness in
every man by nature, whereby they are inclined to all evil, and only evil, and
that continually; And we hear of the God of this world in them that are lost,
blinding their minds 2 Cor. 4* 4. and of the Prince of the power of the air,
the Spirit that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians 2:2. And that
this is the common condition of all, till they be quickened together with
Christ, and brought out of that state of death by faith in Christ, Ephesians. 2:3,
4, 5. and by believing the Gospel 2 Cor. 4:3, 4. (2.) How or what way is this
to be called an Organ? Of what is it an instrument or Organ? Of God, or of the
Soul? Instruments must be instruments of some principal cause: Or is this word
properly taken, or improperly? Is it a Suppositum, or a Virtue and Principle
superadded to the Suppositum, siting it for action? Or is it to the soul, as
our members and organs are to the body? What he means hereby, he would do
well to explain for his expressions are dark and dubious, and give no distinct
sound. (3.) In what respect is this Principle and Organ called spiritual? Is it
spiritual as opposite to Carnal and Bodily, as not being Corporeal? Or as
opposite to Natural? Or as opposite to Sinful and Corrupt? If he mean the
first, it may be nothing but the Soul, or the Faculties, or Natural Qualities
thereof; and so a mere natural thing: But if he take it in the two letter
senses, how comes it to pass, that every one, lying in their natural state,
are made partakers thereof? It must be wrought by the special Operation of the
Spirit; and this special Operation of the Spirit is not common to all men
breathing, but is peculiar to the chosen ones, and to believers, as the whole
Scripture informs us. (4.) We may move the sam^ doubts touching the other two
terms, Celestial, and Invisible. The soul may be called Celestial; as being
immediately created of God, and put into the body; and it is Invisible, as not
being the object of our corporeal senses: But it may be, he takes these
terms, in some other more limited sense. (5.) He says, God dwells in this
Principle and Organ; but how can that be? That God is said to dwell among his
people, in respect of the signs of his Presence, and of the effects of his
Love, Care and Tenderness of them, we read Exodus 25: verse. 8. and 29:45, 46.
Numb. 5:3. and 35:34. Deuteronomy. 12:11. Ezra. 6 12. Deuteronomy. 33:12. 1 King. 6:13.
Ezech. 43:7, 9, Zech. 2.10, 11. 1 Chronicles. 23:25. But this was not common to all
Nations, but was the special privilege of that people. So we hear of God's, of
the Spirits, and of Christ's dwelling in the souls of his beloved and sanctified
ones, by more special significations of his Favor, and gracious Workings of
his Love, Romans 8:9, 11. 2 Cor. 6:16. Ephesians. 3:17. Revel 21* 3. Ioh. 14:17. 1
Cor. 3:16. 2 Timothy 1:14. 1 Ioh. 3:24. and 4:12, 15, 16. But that this in dwelling
of God, or of his Spirit, or of Christ, is common to all men, and not the
peculiar privilege of the Saints, the places cited do abundantly manifest to be
false. Of God's dwelling in such a Principle or Organ, the Scripture makes no
mention; and we must not be wise above what is wri^en. He would do well to
explain this out of the Scriptures; for we value not his dreams and phancies.
(6.) What means that expression, That God dwells there as the Father, as
the Son, and as the Spirit? Does God Father, Son and Spirit dwell in all the
ungodly, Heathens, Barbarians, any other ways, than as He is omnipresent, or
by his Natural and Common works in and about them, as in and about all his
creatures, who proportionably live, move and have their being in Him, as men
and women have; for all are his workmanship, and get life and breath an^ all
things from him, Act. 17:24, 25, 28. and 14:15? But what means that, as the
Father? etc. It may be, he does not acknowledge a Trinity of Persons, in one
Divine Essence; as sure Other Quakers do not: And then all the Trinity of
Persons, whereo^ the Scripture speaks, must be nothing but some different
unintelligible ways of God's manifesting himself, and dwelling in all and
every one of Adam's posterit^; and it may be too, in all ^he Creatures,
sensible and insensible. (7.) He calls this a divine and glorious life,
whereof all are partakers, in some measure: It is a divine life; indeed, and
glorious, to have God dwelling in the soul, in love and power: But by virtue of
what Covenant comes He to dwell in every man? Not sure by the Covenant of
works, for that is broken, and all are become heirs of hell and wrath, because
of the violation of that Covenant. Not by the Covenant of Grace, for that
requires faith before persons be interessed in these special favoures, and
privileges. And the Scripture tells us, that all men have not faith: how then
come all men to share of these highest privileges, or of this divine and
glorious life, which are promised in the Covenant of grace, through Jesus
Christ, by whom they are purchased? Is this divine and glorious life so mean
and common a thing, that even Heathens and Reprobats share of it? Sure, the
divine and glorious life, pointed forth in the Scriptures, is a rare thing, and
is the privilege of very few, and even of few of those, that are members of the
visible Church. Will this Quaker tell me, if this ^ivine and glorious life,
whereof all Iaponians, Brasilians, Cannibals, are made partakers, be
distinguished from the divine and glorious life peculiar to the Saints? And if
it be distinguished, how? Or if it be the same in kind, why Regeneration,
Union with Jesus Christ by faith, the Effectual Working of the grace of God,
and a through Renovation, is requisite to the enjoining of that, in some
greater measure, which all have Naturally, in some measure? (8.) He says, this
measure of the divine and glorious life, is a seed. But whereof? Is it the seed
of the Eternal weight of glory, that the Saints live in the hope of? Wherever
that seed is, it comes at length to the harvest of glory; as the Scripture
teaches us; and if this seed be sown in all, all shall at length be saved. If
it be not the seed of Glory, whereof, I pray, is it the seed? Is it the seed of
Grace? This seed abides 1 Ioh. 3:9. and is incorruptible, and is by the Word
of God, even that Word of God, which is preached by the gospel 1 Pet. 1:23, 25.
So that this seed is no common thing, but peculiar to such, as are borne
again, who by Christ do believe in God, who raised him up from the dead, and
who have purified their souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit 1 Pet.
1:21, 22.. (9.) He says, this seed inviteth and inclines all men to good. But
does it invite and incline the Iaponians, Bra^ilians Artigovanteans, and such
Heathens, who never heard of Christ, nor had any show of Religion, to faith in
Christ? Or even to all, that is enjoined by the Law of Nature, or the Law of
the two Tables? How comes it then that Paul, who was far better versed in the
Law, than Heathens are, says, he would not have known concupiscence, unless
the Law had said, thou shall not covet? And how can this consist with the
sinful state of every natural person, whose thoughts and imaginations incline
and invite to evil? Read Rom 3:10 to 20. All are under sin verse. 9. all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God verse. 23. Nay, how can this be, seeing
the carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be Rom 8:7? Is not the heart of every man by nature
deceitful above all things and desperately wicked? Ier. 17:9. is not their very
mind and conscience defiled? Tit. 1:15. Where then can this good seed lodge?
It lodges neither in Heart, Mind, nor Conscience: And shall it lodge in the
Flesh? It is true, there is left in every Man a bit of a Natural Conscience,
informing concerning some Natural good, requisite for self-preservation, and
for the preservation of Societies, and inclineing thereunto: but what is this
to that Spiritual good, required now by the Gospel, and discovered by its
Light? Alas! I see the hieght of the Quakers divinity is what a Natural
Conscience can teach a Man-eater; and this is their Gospel; and this is their
divine and glorious life. O poor wretches! (10.) This seed he calls the
Vehicle of God. A wonderful expression, savouring more of a distracted brain,
and of an audacious, blasphemous spirit, than of a sober Christian, fearing
God. (11.) He calls it the Spiritual body of Christ: But by what Scripture, I
know not. Christ is called the Savior of the body Ephesians. 1:23. Is Christ the
Savior of this seed? The spiritual and mystical body of Christ is the Church
Ephesians 4:4. 1 Cor. 10.17. and 12:12, 13, 20. Romans 12:4, 5. Col. 1:24. Ephesians.
2:23. R^m. 12:27. Ephesians. 3:6. and 4:12, 16. Col. 1:18. and 2:19 What are the
members of this body? the body is not one member, but many 1 Cor. 12.14. (12.)
He says, it is the flesh and blood of Christ, that came out of heaven. But had
Christ no other flesh and blood, than this? Then the whole Incarnation of
Christ is denied: And where is our Christian Religion then? where is the Death
of Christ? where is his Resurrection? where is his Ascension? where is all the
History of his life? Is all that but dreams and lies? whither will the Quakers
lead us; Christ gave his flesh for the life of the world Ioh. 6:51. did he give
this seed for the life of the world? was this seed a sacrifice to satisfy the
justice of God? what foolries be these? Now the man in deed appears in his
colors, a Quaker in grain; speaking nonsense at random; and hereby evidencing
what Spirit acts him. But one word more; where reads he, that Christ's
flesh and blood came out of heaven? They mean that Christ had the same
Spiritual flesh and blood, within his carnal flesh and blood, which they have;
and so they are as much the Christ's of God, as he was. O dreadful blasphemy?
(13.) He says all the Saints eat of this. What; do only the saints eat of
this, while it is in every Man? Every man, by this man's doctrine, is partaker
of Christ's Spiritual body, and has Christ's flesh and blood in him, but they
do not all eat thereof: a strange fancy, that persons have food in their belly
before they eat it, that persons are partakers of Christ's flesh and blood,
before they eat him by faith: what wild Notions be these? Men are partakers of
a glorious and divine life by having the spiritual body of Christ in them, and
the flesh and blood of Christ, that came out of heaven, and that before they
make any application of him to themselves by faith: where read we of such
things? Christ tells us the contrary, that except we eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his blood, we have no life in us. Ioh: 6:53. and that with a
doubled asseveration, verily, verily. And he tells us moreover, that he dwells
in such, as eat his flesh, that is, in believers verse. 56. and not in others,
and verse. 57. that he that eats him, even he shall live by him. But these
Impudent Quakers, whose work is, as it seems, to c^ntradict Christ, and all
the Gospel, tell us, that even Heathens, and all, before they come to eat
Christ by faith, have Christ dwelling in them, have a divine and glorious life*
are partakers of the body and blood of Christ, and of that bread, that came
down from heaven* What more contradictory to Christ's express sayings; (14.) He
tells us, that all the Saints are nourished by this unto life eternal. Is not
this doctrine of the Quakers a rare Gospel; wherein that, whereby the choicest
of Mankind, the people of God, the Saints, and Renewed ones, live and are
nourished unto life eternal, is nothing but what is common to Turks and pagans?
(15.) It is true, they give this common thing (which is nothing but Nature)
many goodly names and titles, wherein they outvye that cheating enemy of the
grace of God, Pelagius; and are greater and more blasph^mous cheaters and
deceivers, than he was; for he gave the goodly name of Grace, unto corrupt
Nature, which he pleaded for; but they add. That it is a Spiritual, Celestial
and In^isible Principle and Organ, the dwelling place of God as Father, as Son
and as holy Ghost, the Vehicle of God, the Spiritual b^dy of Christ the Body
and blood of Christ* the Food of the Saints, and their Nourishment to life
eternal: And when all is done, it is nothing but Nature; if we believe the
Scriptures. What manifest, absurd, and impudent deceivers must they then be who
thus think to deceive the world with new coined, brainesick, and non-sensicall
titles and notions, with which they guilde the poisonous pile of Pelagianisme,
yea the very dregs thereof, which they would have us swallow over, and thereby
make us good Heathens, but no Christians? Is their Religion any thing, but mere
paganism, under Christian abused expressions?

7. We must have patience, and hear more; for he adds. And as this Light and
seed bears witness against all evil deeds; so is it crucified, extinguished,
and killed by them; and it flees from evil and abh^rreth it, as man's flesh
flees from and abhors that which is noxious and contrary to it: Answ. (1.
does this Light and Seed bear witness against all evil deeds? How or what way
does it bear witnese, in the Heathens, against their not believing in Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, that was Crucified at Jerusalem? or is that no evil
deed? against their not Mortifying the deads of the body through the Spirit
Romans 8:1^. But not to mention the duties, which are revealed to us only by the
G^spel; How came it, that this Light and Seed did not bear witness against the
Cilicians, who lived upon thif^; and against the Messagetians, Who used their
wives in common; and against the Persians, who of old married their own
daughters? Nay it is observe^, that there is hardly any one point of the law of
nature, which some Nations have not violated, not only by their Custom^s and
constant Carriage, but by their very Laws: Did this Seed then and Light bear
witness in them, against these evil deeds? what thinks he ^f the Achaeans and
Heniochians, of whom Aristotle reports, that they used to kill men and eat
them? and we hear of such to day in New England, commonly called Men eaters:
What says their Light and Seed to this? What thinks he of Zenon, Chrysippus,
and the magi of Persia, who allowed the Son to lie with his own Mother: and
Brethren and Sisters to lie together, and of those, who approve Sodomy, and of
Theodorus Phylosophus: who thought Theft, Sacrilege and Adultery lawful? How
came it, that this Seed did not bear witness against the people of Derbe and
Lystra, when they went about to sacrifice unto Paul and Barnabas, and had
followed vanities so long, and did not turn unto the living God, Act. 14:13,
15? why did it not bear witness against the people of Athens, for thinking that
God could be worshipped with men's hands, and that the Godhead is like unto gold
or silver, or stone graven by art and man's device Act. 17:25, 29? As also for
their mocking at the Resurrection verse. 32? But enough of this notorious
falsehood. (2.) He says this Seed is killed, etc. but tells us not by whom: and
the last persons mentioned were the Saints. (3.) He says it flees from evil,
etc. It cannot then be the Grace of God, which opposes, resists an^ fights
against evil: The Spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal 5:17. The work of the
Grace of God in souls is to work out sin, to root it out, kill it, and mortify
it, and crucify it: But this great Nothing of theirs has no affinity with
Grace.

8. He adds. And seeing it is never separated from God and Christ* but where
it is, there is God, and there is Christ involved; therefore in that respect,
when it is resisted, God is said to be resisted, and Christ is said to be
crucified and killed. Ans. (1.) We know, there is in every man a Natural
Conscience, which, as God's deputy and vicegerent, in the soul, pleads and
testifies for Him and his Law, according to its light and information; which
in some is more, and in some less; more in such, as live under the Gospel, than
in such, as live without that light; and in those that have but the light of
nature* it testifies for the God of Nature, according to the relicques of the
Law of Nature in some more, and in some less; but in all these, because of the
darkness of their Minds, and the corruption of their Hearts, whereby they are
subject unto sin, and to the Prince of the Powers of the air, the Spirit, that
works in the children of disobedience, it gives not full testimony for God,
and his Law, but partial, and in some more gross abominations. (2.) We deny
that where this Natural conscience is, there Christ as mediator betwixt God and
man, can be said to be; that is. It is not true, that this Light in Heathens
without the Church, declar^th any thing of Christ, and of the Gospel of
Salvation, in and through Him; or that Christ, as Mediator, can be said to be
crucified and killed, when this is resisted or disobeyed by them: for the great
things of the grace of God, revealed in, and brought to light by the Gospel,
are not to be read upon the works of Nature, but are of pure Revelation, and
have had their different measures of Revelation, and now the greatest under the
Gospel dispensation; whence it is called, a mystery, which from the beginning
of the world has bin hid in God, Ephesians. 3:^. and hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manifest to his saints, Col. 1:26. And all the
various and gradual manifestations thereof have been; in all ages, the peculiar
privilege of the Church; and not common to all, so that others without the
Church, remained without Christ, being aliens from the Common wealth of Israel,
and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2: verse. 12. Never read we, that the Heathens, without the
Church, were challenged and rebuked for the contempt of the Gospel, or of
Christ offered in the Gospel, that was never revealed unto them: for as man as
have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law, Romans 2: verse. 12. So as
many as have sinned without the Go^pel, shall p^rish without the Gospel, for
how can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how can they hear
without a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10:14,
15. (3.) What blasphemy is it to say, that God and Christ are involved in this
thing? Do not their hearts quake at such expressions?

9. What more? And as (says he) it is received in the heart, and is not
hindered from produceing its own natural and proper effect, Christ is formed,
and raised in the heart: of which the Scripture makes frequent mention, which
is called the new man, Christ in the saints, the hope of glory. This is that
inward Christ, of which we only and so often speak, and whom we declare, every
where preaching him, and exhorting all, that they would believe in the light,
and obey it; that they might know Christ born and raised up, in themselves, and
delivering them from all sin. Ans. Here is a short and clear account of the
mystery of iniquity, the abomination of desolation, which they own, maintain
and preach, who are called Quakers, the sworn enemies of the Gospel grace of
God: To which we say (1.) When it is said to be received in the heart, it is
supposed, that formerly it was not in the heart: And how can this be, seeing he
said before, that it was in every one? Or was it only in their head, and not in
their heart? (2.) Did ever Pelagius more Pelagianize, than does this Quaker? Or
can there be anything imagined more opposite to the Gospel, and to the rich
grace of God, therein revealed, than to say, that there is in every man,
Heathen, Barbarian and Scythian, who never heard of Christ in the Gospel, that,
the proper and natural effect of which, is to form Christ in the soul: Why did
the Apostle Paul then say Gal. 4:19. My little children, of whom I travail in
birth again, until Christ be formed in you. What needed the Apostle be at all
this pains, and pain, to travail in birth, for that, which could have been
wrought, though he, and the Gospel, which he preached, had never been heard
of? And what need is there of the preaching of the Gospel, if the whole Gospel,
and the whole Grace of God, necessary to the forming of Christ in the soul, be
in every Heathen, that never heard of the Gospel? Can there be any thing
invented by Satan, more contradictory to that Gospel, whereby life and
immortality is brought to light* Is there any thing imaginable, that more
directly crosses and annulleth the whole frame of the Gospel, in all its
parts, and overturneth its very Foundations? (3.) The Scripture indeed makes
frequent mention of the Grace of God manifested in the Gospel, and of the
effects brought to pass by the Gospel, and the Grace of God working thereby:
but it no where says, that there is any thing in the heart of man by nature,
which produces Christ in the soul, the hope of glory, as its proper and
natural Effect; Nay, the whole book of God, declares the plain contrary, when
it not only shows us the blindness and wickedness of the heart of every man,
till it be renewed by grace, and consequently the utter impotency of nature to
work salvation; but also shows that all that, which the light in every man
can eye, as its object, being only the works of Creation and Providence, is
utterly insufficient for attaining this end; because those works can declare
nothing of the Gospel mystery, whatever it may do of the Law. Hence, the times
of the Gentiles, living without the Gospel, are called times of ignorance, at
which God winked Act. 17:30. and times, wherein God suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways Act. 14: verse. 16. so that they were alienated from the
life of God, Ephesians. 4:18. having the understanding darkened, and being under
ignorance, because of the blindness and hardness of heart. The Gospel does
every where tell us, that we cannot be justified by the works of the Law; and
yet all that, which this Common Light can do, is but to ^nforme, and that most
imperfectly, of somethings required by the Law of Nature; it speaks nothing
of faith in Christ, which is Absolutely requisite to Justification and
Salvation; for without it, it is impossible to please God Heb. 11:6. and by it
we are united unto Christ* the only Mediator; for there is not another name
given to men, under heaven, by which they can be saved, but by the Name Jesus
Act. 4* 12. and it is life eternal to know God, and Him, whom He has sent,
Jesus Christ Ioh. 17:3. But should we expatiat here, in the confutation of this
gross Pelagianisme, we should transcribe the whole Gospel. (^.) Christ in
saints the hope of glory, is not brought about by Nature, nor by the Works of
the Law; but by the Gospel, and faith in it: for this is the riches of the
glory of this mystery, whereof Paul was a minister, according to the
dispensation of God, and which had been hid from ages and from generations Col.
1:25* 26, 27. and wherein Paul labored, striveing, according to his working,
which wrought in him mightily verse. 29. Nay, before they were reconciled in the
body of Christ's flesh, through death, they were alienated and enemies in their
mind by wicked works verse. 21, 22. and this was the peculiar privilege of
such as had received Christ Chap. 2.6. and were in him circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, and were buried with him and risen with
him in baptism, through the faith of the operation of God; and were quickened
together with him verse. 11.12.13: (5.) If this be all the Christ, which they
preach and declare, their Christ and theme is but the dim and dark Light of
Nature, or the Corrupt Nature of Man, which is enmi^y to God, and to the
Gospel: And so they are Heathenis^ Preachers, no Gospel Ministers; they are
Nature Teachers and Admirers, and Gospel Subverters. Therefore all that love
their own souls, should keep far from their tents, and look upon them as the
most desperate Enemies to the Gospel of the Grace of God, that ever Satan sent
abroad in the world, to destroy souls. (6.) The Christ, whom the Gospel
commands us to believe in and obey, is Christ, the Son of God; God man; our
Immanuel; the promised Messiah; the Fellow of God, against whom the Sword of
Justice did awake; the Servant of God, who was Incarnat; God made manifest in
the flesh, who grew up as a tender plant, as a root out of a dry ground, was
despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquanted with grief; who
was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; who was
brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and made his soul an offering for sin, and
poured it out unto death; who bore the wrath of God due for sin, and was
crucified at Jerusalem. But the Christ, whom they command us to believe in, is
a Christ borne with every man, that came into the world since the beginning,
that is neither God, nor Man, could neither suffer nor die, nor satisfy
justice. So that their Christ is a Christ that the Gospel no where makes
mention of; yea, against which every Chapter and verse in a manner of the whole
Old and New Testament bears witness. (7.) He tells us that they exhort all men
to believe in this Light, and obey it. And what can the Faith of, or Obedience
to this Light do; Did ever this light teach, or require of Aristotle, and the
wisest of the Heathens, as Plato, Seneca, Cicero, Pythag^ras and others, Faith
in the Messiah, or in Jesus Christ promised, or at length exhibited and
crucified? Is that light Christ crucified, and Satisfying justice, and paying
the Penalty of the Law, and broken Covenant? What desperate mischievous madness
is this! what horrid abomination do these men preach and hold forth? (8.) He
tells us, that Christ is born and risen in every man, and all their preaching is
to exhort them to know him; and yet he told us before, that this was the work
and proper effect of this Light: and if this effect be already wrought in every
man, in no one person is this light resisted and suppressed: and he needs not
preach and exhort every man to believe in this light, and obey it; for that is
done in every man already, having Christ formed in him, and arisen in him.
Behold how their abominable doctrines cannot hang together, but are ropes of
sand; yea cross and contradict one another. (9) Then he tells us, that it
delivers them from all sins. Then Heathens have a Christ within, sufficient
to purge and take away all sin: Then all must be saved; for who ever is
delivered from sin, cannot but be saved. O what devilish doctrine must this be!
It may be a doubt, if the Devil, appearing in men's bodies, and coming to preach
among people, could broach more damnable and soul-destroying Tenets* than these
are: O! what times are ^hes^ we live in, wherein such doctrines are put in
print and avowed O woeful pagan preachers? O hellish Paganism! Whither will
these men run, and be driven by the Devil?

10. We have seen, by this short hint, what a dash they give unto the whole
Gospel: and what an indignity they have thereby done unto Jesus Christ, cannot
be hid from any, that knows what true Christianity means: and he, in the
following words, seeking to alleviate the matter, does, in effect, make it worse
than ever; for in stead of exalting Christ, he does, with the base Unchristian
Socinians, debase our Lord Je^us Christ, for (says he P. 83.) We desire not
hereby to equalize ourselves unto that holy man, the Lord Jesus Christ; who was
borne of the virgin Mary, in wh^m dwelt all the fullness of divinity bodyly;
nor as we destroy the reality of his present existence as some calumniate us.
Ans. Unworthy man, that dar move such an Objection, and give so unsatisfyin^ an
answer thereunto. O what abjects of blasphemous pride must this gang of
creatures be, that dar have such thoughts of themselves? What, and was our
Lord, who was the Fathers equal, no more but an holy Man, and born of a virgin
and had the fullness of divinity, (and not of the God head, or Deity, though the
word in the original, that is used Col. 2:9 is more emphatick, than that used
Romans 1:20. it being (...), not (...)) in him bodily? And will this Miscreant
deny him to be God equal with the father in power and glory? But if he be but a
man, how can he be said to dwell in us? He dwells not in us (says he)
immediately, but mediatly, as he is in that seed, which is in us. But himself
called this seed Christ born in us and raised in us: and thus Christ dwells
in us by Christ borne in us: What demented creatures must these be, who speak
thus non sensically, in these soul-maters? He adds as the top-mystery of
their mischievous doctrine. Seeing He, to wit, the Eternal word, which was with
God, and was God, and immediately dwelt in that Holy Man; so that he is as the
head, we as the members; He the vine, we as branches; and as the soul is far
otherwise and more immediately, in the head and in the heart, than in the arms
and feet, and as the sap and life of the Vine does otherwise and more exist in
the trunck and root, than in the wine branches, so God dwells otherwise in
the Man Jesus Christ, than in us. Behold, here is all the honor and preference
that Christ geteth, He was nothing but a m^er man, as this Quaker, is; only God
dwelt in him, as the sap is in the root, or trunk of the tree; but he dwells
in the Quaker, as the sap is in the branches: Christ and He is animated with
one God; as the Head and the hand, are with one soul: And thus Christ had no
existence, before he had it in the womb of the virgin, more ^han this Quaker
had an hundred years ago. Where is then the God head of our Mediator? Where is
our Immanu^l? How was the Word made flesh, Ioh. 1:14? How was God manifest in
the flesh 1 Timothy 3:16? Where is he, who was the brightness of God's glory, and
the express image of his person. Heb. 1:3? Where i^ he, who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant etc. Phil. 2:6, 7? Where
is he, who is the Image of the invisible God, by whom all things were created
Col. 1:15, 1^. 2 Cor. 4:4? Where is he, who took part of flesh and blood, and
the sea of Abraham? Heb. 2:14, 16? Thus the Quakers deny the Incarnation of the
Son of God, and that our Lord Jesus Christ, was and is the Second Person in the
Trinity, very and eternal God, of one substance and equal with the Father; and
so join themselves with the wretched Socinians, wherefore, we (if their
doctrine be true can no more be said to be purchased by the blood of God, as
Act. 20:28. And if He had not been true God, how could ^e have stood under the
infinite wrath of God, and the power of death? Act. 2:24, 25. Romans 1:4* with 4
25. How could he have given worth and efficacy to his suffering, obedience and
intercession? Act. 20:28. Heb. 9:14. and 7:25, 26, 27, 28. How could he have
satisfied God's justice? Rom 3:24, 25, 26. How could he have procured to us his
favor? Ephesians. 1.6. Mat. 3* 17. How could he have purchased a peculiar people?
Tit. 2:13, 14. How could He have given to us his Spirit? Gal 4 v. 6. How could
He have conquered all our enemies? Luke 1: v. 68, 69, 71, 74. And how could he
bring us to everlasting salvation. Heb. 5: v. 8, 9. and 9: v. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. But they deny all these things as done by any other Christ, than what is
within themselves, though in a smaller measure, than in him, that was crucified
at Jerusalem. (2.) Behold also, how he runs wild in his notions: for when he
says that Christ was a man, as we are; and that Christ dwells in us; and
that the same God dwells in us, that dwelt in Christ, he must also say that
Christ dwelt in Christ immediately, and Christ dwells in us mediatly. But (3.)
He says the Eternal word, which was with God, and was God, dwelt immediately in
the holy man Christ; but mediatly in us; But he will not say, that Eternal Word
did assume the manhood into its personal union: and so, admitting a gradual
difference, which varyeth not the kind, Quakers and Heathens may as well be
said to be Immanuel, God manifest in the flesh, as Christ Jesus; and to be the
life which is the Light of men, and the true Light, which lights every man,
comeing into the world: and what not? How abominable must that Abomination be,
which these Quakers call and account their Religion? They deserve not to be
called Christians. As for his rejecting of the errors of Apollinaris ( Page
84) denying that Christ had a soul; and of Eutiches, who denied him to have a
true humane nature, what is it, but what all the Socinians will deny, as well
as he?

11. In the third place. 14. Page 84. he says, this grace, light and seed, is
not an accidens, but a real spiritual substance, which the soul of man can
apprehend and feel; and from which proceeds that real and spiritual birth,
called the new creature, the new man in the heart. Ans. (1.) Then this must be
neither Grace, nor Light, for these are not substances. (2.) It is little
wonder, he call it a Real Spiritual Substance, when it is God's Vehicle, and
the Organ, in which He dwells: But neither Scripture, nor sound philosophy
tells us of any substance in man, but what belongs either to his Soul, or to his
Body: it is like he will join himself with the old Heracleonites, who spoke of
a third substance in man. (3.) The soul can apprehend and feel an accidens, as
well as a substance; and the new creature, and new man in the heart, being an
accidens, and consisting in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, the image of
God in man, Ephesians 2:24. Col. 3:10. can proceed from an accidens. (4.) This man
stricks-in with the old Manichees, and with Flacius Illiricus, in part, who
said, that Original Sin was a substance; so also they said, that Original
Righteousness and the image of God, is a substance, and the essence of man. See
Wigandus de Manicheismorenovato Page 8.9. And that the new man is the substance
of man. id. Page 14. (5.) This says, that this Seed and Light, or Grace, or
what ever it be called, must be nothing but what is Natural, belonging to the
Nature and Essence of man, and cannot be any thing supernatural; and so all
their Conceptions of this matter, how substantial soever they suppose it to be,
must be Carnal and Natural. (6.) How can the new creature, which is a
supernatural thing, arise from this natural (howbeit substantial) Seed and
Grace?

12. These things are not very intelligible, being the issue of men transported
with delusory phancies: And howbeit he says, that they are wonderful to carnal
men, who are strangers to them; yet me thinks, The word of God should contain
such things; and till we find the Scripture bearing witness thereunto, we must
forbear the imbraceing of them, though we lie under the imputation of being but
carnal men, with him, who thinks none are Spiritual, but himself and other
Quakers. But how proves he the thing? He tells us only, that they know it, and
are sensible of it, by true and certain experience, They taste it, smell it,
see it, and touch it. And why not also hear it? But the pretended experiences
of deluded men, are no demonstrations to us. The more they talk at this rate,
after we have heard of their corrupt Pelagian, Arminian and Socinian
Principl^s, tending to overturne the Gospel of the grace of God, the more we
cannot but suspect them of gross Knavery, and Delusion: Persons possessed with
the devil, can talk as much of their senses, and sensible experiences of the
workings of Satan, in them, as these Quakers can do; And yet that is no
argument to us, to receive their Assertions, as demonstrations, unless as
demonstrations of devilry.

13. But he learnedly demonstrateth, that it is a Substance; because it abides
in the hearts of the ungodly, even while they remain in their impieties. Ans.
And does not Pravity, Ignorance, Rebellion, etc. remain in their hearts, while
they abide in their impieties? Are these therefore substances? The man shall
thus go far beyond Illyricus, and make all actual wickedness, substances; and
so ascribe them all to God, who is the Author of substances. But (says he) no
accident can be in a subject, unless the subject can be denominated therefrom.
And why may not the man, in whom is this grace and light, be denominated a
graced and enlightened man? And sure, if Christ (as they say) does thus
enlighten every man, every man may be said to be thus enlightened, as well as
when one smites Robert Barclay, he may be said to be smitten; or as well as
when Satan deludeth him, he may be said to be deluded: And thus this Substance
shall be turned into an accidens, by this man's philosophy. But why may not
substances give ground for denominations? The soul is a substance; and if the
soul be in the body, the body may be said to be enlivened therewith; and so,
though it were granted* that this grace and light were a substance, yet every
one, in whom it is, might be said to be graced and enlightened thereby. And
thus his demonstration evanisheth. He tells us, they distinguish betwixt
holiness, as an accident^, denominating a man, as this seed gets place in
his heart; and this holy and substantial seed, which often lies in men's heart,
as a grain of seed in a rockie ground, as we distinguish betwixt health, which
cannot but denominat the man, in whom it is, and medicine, which is a
substance, and which may be in a most unhealthy body. Resp. (1.) Nay we see,
They distinguish betwixt this seeds lying in the heart, and its getting place
in the heart, or else these words have no sense. (2.) If there be such a
difference betwixt this Substantial Seed and Holiness, as is betwixt Physic
and Health, that substantial seed is no part of holiness, and consequently it
is no part of the image of God in man. (3.) How can the man not be denominated
from this seed, and accounted an holy man upon the account thereof, seeing he
called it before a Spiritual Principle and Organ, and the Vehicle of God, and
that wherein God dwells, and from which God and Christ cannot be separated,
And a divine and glorious life? Shall a man have a Spiritual Principle of
holiness in him, and a divine Life, and yet not be accounted a spiritual and
holy man? Nay, shall a man have Christ in him, dwelling and abideing in him,
and yet not be called an holy man? Shall a man have God dwelling in him, as
Christ had (though not in that measure) and yet not be accounted a spiritual
holy man? (4.) The Scripture acquanteth us with no Seed, or Principle of a
spiritual life, communicated to every man by his Birth or Conception, nor to
any, but in Regeneration, when they are borne again, not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God Ioh. 1:13. And these are
they, who receive Christ, offered in the Gospel, and by believing on his name,
receive power to become the Sons of God, verse. 12. for that which is borne of
the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, Ioh. 3:6.
This being so, we pass his comparison, and that which he adds, as being
founded thereupon; all being grounded upon a fundamental error, his reasons
for which are afterward to be examined.

14. In the fourth place. 15. he says* That hereby they do not derogate from
the Sacrifice and propitiation of Christ. But how is this imaginable, seeing
this Seed, which is born with every man, will sufficiently save them, if they
will but suffer it to work in them; so that there is no necessity for a man
once to hear the name of Christ named, in reference to Salvation? And what
improvement does or can this Seed, or Light in Heathens, that never heard of
Christ, make of the Sacrifice of Christ? We are told that Christ, the true
Messiah, by his knowledge, that is, by the knowledge of him, as making his soul
an offering for sin, and as bearing their iniquities, should justify many,
Esai. 53:10, 11. And further we heard before, how this Man joyneth with
Socinians, in denying the Deity and Incarnation of the Son of God; and how,
having done this, he can plead for or maintain Christ's Sacrifice and
Propitiation, is intelligible only to Quakers, who can (as they pretend)
understand unintelligible things. But let us hear, how he vindicateth himself
and the rest from this imputation. He says, They believe all that is written
of Christ's Conception, Birth, Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, to be true. And what then? Socinians will say the same, and yet are
no friends to Christ's Sacrifice and Propitiation. Do you believe, that that
body, which was crucified at Jerusalem, rose again and is now in glory? Speak
your mind here, if you dar; and that that Body was personally united to the
Godhead? we think (says he further) all to whom these things are revealed are
bound to believe them. But what will the belief of them signify, seeing the
devil believes them to be true. Yea (says he) we think incredulity here
damnable. And why so? Because that divine seed would incline all to believe;
for it assenteth to all truth that is declared. But all this being, but an
historical faith, can effectuate no salvation. Has the devil, who is no
stranger to this historical faith, this divine Seed in him also, inclineing him
to believe this truth? If not, then this divine seed is not requisite unto this
Faith; if yea, then God and Christ dwells in the devil; and he is partaker of
a glorious and divine life: for this and more was said above of this seed, as
we heard.

15. We hear nothing yet said for the Sacrifice and Propitiation of Christ:
Therefore he adds, that they firmly believe, that Christ's coming was
necessary, that by his death and passion he might offer himself a sacrifice to
God, for our sins: and who ever obtain remission of sins, it is by virtue of
his Satisfactory sacrifice. These are fair words, but contain nothing that
can satisfy any understanding person; for the Socinians themselves will say as
much, as may be seen in Hoornb. Socinianismi Confut. lib. 3. Cap. 1. Page
490.491. Does he say, that the Quakers grant, that Christ's sufferings were a
proper punishment suffered by Him, as a cautioner, in the room and stead of any
sinner; and that thereby He did truly and properly make satisfaction to the
justice of Go^, for the sins of his people; and so purchase unto them Grace
and Glory, and Remission of sins, having pacified God and reconciled him unto
them, by a true and proper sacrifice; and so properly and truly did redeem his
people? As the Socinians make Christ only a Metaphorical God, in respect of his
Office, so they ascribe to him a Metaphorical Redemption and Satisfaction. And
if this patron of the Quakers can say no more on their behalf, it is too too
manifest, how small account they have of the Sacrifice and Propitiation of
Christ. And what if all this be meant of the Christ within them?

16. Yet he would make us believe, that they magnify and exalt Christ's
propitiation, above what we do: we believe (says he) that as all men were made
partakers of the evil f^uits of Adam's fall, though thousands never heard of
him; so many may feel the virtue of this divine seed, and by it be turned from
evil to good, albeit they be utterly ignorant of Christ, by whose obedience and
suffering they obtain this benefit Ans. (1.) All men are actually made
partakers of the evil fruits of Adam's fall, so soon as they have a being,
because this is propagat by nature, all mankind being in Adam as their head
and root. But grace is not propagat by nature. Had Adam this seed in him after
he fell, and before the promise of the seed of the woman was made to him? Then
he lost it not by the fall; but by the fall, sure, he lost all inclination to
spiritual good. If he represented all Mankind, in the New Covenant of grace,
as he did in the Old Covenant of works, then, as his fall did redound, in the
one, to the actual condemnation of his posterity, so should his faith (for we
charitably suppose, he was a believer) redound, in the other, to the actual
salvation of all: of what necessity then should the sacrifice of Christ be?
(2.) All were partakers of the evil fruits of Adam's fall, actually and not
potentially only; for there is none that escapes: but the feeling of the
virtue of this divine seed, is but a possibility; so that, notwithstanding this
divine seed be said to be in all, yet it might so fall out, that not one should
be saved; for to have a power only to feel this seed, imports no actual
feeling, till Free will come in, and determine the matter; nor has it any
efficacious influence upon Free will to determine it, but leaves it to its
free choice. (3.) Is this all the benefit, that is had by Christ's Obedience
and Death, that people may be turned from evil to good? then it seems
Christ's death was not so effectual for the good of any, as Adam's sin was for
the hurt of all. Is this to magnify and exalt the Sacrifice of Christ? (4.) If
this be all that Christ purchased, to wit, a power to turn from evil to good,
and to feel the virtue of this seed, if men will, he has purchased nothing but
what is Natural, or what is inferior to common moral virtues; for it is
natural to have a power to do or not do, as men will, and a moral virtue is
more than such a power; because it leaves not the man in a state of pure
indifferency, but inclines him to acts of such a virtue, and only to such
acts. And if Christ purchased only this power, he purchased no more a power to
do good, than a power to do evil; for the power of it self is indifferent to
both, no more inclined to the one, then to the other: So that Christ has
purchased ^o Supernatural Grace, which effectually moves and determines to
good; but only the Pelagian Natural Grace, by which no man is more inclined to
good, than to evil; and which a man may make use of, or not, as he will; and
so, if he will, it shall be of no benefit to him (5.) If this be all that
Christ has obtained, it is not much matter, though we say, that such are
partakers of it, that never heard of Christ. (6.) But why says he, Many may
feel this seed that never heard of Christ; and not All? Is there any
difference? if there be, what is it, and upon what is it founded? (7.) We deny,
that any partake of the Supernatural and Saving Benefits of Christ's death,
who are without the Covenant, and never heard of him, we mean persons come to
age, for we except the Elect Infants, who are within the covenant, and are not
capable of hearing. And this Man's doctrine rendereth the knowledge of the
Gospel very useless, at least not very necessary; though life and immortality
be ^rought to light thereby 2 Timothy 1:10. and it be the mean through which
people are begotten unto God 1 Cor 4:15. and the power of God unto salvation
Romans 1:16. the glorious Gospel of the blessed God 1 Timothy 1:11. though by it we
are called to sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, to the
obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ 2 These. 2:14. And in the word
of the truth of the Gospel, we hear of the hope, which is laid up f^r us in
heaven Col. 1:5. Though by it, the Gentiles be made fellow heirs and of the
same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ Ephesians. 3:6* And it be the
Gospel of our salvation Ephesians. 1:13. Though it be a glorious Gospel, having
light in it to shine into the heart of believers 2 Cor. 4:4. and has a
blessing and a fullness of blessing in it Romans 15:29. so it is called the
Everlasting Gospel Rom.. 14:6. and for preaching of which Christ himself was
anointed Luke 4 18. What unworthy creatures must these Quakers be, that think
so little of the Gospel of Christ, and of the preaching of it, and cry up so
much the Light within?

17, But he says, they believe that it is necessary for such as hear the
Gospel to believe it. Ans. Necessary, how? Wherein consists this necessity,
seeing we may be saved without it? Is it because it is a Revelation of God's
truth? But that speaks out no more the necessity of the faith of the Gospel, or
of the History of Christ, unto salvation, than the faith of this, that Paul
left his cloak at Troas, or the History of Cain, Ismael, Judas, etc. which is
recorded in the Scriptures And thus he makes the great mercy of enlarging the
borders of the Church under the New Testament, and of taking-in all nations, by
the preaching of the Gospel, without discrimination, to be no mercy at all, or
at least, a very small mercy, He adds, That they ingenuously confess the
outward knowledge of this to be full of comfort to such as are under it, and
are acted by this inward seed and Light. Ans. But this comfort is not necessary
to Salvation, according to them: This inward Seed and Light is sufficient for
this; and we are enquiring after its necessity, but find none, in this man's
opinion Yet, let us see, wherein this comfort consists? For (says he Page
86.) not only are they humbled by the sense of Christ's death and sufferings;
but they are also confirmed thereby, and encouraged to follow his excellent
example 1 Pet. 2:2. and are also refreshed by his gracious speeches. Ans. And
is this all? Then I see, there is no more necessity for any to be acquanted
with the History of Christ's life and death, than with the History of other holy
saints of God; and we have no more interest in that, than in these: is that to
exalt Christ's Satisfaction and Propitiation? All that was written before time,
was written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures, might have hope Romans 15:4. And is the History of Christ of the same
nature and use, with the History of others? And is there no more to be gathered
therefrom, than what an example may contribute? This is pure Socinianisme in
grain.

18. In fine he discovers to us another mystery, concluding thus, The History
indeed is profitable and comfortable, conjoined with the mystery; but not
without it; but the mystery is and can be profitable without the explicit and
external knowledge of the History. Ans. That the knowledge of the History,
without the receiving of Christ, held forth therein, conform to the Gospel
terms, is of little use, as to Salvation, we grant; but what else he means
by the mystery, I know not, unless he mean the light within. (2.) Can he show
us, how the mystery can be known, without the History? Or to whom, and when it
has been known? (3.) Why was the Gospel written, and that by so many several
hands? And why have we any books of the New Testament? And why did Christ
appoint O^f^cers to continue to the end? Why did he send forth his Apostles to
bear witness of his Death and Resurrection? Why says John Chap. 20 verse. 31.
but these are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son
of God, and that believing ye might have life, through his name? Thus we see,
how at one dash this Mischievous Man would destroy the whole administration of
the Gospel; by making it altogether unnecessary unto salvation: what a desperate
design must these men have?

19. In the fifth place, he comes to clear how Christ is in all, That the Seed
and light is in all, he has said; and that this Seed and Light is Gods
vehicle, in which God and Christ do always dwell, and from which they cannot
be separated, he has affirmed: But that it obtains a place in the heart of
all, and is joined therewith, so that Christ is formed there and arises, he
here denies? Thus we have a distinction without a difference; for in whom
soever Christ is by his Spirit, in them he is formed, there he dwells as in
his house and palace, taking possession of the soul, as his own; and these are
Christ's 1 Cor. 3:23. Christ lives in them, and they live by faith in him Gal.
2:20. they crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5:24. which
cannot be said of the Heathen, who are without Christ Ephesians. 2:12. for Christ
dwells in the heart by faith Ephesians. 3:17. Christ is united to the Church
only, as her head Ephesians. 5:23. who grow up in him, in all things Ephesians. 4:15,
16. and their life is hid with Christ in God; and Christ is their life Col.
3:3, 4. And this indwelling is mutual; as he is in them, so they are in him
Ioh. 6:56. 1 Ioh. 4:15, 16. Hence they are said to be in Christ Romans 8:10. and
16:7. 2 Cor. 5:17. and 12:2. Can this be said of all the World? Is all the
World dead with Christ Romans 6: verse. 8. Col. 2:20? Or joint heirs with Christ
Romans 8:87. or crucified with Christ Gal. 2:20. quickened together with Christ
Ephesians. 2:5. Or risen with Christ Col. 3:1? He grants, that Christ is not in
all by Union, or strickly by Inhabitation. How is he then in all? He answers,
he is in them as in the Seed and Light, from which Christ is never separated*
But what ground have we for this Fancy and Notion? What Scripture speaks so of
Christ's indwelling in all? How is this distinction cleared from Scripture? He
cites Amos 2:12. Behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed, that is
full of sheafs. And what can this Metaphorical expression say, that may be
read, as it is on the margin, I will press your place, as a cart full of
sheafs is pressed, and as Iunius and Tremellius render it, with the Dutch; or
as Munster, behold I raise a pressure like a cart made lean when full of
sheaves; or as the old Tygurin version, Behold I shall straiten you in your
place as a cart full of sheafs is straightened: or as Arias Montanus, Behold I
make a seige in your place, like as a Cart is besieged being full of sheafs? By
all which, we see, this is no nearer to his purpose, then East is to West.
Then he tells us, that Christ is crucified in wicked folks, Which we look upon
as a non-sensical dream. But he adds for a kind of confirmation, that Paul
writting to the Corinthians and Galatians speaks of Christ's being crucified in
them 1 Cor. 2:2 (...) Ans. But what can this import, as to such, as never heard
of Christ; Or as to the whole World? (2.) It is true Paul says 1 Cor. 2:2.
that he desired to know nothing among the Corinthians, a people rich in
knowledge and gifts, but Christ and him crucified; that is, The maine thing he
drove at and desired, was to have them acquanted savingly and practically with
a crucified mediator, for this he preferred to all other knowledge, that would
not humble and bring to a true Christian deportment, but would rather puff up,
and lead away from the practice of Christianity (3.) Whereas he looks to the
particle (...), as if that always were to be rendered in, and that taken
properly too, which is variously rendered, sometimes by Heb. 11:2. Luke 4:1.
sometimes at Romans 8:34. Ephesians. 3:13. sometimes with, or among Romans 1:12, 29.
and 16, 17. Luke 16:15, 16. sometimes with, Romans 15:35 Ephesians. 6 2. (4.) Paul
also, rebuking the Galatians, who had so soon suffered themselves to be
bewitched from the truth of the Gospel, uses this as an aggravation of their
guilt; and to enforce his challenge, Chap. 3:1. he says that Jesus Christ had
been evidently set forth and crucified among them; that is, that the Gospel had
been so plainly and fully preached unto them, that they could no more pretend
ignorance thereof, than if they had seen all drawn and purtrayed on tables
before their eyes. And though this sense and import of the words be so obvious
and plain, that he who runs may read it; yet behold how this Quaker dar
pervert and wrest the plain meaning of the Spirit of the Lord, contrary to the
very Scope and Intendment of the plaee; for thus he paraphraseth it, The
Apostle desired to know this Jesus Christ in them, and to manifest him to them,
that they being made sensible, how they had crucified Christ, might repent and
be saved. As if the Apostle had bin ignorant of this Christ in them, if so be
that he was in all, and every one of Adam's posterity: and as if none of those,
the Apostle wrote unto, had been believers, and penitent, though he accounted
them sanctified in Christ Jesus 1 Cor 1:2. and such as had the grace of God
given to them by Jesus Christ verse. 4. and were enriched by him in all
utterance, and in all knowledge verse. 5. See also verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. What he
speaks of Christ's being the Light, is impertinent here.

20. In the Sixth place Page 87.. 16. He would feign make us believe, that by
this divine Principle, they do not understand, any part of Man's Nature, or any
relicques of good left after the fall: But the reason he gives betrayeth him,
and bewrays his ignorance, or worse; for the says, that they make this
principle distinct from the Soul, and its faculties. And what then? The light
of Nature, and of Common honesty, and the knowledge of some things of that
kind, is neither Soul nor Faculty; and yet it is no grace, nor any thing but
Nature, and some Relics or rubbish of the old building; And, forsooth, to
make us think, that he is no Socinian, nor Pelagian, he tells us again, that
the Light he speaks of, is not only different from the Soul and its
Faculties, but is of another Nature; as if the Socinians Reason, and the
Pelagians Nature or Grace, could not also be distinguished from the Soul and
its faculties. The acts and exercise of the Faculties, is not the same with the
soul, or with the faculties of the soul themselves: no more than seeing or
hearing is the same with the eye and ear. But he adds. That mere rationality
cannot savingly understand any thing in things spiritual, yea is a great
impediment thereof, and enemy thereto. And the same we say of the Seed and
Principle, he talks of, and says is in all men, though he give it goodly
names, and call it the Spirit, supposing that Paul 1 Cor 3:16. maineth every
man breathing, when he says, know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? and not remembering that the Apostle
Romans 8:9. makes this the peculiar privilege of the Saints, saying, But ye are
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be, that the Spirit of God dwell in
you: Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. But this
is a maine business, and it does not a little concern him and his cause, to
show a clear difference (if there be any) betwixt his opinion, and that of
Pelagians and Socinians: and yet, instead of doing this, he runs out in
extravagancies, to bewilder his Reader, telling us Page 87. and 88. that when
the principle or rational propriety exalts it self, to reign and rule in
spiritual things above the seed, then the seed is wounded. We know, that
corruption and carnal reason, can and does fight and strive against the grace
of God, in God's people; and that in others it will rise up against the Truth
and authority of God, in the Scriptures: But to imagine such a thing, as either
of these, in persons living in heathenisme, without God, and without Christ,
and without the very report of the Gospel, is to dream wakeing. And to call it
Antichrist, riseing-up against Christ (as he does call it) is but a Notional
juggle, to hide their blasphemies.

21. He goes on to tell us his dreams, for he says, as God created the sun to
give light by day, and the moon by night; so he has given to men the spiritual
and divine light of his Son, to rule them in Spiritual things, and the light of
reason to rule them in Natural things etc. These are but impertinent fancies;
for he should clear to us here, how that, which he calls the Spiritual and
divine Light of Christ, which is in every man, differs from Nature, or the
Natural Enduements, which accompany the Rational soul; that it may appear, that
he is no Pelagian, nor Socinian: for we grant, that there is a spiritual and
divine light of Christ, which only can savingly make the spiritual things of
God manifest to the soul; but this is not common to all, but peculiar to God's
peculiar ones, if we may believe the Scripture: and in this sense, it is true,
which he says, That reason must be illuminated with this divine light, before
it can rightly take up Spiritual things; but that divine light is some other
thing, then the Light within.

22. Again He would make us believe, that this Light in every man, he talks
of, is distinguished from the Natural Conscience, upon this ground, that the
Natural Conscience can be defiled Tit. 1:15. but the light cannot, for it
makes manifest all things that are to be reproved Ephesians. 5:13. But how
clears he that the light, that is in every man by nature, cannot be defiled?
The Apostle in that cited place Tit. 1:15. says that the Minds and Conscience
(and what light is in men is there) of unbeleevers are defiled. And as for that
light mentioned Ephesians. 5:13. He will never prove, that is a light common to all
men, especially when the next verse restricketh it to them, that awake out of
sleep, and are arisen from the dead (which cannot, I suppose, be said of all
men) and get this light from Christ. Sure, such as are yet asleep, yea dead,
can have no Spiritual light: And they that are yet darkness, are not light in
the Lord verse. 8. nor can they prove what is acceptable unto the Lord verse. 10.
not having yet received the Spirit, which is in all goodness, and righteousness
and truth verse. 9. So that the whole scope of the place manifests this man's
detorsion thereof. The Apostle is exhorting them, who sometimes were darkness,
but now were light in the Lord, to walk as Children of light, and to reprove
the unfruitful works of darkness verse. 8, 11. showing what is the true nature
of that light, whereof they are now made partakers, being light in the Lord,
and brought out of the state of darkness, viz. to discover, and make manifest
such unworthy actions, to the end they may be shuned, and thought shame of.
What he adds of conscience challenging and vexing, for what is not wrong,
according to its misinformation, is nothing to the purpose, now in hand, unless
to give a convincing argument against himself; and to show, that the Light in
Turks, who are challenged by their misinformed and deceived consciences, for
drinking of wine, prohibited by Mahomet, is nothing different from the darkness
of their blinded consciences; for how will he prove, that there is any
spiritual light in them, witnessing the contrary, of what their blinded and
misguided conscience says* Of the same nature and import is that which he
adds Page 89. of the blinded conscience of Papists, challenging for eating
flesh in Lent. But he adds, that the light of Christ, will never consent to
such abominations, but takes away blindness, opens the Intellect, and
directs judgment and conscience. All which is very true of the true light of
Christ, bestowed upon believers, and revealed in his word; but is most false of
his Light, which is in all men naturally, and common to all the Sons of Adam,
Heathens, Turks, and Cannibals, as well as Christians in name and thing. And
while the Quakers preach up this, as a sure guide to life eternal, they are
abominable Pelagian, and Socinian deceivers, who should be fled from, as the
most impudent and sworn enemies of the Grace of God, and of His Gospel, that
ever appeared out of the bottomless Pit; a company of pure Pagan-preachers,
whose doctrine is Paganism, and drives thereunto.

23. In the last place, as a plaster to cover all the deformities of his
opinion, hithertil held forth, he tells us, that this light and seed is not the
power and faculty of the man's soul, whereof a man is master, and can exercise
when he will, if no natural defect hinder; for a man cannot stir up, when he
pleases, this Light and seed, but it moves and breaths and contendeth with
men, as the Lord sees good; so that a man, even though he has some sense of
his misery, cannot, when he will by his stirring up of this light, attain
tenderness of heart; but he must attend to that, which at certain times comes
upon all, in which it wonderfully mollifieth and warmeth the heart, and works
in the man; at which, time, if the man resist not, but join with it, he
obtains salvation thereby: And he compares it with the Spirits moving the
waters of Bethesda (not Bethsaida, as he says) and adds, that God, in love
to all mankind, works so in the heart, by this seed, at certain singular
times, setting their sins in order, before their eyes, inviting to repentance,
and offering remission of sins and salvation, which if man refuse not, he may
be saved. Then he is so persuaded of the truth hereof, that he is assured, no
man that reads this, and deals honestly with his own heart, in the sight of
God, will not acquiesce thereunto, and in some measure be sensible thereof:
Closeing with this Epiphonema. That this is the precious day of visitation,
which whosoever resists not, shall be happy for ever. This is the day of the
Lord, which is as lightning shining from east to west; and as the wind, or the
Spirit, breathing into the soul, and its sound is heard, but we know not,
whence it comes, and whither it goes.

24. To all which, I shall shortly reply, beginning at what is last. (1.) That
Spirit, whereof Christ speaks Ioh. 3. that blows where it lists, waits
not for man's not-resisting, no more then the wind, whereunto Christ there
likeneth it: And it througheth its effect, the new birth; for he adds, so is
every one, that is borne of God: will this man dar to say, that all Men in the
world are partakers of this new birth? (2.) How impertinet that other
expression is, which Christ has, Mat. 24:27. unto the purpose, which this man
is now handling, he may read that runne^h t^ But it is usual for these men, to
play thus boldly with the Scriptures, as men, that have not the fear of God
before their eyes. (3.) He takes no notice, that his writings are not likely
to come into the hands of Heathens, Pagans, Turks and Barbarians. And so his
Proclamation of this day of visitation and fair opportunity of Salvation, to
all, is but vain. (4.) We are to see afterward, if he can prove from
Scripture, that God has planted such a Seed in every man. (5.) He says here,
that God has certain singular times, wherein he thus comes; but in the
preceding Chapter, we observed another account of this day of Visitation, as of
a day, that did not go and come again, as the Angels moving of the waters of
Bethesda. Or he must say, that this day comes but once, in a man's whole life
time; so that, if men repent not at that very hour or moment, they shall never
be saved. And if this be his doctrine, it is neither consonont to his
expressions elsewhere, not to the Scriptures; nor is it comfortable to either
one or other. (6) It is absolutely false, That God offers remission of sins
and salvation to every man, upon condition of non-refusal; for He offers
remission and salvation to none, but in Christ, and that upon the condition of
faith in Jesus: as the whole Gospel clears. And this offer is not made to
any, to whom the Gospel is not preached; for it is the Gospel, whereby life and
immortality is brought to light, and wherein Christ is held forth, as the
Propitiation: it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, Romans 1:16, 17. So that this man's doctrine destroys the whole Gospel,
and renders the whole administration thereof useless; yea it takes away the
death of Christ and his merits and blood shed, when it takes away faith, that
must lay hold upon it. (7.) What is this not-dissenting, and not-refusing, that
he talks of? The Arminians spoke at this rate. Is this any thing else, than the
use of Free will at whose devotion, Christ and his Salvation is? This even
this, with the Pelagianizing, Socinianizing and Arminianizing Quakers, is the
thing, that must wear the crown, and have all the glory of our Salvation, and
to it must the everlasting songs be sung. Glory, honor and Praise must be
given to our own noble and well inclined Freewill, that did not resist, nor
refuse, in the day of visitation. Let never my soul come into these men's
secret? (8.) That God wonderfully warmeth and mollifieth the heart of every
son of Adam, at some one time or other, is mere Quakerisme, that is to say, a
vain dream. And that God wonderfully mollifieth and warmeth the heart of a
man, in reference to salvation, and that yet the man may refuse the call, and
perish, may be true or false, according as that mollifying and warming is
interpreted; But if it be taken for the gracious working of the Spirit of God
(as, it may be, he will take it) he proclameth Armianisme: If he take it for
some common operation of the Spirit, and yet say, that man's not resisting of
this, alone without any more, will certainly prove saving, he preaches forth
Pelagianisme, and denies the necessity of the grace of God. (9.) In fine we
see, that this Plaster will not cover the sore; Nor free him from the charge
of Pelagianisme: For Pelagius said as much and more, as Vossius Hist. Pelag.
lib. 3. part. 2. These. 4. clears, out of Augustine: for he tells us that
Pelagius, explaining the nature of that grace, which he at length came to
acknowledge, said it did nor consist in the Law only, but in the help and
adjutorium of God. But this Quaker will not admit the grace of the Law, or
doctrine of Christ; for the preaching of the Gospel with him is not necessary
unto Salvation. Yet hear Pelagius* The Lord helps us (said he) by his
Doctrine and Revelation, while be opens the eyes of our heart -- while he
illuminateth us with the ineffable gift of his heavenly grace. Is not this as
much, as this Quaker says, when he speaks of Gods stirring up this light
that is within every man? Nay it is more; for Pelagiu^ hereby granted a real
operation of the Spirit upon the Mind, illuminating it by an unspeakable gift
of heavenly grace; but our Quakers illumination is nothing but God's putting
the natural conscience to work. And will this Quaker say more then, or as much
a Pelagius said, on these words, God works in us both to will and to do. God
does this (said he) while he stirs us up by the greatness of future glory,
and the promise of reward; and while by the revelation of wisdom, he stirs
up the lazy will unto the love of God, and while he persuades to every thing
that is good. Will this Quaker say, that God does even this much to every one
of the Heathens? What Knowledge of the greatness of future glory, or of the
promise of the rich recompense of reward; what Revelation of Wisdom; What Love
to the true and only God, is or can be imagined to be, among all, and every one
of the Heathens? Pelagius did very carefully distinguish betwixt Posse, Velle
and Agere. And he said, the first did properly belong to God, who bestowed it
upon his Creature: But the other two were wholly of man. Now all that this
Quaker ascribes here to God, is but he first possibility; for the man is left
at liberty to will or nill, as he pleases, and to operate, or not operate, as
he thinks good. This Possibility, Pelagius said, every man had, whether he
would or not; but the will and the deed was in his own power Has not our Quake
sucked this man's breasts? And as Pelagius would acknowledge no necessity of
grace to help us to will and to do, or to cause us will and do, beside this
Possibility, or illumination of the mind; So this Quaker restricketh all the
grace of God unto the stirring up of the Light. Says he any thing of Grace,
causing the Man to consent? Or taking away that resistance? No; Pelagians,
Arminians, Socinians and Jesuits, are dearer friends to him, than that he
should put any dishonor on their Diana, Free will.

25. Having thus traversed this man's explication of that Universal Grace, Light
or Seed, which he asserteth; and having traced him to his den: We come to
examine his grounds for this wild Assertion, held forth. 21. Page 98. etc. He
first adduceth Ioh 1: ver. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man
that comes into the world. And this, he says, some call the Quakers text: but
I would rather call it their stumbling block, and neck-break; because it is a
passage, which they do wrest, as they do also other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction, as Peter speaks, of some in his days 2 Pet. 3:16. Concerning
these words of John, it would be noticed (1.) Some join these words, which we
have rendered, that comes into the world, not with every man, as in our
translation, but with the word light, rendering the words thus, that true
light, which lights man, was coming into the world, according to the like
phrases, Mat. 10:32. Luke 5:16. and 15:1. Act. 8:28. Not as if the meaning
were, that Christ did enlighten every man, by coming into the world, as if he
did not enlighten them before: But this they give to be the meaning* that John
hereby is pointing forth the incarnation of the word, showing that the light,
the true light, which lighteneth every man, did come into the world: and why we
may not thus take the words, rather than as they are commonly rendered, I do
not yet see any cogent reason. (2.) As to this illumination, which this light
communicates, when it is said to enlighten, it is not one and the same way
understood by all; Some take it to be understood of the common light of nature,
whereof all are in one measure, or other, partakers: So Calvin, Musculus and
others, on the place, and among the Ancients Cyrillus lib. 1. in Joan. Cap. 9.
The Socinians bend all their strength against this exposition, because they
will not acknowledge this Light, Life, and Word, to be the true and living God,
equal with the Father in power and glory; And with these Socinians this Quaker
joyneth, in his opposition to this sense. Others mean hereby Spiritual
Illumination, by true and saving grace; but yet do not say, that this is
actually communicated to every man; but that the meaning is, all that are
spiritually illuminated have this Illumination from that Light. And this way
Augustine of old, and others of late, interpret the words, explaining it by
this simile, a Schoolmaster may be said to reach all the children of such a
place, though all and every one without exception are not taught by him,
because all that are taught in that place, are taught by him alone: But why
both may not be here included, I see not; this serving the more to set forth
the excellency of Christ, yea and his Godhead, which John principally here
intends, as is apparent from almost every verse, from the beginning, where he
is spoken of, whatever the Antichristian Socinians invent, and say to the
contrary: And this being true, that Jesus Christ, the Word, and the Light, and
the Life here spoken of, is true God verse. 1. and the creator of all things
verse. 3. it cannot be denied, that he is the Author of all that light,
wherewith men are enlightened, and that even the light of Nature and Reason is
from Him, who is the fountain of all Light and Life. Nor must we therefore
say, that the Spiritual light is as common as the Natural: Nor is the
intendment of the Evangelist here, to assert this; because he had said verse. 7.
that John Baptist came to bear witness of this Light, that all men through him
might believe, pointing out, that the way of partaking of the spiritual light
and life, which Christ, as a fountain, communicates, was by faith: and it is
notoure enough, that all men have not Faith, and therefore all men are not
partakers of this Illumination. And further John tells us afterward verse. 10.
that the world knew not Christ: And yet all that are spiritually illuminated,
and have gotten an understanding from Christ, know him, that is true, and are
in him, that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life, 1 Ioh. 5:20. And verse. 11. that Christ came unto his own, and
his own received him not: But certain it is, that all, who are spiritually
illuminated, receive Christ; They who have the eyes of their understandings
enlightened, and have the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of
Christ, cannot but embrace him. Nay the whole Scripture confirms this. And if
it be enquired, why is it then said, that He enlighteneth every man? I Answer,
To show the enlargement of the object of this rich favor bestowed by Christ,
beyond what light, John, held forth, who, in his witnessing ministry, was
restricted unto Judea: and further seeing it is said of John, that he came to
bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe, when yet
John did bear witness unto a very small part of all men: We see no reason, why
the every man mentioned verse. 9. should be understood so universally, except
with this restriction, every man that believes. But mainely it is said, that
this Light does thus Spiritually enlighten every man because it is he alone
that has enlightened, in all ages and under all dispe^sations of the Covenant,
both before and after the Law, and now, all Nations, without such distinction,
or discrimination, as was under the Law. Finally if all and every man be
Spiritually Illuminated by Christ, all and every man must be saved, for this
Spiritual Illumination is wrought by the indwelling Spirit, which is not given
to all, but to Christ's peculiar ones Romans 8:9. And the Scripture tells us of
many, whose understandings are darkened Ephesians. 4:18. who are of night and of
darkness 1 These. 5:5. and under the power of darkness Col. 1:13. are in
darkness, and abides in darkness, and walk in darkness Ioh. 8:12. and 12:35,
46. 1 These. 5:4 1 Ioh. 1:6. and 2:9, 11. 1 Pet. 2:9. Act. 26:18. Luke 1:79.
Romans 2:19. And who can think, that these and such like expressions can be used
of those, whom Christ does enlighten with Grace and Spiritual Illumination?

26. Hence it appears, that however we take these words, they can afford no
countenance unto the Quakers Imagination; for though it be true, that all men
are enlightened, one way or other, in one measure or other, by Christ; yet it
will not follow, that all men are enlightened by him Spiritually,
Supernaturally and Savingly; for there is a light of Reason, and Conscience
Natural, which Christ being God gives, and this is not Supernatural, spiritual
nor saving: So there is a Light of the Word, which is not so common, as is the
Light of Nature and of the Natural Conscience, which is from Christ also, and
is different from the Spiritual and Supernatural light. And if this light be
wholly restricted to Spiritual and Supernatural Light, it is not intelligible
out of Scripture, how this can be said to be bestowed on all and every man; but
on the contrary the Scripture shows, that many are not enlightened thus, but
in darkness, and blinded with darkness; and so that this Illumination is proper
and peculiar to a few, if the Scripture be to be believed. Let us now see, what
he can make out of this place of Scripture, for his purpose.

27. He observes first, That the divine Apostle does call Christ the light of
men. Ans. The Apostle indeed says, verse. 4. That the life was the light of
men. But the question is, what may be the meaning hereof? Calvin hereby means
that common light of Nature and Reason, that is granted to men above beasts,
whereby they are said not only to live, as beasts do, and vegetables, but to
have the light of an understanding. And so did Origin Tom. 3. and Cyrillus Lib.
1: Cap. 7. in Joan. of old; and Marlorat and others of late. Others, I know
understand this light of a Spiritual and Supernatural Light. But why may we not
comprehend both, seeing all the light of men, or whereof men are partakers, is
from this life, whether Natural or Supernatural, whether Common or Saving,
whether the Light of Knowledge, of Sanctification and Holiness, or of Joy and
Consolation; whether that, which at first was conferred upon man, in his
Creation; or that which afterward is conferred in his Restoration, through
grace Ioh. 8:12. Ephesians. 4:24. Eccles. 11. ult. 2 Cor. 4:6. Ioh. 16.22. Romans
14:17, 18. Phil. 5:4? But I know, our Quaker will astrick this to a spiritual,
supernatural and saving light, and thereupon infer, that this is common to
all. But Jesus Christ himself teaches us otherwise, Ioh. 8:12. saying, I am
the light of the World, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. So that though Christ be the light of the world;
yet every one has not the light of life, but they only who follow him by
faith: all others walk in darkness; and are void of this light of life? So John
12:46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should
not abide in darkness. Whence we see, that though Christ be come a light in the
world, yet all are not actually savingly enlightened, but many are in darkness,
and abide in darkness; even all that believe not on him. Hence, though light be
come into the world, yet men love darkness better Ioh. 3:19. yea, hate the
light, verse 20. And howbeit Christ be the light, yet none become children of
the light, but by believing in him Ioh. 12:36. and all are not children of
light Ephesians. 5:8, 14. 1 These. 5:5.

28. He observes next, That this light shines in darkness, though the
darkness does not comprehend it. Ans. True, John says so verse. 5. the meaning
whereof Calvin gives to be this, That when man did generat into a state of
darkness, the light of his understanding was not wholly extinct, but there
remained some sparkles of the old light, in which he was created, in the midst
of the mass of darkness, which sin caused, which might have discovered a
Deity: but such was the power of darkness, that the mind of man was rather
filled with vanity, and enmity against God, than did perceive this great Author
and Donor; and so was driven further away from God, by sin and superstition.
But I shall gratify the Quaker so far, as to acknowledge, that more is here
comprehended, than a mere shineing by the Light and Law of Nature; even the
shineing of the light of the New Covenant, in Christ Jesus the Mediator, which
in all ages, since the fall, has, in some measure, been declared unto a dead
and darkened people, who, for the most part, did not perceive, nor lay hold
upon this light. Christ was pleased to reveal himself by degrees and
piece-meals Heb. 1:1. more darkly in the first promise of the Seed of the
woman, that should tread the head of the Serpent; somewhat again more clearly
under the Law, and now most clearly under the Gospel, when the day spring from
on high has visited us, to give light to them, that sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death Luke 1:78, 79. But all that light, which was left in man
after the fall, being but darkness, in comparison with what once it was, was
not able to discern and perceive, nor willing to embrace, this light, without
supervenient Divine and Spiritual light and grace. Hence the people of Israel
could not improve all the manifestations of this light, which they had; for God
had not given unto them an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to
hear. Deuteronomy. 29:3, 4* And still it holds true, that the natural man perceives
not the things of God 1 Cor. 2:14. and that the carnal mind is enmity against
God Rom 8:7. for darkness cannot comprehend this light.

29. In the third place, he observes, that this true light enlighteneth every
man, that comes into the world: Of which we have said enough before. As for
what he adds, that all will admit of no exclusion: we said enough Chap. VIII.
and as to spiritual Illumination, the text it self enforces a restriction,
when it tells, that darkness did not comprehend this light verse. 5: and that the
world knew not this light verse. 10. and that his own received him not. But he
says, This light shines even in their hearts, who comprehend him not, and
dispelleth darkness, where men close not their eyes. But in this the Man
bewrays his ignorance of the nature of spiritual Illumination, which so
dispelleth darkness, and so shines into the soul, as that it gives a
spiritual visive faculty; or so enlighteneth the Understanding, as that the man
cannot but see: when the eyes of the understanding are enlightened, they cannot
but see, what is the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of the glory
of his inheritance in the Saints etc. Ephesians. 1:8. Christ is given for a light
to open the blind eyes Esa. 42:6, 7. when God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, shines into our hearts, he gives the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4:6. so that
with open face, they behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, and are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord 2
Cor. 3:18. The text says not that this light is and was, and shall be in every
man. Quakers are good at dreaming.

30. Then be says, That John tells us verse. 7. to what end this light is given,
viz. that all might believe by it; for he will have (...) to be meaned of the
Light, and not of John. But the man is busy here seeking a knot in a rush. The
Evangelist tells us, what was the end for which John was sent; to wit, to bear
witness of the Light, that all through him might believe; that is, through him
as an instrument, for he was the Eliah, the Prophet, that was to come, to turn
the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to
their fathers Mal. 4:5.6. Mat. 11:14. Mark 9:11. he was to turn many of the
children of Israel to the Lord their God; for he was to go before him, in the
Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
and disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for
the Lord Luke 1:16, 17. He was the prophet of the Highest, and was to go
before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways. To give knowledge of
salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins etc. Luke 1:76, 77,
78, 79. So that this (...) does properly refer to John, who was but an
Instrument, by whom his hearers were brought to believe in Christ, the true
Light: And to John do Cyrillus, Chrysostomus, and all the Latin and Greek
Commentators, except Theophylact, refer it. And the very genuine aspect and
series of the words enforce it; this being the end of John's ministry and
witness-bearing, that by him and through his Ministry, all his hearers might
be brought to faith in the true Light, for this was the intendment of all his
labor and pains; as we see Ioh. 3:36. Act. 19:4. But this Quaker would make
us believe, that to interpret the words so, is to contradict the scope of the
context; for it is Christ, says he, that enlightens all with this light; And
is not this, that they might believe by it? Ans. It is true, it is the true
Light, that enlighteneth all. And He, as an efficient cause, does thereby work
faith in all that are enlightened; but nevertheless by John Baptist, as an
Instrument, might his hearers be brought to believe in Christ, the true Light:
and what way does this contradict the scope? He adds, All could not believe
by John, for his Ministry came not to all Ans. Thence let him learn, how to
interpret these universal particles. So it is said Mat. 21:26. all held John
for a prophet, and yet many in the world never heard of John, but the meaning
is, all, that knew his ministry; and so here, all to whom his ministry came,
indefinitely, without exception of any. But all, says he, enlightened with the
light might have believed thereby. Ans. Nay, all, enlightened with this saving
light, should certainly have believed; for this Illumination gives not a bare
power to believe; but certainly works the effect. John (says he further) did
not shine in darkness, but this Light shines in darkness, that darkness being
dissipated, it might beget faith Ans. And what then? Ergo by John's ministry
men could not be brought to believe in the true light? This is a Quakers
Consequence, that is, ridiculous. But lastly he says, we must believe by that,
in which communion is had with God; but by walking in the Light we obtain this
communion, not by walking in John. Answ. Our walking in the light is our
enjoying communion with God, as the text, at which he glanceth 1 Ioh. 1:7. does
clear? Our walking in the light is a fruit of faith, and not the cause of it,
though it may be a cause of its increase, and confirmation. What is that, to
believe by walking in the light? Though not by walking in John; yet by hearing
and receiving of his doctrine, men might be brought to believe in Christ; for
he came to bear witness of the true Light, and faith comes by hearing. As we
have received Christ, so must we walk in him, Col. 2:6. but receiving goes
before walking, and is not effectuated by walking.

31. He spends sometime Page 99. to prove, that this Light, here mentioned, is
supernatural, saving and sufficient, and foundeth all upon this, that it is the
light of Christ, whereby all ought to believe. And thus subdolously foisteth-in
his corrupt errors, his Pelagian and Arminian conceits, with a special
artifice, that the unwarry Reader may be infected with his poison. But (1) we
know no Supernatural and Saving Light or Grace, which is only Sufficient, and
not Efficacious and Effectual, or such as will certainly produce the effect.
Supernatural and sufficient grace to believe, not only gives the man a
spiritual Power to believe; but powerfully, insuperably, invincibly and
effectually Inclines, Moves, Draws and Determines the heart to believe;
and efficaciously works the Effect, and produces Faith, in the soul. As for
his merely Sufficient Grace, he has learned it in the Jesuits, Arminians and
Pelagians school, not in the Scriptures, Though there be a Light granted even
in the works of Creation and Providence, which may convince of a Deity and of
several duties, called for at the hands of men, which may and does render such
as come short, inexcusable Romans 1:20. And though a greater Light be granted in
the dispensation of the Gospel, to convince and render more inexcusable such as
believe not: yet we know of no Saving Light Sufficient to salvation granted to
all, even of such as hear the Gospel; far less to all Heathens; for as to
this, all naturally are blind and dead; and no grace can be sufficient, but
that which quickens, and gives eyes to see, and ears to hear, and hearts to
understand, and overpowereth all in the man, that makes head against Christ.
In what sense then can it be true, that saving sufficient Light is given to
all? Can that, which is a merely Natural Power, produce a spiritual and
Supernatural effect? As soon may a beast produce acts of reason, or a vegetable
plant do acts of sense; for these are effects of another Nature, and of an
higher sphere, and require a suitable principle. If it be said, By acting that
which is Natural, we may procure, or make way for what is Spiritual and
Supernatural, We enquire, where there is any such promise, or appointment of
God, giving ground for this assertion? Nay, if it were so, we should be called,
according to our works, and not according to his grace, contrare to 2 Timothy 1:9.
Tit. 3:5. Romans 9:15, 16. If it be said, That these words, To him that has,
shall be given, include such a promise, that such as improve nature aright,
shall obtain grace. We reply, That it must be proven, that what is promised to
be given, is of a different nature, and not of the same nature, with what the
man has. Both these parables, to which this is annexed, clear, that the more
promised is but of the same kind with what was had and improved: To say then,
that one that improveth nature shall obtain grace, is as much, as to say, that
one improving health shall obtain wealth or honor, or one by improving wealth
and honor shall obtain health. But the meaning of the saying, is, that such
as improve gifts and talents, given of God, shall get more of the same kind;
as he that improveth wealth gets more wealth (2.) What means that, by
which all ought to believe? does Spiritual Grace and Light bestowed only lay on
an obligation to believe? Then it does nothing; for the obligation lay upon the
man before to believe (3.) Is every thing, that lays on an obligation to
believe, Supernatural and Saving? Then the law is supernatural and saving. But
our Quaker talks, he knows not what (4) we do not exclude supernatural and
saving Light, as appears from what we said: But let us hear, why this man
would have nothing else here understood?

32. His first reason is, because we are not said to receive what is common and
peculiar to our nature, from Christ, and the Evangelist is here declaring
Christ's office, as Mediator, and the benefits which we get from him, as such.
Answ. If we receive not what is natural and common from Christ, we have neither
our Being, nor Conservation of him; contrare to Heb. 1:3. Col. 1:16, 17. And
that the Evangelist is here chiefly clearing and confirming the Deity of
Christ, none but Socinians will deny. His Second reason is, because the light
is said to shine in darkness and yet not to be comprehended by darkness: but
this darkness, is nothing but the natural state of man, and yet in his natural
state man can comprehend what is common and peculiar to him, as such. Ans. Not
to take notice of his calling something both Common and Peculiar, which is a
sort of repugnancy here: we grant, that man's natural state is a state of
darkness; and therefore infer, that while in that state, he is void of all
spiritual and supernatural Light; for when this comes, the man becomes light
in the Lord: And though man, in his natural state, can comprehend that which is
natural, yet he cannot comprehend the God of Nature, who is here called Light.
This Light may shine by natural effects, of Reason and a Natural Conscience, in
a natural man, and yet the man nor comprehend, or understand this Light. Our
Quaker, whose light of reason is darkness, takes the light here to be meant of
the effect, and not of the efficient; and so practically confuteth himself. His
third reason is but a repetition of what he said before, and was answered. 30.
He ade^h more, That, in which we are commanded to believe, that we may become
the children of light, is supernatural, sufficient and saving. But we are
commanded to believe in the light John. 12:36. Ans. That we are commanded to
believe in the light, which is God, is most true. But that we are commanded to
believe in the light, which is but a mere Creature, and a work in us (as he
imagines) is not true: John, who came to bear witness of the light, said unto
the people, that they should believe on him, which should come after him, that
is, on Christ Jesus Act 19:4 And told them, that he that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him Ioh. 3 36. To him gave all the prophets
witness, that through his name, whoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins Act. 10:43. But why do we cite particular places, seeing the
whole Bible confirms it. Here his Quakerisme sets up its head, while he
will have that Light, mentioned Ioh 12:36. not to be meaned of Christ himself,
but of some created thing in every man, that is but mere Nature, contrare to
the very obvious import of the words, as connected with the preceding verse
34. where Christ and the Son of man is mentioned, whom the Jews thought should
abide for ever, and not be lifted up; but he tells them, that he was not to stay
always, and that therefore, they should be wise unto salvation, and lay hold
on him, now by Faith, and walk in him; for darkness would come, when he, and
his dispensations of the Gospel, should be removed; conform to that Ioh. 8:12.
I am the light of the world, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life. See also John. 9:5. But (says he Page 100.)
they could believe in his person, although he was removed. And himself adds
an Answer, when he mentions afterward a day of visitation: so that if they
did not lay hold on the fair opportunity they had, the day would come, when
Christ himself, and also in his Dispensations and Offers of mercy, in the
Gospel administration, should go away; and then they should walk in darkness.
His conclusion, being so ill founded, and destructive of true Christianity,
substituting some Natural (and consequently now corrupt) thing, common to all
men, both within and without the Church, both barbarous and more moralized, in
the room of Christ, is to be rejected with all detestation, and deserves not
to be once more repeated. What he cites at large, out of Cyrillus, if it be
considered alone, without this man's corrupt gloss, which we are not to
regaird, speaks nothing against the Truth, which we own, as might easily be
made to appear, if we judged it worth so much pains, as to clear it.

33. The Second ground of his Universal Grace, set down, Page 101. 22. is taken
from the parable of the sower, Mat. 13, Mark. 4. Luke 8. and this, he says is
the word of faith, Romans 10. and the engrafted word, Jam. 1:21. But is any so
blind, as not to see, that this is utterly impertinent to his purpose, seeing
it is so manifest, that our Lord is here speaking of the ordinary fruit of a
preached Gospel; and that among those, that seem to be most docile, and are not
of the profane and flagitious mockers, opposers and persecuters of the truth.
Is he not speaking of that word, which is heard with the ear? And does not
Paul speak of such an outward word, Romans 10. which is preached by such, whose
feet are beautiful? And that word, whereof James speaks, is the same, which
should be received with meekness, that it may become an ingrafted word, and
prove saving. Is this word a substantial thing, lying in every man's heart? Is
this word communicated to all the world, to all and every man in the world,
since the very day, that Adam fell? What uncouth phansies must these Quakers
have, that are carried away with such dottages? Either sure, these men are mere
mockers, or they are under a judicial stroke of blindness and infatuation. But
says he, This word is really sown in the stonny and thorny ground, as well as
in the good. Alas, poor man, thinks he, that every word in a parable must be
pressed thus, till it bleed? Who ever heard rational men speak thus? And though
it were so, this will not speak for all the world, a great part whereof hear
nothing of this word; Nay nor for all within the Church, or that hear the
word; for open mockers, contemners and persecuters of the word, belong neither
to the rocky, nor thorny ground, nor to the way side. What he cites out of
Victor Antiochemis, from Vossius Hist. Pelag. is utterly impertinent; for it
speaks nothing of all the world, but of such only, as hear the word preached;
and to this end only Vossius himsef adduceth it, as may be seen by his Thesis:
And any that read Victor's words may see, that he speaks of the preached
word, and not of the Quakers substance, and vehicle: a fanciful dream.

34. He urges next Page 102. the Parable of the Talents Mat. 25. saying, he
that had but two talents and had improved them for his masters advantage, was
accepted, as well as he, who had five; and he that had but one, might have done
the same. -- And hence he infers, that though every one has not the same
measure of grace, yet every one has that measure, which is sufficient, Ans.
The maine thing is not here confirmed, viz. That this Talent is a substantial
thing; and not that grace, which is but an accident: I believe he saw, that
what is spoken of improving these talents could not well agree to his
substantial Seed and Light; and far less the hideing of the one talent. Nor
(2.) Has he proved, that these talents signify saving grace, and not mere
gifts of the Spirit, which are given for the good of the Church. Nor (3.) Has
he said any thing, to clear, that by these servants, are meant all the men and
women, in the world; and not the officers of the Church, or others that are
gifted, living within the Church. These things he must clear and demonstrate,
before he can make any use of this Parable: and till he find himself in case
to do this, we proceed.

35. In the third place, he says,. 23. This saving seed is the Gospel, which
the Apostle says, Col. 1:23. was preached in every creature: And the Gospel is
not a bare declaration of good things, but the power of God, Romans 1:16. for
though the word, figuratively and by a metonimy signify the outward
declaration; yet properly it is that inward power, virtue and life, whereby the
Annunciation of good things is preached in the hearts of all, offering
salvation unto them, and willing to redeem them from their sins; and
therefore it is said to be preached in every creature, when many hear not the
external Gospel. Ans. (1.) The Gospel, which was preached, was the doctrine
delivered by men, and whereof Paul himself was a Minister; But that seed, which
he talks of, and which he says is abideing, as a substance, in every man, is
not that, which Paul an^ others, whose feet were beautiful, did preach. That
needs no preacher; for it is its own preacher, and requires no more, but
hearing and obedience. (2.) Thus also the vanity of that criticisme, upon the
particle (...) (which before we had occasion to show to have various
significations) is manifest, for how could that, which was already in every
creature, be said to be preached in every creature? And when was this preached
in every creature? Was it from the beginning of the world? This he must say, or
he says nothing. And does this place prove that? (3.) The Gospel, which was
preached in every creature (to follow the Quakers interpretation) was the same
Gospel, which the Colossians had heard of their faithful Ministers; and that
was not a substance within them, that belonged neither to soul, nor body. (4.)
The term every creature, is but an hyperbolick expression (as the words
following under heaven, are a Pleonasmus) showing the large and illimited
spreading of the news of salvation, to all Nations indifferently, without
Restriction, or Exception, whereby the New Testament is differenced from the
Old Test. as we fully manifested Chap. VIII. and is sufficiently explained,
verse 28. where every man must not betaken in its full extent, as if Paul and
the rest of the Apostles, had spoken in the hearing of every man, then
breathing; far less can it be meaned of every man, that died before they were
borne, and are borne since their death. Here also we hear of all wisdom; yet we
must not think, that Paul and the rest taught Physics, Metaphysickes or
Politics, etc. (5.) The Gospel, which was preached to every Creature, is
explained, verse. 25. and called the word of God, and verse. 26. it is called the
mystery, which has bin hid from ages and from generations, but was now made
manifest to his Saints. But according to the Quakers Principles, their Gospel,
light and seed was never hid, but in all ages, was in all and every one, and
alike manifest and clear, in it self. (6.) The Gospel, which Paul preached, and
whereof he was not ashamed, Romans 1:16. is that mean, which God is pleased to
make use of, whereby to exert his power, in the conversion of souls; and upon
this account is called the power of God. So that the very preaching of the
Gospel, when blessed of God, is a powerful mean of salvation, being
accompanied with faith in the hearers, and is a mean of begetting faith, as
Paul tells us Romans 10. when he says, that faith comes by hearing. (7.) He
should have told us, in what place of Scripture, the word Gospel is taken
properly, in his sense, for that inward Strength, Power and Life, which is
common to all Men: for till he do this, we shall account him but a babbler. (8.)
We deny all such thing, within every man, be it a substance, or an accidens,
that offers salvation, and redemption from sins, to every man: And account it
a greater Antichristian expression, and assertion, than ever Pelagius had the
confidence to maintain. And beyond what any Socinian ever durst vent. Yea, I
look upon it, as a real and substantial overturning of the whole Gospel of the
Grace of God, and of our Salvation; being nothing but pure paganism: and this
Man does hereby sufficiently declare himself to be a Pagan preacher.

36. He adds Page 105. That Paul says Romans 1. that in the Gospel, was
revealed not only the righteousness of God from faith to faith; but the wrath
of God also, against all such, as detain the truth of God in unrighteousness.
Ans. The Apostle says no such thing, but to confirm the absolute necessity of
the Gospel, and that there is no salvation to any, ^ew or Gentile, but by the
Gospel, he begins with the Gentiles, and shows what persons they were, and
concludes with the Jews; and then tells us Chap. 3: verse. 9. that he had
proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin. It is true, he
says, the wrath of God is revealed from haven against all unrighteousness of
men, etc. because that which may be known of God is manifest in them. etc. But
what of this? What is made known of God (says he) is made known by the Gospel.
Ans. This is most false; for the Law and Light of Nature, with the works of
Creation and Providence, do make known much of God. But this is not the Gospel
of the grace of God, whereby life and immortality is brought to light. It is
like indeed, that this is all the Quakers Gospel. Many things have we met with
hitherto, which confirms us in this Apprehension; and thisi expression here
puts it beyond all doubt. Does this Gospel manifest the righteousness of God
from faith to faith? Yes, says he, that is, it reveals to the soul, what is
good, just and equitable: And as the soul receives and beleeveeth that divine
righteousness, it is more and more revealed from one measure to another. Ans.
What ignorant babbling is this? What effronted and bold playing with the word of
God is this? Is every thing that reveals, what is good, just and equitable,
the Gospel? Then the Law must be the Gospel. Then Adam in innocence had the
Gospel. Then the dim light of nature is all the Quakers Gospel; this is their
Grace, their Substantial thing, their Light within, their Seed. Are they not
then noble Divines? And is their Religion any thing but heathenisme? Is it not
worse then Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, Arminianisme and Iesuitisme? The
following words cannot, I confess, be well answered: for they are nothing but
a rabble of nonsense, though fit lettuce for their lips. And though he should
say (as some of them use to speak) that I am in the witchcraft, and cannot
understand his meaning, I must forbear noticeing of him, and his tattles, and
see if any thing worth an answer follows, for though (says he) the outward
creation declares the power of God; yet that which is known of God is revealed
within, by which inward revelation, we are made fit to see and discern the
eternal power of the God head, in the outward creation, for if that inward
revelation, were not, man could no more understand the invisible things of God
by the visible and outward creation, than a blind man see colors etc. Ans.
(1.) What is that Inward Revelation, distinct from the Outward Revelation? It
is, it may be, the reception, or actual intellection of what is outwardly
revealed; and so the Natural Faculties, acting as such, must be Evangelick
Preachers, and Inward Revealers, with the Quakers. (2.) The text speaks of no
such Inward Revelation, distinct from what was had by the outward Creation: For
that which may be known of God, was showed unto them by the things, which were
made verse. 19:20. (3.) There is no more aptitude requisite to see and discern
God's eternal Power and Godhead (not the eternal power of the Godhead, as he
speaks) in a natural way (and Paul is not here speaking of a spiritual and
saving way) by the works of Creation, than to have a natural faculty of
Understanding, and Reason, freed of prejudices, and contracted byasses and
blindness; for this matter is so deeply rooted in their minds, that will they,
nill they, it cannot be thrust out (4.) It seems by his simile, that this
Inward Revelation is the same to the actual understanding of these things, that
the eye of the body is to seeing and discerning of colors; and so it is
manifest, that it can be nothing else, but the inward faculty of the soul,
whereby such things are known and understood: And so this Inward Faculty of the
soul, with the Light of Reason, is the Quakers Preacher and Gospel. Poor souls!
and what will this teach concerning the new Covenant, and the way of salvation
through a crucified Mediator? Do the Quakers know no other Gospel then this,
whereof all the fruit was, that it left the poor miserable heathen without
excuse, when they fell to their idolatrous courses? O how are they to be
pitied, that, under the clear manifestation of the Gospel, do thus run back to
the Heathens Theology, that they may be made much more inexcusable then ever
the Heathens were? Do they glory so much in Paganism?

37. He tells us moreover, that the Apostle says first, that that which is
known of God, or the knowledge of God, is manifest in them; and next, that in
and by that manifestation granted inwardly and received, they were able to read
and understand the power of God in visible things. Answ. (1.) By what authority
makes he (...), and the knowledge of God, one and the same, seeing this is more
comprehensive. and of a larger latitude? (2.) I do not see the second thing, in
the Apostles words, but I want the Quakers spectacles. Then he very learnedly
moves an Objection thus, if any should say, That the external creation of it
self, without any inward supernatural and saving grace, or seed, did declare to
a natural man, that God is. And will he deny this? He must then contradict the
Apostle. But what answers he? What good I pray, would that knowledge do, if
it did not also communicate to me, what was the will of God, and how I should do
that, that is acceptable to him? Ans. And what would this answer say? Either
the Inward Revelation, which the heathens had, (that I may speak in his
language) did also reveal what was the will of God, etc. Or not: if not, to
what purpose is all this said? If it did, then the Apostle is quite out, and
destroys hereby his own cause. But I shall help the Quaker with a
distinction. That same Inward Revelation (as he calls it) could and did
reveal to the Heathens part of the will of God, concerning duties, legible by
the Law of nature, and written upon the creation of God; but could reveal
nothing of the mysteries of the Gospel; because these did depend upon pure
Revelation, there being no lineaments thereof written upon the Creation; nor no
vestige thereof impressed in the heart of man. Hence, though the Heathens knew,
or might have known, to have put a difference betwixt somethings good and evil;
yet they could never understand the Revelation of Jesus Christ, in the Gospel.
All this clears further, that the Qu^kers know no other Gospel, but what the
Heathens, by the Light of Nature, did understand. He cites Page 104. Micah.
6:8. But most impertinently: For the Lord gave not that revelation of his will
to the Heathens, which he did to the Jews Psalm. 147:19, 20. Then he cites
Paul's Words Romans 1. The wrath of God is revealed against them, who detained the
truth of God, in unrighteousness. And what then? Could not the Heathens
oppress and make a prisoner o^ that Truth of God, which the Law and Light of
Nature did reveal? If not, what means all the following discourse of the
Apostle in that Chapter, and Act. 14: verse. 15, 16, 17. and 17: v. 23* 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29? This man is a stout advocat for Paganism.

38. Then he cites Romans 10. where the Apostle says, that the word, that he
preached, was not far off, but near in their mouth, and in their heart: And
thereafter verse. 18. he says, that this divine preacher did sound in all men's
ears and hearts. Ans. The Apostle out of Moses Deuteronomy. 30:14. is clearing the
righteousness, which is of Faith, and is differenceing it from the
righteousness, which is of the Law. Now, that righteousness of faith, whereof
Moses spoke Deuteronomy. 30. was not revealed to all Nations, at that time, but to
that select and peculiar people, to whom Moses was sent, the posterity of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. See Deuteronomy. 4:5, 6, 7, 8. and 7:6, 7, 8. So that all
the world had not that doctrine, which Moses taught these Israelites, revealed
and declared unto them; but they must have gone over seas, and countries, and
adjoined themselves unto the Common wealth of Israel, as proselytes, before
they could have reaped that benefit: and so, though this word and doctrine was
brought near to the Israelites, in their mouth by profession, and in the heart
by faith, of as many as had their hearts circumcised to believe; it will say
nothing for the Universal Grace and Light, which Quakers plead for. (2.) This
doctrine of faith, which Moses declared, was the same upon the matter, with
that, which Paul preached; and that which Paul preached was not in the heart of
heathens, or of all men borne of Adam, but was a mystery, hid from ages and
generations, and spareingly revealed, even to the Church, until the last
dispensation came. Nay, the Apostle tells us plainly what that is, verse. 9.
that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God has raised him, from the dead, thou shall be saved. Now,
will this Quaker say, that Heathens, and such as never heard of Christ, do, or
can confess with their mouth the Lo^d Jesus; or believe with their heart, that
he was raised from the dead? See also what follows verse. 10* 11. for with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
unto salvation, for the Scripture says, whosoever believes on him shall not
be ashamed. (3.) The following words confirm this, where the Apostle verse. 14,
15. shows the necessity of hearing, and of preaching, and of sending, for the
begetting of faith, saying, how shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach except they
be sent, as it is written etc. -- then verse. 17. he concludes, that faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. This cannot then be meant of
any inward thing, that lies in the heart of every man; but is the outward call
of the Gospel, which sounds in the ears. (4.] As for that verse. 18. It is to
stop the mouths of both Jews and Gentiles, especially the Jews, who whould
pretend ignorance of this preached Gospel, and say, that they had never heard
thereof; therefore says the Apostle, Have they not heard? Yes, would he say,
That is unquestionable, for their sound went into all the earth, etc. What
sound is this? Is this a sound of something, that is lodged in Heathens, who
never heard of the Gospel? None can fancy this, but a Quaker; Or will this
Quaker say, that the sound of the Gospel preached came unto the ears of all
and every man breathing? No, he says expressly the contrary. What can he then
make out of this? Has the Light within such a sound and words, as that Gospel,
which the Apostles preached; or as the preaching of the Apostles, which went
far and near into all the earth, and to the ends of the world, in a manner? for
the Apostle is alludeing unto the expressions, which the Psalmist uses Psalm.
19. speaking of the Sun and heavens, these great and universal preachers of the
glory of God, but not of the Gospel. And sure, even these preachers were
outward preachers, and not any thing within the man; not any Light, or Grace,
or Seed, or what they will call it, that is within the heart of any man; or of
all men.

39. Then he cites Heb. 4:12, 13. As bearing witness to his fancy. But though
many take the Word of God, there mentioned, to be understood of the outward
word of the Gospel, preached, and declared; (in which sense it perfectly
contradicts this man's dream) yet, beside what is spoken hereof verse. 12. that
which is said verse. 13. can agree only to a person, and so it is most probable,
that this Word of God, is Christ, as the learned D. Own has lately cleared, in
his Comment on the place* But whether of these ways we take it, it can no
ways favor this man's dream; for there is nothing giving ground to imagine,
that this word of God, is any thing abiding and remaining in the hearts of
Heathens and mere natural persons, which is the Quakers Universal Grace. Who
would not wonder, to hear men say, that there is that in every man, Turk and
Pagan, which is quick and powerful and sharper than any two edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is
there any creature, that is not manifest in the fight of it, but all things are
naked and open unto the eyes of it; and with it; have we to do? We heard
before, that they called this seed, the Vehicle of God, and here he ascribes
to it, the very property of God; to know all things, even the Intents of the
heart: doubtless Quakers, that are sensible of this Light, can know our very
thoughts and designs. But we hear blasphemy too much, out of the mouths of
these men; and yet we must hear more; for he says, that in and by this word,
God sees the thoughts of men; as if he did not see them immediately, but
mediatly by the spectacles of this that is within every man. Does this man
believe verily, that there is a God? And dar he say, that he is beholden to
this Light within, for discerning the Thoughts and Intents of the heart? What a
God must these Quakers dream of? Will they exalt this Light within above God? O
horrid blasphemers? Nay, this Quaker has not yet done with his blasphemy, for
he ascribes to this light, that which is said Esai. 55:4. and so David was a
Type of this light, and the new everlasting Covenant contains, and holds
forth the mercies of this Light, that are purchased, procured, and ^onveyed to
believers by this Light: and it is this light, that is given for a witness to
the people, for a leader and a commander; and so this ^ight is our prophet,
priest and king, and then we have nothing to do with that Jesus of Nazareth, of
whom the Gospel speaks, and whom the Apostles preached, Thus the whole Gospel
is overturned at one blow: and all the New Testament is to be looked upon, as a
cunningly devised fable, or must all be understood allegorically, as speaking
of this Light within, which is Gospel, Bible, Savior and all to the Quakers;
and of no other Christ, of no other Savior, and Redeemer. What a fundamental
and antievangelick error, this of the Quakers is, no man needs now to doubt;
nor fear to call them pagan Preachers.

40. Faith comes by hearing (says he) and hearing by the Word of God, which
is placed in every man's heart, to be a witness for God, and a medium by which
they may be brought unto God, through Faith and Repentance. And because man's
heart is naturally hard as iron, God has put this word in it, to be as a fire
and as an hammer Ier. 23:29. by whose strength and virtue, if it be not
resisted, the cold and hard heart of man is warmed, and made soft, and
receives an heavenly image and impression. Ans. Here is a further confirmation
of the desperate design of these Quakers, to overturne the foundations of
Christian Religion, for (1.) The word of God, by which Faith is wrought in
souls, is not, with them, the word of God which is preached, or the Gospel,
which Christ and his Apostles preached; but a thing in every man's heart,
Heathen as well as Christian, which they nickname, and blasphemously call the
word of God* Did Paul preach this word, which is in every man's heart? Or did
any of the Apostles make this their theme and text? Did they ever say, that by
this word Faith was wrought in the heart? Was this the Christ crucified, that
Paul spoke so much of? Sure, faith comes by the hearing of that word, which is
outwardly preached by such as are sent, and whose feet are bautiful upon the
mountains, bringing glade tideings Romans 10:15. Esai 52:7. Nah. 1:15. and by
such as was Esaias, whose report was not believed Romans 10 16. Esai 53:1. Hear
what Peter said Act. 15:7. -- Men and brethr^n, Ye know, how that a good while
ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles, by my mouth, should hear the
Word of the Gospel, and believe. And what that word of the Gospel was, which
Peter preached to Cornelius (to which passage this relates) see Act. 10:34. to
43. What means Paul by the foolishness of preaching, whereby such as believe
are saved, 1 Cor. 1:21. was that the preaching of a Light within? Why does he
then call it the cross? verse. 18. and Christ crucified verse. 23? would the
crying up of the light within be a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Greeks? No certainly: But because the Apostles doctrine did
lie so cross hereunto, neither Jews nor Greeks could relish it, except those,
who were the called; and they indeed, and they only, saw Christ the power of
God and the wisdom of God verse. 24. What need is there, that we should insist
in disproving of this, which overturneth the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and
rendereth all the administrations thereof useless and ridiculous? (2.) What
Faith, I wonder, can be produced by this Light within? It cannot be the Faith
of God's elect; for the mighty operation of the Spirit is required thereunto:
and, as an external mean, the out ward preaching of the Gospel, which is called
the word of Faith Romans 10:8. and the hearing of faith Gal. 3:2. And Paul tells
us Romans 1:5. That he and others received grace and Apostleshipe, for obedience
to the Faith among all nations. The Gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was keept secret, since the
world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of ^he Prophets,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all
nations, for the obedience of faith Romans 16:25, 26. Through the Gospel did the
Apostle beget the Corinthians 1 Cor. 4:15. The Thessalonians were called to the
belief of the truth, by the Gospel 2 These. 2:14. It must th^n be the faith of
Heathens, or rather the faith of Devils; for they believe and tremble: and
Nature can produce no other faith, but a natural faith founded upon nature,
which is of the same kind with the faith of devils. Is not the Quakers
Religion a noble Religion* which would bring us the length of Devils? (3.) That
which is left in every man, to be a witness for God, is nothing but a Natural
Conscience, witnessing according to the Law of Nature, and the dim light
thereof, that is not yet extinct: and will this Natural Conscience produce
saving faith in a heathen? Sure, the devil has a conscience, as an
intellectual creature, witnessing that there is a God; and so witnessing for
God. Shall we call this conscience the word of God, the hearing of which will
produce faith? Then the Quakers Gospel is a Gospel for the Devils; giving them
ground of hope of Faith and Repentance, if they will but obey that Gospel,
which is preached within them. (4.) What a bold and manifest perversion of
Scripture is it, to apply that Word Ier. 23:29. which is express of the word
spoken by the true and faithful Prophets of God, unto this dumb preacher in
every man's bosom? (5) We see then, that the softening and warming Spirit of
God, who, by his power and efficacy, melts the heart, is in every man by
nature, in every Turk, Tartar, Barbarian, etc. And whatever the Scripture
speaks, of this work of the mighty Spirit of God, must all be understood of
this Light within every man. O desperate souls! O wretched error! Will not the
Lords hand be seen against these impudent, audacious perverters of the right
ways of the Lord? (6.) This fire and hammer will do wonders, if it be not
resisted: But when fire works upon water, and a hammer beats upon hard iron
or stone, can it but meet with resistance? At length we see, all the operation
of grace, which he talks of, is the sufficient grace, that Pelagians,
Jesuits, and Arminians, plead for, which must have no more efficacy an^ power
ascribed to it, whatever great names it get, than may salve the honor, and
consist with the glory of Free will, which must wear the crown, and have all
the praise; for this grace must not entrench upon the Lordly liberty of man's
will; but must stand off, and petition Lord Free will to consent, and yield, if
it will; but if not, it can do no more. And so it shall be of him, that wills
and runs, and not of God, that shows mercy; contrare to Romans 9:16. And, it
is not God, that works in us to will, contrare to Phil. 2:13. Thus homage
must be paid, and honor done unto the great Diana, Goddess Free will; She
must keep the keys of heaven and hell: She opens and God himself cannot
shut, and shuteth the door, and God cannot open it. She is master of the
everlasting Purposes and Decrees of God. She is sole administratrix and
dispensatrix of the great blessings of the Covenant, and of all the fruits of
Christ's death; so that, if she will, Christ shall not save one soul, for all
his travail, he shall lose all that were given him to save, and cannot help it,
there is no remedy, Free will is inexorable, and God Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, must do no violence to this Sovereign: They must not enter within his
Jurisdiction: Man's will must be Supreme, and above God himself. O strange! Do
these men pretend to light? Their Light, sure, must be hellish darkness. Will
not these men suffer God to have a power over their will, and grant him power
to take away and overcome their resistance? If not, their case is desperate; for
without the mighty power of God, bowing, inclineing, drawing, and efficaciously
moving the will to assent, and taking away that resistance and opposition, the
carnal heart, which is enmity to God, neither is nor will be subject to the Law
of God; and so will never yield: Woe to such as practically receive these
principles.

41. He alleigeth some Fathers, as confirming his opinion: but these all are
but three, and it were tedious to search for a few lines, in a whole book, that
we might examine what pertinency and faithfulness is in the allegation: And
beside, for any thing I see, the very words, which he has cited, prove not his
conclusion. Not one of them speak of a Substance within every man, which is
neither a part of soul, nor of body; not one of them call this, the Vehicle of
God, or Christ within every man. No man says* that the Word of God, by which
saving faith comes, is in every man. Not one of them faith, that the fire and
hammer of God, which melts and softeneth the heart, is in every son of Adam,
and was in all since the fall. Not one of them says, that there is, and ever
since the fall was, in every man, a real spiritual substance, distinct from the
soul and all its faculties, from which the spiritual birth, the new creature,
and the new man in the heart, has its original. And if they conclude not this,
what can they say for him? Though they should seem to speak for an Universal
Gospel, or word without, (which yet they do not) this will not prove an
universal grace within, and that common to all, since Adam fell. So that this
Quaker is at much pains (if he transcribed not those few sayings out of some
Jesuit or Arminian Author) to no purpose. And further, as to some Fathers, who
lived before the Pelagian heresy arose, it is observed by some, that they so
put on Christ, as not fully to have put off Plato; and therefore, imagined that
some living (...), i. e. according to the dictats of right reason, before the
Incarnation, might be saved without faith in Christ. See Casaubon Exerc. 1.
against Baronius: But the Gospel teaches us no such thing.

CHAP. XI Of the necessity of this Light to Salvation.
1. WE told above Chap. IX.. 2. how this Quaker laid forth his new doctrine, in
three Propositions; the first whereof we examined Chap. IX. the second Chap. X.
Now the third should come under our consideration, which, as he did word it
Page 79. was concerning an Universal Gospel, (for our Quakers are great
universalists) for these are the words thereof. That God does by this light and
seed, invite, call, reprove and exhort all and every man, and contendeth, as it
were, with them, in order to salvation: If this be received, and not resisted,
it works the salvation of all, even of these who never heard of Adam's fall,
nor of Christ's coming, because it makes them sensible of their misery, and
inwardly makes them partakers of Christ^s sufferings; and being partakers of
his resurrection, are made pure and just, etc. Thus is clearly pointed forth an
Universal Gospel, which indeed is no Gospel, or at least not that Gospel, which
we have revealed to us in the word of God. And by this doctrine, the whole
Gospel, revealed to us in the word, is wholly useless or unnecessary: So that
by this one Proposition, the whole Gospel of the grace of God is made null and
void; and the great blessing of a preached Gospel, and the rich advantage of
the Gentiles, in the days of the New Test. and under the dispensations
thereof, beyond what they were capable of, in the days of the Old Test. is
undervalued, yea and annihilated; and all the boasting, rejoicing and glorying
of the Apostle, in his being made instrumental in preaching of this Gospel to
the Gentiles, and in suffering so much upon the account thereof, Romans 1:1, 5,
14, 15, 16. and 11:13. and 15:15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24, 29. 1 Cor. 1:17. and
2, 3, 4, 5. and 3:9, 10. and 4:1, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and 9:16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and 15:1, 2, 3. etc. 2 Cor. 1:4 -- 13. and 2:13, 14, 15,
16, 17. and 3. throughout, and 4:1 -- 15. and 5:18, 19, 20, 21. and 6:1 -- 11.
with other places innumerable, made his folly and vainity, and a glorying in a
thing of naught. O what desperado's must these Quakers be, who thus undervalue
and trample upon the riches of the wisdom and grace of God, and instead of the
true Gospel, give us pure Paganism?

2. After his prosecution and confirmation (such as it was) of the two first
propositions, we exp^cted some proof and confirmation of this Third
proposition* but in stead thereof, we have Page 106. a distinct proposition put
in its place, which is thus worded. The third proposition is, That by this
Grace, Light and Seed, God works the salvation of all, and that by this, they
are made partakers of the benefit of Christ's death, and of salvation acquired
by him. And this Proposition he devideth in two Page 107. The first part
thereof he says, is That they, to whom the Gospel is preached, are not saved,
but by the inward operations of this light and grace. The second is, That by
the operations hereof the most part of such, as never had the outward Gospel
preached unto them, and were ignorant of the history of Christ, were saved, and
some such now may be saved. Why he did supercede the direct probation of that,
which was his first third proposition, I know not: Possibly he thought, that it
was sufficiently confirmed by what he said, in confirmation of the first and
second. And if so, I suppose the Reader will see, by what I have replied, its
manifest untruth and falsehood.

3. But as concerning his last third Proposition, which he divides in two, we
shall examine it, in its parts: And in this Chapter, we shall consider what he
says on the first part, referring the examination of the second part, unto
the next Chapter.

4. As to what concerns the operations of this Light, whereof he talks,
before I come to a particular examination of what he speaks here thereof, I
must turn a little back, and consider somethings, that remain to be examined
of what he was pleased to set down, for clearing the question (as he said,) and
explaining his meaning in these Propositions, which seem to relate to what he
is here about to prove; lest he blame me, for passing over any thing, he was
pleased to say, for clearing of his meaning. I must therefore turn back to Page
90. of his Apology. 17. where he tells us, he must speak somethings of the way,
how this seed works in the hearts of men, and this he says, he the rather
does, that it may thereby appear, how they ascribe all their salvation, unto
the Grace and Spirit of God; and differ from Pelagians and Arminians. In this
design, if he be in case to effectuate the thing, I cannot but commend him;
and because I am loath to Father any more upon them, then their expressions
give me just ground, I shall the more narrowly take notice of what he says.

5. To this question, If equal and sufficient grace be given to all, must not
the cause, why one is saved and another not, be in man, who uses grace well,
when the other does not? This is a question, which, I confess, I see not, how
any Pelagian, Arminian, Jesuit or Quaker can so answer, as to ascribe the
salvation of man, unto the pure Grace and Spirit of God. Let us see what he
answers, Grace (sais he) and light granted to all is sufficient to save all,
and of its own nature will save all, and contendeth with all, and operateth so
as it may save all. He who resists, is the cause of his own damnation; who
resists not, it becomes his salvation: In him that is saved, the work is of
grace, not of man; and that which is man's, is rather a passion, than an action.
-- The first progress is not by cooperating, but by not opposeing or
counter-working. Moreover we believe (says he) that in that special time of
every man's visitation, as man of himself is wholly impotent for working with
grace; so neither can he make the least progress out of his natural state, till
grace lay hold on him. So that it is possible for him to suffer and not resist,
as it is also possible for many to resist. But this answer is not
satisfactory: For (1.) By what Scripture it can be asserted, that the Spirit of
God, or his Grace, is given to all, and that in a measure sufficient to save
all; even as well to such as are without the Visible Church, and live in
heathenisme, as to such as are within the visible Church, and are actual
believers. I am yet to learn. (2.) what means he by that sufficient to save
all? A thing may be said to be sufficient for such an end or work, either
Absolutely, or only in a certain respect: That which is absolutely sufficient
is ^ha^ which alone, without the concurrence of any other thing, can effectuate
or attain that end, unto which it is said to be sufficient: That which is only
sufficient in a certain respect, or in its own place and order, is that which
alone can never attain or effectuat the end; but only in so far as its own
sphere can reach; and so it is only sufficient in its own kind, and no more;
it can help so far but no further. (3.) The Jesuits, I know, with their
foreman Molina, make much of the distinction of grace, into that which is only
Sufficient, and that which is effectual or efficacious: and with them the
Arminians join themselves, in the asserting of this distinction, and in the
explication thereof: other Papists also, such as the late Thomists, and
Iansenists, do use this distinction, but diversely explained, and both in a way
far different from the way of the Molinists, and Arminians. Now because our
Quaker, in this matter, so far as I see, joineth with the Jesuits and
Arminians; and is not pleased to give us his plain and full meaning, we must
see what way these Jesuits and Arminians explain this matter, that we may
thereb^ come to understand his meaning the better. The Jesuits foreman Molina
will have that called sufficient grace, which alone, without any more on God's
part, can produce the effect; so that thereby alone, man may be wrought up to
Faith and Conversion, if he will; and this Quaker ordinarily says, if he do
not resist, which is one and the same thing upon the matter. This Sufficient
Grace and Help, is said to be given as well to such as shall never be
converted, as to such as shall be converted; and this says our Quaker also.
This Sufficient Grace is with them distinguished into that which is Effectual,
when the effect and work follows; and that which is Ineffectual, when the
effect and work follows not. So that the difference betwixt Sufficient and
Effectual grace is only taken from the Effect, and this effect does wholly
depend upon Man's will; and man's will makes this difference, or makes this
sufficient grace, become Effectual, or ineffectual, and nothing else; for there
is nothing in that grace, which is called Effectual, more then in that which is
Sufficient; Sufficient grace being, upon God's part, absolutely sufficient to
work the effect, if man will be tractable, and not resist, but concur and
comply therewith, without any further addition of grace, yea and without any
other requisite, beside the actual consent of man; and no more can be said of
that grace, which is called Effectual. And thus all the difference is from the
Event, and the Event does wholly depend upon man; so that when the same measure
of Sufficient Grace is given to two persons, the one believes, because he
willingly consents, the other believes not because he will not comply, but
resist: yea they tell us, that it may so fall out, that he who believes not,
may have a greater measure of that Sufficient Grace, then he who believed; and
this man's will was better natured, and more pliable, then the will of the
other; and he complied because he would, when he might, had he pleased,
refused, and not have been converted, not only in sensu diviso, as they speak,
but even in sensu composito. With these the Arminians do wholly agree, upon the
matter; for they say, that Sufficient grace is the same with Effectual, only
distinguished by the effects following the one, and not the other, through man's
free will consenting, when the other put a bar in the way. They will not have
the Efficacy of grace placed in any omnipotent manner of its operation, nor in
the determination of the will of man thereby, but in its obtaining the effect
through man's not resisting, when he might resist if he pleased; so that of two,
having the same measure of sufficient grace, (then which no more is requisite,
on God's part, for effectuating the work) the one believes, because he does
put no bar in the way; the other believes not, because he resists, and does
put a bar in the way. (4.) Hence it is manifest, why this answer of the Quaker,
who takes part with Jesuits and Arminians, cannot satisfy: to wit, because
all the actual efficacy of grace is made to depend on man's will; for, as we
saw, the same Sufficient Grace, that is bestowed upon two Persons, can of it
self produce the actual conversion of neither, but must leave both to their
free liberty and choice; and one believes, not properly and immediately by the
power and efficacy of this grace, even suppose it were in a greater measure,
(for then it should work the same effect in both,) but because his will did
freely of its own accord, consent and yield, when it might have done otherwise,
even in sensu composito, as they speak; and the other believes not, because he
opposes and resists, when he might, had he so thought good, have yielded. If
our Quaker should run to the foreseen congruity and contemperation of the call
of God with Free will, which Bellarmin and Vasques devise, to alleviat the
matter, it will be of no advantage: for first, this Scientia Media, by which
they imagine God to foresee what will be, in such and such cases, is
groundless; and Next, at the long run, the crown is put upon Man, and not upon
the Grace of God; for this Grace, tha^ becomes congruous, as coming in a good
day, when the man is in a good mood, and pleasant disposition, works no more,
as to it self, then it did, upon another, whom it found not in so good a
temper, but worse disposed; so that man may thank his good disposition, that
the grace of God was Congruous, and so Effectual; and not incongruous, and so
Ineffectual. So that Effectual Grace and Sufficient Grace is still the same,
Physically, and as to its real entity; and all the difference is from man's good
or evil disposition, whose evil disposition can make a Greater measure of grace
Ineffectual, and good disposition can make a Lesser measure Effectual, if it
come in its congruous season. From whence we see, it is clear as the sun, that
man's Free Will, and not the Grace of God, according to our Quakers, is to be
praised for Faith, Repentance, and Conversion; and man's free consent makes
that grace Effectual, which otherwise would have been Ineffectual; and his
Opposition or Resistance makes that grace Ineffectual, which otherwise might
have been Effectual. And thus, their Sufficient grace is, with them, absolutely
sufficient upon God's part, and all its Efficacy and Effectualness depends
upon, and has its being from, man's free Consent. Will this Quaker, or any of
his Masters, the Molinists, or Arminians say, that beside that Sufficient
Grace, which is made common to all, there is necessarily required a further
work of Preveening Grace upon the will of man, physically determining the same,
and certainly and efficaciously effectuating the actual consent thereof, and
removing or overcoming its Opposition, or Resistance? As for the Gratia
Cooperans, which they say, he who believes and complieth with the call, has,
and which the other, who resists, wants, it does not help them; for it is
also made to depend wholly upon man's Consent; so that God cooperateth, because
the man consents; and cooperateth not in the other, because he resists; and
it is made the same upon the matter with Sufficient Preventing Grace, only now
having a new denomination, because of its cooperating with man's will, which
goes before, and upon which it depends. I know, the Arminians say, that God
works upon the will, granting to it a Supernatural Power, to obey and yield;
but yet they will not grant, that this grace shall determine the will, and
certainly and efficaciously bow, and incline the will to consent: for the will
must still retain its power to obey, or not, as it pleases; and all the work
of grace upon the will must remain resistible; and be nothing but Moral
Swasion; so that when Antecedent and Preveening Grace has done all it can do,
it may so fall out, that no conversion shall follow; so that conversion is
still contingent and uncertain, (though not in respect of the foreknowledg of
God, yet) in respect of its dependence upon that cause, and does not follow
necessitate causae, five consequentis; because for all that grace, man was
always free to resist; and the grace, ( Preventing, I mean, and Antecedent)
granted to him that resists, was equal to that, which was granted, to him
that yields: And therefore, with them, there is no grace granted, that
Effectually or Efficaciously and Certainly takes away the wills resistance,
and causes it infallibly to bow and yield; otherwise their Sufficient grace
should not be simply, and absolutely sufficient, but only so far, and in its own
kind. And seeing they deny any concession of more Prevening and Antecedent
Grace, then what is purely sufficient, as all Papists must do, who will follow
the Council of Trent. Sess. 6.. can. 4. and 5. It is undeniable, that with
them, and our Quakers, who follow them, the Efficacy of Grace is from man, and
man must thank himself and his own Free Will, that he is saved, if not wholly,
because of cooperating grace, which is yielded to, yet principally. (5.) So
that though he who resists is clearly guilty of his own damnation; yet that
Grace, which is only Sufficient, cannot be truly and simply called that man's
Salvation, who resists not; but his salvation must principally, or rather
only, be ascribed to himself, for that Sufficient grace did no more upon its
part to him, who resists not, than it did to him, who resists; and it has
no more Influence or Efficacy, as from it self, upon the one, than upon the
other. It cannot then be said, that the Salvation of him, that is saved, is
merely of grace, and not of himself; seeing he and not grace made the
difference, and made Sufficient grace become Effectual. (6.) Nor is it true,
that Man is wholly passive, with our Quakers; for the man's actual consent is
requisite, and his non-resistance is rather an Action than a Passion, as it is
in the will; for not only the will must positively will this non-resistance;
but this non-resistance in the will is a positive yielding: for, in Scripture
construction, a suspension of actual consent is a resistance, and a
non-yeelding. (7.) Hence we see, that it is all one thing, whether the first
progress (as he speaks) be by cooperating, or only by not counterworking; for
whatever way we name it, the will is positively acting: when the will yields,
it does it willingly, and when it does not repugne nor resist, it yields;
non-resistance is a kind of consenting. But whatever we call it, it is,
according to the Quakers, with the Jesuits or Molinists, and Arminians; (with
whom we may join as to this, the Lutherans) that upon which depends the
efficacy of grace; and it self is not the proper Effect of grace, because they
will not grant, that God, whatever way he work upon the will, does, by his
Preventing and Antecedent grace, produce and infallibly effectuate this
Non-resistance, or Consent; or that he does more by this Grace; to produce and
effectuate this non-resisting in him that yields, than in him that yields
not. (8.) Though the man can make no progress out of his natural state, until
grace lay hold upon him (as sufficient grace, in the judgment of Quakers and
Arminians lays hold on all) he can and may resist; and all that grace of God
can cause no progress, till the man, of his own Free accord and good will,
yield and lay aside his resistance: And this yielding, or laying aside of the
resisting humore, is not caused by grace; because the same measure, yea a
greater measure, of the same grace, could not cause it, in another, who would
continue in his unwillingness and resistance. (9.) Though it be possible for
man, in that case, to suffer, and not resist, because it is possible with
Quakers, Jesuits and Arminians, that Lord Free will shall be good natured and
well disposed; yet all the grace of God cannot make it certain and infallible;
for Grace, must not enter within the Wills Jurisdiction, but stand cap in hand,
without doors: Lord Free will must not be encroached upon. (10.) One thing
more, I would desire to know of this Quaker, what he means properly by this
Sufficient grace? Hitherto he has given us big words; but yet, upon the matter,
nothing but the mere Light of Nature, or some common gifts and favoures,
wherein he is worse, then some Arminians, Pelagians and Jesuits; who will
grant the necessity of the outward preaching and dispensation of the Gospel,
which this our Quaker plainly slighteth and undervalueth. But among the^ all,
where is that grace of God, that effectually draws, teaches and causes the
soul to come and consent? where is that heart of flesh, etc. Ier. 31:33, 34.
and 32:39, 40. Ezech. 11:19, 20. and 36:26, 27. Ioh. 6* 44, 45. Phil. 2:13.
Ephesians. 1:18, 19. 2 These. 1:11. 2 Pet. 1:3. Psalm. 119:36. 1 King. 8: verse. 37. ^
These. 5:23. 1 Cor. 3:5, 6. 2 Timothy 2:25. Col. 1:12.13. It seems all our
prayers must be made to Lord Free will; for that is the supreme Master of all,
if the doctrine of our Quakers, and their Masters the Jesuits and Arminians,
be true.

6. Next the says, That though our nature be corrupt and polluted and prone to
all evil; yet grace can work upon it, as fire can make iron soft. But can grace
change the will, with him? Can grace work upon it immediately, and cause it bow
willingly and consent? Why does he not say this? No Arminian, Pelagian,
Socinian nor Jesuit will say, that grace cannot work upon nature, He adds,
as iron removed from the fire, returns to its old hardness; so the heart of
man, when it resists, or recedeth from grace, returns to its old condition.
And will not Arminia^s say the same? Is not this manifest pleading for the
Apostasy of the saints? It seems then, grace can make some change upon
nature, but cannot alter it; as fire, though it can make iron warm and soft,
yet it cannot change the iron; so, for all that grace can do, corrupt nature
shall remain corrupt nature still, though a little softened and mollified: is
this all that grace does? Where is then the new heart? and where is the heart
of flesh, that grace works? He says, the ^eart of man returns to its old
condition, when it resists. But does not grace take away this resistance? It
would seem then, that, at the first, the heart resists not; and how can this
be, seeing the heart naturally is prone to all evil, yea is enmity against God,
and is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be?

7. He adduceth Page 91. some similitudes, which may serve indeed to illustrate
what is already confirmed; but are of no use to confirm any thing, that is in
question: Yet let us see, what the matter is. He compares a man in his natural
state to one, that is very sick. Which already discovers the man's vanity, and
d^clarth his simile to be a dissimile; for man, in his natural state, should be
compared rather to one that is dead; for the Scripture does so point him out
Ioh. 6:53, 57, and 5:21, 24, 25. Ephesians 2:1, 5. and so is he indeed. What would
he say more? He compares God to a Physician, that puts the Physic in the
sick man's mouth; and lays him on his bed; and if the sick man will but be
passive, the physic will work; but if he be unwilling, and rise up, and eat
what he should not eat, it cannot work because he hinders its operation, and
so though the physic of its own nature be wholesome, and tend to health; yet
it proves deadly to that man, and he is the cause of his own death: and yet
if he had been quiet and passive, the physic had wrought; and he could not
have said, that he healed himself, but that the physic did it. Ans. (1.)
Physic cannot work upon a dead man, but must have some strength of Nature
concurring and cooperating? How agrees this simile with his own doctrine? He
told us before, that in the first progress man does not co-operat, and yet here
nature must cooperate, or nothing will be done (2.) Bodily physic works
only upon the body and humors, but reaches not the will of the man; but the
soul humors lie most in the will; and grace, that would cure these, must work
upon the will; for till the will be cured, the man is never cured. So that (3.)
This simile does more sufficiently demonstrate him to be a Pelagian, Arminian
and Jesuit, than any thing, he has yet said; for let the physician give what
physic he will, the patients will is wholly at liberty; so let God work what
he will, and employ all his grace, the man's will is at freedom; and so at
freedom, that all that God can do shall not avail; the man will, if he be ill
disposed, hinder the physic to work; as the patient may do, in the similitude.
(4.) Though the man cannot properly say, that he purged away his own humors,
because the physic did that; yet he was truly the concurring cause of his
own health, and may thank himself therefore: For had he been so ill disposed
as his neighbor, all the physic should not have saved his life, more than it
saved his neighbors, who hindered its operation. (5.) Have we not here enough
to Demonstrate to us, how devoted the Quakers are unto Lord Free will; And how,
according to them, Christ and the grace of God must be beholden to Free will,
for every soul, that is saved; and must come pray and beseech Free will, to be
good, and quiet, that grace may work, and Christ may not miss his errand. O
desperate doctrine! O proud man! Our Salvation then is not to be referred unto
the Power of God, contrare to what Christ says, Mat. 19:26.

8. His next simile is of persons lying in a deep cave, where their senses are
stupefied, so as they are scarce sensible of their own misery. But neither does
this simile come home: for men an^ women naturally are dead: and though they
cannot but feel something of their misery; Yet are utter strangers to the rise
thereof, and to the greatest and most special part of their misery. I do not
think (says he) that any of them, by laboring to deliver themselves, can move
God to compassionate their case, and send help, as seeing them willing to be
saved, and doing all they can, as say the Pelagians, Socinians and
Semipelagians: nor do I imagine, that the deliverer sets a ladder to the
bottom of the cave, saying, if any will be delivered, let him use his own
strength and come up upon the ladder, as say the Jesuits and Arminians. Ans.
The man would feign wash his face, that he might appear to be neither Pelagian,
nor Semipelagian, nor Socinian, nor Arminian, nor Jesuit; but he has appeared
already so deeply dyed in their errors, that his labor is in vain; for when
he has said so much of a Sufficient Grace common to all, say what he will, he
shall never rid himself of that foul company: and when all the explication, or
discovery of the nature of that Sufficient Grace, issues in what is merely
Natural, as we have seen, he is but beating the air, in laboring thus to
cheat his Reader. And I would feign know, what he will do with his former
doctrine concerning the Talents? And what does his Light within, his Christ and
all serve for now? I pray him, the next time he writes, to reconcile these.
But how proposes he the case? I suppose (says he) the Redeemer comes at
certain times, and manifestly declares unto them, what and how great their
misery is, if they remain in that place, yea and impresseth upon them a
certain sense of their misery and not only so, but apprehends them, draws
them out, and plucketh them up, that he may bring them out of their misery; and
if they resist not, they will be saved. Ans. (1.) The Lord's coming at certain
times to convince all and every man of his misery, in reference to his
salvation, and delivery, is but a dream for Paul tells the people of Athens,
Act. 17:30. that God winked at the times of ignorance, but now commands all
men every where to repent. (2.) It is also a groundless imagination to think,
that God impresseth upon every man breathing a sense of his misery. (3.) If God
draw them up, and pluck them out of that pit, they must be out of it, whether
they resist or not: Or does he imagine, that God by the Sufficient Grace, which
he bestows, plucketh them only half up, and, when they begin to resist and
spurn, lets them fall again, that they may perish in the pit? But how or
what way does God thus pluck all men half out of the pit? I wish he would
explain this, and then we should see, whether his hands be clean of
Pelagianisme, etc. or not. (4.) Though he will not say, that he is a Pelagian,
or Semipelagian, or Socinian, or Arminian, or Jesuit; yet he must put the
crown of Salvation on Free wills head, and sing praises to Free will, that was
so good and kind, as not to spurn and resist. But whence came this Non
resistance? Not from the arm of him, that was pulling them up, but from their
own innate kind and gentle disposition, he must say; Then glory and thanks
must be given to this kind disposition, that the man is saved, outright, and
brought fully out of the pit: for what grace did, was but half work, and a
common thing, that others, who are lying in the pit, met with, as well as he.
And yet this is the man, that would make us believe, that he is neither
Pelagian, nor Semipelagian, not Arminian, etc. but his speech bewrays him to
be that, and worse: For wherein does his doctrine differ from all the Papists,
who are this day against the Iansenists, upon this account, that these assert
Christ's grace, to be adjutorium quo, that is, such help as makes the man to
will; and so effectuateth the actual will and consent?

9. He obviateth and Objection Page 92. It might be objected, that grace should
hereby be frustrated; And indeed grace is at man's devotion, by his opinion; for
if man will not, grace shall never save a soul, for grace cannot change the
Will, nor come near to its Territory: And man, being always left at his
natural corrupt liberty, and his corrupt nature being enmity to God, and all
the ways of God; how is it imaginable, that any one soul can be saved? Thus
the great exalters of Universal Grace, give us, in end, no grace at all, but
such, as cannot save. What says he to this? He says, grace is not frustate,
because God gets his glory. But had not God gotten glory, though this grace,
that makes Salvation (with this Quaker) possible, had never been heard of? Had
not God gotten the glory of his justice, though never one of Adams sons had
been saved? He told us before Page 90. that grace of its own nature will save
all, and works with every one that it may save them. And as to this, which is
its native and proper design and end, it can be frustrated by man's
refractariness; and so grace attaineth nothing of its proper end, but as man
will. What he speaks of the Suns hardening clay, and softening wax, is but a
further confirmation of what we say, of this Quaker, to wit, that as the Sun
can never soften clay, so, with this Quaker, all the grace in heaven shall
never soften a man's heart, till man, of himself, without the grace of God, lay
aside his hardened disposition, and take on a new Nature, and become wax, that
the Sun of grace may melt him: Was ever Pelagius more a Pelagian, or Arminius,
more an Arminian, than is this man? Grace with him, is but a general common
thing, concurring with a general Influence, as is the influence of the sun,
causing the dunghill stinck, and the flowr to smell well; and as the nature of
the flowr is the immediate cause of the good smell, so man's good nature and
disposition is the immediate particular and proper cause of all the good that is
done. All which he confirms, in the close of that paragraph, saying, so the
Sun of righteousness shines upon every one, dureing the time of his
visitation, that they may bring forth good fruit, and send forth a good smell:
And by the rays hereof their hearts can be mollified and warmed; but if they
suffer that day to pass, the same sun does more harden them, as clay, etc. But
the Sun can never make a thistle bring forth grapes, or a carcass to smell as
a rose; so neither can the Sun of righteousness, by this Man's opinion, cause a
dead man live, or a rotten withered branch bring forth fruit: And the change of
the corrupt nature of man is not from the Sun of righteousness, but from
himself: and it lies at the man's own door, and is in his option, whether he
will bring forth fruit or not, let the sun shine, as it will. And further, let
him explain to me, How grace can properly harden a man. I know, that by
accident of man's corruption, abusing it, the man may thereby grow worse, but
this is not the proper work of grace: as the heat of the sun hardens the
clay, as natively and properly, as it causes the flower to smell fragrantly.
However we see clearly, what are this man's thoughts of grace: and let any tell
me, if ever a Pelagian, Semipelagian, Socinian, Arminian, or Jesuit, spoke
more to the undervalueing and disparagment of the grace of God?

10. Finally he tells us,. 18. that he acknowledges, that God does operat in
some, in a certain special manner, in whom grace so far prevails, that
salvation necessarily follows, and God suffers them not to resist: This, I
confess, is the expression, that seems most orthodox, of any he has yet had,
in this matter; and yet Arminians will say the same. But is it not thus with
all, whom God effectually Draws and Converteth? Or are there any really
converted and saved without this special operation of grace? If it be not thus
with all, then all are not alike beholden to God and his free grace, for
Conversion: and out of what Scripture can we learn this? If it be thus with
all, and it must be so with all, who are truly converted; why does he trouble
us with his Sufficient Grace, which alone, without this special manner of
operation, never brought a soul to heaven? Was ever, or will ever, a man, that
is born in sin, be converted, till grace take away that resistance, which is in
him naturally? And did ever that sufficient grace alone do it? Yet (says he)
in that none did want that measure of grace, whereby they might be saved, they
are made justly inexcusable -- and they that perish, while they remember the
days of Visitation, wherein God by his Spirit and light did strive with them,
are forced to c^nfesse, that t^ere was a time, wherein the door of mercy stood
open, and that they are justly condemned. Ans. (1.) We see no ground for such a
day of Visitation, as he dreameth of, granted to all and every son of Adam, as
appears from what was said above, upon that h^ad. (2.) That no man shall have
an^ just ground of pleading his excuse, before God, when condemned, we nothing
doubt; though we feign no devices of our own, to this end. (3.) what sense or
remembrance of a day of Visitation, wherein mercies door stood open, Heathens,
and such as never heard of Christ, can have, we are yet to learn. (4.) Nor do
we understand, how that grace can absolutely be called Sufficient, which
removes not the greatest of impediments, that is to say, Man's Reluctance. But
Quakers, and their brethren, the Arminians and Jesuits, can imagine strange
things.

11. We come now to see, what way he proves the necessity of this light unto
salvation, or how such as hear the Gospel are saved by the operations of this
Light. Page 107. etc. He cites that Ioh. 3:3. except a man be born again, or
from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And what can this evince? That
the outward preaching of the Gospel alone, the literal knowledge of Christ, and
historical faith in him, does or can save a soul, we never said; though he
falsely insinuates so much, in the following words: Yet we see here the man's
wicked design; to wit, to cry up this grace, to the end he may destroy all the
Ordinances of Christ, which he has appointed as means, whereby he is pleased
to bring about this effect. We never said, that the external preaching of the
Gospel alone could save any; yet we know, that by the foolishness of preaching
the Lord saves such as believe 1 Cor. 1:21. And Paul tells us, that he begote
the Corinthians through the Gospel 1 Cor. 4:15. And he begote ( Philem. 10.)
Onesimus, in his bonds. The word, becoming ingraffed, is able to save souls
Iam. 1:21. But the maine thing here to be noticed, is that this can make
nothing for his point: we grant, that a man must be regenerated by the Grace
and Spirit of God; but we deny that any thing, call it as he will, that is
common to all the Heathen, is the Seed, or Cause of this new birth. It is
wholly from above, and of the Spirit, who is not given to all persons: only
such as were foreknown, are predestinate to be conform to the image of Christ,
and they who are thus predestined are effectually called Romans 8:29, 30. Se
also Ephesians. 1:4, 5. It is they only, who are given of the Father to Christ, who
will come to him Ioh. 6:37. and 17:19, 20; For they only partake of that, which
is obtained by Regeneration, viz. the New Creature Gal. 6:15. the New Man Ephesians
4:24. the Image of God Col. 3 10. the Divine Nature 2 Pet 1:4. the Spirit Gal:
5:17. the Inner man Rom 7:2^. the Law of the mind verse. 24. When he has
proven, that this Common and Sufficient Grace is able to effectuate this new
birth, then he shall speak something to the purpose: But neither he, nor his
Masters, the Pelagians, Jesuits nor Arminians, shall ever be able to do this.

12. What he says of the necessity of this New birth, and its preferableness
to any external knowledge of Christ, from 2 Cor. 5:16, 17. we shall not oppose:
only we must say, that it is wild and unreasonable, from that place to
infer, that the knowledge of Christ, is but like the Rudiments, that children
use, which must be laid aside, when they attain to more perfection; seeing the
knowledge of Christ is our life Ioh. 17:3. and he who knows him, knows the
Father Ioh. 10:^8. and 14:9, 10, 11, and 17:21. His granting that every
similitude halteth, does not much alleviate the matter; for he adds, that
such, as do not advance above the outward knowledge of Christ, shall never
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Unless by the outward knowledge of Christ, he
understand a mere literal, superficial, book-knowledge; which inded will nor
avail unto salvation; and yet the want of which makes the case of Heathens,
and such as are without the Church, desperate.

13. He tells us afterward Page 108. that the new creation, whereof the Apostle
speaks 2 Cor. 5:16, 17. proceeds from the operation of this Light and
Grace. And this is the thing, which he should prove; for we deny it, of the
Light and Grace, whereof he talks, and which he will have common to all men
breathing. His saying, that the Word, of which he spoke, is lively and
penetrating etc. Is no proof. For that word, is not a Word, or Seed, or Grace,
implanted in every man, as we showed. He adds, this seed is called, the
manifestation of the Spirit given to every man to profit; for it is written,
that by one Spirit, we are all baptized into one body. And Peter ascribes this
birth unto this seed 1 Pet. 1. being born again not of corruptible seed, etc.
Ans. (1.) If this Seed be the manifestation of the Spirit, whereof Paul
speaks 1 Cor. 12:7. It is not common to all the world; for the Apostle is
there speaking of the Church, whereof the Corinthians, (who were sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called saints 1 Cor. 1:1.) were a part; and being an homogeneal
part, are called the Body of Christ 1 Cor. 12:27. Where does this Quaker read,
in the Scriptures, that Heathens, and such as are without the Church, are
called the Body of Christ? (2.) Nay, if this seed be the manifestation of the
Spirit, it is so far from being common to all men, that it is not common to all
Church members: For these gifts (as they are called verse. 4.) were peculiar
only to some members of the Church, and given in order to Administrations and
Operations verse. 5, 6. and are particularly specified verse. 8, 9, 10. Therefore
says the Apostle verse. 11, 12. But all these works that one and the self
same Spirit, divideing to every man severally, as he will; for as the body is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many,
are one body; so also is Christ. Which is abundantly confirmed by the scope and
whole contexture of the discourse. (3.) The Apostle, for pressing of union and
concord, among the members of the Church of Corinth, with an edifying use of
their several gifts, says verse. 13. That by one Spirit all we are baptized
into one body, etc. that is, that by baptism, all the Professors of the Name
of Jesus, are outwardly made members of the visible body of Christ; and such,
as are really baptized by the Spirit and made partakers of his grace, are made
members of the invisible and mystical body of Christ; and so should lay forth
themselves, in the use of their gifts and graces, for the common good of the
whole body. And what, I pray, can this make for the Quakers point? Does the
Apostle say, that this is common to all such, as never were baptized, nor heard
thereof, or did never partake of the other Sacrament, imported by these words
made to drink etc. in the end of the verse, as some suppose? And if not, what
way will this Quaker hence prove, the operation of the new birth, by that which
is common to all men breathing? The Apostle, it is true, says here, whether
Jews or Gentiles: Yet he means only such, as are comprehended under we; that
is such, as were already members of the Church. Will this Quaker say, that all
and every man are baptized by the Spirit, and have bin made to drink into one
Spirit? Then I suppose, he will next say. That all must needs be saved. (4.) As
for that Word, or Seed, whereof Peter speaks, every one may see, that will
believe Peter himself Chap. 1. verse. last, that this word of the Lord, which is
the incorruptible seed, and which lives and abides for ever, is not any thing
abideing in all men; but is that, which is preached by the Gospel.

14. He proceeds and says, Though this seed, in the first manifestation, be
small, as a grain of mustard seed Mat 13:31, 32. and though it be hid in the
earthy part of man's heart, yet life and salvation is hid in it, and is revealed
according as they yield unto it: And in this seed the kingdom of heaven does
potentially lurk, to be produced, or rather exhibited, as it gets ground, is
nourished, and is not suffocated. Answ. (1.) Are not these noble proofs? Do the
Quakers think, that we are bound to take their groundless and inconsistent
assertions, for probations? (2.) How can this seed have its manifestation; and
yet be hid and latent? (3.) Has a natural, carnal, unregenerat and heathen
man, a spiritual part of an heart? or is the heart of every man partly earthly,
and partly heavenly? and why does this seed lie hid in the earthy part, and not
in the heavenly part of the heart? are these any thing but Quakers dreams, or
new Pelagian Notions, sufficiently confuted above? (4.) This must needs be a
hid salvation which is hid in a seed, which is hid in the earthy part of man's
heart, and that even in its first manifestation; What idle fancies do these men
feed upon? (5.) This hid salvation must be a wonderful salvation, for it is
revealed, according as these, in whom it is hid, yield unto it. But must it not
first work and appear in its operations, before men can yield to it? who can
yield to a latent lurking thing, that works not, nor appears not? (6.) If
Salvation be hid in this seed, the kingdom of heaven is more then potentially
in it; for we say not that an apple is hid in the seed, especially seeing he
says, that this kingdom of heaven is not produced, (as the seed can produce,
in its way, a tree and its fruit) but rather exhibited. (7.) This seed, he
says is already hid in the earthy part of man's heart: and if so, sure, it has
ground: how can he then say, that it is exhibited, as it gets ground? (8.)
The sum of all is pur^ Pelagianisme, or worse; viz. that there is something
in every man, which is sufficient of it self to Produce Grace and Glory, Life
and Salvation, if man will be but that well natured, as to suffer it to work,
and not suffocate it; so that there is no need either of the outward Preaching
of the Gospel, or of the inward Operation of the Spirit upon the mind (which
Pelagius at length did acknowledge) let be of the special Operation of the
Spirit of grace, renewing the will, and creating a new heart of flesh, etc.
This is doctrine for Pagans indeed.

15. But how is this proven? He cites Luke 17:20, 21. and would have n^
believe, that Christ says there, that the Kingdom of Heaven was in the
Pharisees. But judicious Calvin thinks, these words were spoken to the
disciples, upon occasion of that question of the Pharisees. And though we take
them as spoken to the Pharisees, it will not hence follow, that this Kingdom
was already in them, though the greek preposition (...) be used, which (as was
shown above) does not always carry this import, as might be evidenced by a
number of places, as Luke 14:1. Mark. 13:24. where it imports after. So Mat.
20:26. Luke 16:15. Romans 16:7. 1 Cor. 2:6 Romans 8:29. 1 These. 5:12. where it
signifies among: and he might have found it rendered in the margin of our
bibles among; so that the meaning is, the Kingdom of God, (which they imagined
would be some outwardly glorious and splendid thing, and therefore could not be
in and with Christ) was already near unto them, and among them: for thus he
clears it afterward verse. 22. saying unto his disciples, The days will come,
when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye shall
not see it. Whence we see, this could be nothing, that was within the carnal
part of the heart of every man. We reject therefore with detestation that which
he says afterward, to wit; That Jesus Christ, the hope of glory, who becomes
wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, is in the heart of every
man, in that little seed, as man is potentially in the embrio; as cursed
Pelagianisme, and doctrine for Pagans.

16. He tells us Page 109. That the Calvinists take grace to be a certain
irresistible power; and therefore reject this little seed of the Kingdom, and
despise it, as an contemptible insufficient thing, and unprofitable to
salvation. And why not, seeing Scripture speaks of Grace, as a Drawing and
Teaching of the Father; as a Quickening of the dead; as a giving of a New
heart; as Enlightening ^he mind spiritually and savingly to understand the
things of God, as a Renewing of the will, and by almighty power determining it,
to that which is good? See Ioh. 6:44, 45: Ezech. 36:26 27. and 11:19. Phil. 2:
verse. 13. Deuteronomy. 30:6. Ephesians. 1:17, 18, 19 Act. 26:18. 1 Cor. 2:10, 12: And as
for this Seed, which he talks of, the Calvinists, as he calls them, cannot
but reject it; and all that are not one with Pelagians, Jesuits and Arminians,
the sworn enemies of the grace of God. But to astonish his Reader, he adds,
That the Papists Socinians and Arminians, on the other hand, do extol nature
and Free will, and deny this little seed, and small manifestation of Light to
be that supernatural and savving grace of God* given to all unto salvation. But
poor man, he bewryeth his ignorance, not knowing, that Pelagius called the
posse, the grace of God; and that Arminians plead for a Supernatu^al grace
granted to all, whereby they have a power to do what is commanded; See Act.
Synod. Remonst. de gratia Page 14, 15. Praeterea minime quoque diffitemur,
Spiritum Sanctum immediate agere in voluntat^m* in illam vires infundendo, ac
potentiam supernaturalem ad credendum: and again, Si per gratiam habitualem
intelligere libeat potentiam supernaturalem, concessam voluntati, ad hoc ut
credere and been agere possit, eam libenter admittimus. Yea Page 62. they say,
that this power of believing is con^erred by irresistible grace, See their
Apology Page 117. b. Let this Quaker now tell me, wherein he d^ffereth from the
Arminians? Does not he and they conspire to put the crown of salvation on man's
head, that man may have all the praise of willing and doing, while as God gave
to all in common a power to will and to do, by which all might, if they would,
believe and be saved, and which could do no more; and thus we need not notice
what he adds further there, to this purpose; only I observe his sarcastical
scoff, at the Calvinists, as he calls them, wherein he bewrays much
ignorance, or malice, or both: For it is most false, that they cry up such a
Savior, as repareth little or nothing within, and gives ground of certanety
of Salvation to such as live in sins. I value not his commendations of this
Light, being all founded on pure ignorance and presumption; though he
blasphemously Page 110. misapply these Scriptures Ioh. 3: verse. 20. Psalm.
1^8:22. Mat. 21:42. Mark 12:10. Luke 20:17. Act. 4:11. as speaking of his
Pelagian dream. Nor do I regard his saying from experience, that that stone,
which the builders rejected, is become the head of the corner; though he,
taking Gods blessed name in vain, ascribes, upon this account, glory to God;
for his delusions are no ground of our faith, nor confirmations to be regarded
by us. And whereas he boasts of their being sent forth, as the first fruits
unto God, in the day, wherein he is to arise and contend with the nations, to
preach this everlasting Gospel; he but foameth out his own shame; for we have
seen already what a Heathenish Gospel this is, which he preaches. Nor do I
take any notice of this man's undervalueing of all preachers, that are not of
his mind, this being the usual strain of all broachers of pernicious
doctrine, to fill the minds of the less knowing, of whom they think to make a
prey, with prejudices against the Faithful assertors, and maintainers of truth.
What he adds further Page 110. in commendation of themselves, is but a
proclamation of his pride and vain glory. And that sum of the Gospel, which
the Quakers preach, repeated so often Page 110. and 111. to wit, That they
call, request, and invite all, to turn in unto the Light within them, and
believe in Christ, as he is in them, is enough, and more then enough, to make
all wise men abhore their doctrine, and all that love their souls to keep far
from them; seeing, by what we have said, it is apparent, what this Christ within
every man is, and what is this Light, to which he would have all turning in; to
wit, nothing but Pelagian or rather Heathenish darkness, which overturneth the
Gospel, and its whole administration; for it is but that which every man's
conscience can teach: and what the conscience of an Hannibal, Caesar, Catalin,
yea or of the most polished heathen, can teach of that Salvation, Light, Life
and Immortality, which is brought to light by the Gospel, who but Quakers can
imagine? And though this conscience even of a natural heathen wakened, and
armed by God in Justice, would make them tremble, as Quakers do, as he says;
yet this will not prove, that it could inform them of the way of salvation by
a crucified Christ, without ever hearing of the same preached; as he ignorantly
imagines. And we deny not, that to be a most sure truth, which Paul says 2
Cor. 13:5. but see not of what advantage it can be to him. And this is all
which we have for probation of the first part of his Position.

CHAP. XII. Of the Salvation of Heathens without hearing the Gospel.
1. THe second part of this Quakers last Assertion, is set down and prosecuted.
25. Page 111. It is this in short, That by the working of this light and feed,
some have been saved, and may yet be saved, who never heard* or shall hear of
Christ, or the Gospel externally preached. And this must be true with this
Quaker, though the Apostle faith the contrary, Romans 10:14. How then shall they
call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe on him,
of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? v. 17.
So then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And though he
tell us Ephesians. 2:12. that the Gentiles in the flesh, who are called
uncircumcision -- were at that time without Christ, being aliens from the
Common wealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. And 1 Cor. 1:20, 21, 22, 23. -- That God
mad foolish the wisdom of this world; for after that, in the wisdom of God,
the world by wisdom knew not God it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching
to save them that believe: For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek
after wisdom: but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Greeks foolishness. And though Peter tell us Act. 4:12 That there is
not salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given
among men, whereby we must be saved.

2. The first Argument, whereby he would prove this, is deduced from some
things formerly asserted by him; and is thus set down Page 112. They, to whom
the Gospel, which is the power of God unto Salvation* is made manifest, may be
saved, what ever external knowledge they want. But this Gospel is preached in
every creature, under whom are comprehended even they, who want the outward
knowledge. Therefore, etc. Answ. (1.) This does not conclude that any such have
been, or shall be saved: a may be will not evince a shall be, (2.) The Major in
his sense is false, and nonsense, for it is made up of inconsistencies, to
wit, that ^he Gospel, which is the power of God, can be made manifest; and yet
such, to whom it is made manifest, may not hear of it. And the man, it seems,
was aware of this, and therefore used these sophistical and ambiguous words,
quacunque externa scientia careant, whatever outward knowledge they want. (3.)
The minor is false, as we cleared above, and vindicated that abused place of
Paul, Col 1:23. And the Gospel, whereof he speaks there, is a Gospel, which
was heard, and whereof Paul was a Minister, verse. 23. and was the word of God,
which he was commissionated to preach, verse. 25. the mystery, which was
formerly hid from ages and generations, verse. 26. and which he preached by
warning and teaching verse. 28. And as this could not be without the knowledge
of Christ, so it is certain, that Paul did not preach this to every creature,
for Chap. 2:1. he speaks of some, that had not yet seen his face in the flesh
See Beza on the place.

3. A maine argument he brings from Tit. 2:11. for the grace of God, that
brings salvation, has appeared unto all men. But that particle, all, does
not always carry an universal sense, as we manifested above Chap. VIII. And
until he prove, that it is thus universally to be taken here, he can prove
nothing. And whatever he think, who is not, it seems, very well acquanted
with the laws of disput, a negation is sufficient to elide a naked affirmation;
and he that affirms, must prove. Nor regard we his saying, that the
interpreting of this particle, as importing genera singulorum, is abusing of
the Scripture; or that this universal particle cannot be taken for an
indefinite; Seeing there are so many instances thereof in the N. T. as Mat.
4:33. and others formerly cited. And his grounding his opinion upon mistaken
and thus misinterpreted words and sentences, is not a founding of it upon
express Scripture; but upon abused and perverted Scripture. Let him consider,
what Beza (a man better acquanted with the Greek tongue, than he is) says in
his Annot. on 1 Timothy 2:1. where he tells us, that he has observed almost in
every page, that the universal particle is taken for an indefinite, and is used
to take away a difference, as Romans 1:16. it is used to take away the
difference, that was betwixt Jew and Gentile: and 1 Cor. 6:12. where it
removes the Jewish distinction of meats. And he tells us moreover, that this
manner of speaking is used among the Latins, as well as among the Greeks, as
by Cicero in orat. pro Roscio Amerino: Non omnem fr^gem, neque omnem arborem in
omni agro reperire possis. And by Virgil. Non o^nis fert omnia tellus. And as
for this passage of Paul to Titus, the context clears, that the universal is
to be here taken for an indefinite: For he was before speaking of Servants; and
here he shows, that the Gospel is revealed unto them, as well as to others,
to the end, they should know how to carry themselves, so as to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior, in all things. And if he read that Epistle, he
will find the universal particle, oftener than once, taken for an indefinite,
as Tit. 1:16. and 2:15. and 3:1, 2. And beside, what will all this make for his
point? He must prove, that it was thus, as well under the Law, as now it is
under the Gospel; and sure, no such thing can hence be made to appear; for
these universal particles, in this matter, do denote the largeness of the
extent of the Gospel administration, beyond what was under the Law, as we
observed and proved above: And in this same Epistle Chap. 1:3. he says, That
in due times, God manifested his word through preaching, which was committed
unto him. Out of which words also we learn, that this Gospel and word is
manifested through preaching of men, such as Paul, to the outward ears of
people, contrare to what this man imagines. And so, if this Gospel or Grace of
God, has appeared to every man, without exception, every man, without
exception of any, has outwardly heard the Gospel, preached by men, sent of God
to speak with an audible voice: Yet I suppose, this Quaker will blush to say,
that every man, all the world over, hears Gospel preachers, or men sent to
preach the Gospel, and has heard such since the beginning. And if he say not
this, and prove it not too, he must quite his Assertion, and laugh at his own
rididiculous folly and boldness, or rather weep over it. What he says Page
113. of our taking All for the lesser part, is both false, and Childish
pedantry in him; for we say, that it is taken in this matter indefinitly, and
so does neither import a greater nor a lesser number, or part; as when Christ
is said to have cured all diseases; though upon the matter, the number of
diseases he cured, being within the confines of Judea, for the most part, was
the far lesser part, in comparison of all the diseases, that were through the
whole world; yet we say not, that the particle all there denotes the lesser
number, but that it is taken indefinitly. I must also take notice here, that
when the Apostle only says, that the grace of God, that brings salvation
has appeared to all men, that is, was preached, and plainly declared and made
manifest in the Gospel administration, he dreameth of a saving grace given to
every man, and received by every man: and so what the Apostle speaks of
Outward grace, or of the Outward Dispensation of grace, he understands of
Inward grace, wrought and rooted in the heart. Finally, neither can he hence
prove, that ever any without the Church was or shall be really saved; for, as
we said, a possibility, or may be, will not infer a shall be, or must have
been. And will he say, that this grace; which teaches to live soberly,
righteously and godly, in this present world, has appeared to all heathens,
who never understood the right way of worshipping of God, in Christ, according
to his word? Whatever the light of nature might teach them darkly, concerning
Sobriety and Temperance, as to themselves; and concerning Righteousness in
their dealings with others; as also concerning the unreasonableness of their
Idolatry Act. 14:16, 17. and 1^.29. R^m. 1 20, 21, 23, 25, 28. Yet it could
never acquant them with the Instituted and Prescribed Worshipe of God, and with
true Gospel godliness, or with any essential and necessary part thereof.

4. Another argument, to prove this possibility of salvation to heathens, he
brings from Romans 5:18. Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men unto justification of life: And he will needs have all
men in the last part, to be of as large an extention, as it is in the first
part; little considering, that hereby, he shall not only prove a possibility of
salvation to all men (which is the thing he intends here) but also, that all
men are and shall be actually saved; for judgment came upon all the posterity
of Adam, not potentially only, but actually: and this Justification of life; is
actual and real justification, through the imputed righteousness of Christ,
which who ever has shall really obtain life. But he perverteth the words of
the Apostle, to evite this absurdity, when he frames his argument thus, If all
men received by Adam evil leading to damnation; then all men did also receive
benefit by Christ, leading to justification; while as the Apostle says, that
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; and Beza well shows, that it is
reatus or guilt, or judgment, that is here to be understood, as is clear from
verse. 16. for the judgment was by one to condemnation: and the free gift,
(which must also here be supplied from verse. 16) came upon all men unto
justification of life; So that it was not any thing, having a kind of tendency
or manuducency unto Condemnation, or Justification, which yet might fail; but
it was that which is necessarily attended with Condemnation in the one, and
Justification in the other; or rather was Condemnation and Justification it
self, as the Syriak version has it. But whatever this man imagines, the sense
and meaning of the place is clear, that as all, whom Adam represented, did by
his one Offense incur Condemnation; so all, whom the second Adam Christ Jesus
did represent, did by his Righteousness obtain Justification; as we cleared
above, on another occasion; and therefore need say no more to i^ now.

5. He cites to this same purpose Esai. 49* 6. Where Christ is said to be
given for a Light to the Gentiles: But its impertinency is obvious; for though
Christ be given for a light to the Gentiles, who under the Gospel dispensation,
are not excluded, as they were under the law; yet it will not follow, that all
such Gentiles, as never once hear of his name, or have this Gospel declared
unto them, may as well be saved, as such who are brought within the Church, and
have this light of the Gospel, which brings life and immortality with it,
shineing among them. And further, Christ becomes a light to the Gentiles, by
opening the blind eyes, by bringing out the prisoners from the prison, and
them that fit in darkness out of the prison house, as the parallel place Esai.
42 6.7. clears. And all this is done by preaching of the Gospel, as we see in
Paul's commission Act. 26:18. And as this same Prophet clears Esai. 61:1, 2,
3. Where Christ himself (as we see Luke 4:18.) by preaching good tidings unto
the me^k, binds up the broken hearted, and proclameth liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound* etc.

6. In the next place, he assayeth to prove, that some such have been really
saved, and he says, that to think otherwise is against all charity, and he
sees not how it can be made good. But our charity is not to be blind, but is
to be ruled by the word: And he should know, that he is now the affirmer, and
should prove what he asserteth. What says he to Act. 4:12? He answers. That
though outwardly they do not know, yet inwardly feeling his power and virtue,
they know inwardly his name really, redeeming them from sin and iniquity, and
so may be saved. But how proves he, that such as are without the Church and
Covenant, and hear not of Christ in the Gospel, and have no external knowledge,
can have any inward feeling of the power of Christ, as a Savior? And how can
he show to us, that this gloss does agree with, and not manifestly cross, the
scope of Peter, in that place? Both these I deny, and in this he goes further
than Vasques, and other Papists, who say that even heathens and such as have no
faith in Christ may get of his grace to do things morally good. See Estius also
in secund. sent. did. 41.. 3. His adding Page 114 that salvation is not in a
literal knowledge; is impertinent; for he should prove, that salvation is,
where there is no literal knowledge, nor means thereunto. His supposing, that
there can be a real inward and experimental knowledge of Christ, where there is
no outward or literal knowledge, is but a dream, which we cannot receive
without clear proof. His argument is a plain non-sequitur, If (says he) a
distinct and outward knowledge of Christ be necessary to me, before I receive
any benefit by him, then, by the rule of contraries, it will follow, that I
can incur no damage, unless I have a distinct knowledge of him. For when
capt^ves are in prison, and one offers to redeem them upon such and such
conditions, and he thinks good to make known the conditions to some, and not
to others; can any ra^ional man think, that because the ignorance of these
conditions is prejudicial to the redemption of some, that therefore these same
can be accounted no prisoners, until they hear of these conditions? Redemption,
which Christ brings with him, supposes persons already lying in bondage,
slavery and misery; and is not offered to persons, that are free at liberty.
But if the man will here understand that damage, which follows upon a
rejected Mediator, and the woe of Bethsaida above the woe of Tyrus and Sydon; and
the woe of Capernaum above the woe of the men of Sodom, I shall grant his
consequence to be good; though it be absurd and ridiculous, in a general sense.
His question, asking, why such as never heard of Christ's death and
resurrection cannot be saved, as well as such, as never heard of Adam's first
sin, can be damned therefore? Is no proof: And the answer is manifest,
because, all were naturally and foederally in Adam: But all are not so in
Christ: And it has pleased the Lord to appoint this way of salvation by faith
in Christ, which cannot be without knowledge of Christ, and the Lord has
thought it good to apply the benefits of Christ's death by bringing such, who
are to partake thereof, within the bond of the Covenant, within the visible
Church, and under the administrations of the Gospel; and so to join to the
Church such as should be saved Act. 2:47. Therefore the Lord says Esai 53:11.
-- by his knowledge (or by knowledge of him) shall my righteous servant
justify many. And the predestined ones are made partakers of the Redemption
purchased by Christ, according to the riches of God's grace, wherein he has
abounded toward them, in all wisdom and prudence: having made known unto them
the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in
himself Ephesians. 1:7, 8, 9. And if the will and good pleasure of God, so
ordaining matters, for the praise of the glory of his grace, will not satisfy
this Quaker, but he will frame a Gospel, out of his own brains, we cannot
help it; but must tell him, we will rather believe God, and submit to his wise
dispensations, than embrace the delusions of fantastical Quakers, who purpose
to overturne the whole Gospel of the grace of God, and destroy souls. His
simile, of medicine, curing such as know not whereof it is made, nor by whom,
is but a further evidence of his desperate design to destroy the Gospel: for
medicine will as well cure such as know nothing of its composition or Author,
as such as know both: And thus he would infer, that the Gospel is not more
necessary to the Salvation of souls, than the knowledge of the composi^ion and
Author of a me^icament is to its working on humors. But alas! the silly man
knows not the way of the Gospels worki^g on souls, but supposes it to be in
a physical manner, as medicine works on the humors of the body, wherein he
declares his intolerable folly and ignorance, beside his desperate design.

7. But he alleidgeth against us, the Instance of Infants and deaf persons; to
very little purpose, seeing, his question is of ^dult persons, and of such also
as have ears to hear: And as for Infants, we grant no salvation to such,
unless they be within the Covenant, and born within the visible Church; not to
all such either, that die in infancy, but to those only, who belong to the
election of grace: And the same we say of deaf persons. And we except both
these from the necessity of outwardly hearing the Gospel: And every exception
destroys not the Rule, but confirms it rather, in all cases not excepted.
His saying, that being within the Church and partaking of the Sacraments give
no certain title unto Salvation, is impertinent: for we say not that all such
as are within the Church, and partake of the Sacraments, shall cer^ainly be
saved; but only, that there is no salvation without the Church. We know, that
many are members of the Visible Church, who are not members of the Invisible
Church. But we know likewise, that none are members of the Invinsible Church
actually, who are not members also of the visible Church. His question Page
115. Why our charity does not extend to those without the Church, to whom the
hearing of the Gospel is impossible, a^ well as to such within the Church?
Receives a short answer; to wit: Because we have no ground; and Christian
charity must be ruled by the word of God, and not by the phancie of a deluded
Quaker. He multiplieth his Questions, instead of probations, according to the
usual manner of the Quakers; for he asks again, Is not one in China and
India as excusable, for not knowing that which he never heard, as a deaf man?
To which we answer* Yes: But we deny, that the one may be as well saved, as
the other; being within the Covenant and Church. Of Salvation, are we here
speaking, and not of persons being excusable or inexcusable. We know that to be
true; which Paul says Romans 2:12. As many as have sinned without Law, shall
also perish without Law. And we know, that albeit God will not challenge the
Indians, or men of China, who never had any possible opportunity of hearing the
Gospel, for ignorance and contempt of the same; yet they may and will perish,
being without the saving means of grace; and if he think otherwise, let him
go preach up the Light within among them, and not labor to blind our eyes,
that we man not see the sun, with his smoking snuff.

8. He has another proof from Act. 10:34. But how will he prove, that
Cornelius, conversing so much among the Jews, had no knowledge of the Messiah,
and of salvation through him; though he did not as yet know, that Jesus of
Nazareth was the true Messiah? Do we not find, that Peter clears up to him,
that great question, and tells him, how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
Holy Ghost and with power etc. And this Jesus of Nazareth Peter Preached unto
him, and told him, that to Him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his
name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, verse. 38 --
43. And by this instance, Peter was brought to understand, that now, under the
Gospel administration, in every nation, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him: so that the benefit of Christ the
Mediator was not now restricted to one Nation, as of old under the Law. Peter
had yet too much of that national prejudice, which the Jews had against the
Gentiles, sticking in him; and so thought, that all, except the Jews, were
always to remain as our casts, and to have no share or interest in the Gospel
blessings, and the good things of the Messiah; but now he is made to understand
the matter aright. Our Quaker may, if he will, read Calvin and Beza both upon
the place; and see his Imagination confuted.

9. Next he tells us, that Job was a perfect man, etc. and enquireth, who taught
him? How did he understand the fall of Adam? Out of which Scripture did he draw
all that excellent knowledge? And then answers, That it was this inward grace
that taught him. But all this is founded upon a very improbable conjecture, to
wit, That Job was coaetaneus with Moses, and so was without the Church, which
the Lord erected among the ^ewes: Whileas it is much more probable, that he
lived before the children of Israel were brought out of Egypt; and that for
this one reason, That in all this book, where so much is spoken by Job, and by
his friends, of God's power, and faithfulness, there is not one word of God's
delivering his people out of the furnace of Egypt; which would not have been
omitted, it being so apposite to what is there oftentimes handled, if so be it
had been done before this time. His questions then may easily be answered,
without that inward common grace, which he dreameth of; to wit, that God taught
Job, as he did other holy men before the giving of the Law; and that without
Scripture, which was not then written. His supposing thereafter Page 116. that
Job speaks of this light Chap. 24:13. is another of his fond imaginations.
What he says next of Job's friends, receives the same answer, that we gave
to what he said of Job, seeing the ground of the mistake is the same, in both,
and requires no new consideration.

10. Then he tells us, how Paul Romans 2. says, that the Gentiles did those
things, which are contained in the Law: and hence infers, that they feared
God and wrought righteousness. Ans. (1.) That the Gentiles were not without all
knowledge of what was just and unjust, honest and dishonest, is most certain;
for so much was remaining engraven in their hearts, that could not be delete:
and this was evidenced by their commanding and forbidding, by their Laws,
somethings commanded and forbidden by the Law of God, as appears by their
Laws against Theft, Adultery, Manslaughter, and the like; which yet was not
universal. It is in the original only thus, they do by nature the things of the
Law; And as Beza well observes, this differs from doing what the Law
commands, being a doing of what the Law does, that is commanding or
prohibiting what the Law commands or prohibiteth: And therefore is it added,
these, having not a Law, are a Law unto themselves. (2.) Hence it appears,
that it will not follow, that they therefore feared God, and wrought
righteousness; for the same Apostle tells us, Chap. 1:21. that when they knew
God, they glorified him not, as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Is this to fear God,
and work righteousness? And though hereby the Apostle evinceth the Gentiles to
be without excuse: Yet he tells us, Chap. 3:9. that he has proved both Jews
and Gentiles, that they are all under sin. And will this Quaker contradict the
Apostle; and say, it is not true, that the Gentiles are under sin, though the
Apostle has charged it home upon them; for they feared God and wrought
righteousness? This were indeed blasphemous boldness, suiteing only a Quaker.
But he thinks that verse. 13. confirms all; where Paul says, the doers of the
Law are justified. As if Paul were speaking that of the Gentiles, which is
spoken of the Jews, who heard the Law, which the Gentiles did not: And as if
Paul did hereby insinuat, that any man, Jew or Gentile, could be justified, as
a doer of the Law, that is, by his own obedience, which is diametrically
opposite to his whole disput and scope, in this part of the Epistle, and to his
conclusion set down Chap. 3:28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified
by faith, without the deeds of the Law. Verse. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the
Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. What shall we think of this
Quaker, who thus makes the Apostle contradict himself; and infers out of
the Apostles words perverted, the contrary of what the Apostle himself (who
knew the force of his own premises best) concludes? And what boldness, and
blasphemy is comparable to this? And withal he will be yet so bold as to tell
us, that nothing is more clear; and that the Apostle verse. 9, 10.11. does
confirm this doctrine; yea and Page 117. declare moreover, that unless we
suppose the Apostle to have spoken otherwise, then he thought, we may saifly
conclude, that those Gentiles were justified, and partakers of glory, honor
and peace; and that by their own works. O what miserable miscreants must these
men be, that dar thus expose the Apostle, yea the Spirit of God, speaking in
him, and by him, to open laughter, as proving and concluding contradictories,
and that by the same medium and premises, which is hardly supposable of a man
in his wits, and that knows what he says? His repetitions Page 117. I wave,
they being formerly confuted: and repititions being jejune probations, need not
be again examined. He doubts, whether we can prove, that all the Patriarchs,
and holy men before Moses, had any distinct knowledge either of Adams fall, or
of the coming of the Messiah, (for I see not what else he can understand by
his, vel hujus, vel illius, these being the only two things, spoken of by him
immediately before; and his following words confirm this.) And if he doubt
whether we can prove it, it is no great matter, if he doubt not himself of the
thing: And if he do doubt of the thing, Where is his charity to the Patriarchs
and Saints? What charity can this be, which is so large to Heathens, and so
straightened to the Saints of God? Can this be divine charity? No, it is a Pagans
charity, suting him, who would have us all turn Pagans. But seeing the Scripture
tells us, that they all obtained a good report by faith, which is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11:1, 2. And
that they all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, verse. 13. And
Christ himself tells us, that Abraham saw his day Ioh. 8:56. what needs us more
proof? These and the like passages satisfy us, concerning their knowing as
much, as was then requisite, in order to salvation. And that the Gentiles, who
never heard of Christ, know so much, is that which he should prove, and does it
not, nor never shall.

11. He tells us, that the Jews, even after David's days, who prophesied more
largely of Christ, than did others before, could not out of all these
prophecies discern Christ, when he came, Act. 3:17. 1 Cor. 2:8. Yea Mary
herself did not know, that her Son was about his Fathers work, when disputing
with the Doctors; and the Apostles, that long conversed with him, and saw his
miracles, did not believe, what belonged to his death and resurrection. Ans. Is
not this a wonderful proof, that the holy Patriarchs had no saving knowledge
of, and faith in the Messiah, who was to come, because the wicked Jews did
crucify him, when he came? Who would not simile at this? But David had many
clear prophecies of the Messiah, and yet they did not understand these? And
what then? Ergo they were saved without the understanding of these prophecies?
or therefore, others did not understand them, and savingly believe them? who
will receive any of these consequences? But mary her self understood not
somethings, not yet the Apostles. And what then? did they not understand so
much as was then revealed, and necessary to salvation? And did they not
understand after Information? Poor man, he goes far to fetch wa^er, to no
purpose. Will any thing here said bring the least relief unto his desperate
cause: and prove, that Heathens now, without the Church, can be saved without
the knowledge of Christ? Quakers can dream waking, I see.

12. But Page 118.. 27. he says, that several of the Gentiles, by this inward
light, were sensible of the damage, that came by Adam's fall. Answ. And what
then? were they also sensib^e of the advantage that came by Jesus Christ? and,
will all that are sensible of their damage, suffered by Adam's sin, be saved?
This is a wide door to salvation indeed; but the Scripture tells us no such
thing. His citeing of a ^aying of Plato, and another of Pithagoras, and a third
of Plotinus, and a fourth of we know not whom, whether truly or not, is
uncertain; not does he name the places, where they say so, that some, who might
be so curious, as to know the truth, might try; is to as good purpose, as if he
did thresh the water; for whatever apprehensions these Heathens had of the
misery of man, (and ^et a very small knowledge, and reason, considering what
was obvious to all their eyes, might soon have made them say all, that he
cites of them here, viz. that men's soul is fallen into a dark cave, where it
converseth with shadows. And that man wandereth in the earth, as a stranger
exiled from God: and that man's soul is like an extinct coal: and that the souls
wings are clipped, so as it cannot flee to God) He tells us nothing of their
apprehensions of a way of Redemption, out of that misery; and the knowledge of
this, we say, is necessary unto Salvation. Yes, in the following words he tells
us, that they also knew Christ, as a remedy to deliver them, though not under
that denomination. Then sure they had not this knowledge by Revelation. For
divine Revelation would have given the knowledge of Christ under the right
denomination; but by natures light: And if Natures Light will lead people to a
crucified Christ, we may burn the bible. But how proves he this? He tells us,
that Seneca Epist. 41. speaks of an holy Spirit, that is in us, that teaches
us, as we receive him. What is in this true or false, ^ cannot judge at
present, not having that book by me: only I must tell him, that the Scriptures
speak of no holy ghost in every man: And that the Holy Ghost, and Christ
Immanuel, God-man, is not one and the same: and that faith in Christ is
required unto salvation. And might no^ Seneca mean hereby Reason, which the
Scriptures tell us, is now corrupt and carnal and an enemy to the Gospel? Sure,
that passage he cites next of Cicero's, out of Lactan. Too long here to
translate and insert, is speaking of nothing, as the words clear, but of
Reason, and it is expressly called so, recta ratio, given to every man. Is this
the Quakers Gospel-Teacher, Savior, Christ and Redeemer? Why does he else
where seem to cry out against the Socinians? When here he cries up so much,
with them and with heathens, pure Reason. Is this the Holy Ghost* that acts,
leads, and guides them, and teaches them all their divinity? poor souls! Are
they so in love with paganism; that for its sake, they will renunce all
Christianity?

13. There is a mighty argument following, which must be noticed: it is this.
The Heathens call this (Reason, or I know not what) wisdom, and this is the
name, that is given to Christ in the Scriptures, Prove. 1:20. and 8, 9, 34. Ergo
what? Therefore the Heathens knew Christ. Is not this a noble argument, well
becoming such, as pretend to rare light and knowledge, and to nothing less,
then Revelations and Inspirations? It is no wonder, that they say, Christ is in
them, for they are possessours ^f wisdom, and Christ is called wisdom. Did he
never read, that the wisdom of this world is foolishness, and that the world by
wisdom knew not God? And was this Christ, because he is elsewhere called
wisdom? did he never read, that God would destroy the wisdom of the wise? and
is the meaning of this, that God would destroy Christ, because Christ is
somewhere called wisdom? What notions of men destracted, or rather judicially
given up of God, are these? Hence (says he further) such among the Gentiles,
as left that which was evil, and turned to that, which was good and justice,
were called Philosophers, that is, lovers of wisdom. But what if he be
mistaken, in the ground or reason of this name given or assumed? And whether he
be mistaken, or not, what can he make of it? Belike he would say, They were
lovers of Christ, for Christ is called wisdom. Is not this man a noble advocat
for Heathens, and worthy of his hire? Are not these all very strong arguments,
to prove that Heathens knew Christ, though not under that notion; and therefore
may be saved? But Phocilides (who knows where?) said, (says he) that that
was best wisdom, which was had by inspiration of God. And could not blind
nature have told him so much* Was this such an excellent piece of knowledge,
that it may truly be called saving? And was this the knowledge of Christ,
under some other denomination? Could not the devil say as much? And may he
therefore also be saved? What were this man's thoughts busied about, when he
wrote these things? was he dreaming; Or in a rapture of Quakerisme* or sunck
into his introversion, where he lost all humane Reason?

13. Then Page 119. he says he could produce many such. But to what purpose?
To prove, says he, that they knew Christ by his work working in them, by which
they were turned from unrighteousness to righteousness, and made lovers of his
power, and whereby they felt themselves delivered from evil. If this be the
conclusion, that he would pro^e, why has he not brought one testimony to this
end? what he has hithertill adduced, agrees as well with this conclusion, as
harp does with harrow. But the Ap^stle he adds says, they did show the work
of the law written in their hearts: and therefore as all were doers of the law;
so without doubt, they were justified. We spoke to this before; and this man is
tedious in his repetitions, for want of arguments? only I note, that I see now,
he concludes that all the Heathens were saved: for they were all (^ith him)
doers of the law; and that because, they had all the work of the law written in
their hearts; and so were all justified. Happy Heathens, if so. and if so, it
were better to be Heathens, than Christians; for all Christians are not
justified and saved, though they have the same Law written in their hearts,
which the Heathens had, and something more revealed to them in the Gospel. What
he cites in the words following out of Justin. Martyr, Clem. Alexand. and
Augustine. I am not in case at present to consider: only I see not, what
Augustines saying he read in some Platonicks books some words of Ioh. 1. can
evince; seeing there were many Platonicks in those days, who were not utter
strangers to what the Evangelists wrote, and they could transcribe words and
sentences, according to their own fancy: And what can follow from hence?
Supposes he, that the Platonicks spoke by the light within them, what the
Evangelists spoke as acted by the Infallible Spirit of God? Or that it was the
same Spirit acting both? Quakers, I see, are great supposers, but ill provers.
And as Bernard said of some, who laboring to prove Plato to be a Christian,
they proved themselves to be heathens; so we may say of this Quaker. I find
also that Casaubon, Exercit. ^. in Baron, cites out of that same lib. ^8. c.
47. August. de civit. Dei, out of which our Quaker here cites some words, as
for him, a sen^enc^ of a far contrary import, ^hewing us, that in no age, any
did belong to the spiritual Jerusalem, but such, to whom Christ was revealed:
And the said Casaub^n adds a good caveat as to other Fathers* speaking of
this matter, which our Quaker would do well to notice. And as for his Arabic
book (which who have ever seen, I know not) it is no Canonick Scripture to me.
And when this Iokdan (of whom that book speaks) lived, or where he was borne
and educated, he tells us not; and till he clear us in this, he says
nothing; for a man, trained up in Christianity in his infancy, may by
providence be cast in some Island, and so be separated from all company, and
enjoy Gods company, and be no heathen, but a Christian still: I think this is
not impossible.

15. In fine. 28. Page 120. resuming what he thinks (through a mistake) he has
sufficiently pro^ed, he tells us, that this is the Gospel, and the Christ, which
is revealed in them, and which they must preach. Whereby we have a further
proof, that the Quakers Gospel is pure Paganism; Yet he must cite some words
of Augustine Conf. lib. 11. Chap. 9. in favors of this light, which he
pleads for: the impertinency of which is discovered by the bare reading of
them. And he must also cite some words of Buchanan de jure Regni apud Sc^tos,
where speaking of that, whereby we difference betwixt that which is honest and
that which is dishonest, he calls it a divine thing. And no wise man will
call it a diabolical thing. Does Buchanan call this, Christ, and the Gospel? He
was a better Christian than so. And hence also, we have further confirmation,
that the Quakers Gospel is the pure light of Nature; and so the Quakers are
nothing but Pagan-preachers, leading poor silly souls from the Gospel, away to
Paganism, and to the blind light of Nature, that is among Pagans. Let wise
men heed these things, and beware of these men, called Quakers; for this their
advocat has sufficiently discovered to us, what they are. What he adds,
asserting that their ministry is the same with the Apostles Act. 26:18. and
that the righteous one, of whom James speaks Chap. 5, 6. is in every man, is
but a wicked perverting of the Truth, and a profane abusing of the Scriptures,
to countenance their diabolical positions, and Antievangelick assertions; for
which, if they repent not* the Lord will judge them.

CHAP. XIII. Of Justification.
1. WE come now to that, which has been by Heretics principally called into
question, being one of the chief articles of Christian Religion, The doctrine
of Justification of a sinner before God: which by some has been accounted, and
that deservedly, one of the greatest questions, whereby divine Theology is
distinguished from humane philosophy; the Gospel from the Law; the Church of
Christ from Jews, Turks and Pagans; and the truly Reformed from Papists Yea
Bellarmine with Pighius confess, that upon this hinge, turn all the
controver^ies, which are agitated betwixt us and them. Gerhard, the Lutheran,
says, that this is a Castle and chief strength of our whol^ doctrine and
Religion, that if his truth be darkened, adulterated, or overturned, it is
impossible, that other heads of doctrine can be kept pure. And Luther himself
said, that this Article of justification is diligently to be taught and
learned; for if it be lost, we can resist no heresy, no false doctrine, how
ridiculous so ever and vain: whence it comes to pass, that all, that hold
not this article, are either jews, or Turks, or Papists, or Heretics. And
again, if it fall and perish, all the knowledge of truth falls too, and
perishes: but if it flourish, all good things flourish with it. Religion, True
worshipe, and the Glory of God. The Church of Bohemia, in their Confession,
tells us, that this head of doctrine is accounted by them, for one of the
chiefest and most weighty, as being that, in which the sum of the Gospel is
placed, and in which Christianity is founded* the precious and most noble
treasure of salvation, and the only and lively consolation of Christians is
contained. The matter being thus, we have great cause to contend earnestly for
the faith, in this point, once delivered to the Saints; And to examine narrowly
what this Quaker delivers, as the sentiment of all the Quakers, upon this
head of doctrine, which he delivers in short, in his Seventh Thesis, and more
largly in his Vindication thereof, in his Apology.

2. What that is, in this matter, which the Orthodox maintain; may be seen in
their Confessions, and disputs against Papists and Others, and particularly,
with great plainness, and succinctness in our Confession of Faith, first agreed
upon at Westminster, and thereafter approven by the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland Chap. XI.. 1. in these words [ Those whom God effectually
calls, he also freely justifies (Romans 8:30. and 3:24.) not, by infusing
righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous: not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them; but for Christ's sake alone: not, by imputing faith it self, the
act of believing, nor any other Evangelical obedience to them, as their
righteousness; but by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ unto
them (Romans 4:5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5: verse. 19, 21. Romans 3:22, 24, 25, 27, 28.
Tit. 3:5, 7. Ephesians. 1:7. Ier. 23:6. 1 Cor. 1: v. 30, 31. Romans 5:17, 18, 19.)
they receiving and resting on him and his righteousness by Faith: which faith
they have not of themselves, it is the gift of God (Act. 10:44. Gal. 1:16.
Phil. 3 9. Act. 13:^8, 39. Ephesians. 2:^, 8.) Read and ponder what follows in
that Chapter. So in the greater Cathechisme Q. 70. What is justification? Answ.
Justification is an act of Gods free grace unto sinners (Romans 3:23, 24, 25 and
^:5.) in which he pardons all their sins, accepts and accounts their
persons righteous in his sight (2 Cor. 5:19, 21. Romans 3* 22, 24, 25, 27, 28.)
not for any thing wrought in them or done by them (Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 1:7.) but
only for the perfect obedience and full satisfaction of Christ, by God imputed
to them (Romans 5:17, 18, 19. and 4: verse. 6, 7.8.) and received by faith alone
(Act. 10 53. Gal. 2:16. Phil. ^ 7.) Add to this Q. 72. What is justifying
faith? A. justifying faith is a saving grace (Heb. 10:39.) wrought in the heart
of a sinner by the Spirit (2 Cor. 4:13* Ephesians. 1* 17, 18, 19.) and the word of
God (Romans 10:^4.17.) whereby he, being convinced of his sin and misery, and of
the disability in himself, and all other creatures, to recover him out of his
lost condition (Act. 2:^7. and 16:30. Ioh. 16:8, 9. Romans 5:6 Ephesians. 2:1. Act.
4:12.) not only assenteth to the truth of the promise of the Gospel (Ephesians.
1:13.) but receives and rests upon Christ, and his righteousness therein
held forth, for pardon of sin (I^h 1:12. Act. 16:31. and 10:53.) and for the
accepting and accounting of his person righteous in the sight of God for
Salvation (Phil. 3:9. Act. 15:11:) And Q. 73. How does faith Justify a sinner
in the sight of God? Answ. Faith justifies a sinner in the sight of God, not
because of these other graces, which do always accompany it, or of good works
that are the fruits of it (Gal. 3:11. Romans 3:28.) Nor as if the grace of faith,
or any act thereof, were imputed to him for his justification (Romans 4* 5. with
Romans ^0:10.) but only as it is an instrument, by which he receives and
applies Christ and his righteousness (Ioh. 1:1^. Phil. 3:19. Gal 2:16.) With
all we will be h^lped to understand the orthodox truth in this matter, by
considering two other questions to wit Q 75. What is Sanctification? A.
Sanctification is a work of Gods grace, whereby they, whom God has before the
foundation of the world chosen to be holy, are in time, through the powerful
operation of his Spirit (Heb. 1:4. 1 Cor. 6.11. 2 These. 1:13.) applying the
death and resurrection of Christ unto them (Romans 6:4, 5.6.) renewed in their
whole man after the image of God (Ephesians. 4:23, 24.) having the seeds of
repentance unto life, and of all other saving graces put into their hearts
(Act. 11:18. 1 Ioh. 3:9) and those graces so stirred up, increased and
strengthened (Iud. verse. 20. Heb. 6:11, 12. Ephesians. 3:16 17, 18, 19. Col. 1:10,
11.) as that they more and more die unto sin, and rise unto newness of life
(Rom 6: to 14. Gal. 5* 24, with Q. 77. Wherein do Justification and
Sanctification differ? Answer Although Sanctification be inseparably joined
with Justification (1 Cor. 6:11. and 1:30.) Yet they differ, in that God in
Justification imputes the righteousness of Christ (Romans 4:6, 8.) in
Sanctification his Spirit infuseth grace* and inableth to the exercise thereof
(Ezech. 36:27.) In the former, sin is pardoned (Romans 3:23, 25.) in the other it
is subdued (Romans 6:6, 14. the one does equally free all believers from the
revenging wrath of God, and that perfectly in this life, that they never fall
into condemnation (Romans 8:33, 34.) the other is neither equal in all (1 Ioh. 2:
v. 12, 13, 14. Heb. 5:12, 13, 14.) Nor in this life perfect in any (1 Ioh. 1:8,
10.) but grows up to perfection (2 Cor. 7:1. Phil. 3:12, 13, 14.] ^hus we
have the orthodox doctrine, in this point, fully cleared, and confirmed.

3. Let us next see, wh^t is the opinion of the Q^akers, in this matter: And
before we examine particularly, what this Man, with whom we deal, says, we
shall shortly see what other Quakers have maintained before. Mr Clapham in his
book against the Quakers Sect. 5. tells us, that I. Nayler, in his Love to the
lost P. 3. joyneth with the Papists, and pleads for our being made righteous,
by Gods putting in righteousness in us, and by righteousness wrought in the
creature. And P. 50. with Papists, he confounds Justification, Sanctification
and Mortification; and argues for it, as they do. So Mr Stalham, in his book
against them Part. 1 Sect. 22. shows out of their own words, what friends
they are unto the man of sin, by laying the bottom of a believers
justification, not upon Christ's obedience, but upon sanctification. And Sect.
25. he tells us, that I. Nailer said, that the man of sin is discovered in them,
who say, believers are pure and spoteless too, by reason of imputation: and in
his Love to the lost p. 51. that men are so justified, as they are sanctified
and mortified, and no further. And that F. Howgil, in The inheritance of Jacob
Page 29. has these words Christ fulfilled the Law, and he fulfils it in them,
who know him and his work, and herein man becomes to be justified in Gods sight
by Christ, who works all our works in us and for us. Mr Hicks in his 2 Dialogue
Page 4. tells us, that Isaak Pennington asks this question, Can outward blood
cleanse? And says, Therefore, we must enquire, whether it was the blood of the
vail, that is, of the humane nature, or the blood within the vail viz. of that
spiritual man, consisting of flesh, blood and bones, which took on him the
vail; or humane nature? It is not the blood of the vail, that is but outward;
and can outward blood cleanse? And that Edward Billing most wickedly said, that
the mystery of iniquity lies in the blood of Christ. And that these words
frequently drop from their mouths, do thou look at Christ's death afar off?
What will that blood avail? Did ever see any of it? That carnal blood
cleanse? If thou had a great deal of it, would it do thee any good? If such,
as speak thus of the precious blood of Christ, can have right thoughts of
Justification, the sober may easily judge. And what intimation Edward Buroughs
gives about this, may be seen there P. 18, -- 22, etc. I love not to
transcribe the words, only that which he has Page 26. seems to be plain.
Thou beast -- who would have another righteousness, than that which Christ
works in the saints and by them. He tells us likewise ib. Page 31. that Will.
Pen Sandy foundation Page 29.30. has these words, Obedience to justification
ought to be as personally extensive, as was man's disobedience to condemnation:
In which real (not imputative) sense, those various terms of Sanctification,
Righteousness, Resurrection, Life, Redemption, Justification, etc. are most
infallibly understood; for impute, or imputing signifies no more in Scriptures,
but to express men really and personally to be that which is imputed to them,
whether as guilty or remitted: For any to be justified from the imputation of
another righteousness, is both ridiculous and dangerous, whence came that
usual saying amongst many professors of Religion, That God looks not upon
them, as they are in themselves, but as they are in Christ. And Page 25 (See Mr
Hicks Page 51. etc.) Justification (...) not from the imputation of another
Righteousness, but from the actual performing and keeping of God's righteous
statutes, and Page 25, 30. It is a great abomination to say, God should
condemn and punish his innocent Son, that he having satisfi^d for our ^innes,
we might be justified by the imputation of his perfect Righteousness. And
again, I caution and warn men by no means to entertain this principle (of
Christ's dying to make satisfaction to divine Justice) by whomsoever
recommended. And again Page 26. He (i. e. Christ) fulfilled the Law, only as
our pattern or example. And ib. Christ is so far from telling us of such a way
of being justified, as that he informs us, the reason, why he abode in his
Fathers love, was his obedience: he is so far from telling us of being
justified by virtue of his obedience imputed, that unless we keep the commands,
and obey for our selves etc. And P. 30. was not Abraham justified by ^orks? we
must not conceive as the dark imputation of this age, that Abraham's personal
offering was not a justifying righteousness? Ib. p. 30. I do say, Abraham had
not the imputation of another righteousness to him, his personal obedience was
the ground of that just imputation. And elsewhere Apol. p. 148. justification
by the righteousness, which Christ fulfilled for us, in his own person, wholly
without us, we boldly affirm to be a doctrine of Devils, and an arm of the sea
of corruption, which does now deluge the world.

This is su^ficiently plain. And Sand. found. Page 30.31. I farther tell thee,
that Justification by an imputed righteousness, is both irrational,
irreligious, ridiculous and dangero^s: and Page 27.29.30. Justification goes
not before, but is consequential to the mortifying of lusts, and the
sanctification of the soul. More might be added, but here is, I suppose, enough
to discover, how these Quakers homologate, in the point of Justification, with
Papists, Socinians, and Arminians, in denying the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness in Justification, and substituting another ground, or formal
reason thereof, even works done by us. And how dangerous an error this is,
undermineing the very cardinal point of Christianity, every true Christian may
know. The Quakers in this are one with their Predecessors, the old Anabaptists
too.

4. We come now to our Quaker, and must see, how he expresses himself in this
matter: In his Thesis he says, who receive the illumination of this light
(that is, as we evinced above, the dim light of nature) it (that must be the
Light or the Natural Conscience) becomes in them a holy pure and spiritual
birth, produceing piety, righteousness, purity and other excellent fruits,
most acceptable to God. This, sure, is a wonderful metamorphosis. But how
comes it, that this light is so much beholden to man, in whom it is, that if
he do not resist it, but receive its illumination religiously, it will become a
glorious and mighty powerful thing; but if he do resist it, and receive not its
illumination, it remains what it was? Is this the Christian New birth, and
Regeneration, whereof the Scripture speaks? Is this to be borne of the
Spirit? There is no infusion of any gracious principle or habit of grace and
virtue here; for the seed of all was in the man from his mothers womb, and his
kind nature, in receiving the illumination of this connatural light, blew the
coal, and it became a burning fire, warming the soul into all Christian
virtues. Is this Gospel doctrine? or rather is it not Pelagian-quakerisme* What
follows upon this? By this holy birth (says he) to wit, Christ Jesus formed
within (a goodly title; but it is but the Quakers Jesus; that is, blake Nature,
or the product of Corrupt nature,) produceing his works in us, (these, sure,
are nothing but works of darkness) as we are sanctified, so are we justified in
the sight of God. Then Justification, and Sanctification, ^tand upon one and
the same ground; and if there be any difference betwixt them, Justification
must follow Sanctification. Thus it is manifest, how he homologateth with other
Quakers, and how they all agree with Papists, in the doctrine of Justification.
He adds (and one may wonder at the man's confidence and boldness) according to
the Apostles words, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. But if either his sanctification
or Justification, as now explained to us, be either in the name of the Lord
Jesus, or by the Spirit of God, I am far deceived: Nay, it is manifest, that
they are rather by the Power and Authority, Virtue and Efficacy of Free will,
and the Natural Spirit of man, receiving kindly the Illumination of that
natural Light, in every man, and so transforming that natural thing to produce
such works, as by which the man is both Sanctified and justified. Though this
be the native sense and import of his words; yet mark his effrontedness.
Therefore (says he) it is not done by our works, produced by our will, nor yet
by good works, considered by themselves. What a shameless man is this, to deny
these works to be man's own works, which flow from a principle, borne and
brought into the world with him; and not only so, but actuated, and transformed
into a new pure and spiritual spring, by the sole will of the man, not
resisting its light, but receiving the same. If these be not properly the man's
own works, it is a great question, if man have any works, that can be called
his own. But let it be so, that they go under the name of works done by a new
infused principle (and yet the Quakers are more Pelagian, then the Jesuits,
and all the Papists; for these acknowledge infused habites, which Quakers know
nothing of) yet they may be called man's works, and works produced by man's will;
to wit, now regenerated and principled of new; otherwise they are produced in
man, and man's will has no elicite or imperat acts thereanent, This is indeed
Phanaticisme in folio. But how can men be Sanctified, or Justified (according
to the Quakers,) by that which is none of theirs, nor wrought by them? Again,
he must know, that the Scripture excludes all these holy works, even produced
by that new principle, from being the ground or formal reason, or ratio
formalis objectiva, of our Justification; as all our Divines show, writting
against the Papists, on this head: And in this he gives further evidence of
his conspireing with Papists against the truth. Finally, I wish he had
explained that to us, nor by good works considered in themselves, for it
imports, that good works considered some other way, possibly in conjunction
with some other thing (and what that is, I know not,) are the ground of our
Justification: But seeing Justification and Sanctification, stand upon the same
ground, with him, he must also say, that we are not Sanctified by good works
considered by themselves: and if good works, or works of Sanctification and
holiness, considered as such, will not ground the denomination of
Sanctification, I would feign know what will?

5. But if they neither be Sanctified, nor Justified by these good works, by
what are they Sanctified, or Justified? It is by Christ (says he) who is the
gift, and the giver, and the cause produceing the effects in us. But this
Christ is nothing else but a Creature, produced in man, by man's industry and
goodwill, not stubbornly resisting, but piously receiving the illumination of
the light; and that out of this light, which is in every Son of Adam; for he
told us, that this Light, when thus religiously entertained, becomes a holy,
pure and spiritual birth; and this is the Christ formed in us, who is the gift
and the giver, and producer of all the fruits of holiness, which are acceptable
unto God: Are we not then Justified by our works, when Justified by this
Christ, or Principle produceing these works in us; especially seeing this
Christ, is a Christ formed within; and not that Christ, who laid down his life
a ransom for sinners, and offered up himself a sacrifice to divine justice, to
satisfy justice and the Law, by his Obedience and Death, for the Redemption of
his people? We heard lately, that this Christ, and his Blood, is far off, in
their account, and cannot cleanse, or do us any good. But further I think,
that, even in this, Quakers are far worse then Papists; for when Papists will
have us Justified by works, they speak of works wrought in the soul by the
Spirit, real works of grace, flowing from an inward principle of grace; but our
Quakers, though they give goodly words, yet really their works, by which they
are Sanctified and Justified, are but works wrought (at best) by the Power of
Nature: For that Light within every man, (as was showed above) is but pure
Nature, and whatever is borne of or proceeds from this seed, is but Nature;
for that which is borne of the flesh, it flesh, Ioh. 3:6. And from nothing that
is in man by nature, or in all men, can that which is heavenly and spiritual
spring: unless we turn Pelagians, this is to be held. And that Light within
them, if its eyes were not blinded with prejudice, though it be not sanctified,
nor of the Spirit, might even cause them understand so much. And when all the
Efficient cause, that we hear of from him, produceing this pure and spiritual
birth, or educeing it out of its matter, or causing its change, and being some
other thing than it was, is only man, and man doing nothing but receiving the
illumination of this light; can we suppose, this to be any thing else, than a
pure product of nature, which Heathens and Pagans, Turks and Tartars, who never
heard one word of Christ, may be partakers of? And can this Sanctification and
Justification, be that mentioned in the Scriptures, when it is common to
infidels, who are without God and without Christ, in the world, if they will
but obey the light of nature? Is this which he talks of, to be borne of God?
No certainly, but rather it is to be borne of blood, or of the will of the
flesh, or of the will of man; but so are not any borne, that receive Christ,
and believe in his name, Ioh. 1:12, 13. One thing more, Seeing this Light, which
the Quakers say, is in every man, is in Devils, and that in a greater measure,
than in man; may it not also be said of them, that if they will receive this
light, and not resist it, it shall become an holy, pure and spiritual Birth,
and Christ formed within? And shall not they likewise, upon this account, be
capable of this Sanctification and Justification? (I must still put
Sanctification first, that I may speak according to the Quakers Language:) and
shall we have no other Sanctification and Justification. preached to us by
Quakers, than what Devils are capable of, and have the real feed of already? O
poor deluded wreatches? Is this the top of all their endeavors, and the upshot
of all their hopes? Sall we get nothing, at most, but a Paganish Justification
and Sanctification?

6. He closes his Thesis thus, who (i. e. Christ) when he reconciled us, while
enemies, according to his wisdom, does save and justify us this way, as the
Apostle says else where, He has according to his mercy saved us, by he lawer
of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost Ans. But what way did he
reconcile us, while enemies? was it by his blood, and by his cross? Ephesians.
2:16. Or by the blood of his cross; or in the body of his flesh, through
death? Col. 1:20, 22. Or was it by his death? Romans 5:10. If so, then sure, he
died for the ungodly Rom, 5:6. And for sinners verse. 8. that they might be
reconciled to God by his death verse. 10. And then the grace of God, and the
gift by grace must abound unto them, verse. 15. and that unto justification
verse. 16, 18. Then, sure, Christ died in their room and place, as their
Cautioner, and Surety; and as their Surety made satisfaction to justice, that
they should be redeemed and delivered from Law, Justice and Wrath; for what the
law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh,
That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8:3, 4. And if
so, as the Scriptures do richly witness; then that mediatory Righteousness of
Christ the Redeemer, and Cautioner, must legally be made over unto them, to the
end that they may be legally acquit, and freed from the Accusation and
Condemnation of the Law: And by virtue of that Righteousness of Christ the
Cautioner, imputed unto them by God, they, as clothed therewith by faith, and
appearing therein, must be Justified before God, and not by any thing wrought
in them, at what hand so ever: And thus all that he has said, in his Th^sis,
is overturned. (2.) It is true, that the Lord in wisdom has ordered things
aright, and appointed the way, how we should be partaker of the benefits,
which he has purchased, and particularly of Justification and Sanctification:
But that the wisdom of God has appointed, that we should be Justified, by any
thing done by us, whether from a principle of Nature or of Grace, wrought in us
even by the Spirit of God, as the formal objective reason, or that, upon the
account of which, we can be accounted Righteous, and Absolved from Accusation,
and have our inquities pardoned, is not revealed to us in all his word; but the
contrare rather, as has been seen. (3.) Nor does these words of Paul to Titus
Chap. 3:5, 6. any way confirm his fancy; but rather establish the contrary
truth: to wit, that all the favors, which God conferreth upon us, in order to
salvation, are of free grace, and not by works of righteousness (or works,
which are done in righteousness, and righteously, as the words in the original
bear) which we have done: Grace and Mercy here are set in opposition to all our
works, yea to our best works; and therefore, if Justification be an act of
God's grace, (as the Scripture says it is) it is not, nor can it be, because,
or upon the account of our works of righteousness. And if in and through or by
Justification, there is pardon of iniquity, as there is Romans 4:5, 6, 7. And if
pardon of iniquity be a merciful and gracious act in God, being an act of his
free grace and mercy Ephesians. 1: verse. 7, 8. it is manifest, that Justification
is not upon the account of our works. Therefore, we are said to be Justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ Romans 3:24.
Moreover, the judgment of God is always, (as in condemning of sinners, so in
justifying of believers) according to truth Romans 2:2. And in the matter of
justifying of the ungodly, the righteousness of God is declared; and it is all
so contrived, that he might be just, and the justifier of him, which believes
in Jesus Romans 3:25, 26. Therefore cannot Justification pass upon the account
of any thing framed, and done in us, or by us; because, that is not, nor can it
be, that which will pass for a Righteousness, in the eyes of God, and a
Righteousness answerable to the Law, in all points; it being, when it is at its
best, but imperfect; nor can it have any merit or deserving in it, to
compensat for former transgressions, being always that only, which we are
obliged unto; so that when we have done all, we must say, that we are but
unprofitable servants, Luke 17: verse. 10. we have done but what was our duty to
do.

7. Having thus briefly dispatched his Thesis, wherein we see his opposition to
Justification by, and upon the account of, the Righteousness of Christ imputed,
and therein his harmony and agreement with Papists, Socinians and Arminians: we
come now to consider what he says, more largly, in his Apology Page 122. etc.
In the beginning, he tells us that the handling of this does well follow his
treating of universal Redemption, and universal grace: And I shall not quarrel
with his Method, were his doctrine orthodox; but seeing few, who plead for the
universality of the death of Christ, and who contend for the universality of
grace, are found sound and orthodox, in the point of Justification, we might
upon this ground, though we had got no taste of his judgment in the Thesis,
suspect his doctrine of Justification. But after trial, we will be better able
to judge. He says truly, that there are many controversies moved already
about this point; and the more blame worthy is he, who does not diminish, but
increase these rather, as to some things; though in the principal, he likes
the Popish way better than ours. He promises first to state the controversy,
so far as concerns them, and to explain their judgment; and then, he says,
he will confirm it by Scripture testimony, and the certain experience of all
that are really justified: we must see how he performs what is promised.

8. What he says. 2. of the Papists depraving of this truth, we hear; but are
ready to suppose, that howbeit he do not with them stand up for the merit ( ex
condigno, as it is called; and yet many Papists reject this, and are satisfied
with meritum ex congruo, in the matter of Justification; and some reject both,
as may be seen in Stapleton Prol. ad lib. 5. de justific.) of good works; nor
approve of the vulgar Papists, placeing their Justification, in things that are
neither good nor evil, or in things, that are rather evil as good, (as he
thinks to be evident from their doctrine of the Sacraments, and Indulgences,
etc.) but commend our Reformers, for opposeing these Abominations: Yet as to
the maine controversy, handled betwixt our Reformers, and the Papists, viz.
what is Justification: and what is the formal reason Objective; or the formal
cause (as some speak;) or Material cause (as others speak;) or that, because
and upon the account of which, men are Justified, in the sight of God; this
Quaker joyneth with the Papists. The Council of Trent. Sess. 6. Chap. 7. tells
us, That Justification is not only remission of sins, but also Sanctification
and renovation of the inner man, by a voluntary susception of grace and gifts;
whereby man of unjust becomes just, of an enemy becomes a friend, that he may
be an heir, according to the hope of eternal life. Why does our Quaker
embrance this, upon the matter, and give a worse Justification; even a
Justification, wherein there is no mention made of remission of sins? Why
does he, with this Synagogue of Satan, confound Justifi^ation and
Sanctification? He knows, how Bellarmine de Iustif. lib. 2. Cap. 2. briefly
stateth the question, betwixt us and them, in these words. Whether the formal
cause of absolute Justification, be a righteousness inherent in us, or not? If
this Quaker be no Papist, why does he conspire with them, in this cardinal
point of difference? Why does he and the rest rise up so much against the
Imputed righteousness, as do the Papist, following the Council of Trent, as we
see Page 125. he does, showing his teeth against our Confession of faith? And
there also, I cannot but take notice of a base falsehood, and deceit, when he
would make his Readers believe, that the Papists do not place Justification in
any real inward renovation of soul, more then the Protestants; while as we have
seen the contrary out of the Council of Trent. and Bellarm. and multitudes more
might be cited. But what needs more, when we have the words of that Council,
which all Papists must stand to: and in that forecited Chapt. the same Council
says; The only formal cause is the righteousness of God, not that, by which he
himself is righteous; but whereby he makes us righteous, to wit, by which, we
are renewed in the Spirit of our mind; and are not only repute, but truly are
called, and are righteous or just. It is true, that they say, that this grace
and charity, that is infused in Justification, is through the merit of the
most holy suffering of Christ: And in this they are more orthodox, and less
Socinian, than are the Quakers; to this Man's shame be it spoken: Yet still they
make Justification to consist in the Infusion of grace, and Renovation of the
soul.

9. He begins his explication of their judgment Page 126.. 3. And tells us
first. That as it appears from the explication of the former thesis, they
renunce all natural power in themselves, for delivering of themselves out of
their lost condition. And in our examination thereof, in its several parts, we
have manifested the contrary: And whether this be not a palpable untruth, the
Reader is free to judge. He faith moreover. That they deny remission of sins,
or justification to be had by any work of theirs; etc. And what is this to the
point, seeing they say, that we are justified by an Inherent Righteousness, and
not by Righteousness Imputed?

10. He gives us, in the next place, good words about the satisfaction of
Christ: which if he would stand to, and not deceive us with Socinian glosses,
and metaphorical senses he should withal overturne his own doctrine about
justification; as we did show lately. 6. In the third place, he says several
things, that are not true, as first. That all men, that have come to man's age,
(except Christ) have sinned, insinuating, that none else have sinned, nor are
capable to sin, until they come to Man's age: and so denies original sin, and
denies that the wicked actions of young children, and young girls, who are
not yet come to be men and women, are sins. Then says he, Therefore all have
need of a Savior, to take away Gods wrath, due for sins. Have none need of a
Savior, but these only, who are come to man's age, qui aetatem virilem adepti
sunt? Does the Scripture make any such restriction? Where is then his universal
Redemption, that he pleaded For? He adds, In this respect therefore, he is
truly said to have born the sins of all, in his own body, on the tree. In
what respect is this? Is it in respect, that all have sinned? but what sense is
there here; or truth either? did he bear the sins of none, but of such as are
come to man's age? what becomes then of infants, boys and girls? and if he
bear all their sins, they must, upon that account, be freed from the guilt
of sin, and justified; and so we shall have an universal justification, as well
as Redemption; and this is confirmed indeed, by the following words; to wit,
therefore he is the sole mediator, removing the wrath of God, that our bypast
sins may not meet us, seeing the^ are pardoned by virtue of his sacrifice. For
this he understands of all, for whom Christ died. But he tells us afterward,
that remission is no other way to be expressed. And I would ask, whether there
be any remission in or by justification? and if so, why are we not justified
upon the account of the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by
faith? Then follows a word, which undoeth all (not to mention his
parenthesis, were he says, some may partake of this remission, who have no
knowledge of the history of Christ, sufficiently above spoken unto) Christ
(says he) has by his death and passion reconciled us while enemies, unto God,
that is to say, he offers unto us reconciliation, and makes us capable
thereof. If this be all, it is but the Arminian Reconciliation, he has been
speaking of; yea and nothing but what a Socinian may say. Sure the Apostle
speaks otherwise of this Reconciliation; as of that, which certainly is
attended with Justification, and with such a Justification, as has life
following, saying Romans 5:8, 9, 10. But God commends his love toward us, that
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him, for if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by ^is life. The reconciliation then, which
was had, by the death of Christ, the Son of God, was not a mere offer of
reconciliation, nor a mere capability for it; But that which was a certain
forerunner of salvation, and that which Salvation must necessarily, with a much
more, follow. He cites 2 Corinthians. Chap. 5: verse. 19, 20. and tells us, that the
Apostle insinuates, that seeing the wrath of God is removed by Christ's
obedience, the Lord is ready to be reconciled with them, and pardon their
sins, if they repent. Which is a manifest perversion of the scope and meaning
of the Apostle, who is there showing, how the Reconciliation of sinners unto
God is brought about, both upon Gods part, and upon man's part; not of all the
world, but of the Elect scattered over the face of the earth, and from the
beginning of the world, and how they were brought into peace with God, through
Jesus; and so it is a limited world, as appears by the us used ver. 18. And
again more fully ver. 21. for he has made him sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And therefore it is onl^
that world, he understands here, for whom Christ was made sin, having their
sins imputed to him, as their cautioner and sponsor; and who by virtue hereof
are clothed in due time, with his righteousness, imputed unto them, and so
are made the righteousness of God, in him. Now all this was not a mere may be,
or a mere possible or potential thing, but such as was attended with a
non-imputation of trespasses: nor does it import only a readiness in God to be
reconciled with all, upon conditions; as if there were none in particular,
whose sins the Lord did bear, and for whom he offered up himself a
satisfactory sacrifice to the justice of God, purchasing unto them faith to be
granted in due time, whereby they should come ^o be actually reconciled unto,
and brought in favor with God, when through his grace they should yield unto
the beseachings of Christ's messengers, to whom the Word, Ministry, or
Administration of this Reconciliation is committed, as to Ambassadors for
Christ, sent forth to beseach in Christ's stead. By all which the Apostle is
clearing, how all things are of God, and particularly all the new things which
the new creature, the man in Christ, is made partaker of verse. 17, 18. And
moreover we see, verse 14, 15. that these all, for whom Christ died, are one
time or other, made alive unto God, through grace communicated to them from
their Head, Christ, As it follows. And that he died for all, that they which
live, should not hence forth live unto themselves, but unto him, which died for
them, and rose again. And who will say, that it shall, at any time, be said,
with truth, of all the world, that they are thus alive?

11. He tells us next of a double Redemption, both which he says are perfect in
their own nature, and as to us cannot be separated; Then all, certainly, must
be redeemed the one way, who are redeemed the other way. What is the first?
That (says he Page 127.) made by Christ, in his crucified body without us --
and by this, Man, as he stands in the fall, is put in a capacity of
salvation, and has transmitted into him, a certain measure of power, of grace,
and of the virtue of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ, which is able to
overcome and eradicat the evil seed Ans. 1. The Redemption made by Christ on
the cross, and by his obedience and sufferings, we cheerfully acknowledge; But
that it was a Redemption made for all^, we abundantly disproved above Chap.
VIII. (2.) That there was any such Power, Grace, or Virtue of the Spirit of
life purchased hereby, and granted to all, is false, and abundantly above
disproved likewise. See Chap. X. (3.) To imagine, that every son of Adam has
power granted to him to subdue, and root out natural corruption, is but pure
Pelagianisme, Arminianisme, and Iesuitisme; but not the truth, revealed to us
in the word of God; and is to wedge war against the pure grace of God, and the
free operations thereof; and to set the crown of salvation, upon the head of
the creature: all which we made manifest above, at several occasions.

12. What is the Second Redemption, that is inseparable from the other? It is
that (says he) which Christ works in us: And what is that? It is that (says
he further) whereby we possess and know, that that pure and perfect redemption
is in us, purifieing us, delivering us from the power of corruption, and
bringing into favor, union, and familiarity with God. Answ. (1.) That the Lord
Jesus Redeemeth by Power, through his Spirit, from sin and corruption, all such
as he has Redeemed by Price, from Law and justice, we willingly grant: But how
can he say, that these two are inseparable, seeing then they must be of equal
extent; and so, as the first Redemption was, in his judgment, for all and every
man; the second must extend to all and every man; and so all and every man must
be delivered from the power of corruption; and consequently must be saved.
Again, how can he say this, who pleads afterward for the Apostasy of the
Saints? But (2.) This purifying and delivering from corruption, as would appear
by his words, is not wrought by the second Redemption; but only a knowing that
that pure and perfect Redemption is in us, purifying us etc. And so all that is
had by this second Redemption, is but a sight of what the fruit of the first
Redemption is doing: So that by the first Redemption, not only man has power,
to subdue corruption, but he actually does subdue it, without any new grace or
divine help, and by the second Redemption he is only delivered from darkness,
which hindered his actual perceiving of the operation of the gift and grace
bestowed, upon the first Redemption. (3.) whether is this second Redemption
necessary unto salvation, or not? I suppose he will say, yes. Then what shall
become of the child of God, that walks in darkness, and has no light? what
shall become of them, that have true grace, and grace uniteing them to Christ,
and to God through Christ, and yet through darkness (the Lord dispensing so,
partly as a punishment, and partly for trial and exercise) can see and
acknowledge no such thing?

13. He tells us over again, that by the first Redemption, all mankind was so
far reconciled unto God, that they were made capable of salvation, and had the
offer of Gospel peace: citeing for this Ephesians. 2:15. 1 Ioh. 4:10. Ezech. 16:6.
1 Pet. 2:22, 24. and 3:18. Tit. 2:14. Phil. 3:10. Ans. (1.) we have seen
before, at several occasions, that the Redemption of Christ is a far other
thing, and has far other effects, even remission of sins, 2 Cor. 5:19.
actual reconciliation, grace and glory. Dan. 9:24, 26. Col. 1:19, 20. Ephesians.
1:11, 14. Ioh. 17:2. Heb. 9:12, 13. 2 Cor. 1:20. (2.) The very texts cited by
himself make against him: for Ephesians. 2:15. he died to make in himself of twain
one new man, so making peace: and this was not a mere capacity. See verse. 13.
but now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. Was this only a capacity of coming near, or a mere offer of
it? deluded souls may think so, but the words are plain: let him see also
Ephesians. 1:7. and 2:5, 6. The next place he cites is 1 Ioh. 4:10. Where God is
said to have sent his son to be a propitiation for our sins: and sure, a
Propitiation does work more then a mere possibility of friendshipe; and he was
so a Propitiation, as that for the same persons, he is an Advocat with the
Father 1 Ioh. 2:1, 2. His next passage is Ezech. 16:6. And does he think, that
when God says to any, lying in their blood, live, that that creating word
gives nothing but a mere capacity to live? See verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. But
this properly is to be understood of Gods dispensation of love to that visible
Church, as such, and so is not very pertinent to the purpose in hand. His next
passage is 1 Pet. 2:22. (he would say, 21.) 24. And what can be more clear
against him, seeing the Apostle says verse. 24. that he bear our sins, for this
end; that we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: and then
adds, by whose stripes ye were healed? See also Chap. 1: verse. 18. Where he
says, that we are redeemed from our vain conversation, See also Chap. 1:2, 4.
He cites next 1 Pet. 3:18. Where it is expressly said, that Christ has once
suffered, that he might bring us to God, and not put us in a bare capacity. Was
this man's mind present, when he wrote these citations? Why did he not cite
also Col. 1: verse. 14. Gal. 1: verse. 4. and 3: verse. 13, 14. and 4. verse. 5. If
he would cite passages against himself. As also Revel. 5: verse. 9, 10. and
14.3, 4. and Tit. 2: verse. 14?

14. He explaineth over again his Second Redemption, and adds that hereby we
are really Justified. That is, when we are sanctified, we are Justified, or
Justified by sanctification; as say the Tridentine Papists. Then he tells us,
That both the Redemptions are the cause of Justification, the first the
procureing cause, and the last the formal cause. And just so say they, as we
saw above out of the Council of Trent, and may be seen in Bellarmine, who de
justify. lib. 1. Cap. 2. proves that Jesus Christ is the meritorious cause of
Justification; and is sounder here, than I suppose this Quakers is, who
complyeth more with Samosatenians and Socinians, against whom Bellarmin there
disputes: And the Council of Trent said, that Christ did merit justification
to us by his most holy passion, on the tree of the cross; Wherein does this
man now differ from Papists, the worst of them, I mean such as follow the
Council of Trent? There are some Others, that may shame this Quaker, in this
point; As Contarenus, a cardinal, who, in his Treatis of Justification,
clears and determines the question thus. Because by faith, we attain to a
twofold ^^ghteousness, one inherent -- whereby we are made partakers of the
divine nature; the other the righteousness of Christ, given and imputed to us,
because insert in Christ, and we put him on. The question is, unto which of
these we ought to lean, and account our selves justified before God. And I
(says he) wholly think, that it is piously and christianly said, that we ought
t^ lean to, I say lean to, as to a firm thing, which may uphold us, the
righteousness of Christ, gifted to us, and not to grace and holiness inherent.
So also Pighius, de fide and Iustificatione, may shame this Quaker.

15. In the fourth place. Page 128. For clearing of his meaning he tells us,
that by this Justification, they do not understand simply good works, nay not
as done by the holy Spirit. But did ever man in his wits understand it so? The
question is, whether good works be the formal cause; or the formal objective
reason of Justification? And this he granted above, and asserted with the worst
of Papists. But he says with protestants, that these are rather the effects of
Justification; then the cause. This is better said: but way then said he
lately, that by the Second Redemption, whereby we are Purified, Liberated and
Redeemed from the power of corruption, we become justified formally; or that
that second Redemption was the formal cause of our justification? And what will
he now have to be the formal cause of our justification? Christ formed within
us, this inward birth, produceing righteousness and holiness in us, with which
the Father is well pleased. Ans. But this is only an inward Principle of grace,
and the sanctification, which is defined in the Larger Catechism, as we saw
above; and by this himself afterward tells us, we are parkers of the divine
nature; and this, as Contarenus said with truth, belongs to an Inherent
Righteousness: and so still he holds with the Tridentine Papists, who will have
us justified by a Righteousness inherent in us; and that in opposition to a
Righteousness imputed. And when afterward he says, that Bellarmine and others
disput against this, and other Papists understood it not, he should have named
the place (2.) That God is well pleased with this, will say nothing, for he is
well pleased also with good works, that flow from this Principle, betwixt which
two, this Quaker would distinguish, in this question. He adds, This is to
possess whole Christ, who is the Lord our righteousness Ier 23:6. and to put on
Christ. Ans. Yet this is not to put on the righteousness of Christ in
Justification, and to be clothed with his Righteousness, in appearing before
Justice. This is not to make the Lord our righteousness, as Ier. 23:6. nor to
say with Paul. Phil: 3:9. and be found in him, not having min^ own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith. Further he says, hereby
we are made one with him, as branches into the vine; and we have right to all
things, which he did and suffered for us, so that his obedience, righteousness
and death is ours. Ans. All this is true by faith uniteing us to Christ. But we
are not so properly by Christ formed within us; for this is a consequent of,
and in nature, though not in time, posteriour to our union to Christ by Faith,
which is brought about in effectual calling: and as a consequent of this union
follows also Justification; the formal objective reason of which is not
either this union, or begun san^tification, but the Righteousness of Christ, or
his Obedience and Suffering made over and imputed to the believer by God. Seeing
in these matters, he seems to be an utter stranger, I would advise him to
read our Larger Catechism better, if he think not himself too far advanced, to
turn a catechumene again. What follows Page 128. is but a specimen of the
Quakers Spirit, in abusing of Scripture with their senseless allegorick glosses,
and has no Interest in this queston; and therefore I have nothing to do with
it.

16. He tells us next, that though we be not justified for good works, yet we
are justified in them: and they are necessary, as causa sine qua non. Ans. That
good works are called for from Justified persons, we acknowledge; but what
Interest they have in putting us into a state of Justification, we see not. His
giving them an interest of a causa sine qua non, contradicts what he said
before: for he would have us Justified by Christ formed within; and this is
antecedent to good works, as the tree is unto the fruit. And he also said in
the preceding Page, that good works follow Justification, as the effects
thereof: and how then, they can come in, as a causa sine qua non, he must help
us by his next to understand; and clear to us, how the Effect can be the causa
sine qua non of the Cause: But this man must have liberty to contradict
himself. He must also explain to us, what that is, to be justified in good
works: That a man may be in a justified state, while do^ng good works, we
understand very well; but how otherwise, he can be justified in good works, I
see not, unless by Justification he mean, not a justification as to state, but
a justification as to particular actions, which is impertinent.

17. In the last place he says, that if he and his fraternity held the same
opinion about good works, that Protestants hold, they would easily confess,
that they were not only not nec^ssary, but that they were noxious. Though
Protestants assert the necessity of good works, in justified persons, come to
age; they assert notwithstanding their noxiousness in Justification; that is if
they be considered, as any part of that Righteousness, upon consideration
whereof the person is declared just, and Justified before God; or as any part
of the formal Objective reason of Justification; or, as others speak, as any
part of the formal cause of Justification. But what is his ground? for they
affirm, says he, that the best works of saints are corrupted and defiled. It
is true, we say indeed, that our best works are not perfect, but have ad
mixture of dross, and of much imperfection; but that is not all the cause, why
we deny such an interest to works in Justification, as Papists, and he plead
for; but this Interest we deny to works mainly because, it would spoil Christ
of the glory of our Justification, and of being our Righteousness, that is due
to him; and give man ground of boasting, which by Gospel Justification is
wholly excluded. But do not Quakers say the same of good works? we judge (says
he) the best works, done by man, intending conformity unto the Law, in his own
strength, natural power, and proper will, to be such, that is, polluted. But
protestants do not account these properly good works, but only materially such,
as not flowing from a principle of grace, and from the Spirit of
sanctification. What does he say of these? These are pure and holy (says he)
as is the root they come from, and therefore God accepts them, and justifies
us in them, and rewards us for them of his proper and free grace. But the
question is, whether they be perfect, and can stand before the tribunal of
Justice, and so become any part of that Righteousness, answering the Law, which
requires perfect conformity in all points, which is the formal objective
reason of our Justification before God, whose judgment is according to truth?

18. Thus we have seen his explication of their Opinion, which in short is
this, That the formal objective reason, or, as he with others speak, the formal
cause of Justification, is a Principle of grace within, or Christ formed there;
that is, the spring and principle of good works, which is begun sanctification.
This I say, is it, according to his words; but if we ^emember what was said to
this above, and consider what this Christ within is, according to the Quakers
principles, we shall find, that, in this point, their judgment is more
d^testable, than is that of Papists; for this Christ within, is formed of mere
Nature, and that without any assistance of divine grace, by the mere Rational
power, and will of man, yielding unto the dictats of that Light, which is, as
well in pagans, that scarce have the use of reason, as in Christians, and in
all alike; and so it is a Christ formed within, whereof Pagans, Turks and
Indians, that never heard, nor never shall hear, the least sound of the
Gospel, are capable, and by virtue whereof, they, as well as Christians, can
come to be justified: So that, in short, the justification, which Quakers
maintain, is a Pagan-justification, resulting from a Pagan-sanctification; and
if this be not many degrees more damnable and abominable, then the doctrine of
Tridentine Papists, let any of understanding judge.

19. After this, he lays down three Propositions, the confirmation of which
will, as he thinks, prove his point. The first is this Page 129. The
Obedience and Passion of Christ is that, whereby the soul obtains remission
of sins, in that it is the cause pr^curing that grace and seed, by whose inward
operations, Christ is formed within, and the soul is made conform unto it, and
so just and justified: And in respect of this capacity and offer of grace, God
is said to be reconciled, not that he is actually r^conciled, or justifies
any, or holds any justified, who remains in his sins, ungodly, impure and
unjust* Ans. (1.) To say, that the obedience and suffering of Christ procures
remission of sins, in that it procures that grace and seed, etc. is but a
Socinian and Arminian untruth, destroying the Satisfaction of Christ; and upon
the matter, saying, that Christ, by his Obedience and Death, did not fully
discharge the debt of all those, that are justified; and did not make a Proper,
Real and Full Satisfaction, to justice, in their behalf, contrare to Romans 5:8,
9, 10, 19. 1 Timothy 2:5* 6. Heb. 10:10, 14. Dan. 9:24, 25. Esai. 53:4, 5, 6, 10,
11, 12. Nor does the Scripture speak so of the matter: see Ephesians. 1:7. In whom
we have redemption, through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. So Col. 1:14.
See also. Col. 2:13. Ephesians. 4:32* Mat. 9 2, 5. Mark. 2:59. Luke 5:20, 23. and
7:48. Mat. 26:28. Heb. 9:22. It is true, the method of the Gospel requires,
that the Persons be first united to Christ by faith, before they can obtain
these benefits of his Redemption; but this is not the thing, he speaks of.
(2.) This grace and seed is, with him, common to all flesh: But the Scriptures
tell us not, as we have shown above, that Christ's righteousness was for all,
or that all receive grace, by virtue thereof. (3.) Christ formed within by the
inward operations of that grace and seed, which is common to Pagans, is but a
Natural Christ, and Birth: for such as the cause is, such must the effect be:
And so, what follows upon this, is but a Pagan righteousness and
Justification. (4.) It is false, as we have already manifested, that God is
said to be Reconciled only in respect of this capacity, and offer of grace.
(5.) We say not, that God justifies any remaining in their sins; yet we
grant, that the Justified may commit sins, and thereby fall under God's
fatherly displeasure, Psalm. 89* 31, 32, 33. and 51:7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12. and
32:5. 1 Cor. 11:30, 32. Luke 1:20. Mat. 26:75. and yet withal remain, in the
state of Justification, Luke 22:32. Heb. 10:24. for we approve not of
Antinomians, in this matter.

20. The Proposition we have heard, and what he would properly assert thereby,
we are yet to learn: Possibly his proofs will help us to understand it. The
first proof Page 130. us from Romans 3:25. Here, says he, the Apostle shows
the efficacy of Christ^s death, viz. that by it, and faith in it, remission of
by past sins is obtained. And what then? This is it in which, and for which
the long suffering of God is exercised toward men. And what then? Therefore
though men by their daily sins deserve eternal death, yet by virtue of the
sacrifice of Christ, grace and the seed of God move them in love, dureing the
day of their visitation, -- that they may be redeemed from evil. Here are
Quakers dreams, whereof the text makes no mention, and dreams that have no
sense, but with men of distracted brains.

21. We are nothing the wiser by this proof, let us see the next. If God (says
he) should be totally reconciled unto men, and repute them just, while they
were actually unjust, why does he so often complean of his people, as Esai 59:2.
where there is perfect and complete reconciliation, there is no separation; or
it will follow, that sins can make no separation, and that their good works and
worst sins are the same, in Gods account, This gives too great liberty to
sin. And in the margin, he says, he speaks not here of persons not yet
converted, whom Antinomians, their adversaries, say were justified from the
beginning; but of persons converted, according to Protestants, who may fall
into grievous sins, and yet are said by them, to remain perfectly and wholly
justified. Answ. (1.) Here begin we to understand something of his
Proposition, and of its design: And for answer we say, That there is a
twofold unrighteousness; one of State, or of Person, another of Condition, and
particular Actions. As to the first, no unrighteous person is justified;
because, before Justification, he must be clothed with the imputed
righteousness of Christ, and so constituted just; and in Justification declared
just, because constituted just. And as to the second, though such an one, as
commits sin, be in so far unrighteous, as to his actions; and in that, not
justified, or approven of God: Yet, being united to Christ by faith, and
thereby put in a justified state, he remains in Gods account, a justified
person, as to his State, which is not broken off by these sins. This may be
further cleared, when we come to speak of perseverence. (2.) Not to insist on
Esai. 59. and other such Scripture places, which may be understood of the
generality and body of a Church, which are Gods people by profession, but not
by real union, through faith; and so speak nothing to the point in hand: We
say, that sin in the justified, though it makes a separation from God, in
respect of his fatherly smileing countenance, and so procures fatherly
displeasure, wrath and anger, and sad chaftnings; Yet makes not a separation
from the state of favor; nor puts them again into that state of
separation, wherein they were before conversion. (3.) We grant, that sins in
the Regenerat can so far make a separation, as that by such sins, the
regenerat may incur Gods displeasure, Esa. 64:5, 6, 9. 2 Samuel 11:27. grieve
the Spirit of God Ephesians. 4:30. lose some measure of their graces and comforts
Psalm. 51:8, 10, 12. Revel. 2.4. Cant. 5:2, 3, 4, 6. have their consciences
wounded Psalm. 37:3, 4, and 51:8. and bring temporal judgments on themselves, 1
Cor. 11:32. Psalm. 89: ver. 31 32. (4.) Hence we see a manifest difference,
betwixt their best works and worst sins, even in Gods account. (5.) And also
we see, how false it is to say, that our doctrine opens a door to
licentiousness. (6.) Though he call Antinomians his adversaries; Yet he and
they agree in this principal thing against the Orthodox, that both say there is
no difference to be put, betwixt God's Fatherly-displeasure, and his Law-wrath.

22. His third argument follows, which in sum, is this, The Gospel
requires faith and repentance, and other like conditions, before
Justification; which is in vain, if we be justified before. Ans. This says
something against Antinomians, who plead for a Justification before faith: But
the man knows, that we are not of that judgment; for our Confession of faith
says Chap. 11. 4. That though God did from all eternity decree to justify all
the elect (Gal. 3:8, 1 Pet. 1:2, 19, 20* Romans 8:30) and Christ did, in the
fullness of time, die for their sins, and rise again for their Justification
(Gal. 4:4. 1 Timothy 2:6. Romans 4:25.) yet they are not justified, until the holy
Spirit does, in due time, actually apply Christ unto them (Col. 1:21, 22. Gal.
2:16. Tit. 3:4, 5, 6, 7.) What follows in that Page 131. speaks nothing
against us; for we maintain not Antinomian doctrine. But Page 132. he says,
that the Intercession of Christ should be made vain and unnecessary, if he
should pray for such, as are already reconciled and perfectly justified. Ans.
Neither does this make against us: for we say not, with Antinomians, that
sins not yet committed, are actually pardoned. And as for the state of
Reconciliation, and Justification, which we own; as it makes not after-sinnes
to be already pardoned, so it rather establishes the use and necessity of
Christ's intercession, to the end, they, who are justified, may obtain
remission of these after-sins, after the Gospel method; that is, after they
have repented of them, and gone by faith to the blood of Christ; and that they
may get grace to recover them out of sin, by Faith and Repentance. And this may
serve for confutation of what follows, being nothing but a repetition of his
corrupt doctrine, and a renewed act of his wonted manner of perverting
Scripture, to the countenancing of his dreams, without any color of verity.

23. He says next, he will answer Objections, and proposes one Page 133.. 6.
And that he says, is taken from 2 Cor. 5:18, 19. whence he says, they (and
who these are. he tells not) infer that Christ perfected totally the work
of reconciliation, while he was upon the earth. Ans. If the meaning of the
Objection be, that Christ did so perfect the work of reconciliation, on earth,
that there was nothing to be done by man, in order to his actual Justification,
and reconciliation with God; we own it not: And by his answer it seems this
is the meaning thereof. Of the place we spoke above, and rejected his corrupt
sense thereof, which here again he repeateth. The next Objection is from verse.
21. and he thus frames it, As our sin is imputed to Christ, so is his
Righteousness imputed to us, though we be not just; and we are just only by
imputation, as Christ was a sinner. How this is brought in here, I see not: but
he must take his liberty. Let us hear what he answers. Albeit (says he)
Christ is said to have borne our sins, and to have suffered for them, and to
be reputed among men, for a sinner; Yet God did not repute him a sinner, for he
was holy. Ans. That Christ was personally and inherently holy, is very true;
and that God looked upon him, as such, is true also; but yet, as a Cautioner,
taking on the debt of his people, he became imputatively a sinner; And the
Father constituting him thus a cautioner, in the room and place of the chosen
ones, is here said to have made him sin, who knew no sin, that we through him
might be made the righteousness of God. He adds. Nor did Christ die, that we
might be accounted just, though no more really just, than Christ was really
unjust. Ans. Nor do we speak so; but this we say, as Christ, who was inherently
and personally holy; Yet, as our Cautioner, was by imputation accounted a
sinner, our sins being laid upon him, and caused to meet upon him, as Esa.
53:6. So, though we be unrighteous in ourselves, and inherently sinful and
guilty; Yet, by imputation of Christ's righteousness, we are really accounted
just. He proceeds, If we be made just, as Christ was a sinner, by imputation,
then, as there was not the least sin in Christ, so there is no necessity for
the least righteousness in us. Answ. Neither is there any necessity of our
righteousness, (if we except faith closeing with Christ) in order to our
becoming Righteous by imputation, or being justified upon that account. But as
to other ends and uses, he knows we plead for a necessity of inherent
righteousness. He says, This is to be understood only in that he did undergo
torments in soul and body, which were due to our sins, that we might be
partakers of that grace, which he by suffering obteaned for us, by the
operations of which grace, we are made the righteousness of God in him. Ans.
This is said but not proven; and is contradictory to the native import of the
words, and scope of the place: His undergoing the punishment due to our sins,
as our Sponsor and Cautioner, presupposes his standing in our room, and being
charged with our guilt, else he could not have suffered, and paid our debt, as
our Surety, He proves, That this righteousness is meaned of infused
righteousness, because the Apostle speaks of such a righteousness in the 14,
15, and 16. verses of the following Chapter. Answ. This Argument is fit for a
Quaker, and for a desperate cause; but a wise man will laugh at it. But says
he, There should be concord betwixt light and darkness, and betwixt
righteousness and unrighteousness, if men were said to be in Christ by an
imputative righteousness without them, while they are actually unjust. Ans. He
knows, that though we say, persons are justified only by a righteousness
imputed, whereby they are declared to be really righteous in the sight of God,
and accepted of as such: Yet we say with all, that the same persons are really
sanctified; and that sanctification is inseparably joined with Justification:
And so the discord is in his own imagination. But he loves to drink in
Bellarmines muddy waters. He says, that Christ would never, in all his
sermons, have people resting upon such a righteousness; but did always
recommend to them good works, as instruments of Justification. Ans. This is a
notorious untruth. See Ioh. 6:29. and 9:35, 36. and 10:38. and 12:36. and 14*
1. and 16:9. Nor do we regard his saying, that to his observation, there is no
mention of the imputed righteousness of Christ in the Scriptures: For his
observation is small, and of little worth: But were he as much acquanted with
the Scriptures, as he is with Popish writers, and Quakers vanities, he would be
in case to speak otherwise; However we know, this is Bellarm: argument de
Iustif. lib. 2. c 7. And Protestants have abundantly confuted it, pointing him
to Romans 4* 5, 6, 11. and 5* 18, 19. 2 Cor. 5:19, 21. Romans 3:23, 24, 25, 27, 28.
Ier. 23:6. 1 Cor. 1* 30.

24. His second proposition follows Page 135. which is this. That by this
inward birth, or Christ formed within, we are formally justified. That is, in
Bellarmines words. That Inherent righteousness is the formal cause of our
Justification. Let us hear, what way our Quaker proves this. He adduceth 1
Cor 6:11. which is Bellarm. 3. Argument. But what says he of this place?
Justification here (says he) must be understood of making really just. And if
by really just he mean inherently just; as he must, or speak nonsense, I
enquire, why so? Otherwise (says he) washing and Sanctification must be also
understood imputatively. What necessity is there for this? for (says he) in
the foregoing verses the Apostle was showing, how no unrighteous person shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Very good, what then? And here he subsumeth,
saying such were some of you etc. And what then? And because they were now
washen and sanctified therefore they were also justified. Though this may be
true, in one sense; to wit, that their sanctification and washing was a proof
and evidence, that they were justified, because all justified persons are also
sanctified and washen: Yet it is not true in the Quakers sense, to wit, that by
their Sanctification they were justified; that is, really made inherently just,
and thereupon justified: And where finds he his, because and therefore, in
the text? He proceeds, for if this justification were not real. (And who
says, that it is imaginary; or a fictitious thing? He should have said, if
this justification were not a making inherently holy;) then it might be said,
that the Corinthians, not having left their evil courses, but abideing in them,
were justified. Ans. This consequence is false, and has no appearance of truth
in it: we say with him, that there was a real change upon the Corinthians, and
that their faith was not a mere fruitless assent; but this real change was in
Sanctification, and not in Justification.

25. He tells us next very gravely, that he could never read or see, nor with
any color of reason conceive what could evince justification to be here taken
imputatively. And what wonder, seeing no man ever spoke of a justification here
taken imputatively: As if there were two justifications, one real, another
imputative; will he name the man that speaks so. But if his meaning be, that
he never read nor saw, nor could conceive, what could evince Justification to
be taken here in the orthodox sense: We cannot help it; for when men put out
their own eyes, or give up themselves to the Devil, that he may do it, what
remedy? Justification, with we, being always (at least most rarely otherwise)
in Scripture taken in a farensical sense: And though it were granted, that
here, and some where else, it did import the same, that sanctification does;
yet this man could not hence prove, that the word Justification did never
signify another thing, seeing one and the same word may signify various things
in Scripture; nor could he hence prove, that this was the proper import of the
word, seeing the Apostle is not here defineing the nature of Justification, but
showing what a change was made upon them, both a real and relative.

26. But, as a learned grammarian, he tells us, that the word Iustificare is
either derived from the substantive Iustitia, or from the adjective Iustus, and
both these are used to signify truly and really, not suppositively, that
virtue of the soul, which is expressed by the word Iustitia. Yea the adjective
Iustus signifies a man, in whom that virtue is: for not only is it a great
impropriety, but a lie, to call a man just, who is suppositivly and not really
such. And Iustisico formed from Iustitia signifies him, who is made just,
seeing it is but a composition of the verb Facio, and of the adjective Iustus;
and so Iustifico, is Iustum facio, I make just, and Iustificatus is justus
facius, made just. ^o all which, I Ans. (1.) If this man would have given us a
seasonable taste of his gammatical pulp, he should have shown us, that the
Hebrew and Greek words, which are rendered in the latin by Iustifico and
Iustificatus, have this import, that he would prove the latin words to have;
for whatever he may think with Bellarmine (who has helped him here) of the
latin vulgar version, as it is called, we do not account it authentic. So
that though all that he has said were true, it would prove nothing, but that
these latin words were not fit enough to express the Hebrew and Greek words
by. (2.) But he must know, that use is the master of words, and that they go
not always by the rules of etymology: and he cannot but know, that Iustifico
and Iustificatus do usually import a judicial, or juridical absolution, by the
sentence of a judge, from what was laid to the charge of the impanelled; as
they do also signify in our own language. When do we say, that a man is
justified, by infused justice? Or let him tell me, when or in what sentences,
we use these words, when we would signify thereby infusion of righteousness,
or making just? Let him consider these passages of Scripture, and see how his
sense will agree; Exodus 23* 7 Deuteronomy 25:1, 2. 2 Samuel 15:4. 1 King. 8:3^. Psalm.
82:3. Esai. 5:22. and 50* 8. Luke 7:29. and 10:29. and 16:15. Dan. 8:14. Job
32:2. and 9:2. and 33:32. Esai. 53:11. Dan. 12:3. Mat. 12:37. Ier. 3:11. Genesis
44:16. Prove. 17:15. Not to mention other passages, where justification of a
sinner before God is handled, because he may think to affix his vain gloss
unto them; as we have seen in part, and shall see more (3.) How Iustifico, I
Justify, can signify him, who is made just, I would feign know, of what Master
he has learned.

27. This man will needs be the master of words, and therefore he will have
Iustifico to be like sanctifico, honorifico, sacrifico. Ans. And why not also
as verifico? Sure, honorificare signifies not to infuse honor, but publicly
to declare our respect, for such a person: and he knows the common saying,
honor magis est in honorante, quam in honorato. And Sacrifico signifies
sometimes I sacrifice, and offer in sacrifice, and ask God pardon. Is that to
make holy? But says he, all these are spoken of a subject really endued with
that virtue, from which he has that denomination. No man is said to be
sanctified, who is really profane; so nor can any man be said to be Justified,
who is not really just. Ans. And do we say, that a man is said to be Justified,
who is not really just? No. He is really just by Righteousness imputed, and
then declared and pronunced just, by Justification: But he should show, that as
to sanctify, signifies sometimes, to infuse holiness, so to Justify is to
infuse righteousness; or that a man can not be denominated Justified, but upon
the account of infused and inherent righteousness, as one cannot be denominated
sanctified, without inherent holiness. But this is too hard for him.

28. His perverseness discovers it self, in the following words, where playing
with the forensical use of the word Justify, he says, it is, as when one
really guilty is freed from the punishment, and so he is Justified. that is,
put in the place of him, who is just; Insinuating hereby, that in our
justification there is nothing but a fredom from punishment, while as we say,
that the cautionary righteousness of the Lord our Surety is imputed to the
believer, and he thereupon Justified. He proceeds, and tells us, that this
use, (to wit forensical) of the word proceeded from this supposition, that none
should be liberated but innocents. Ans. Rather from this supposition, that none
ought to be absolved, but either he who is not guilty of what is charged, or
has satisfied the Law and accusation by a Cautiner. What he adds is nothing
to the purpose: Hence we say, (says he) I shall Justify this, or that,
meaning that such a thing is Justifiable. For believers are Justifiable, by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. What he cites out of Pareus against
Bellarm de justific. p. 469. where Pareus is showing how Bellarmine at length
comes to his hand, is nothing to the purpose, for when he says, we are not
formally righteous or so called, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
his meaning is, that thereby we are not made such, as never sinned; as his
following words import: but that the Righteousness of Christ is not so imputed
to us, as that it becomes the formal objective reason of our Justification,
Pareus says not. The matter is cleared thus; though a man, who is not
solvendo, can not be made, by his cautioners paying of the debt for him, one
that is formally just, and that has never failed in paying his debt, nor can
the cautoners payment be so imputed to him, when he is absolved; yet the
Cautioners payment is so imputed to him, as that thereupon he is absolved and
justified; and so declared one that has paid his debt, by his cautioner; and
consequently free from any execution of the Law against him; and that payment
of the cautioner is so imputed to him, as that it becomes the Formal Objective
Reason, why he is absolved.

29. He wonders, that we should place our hope and confidence, in a matter of
such moment, upon a figurative use of a word, and exclude that, or at least not
account it necessary, without which we cannot see God. Ans. We deny, that our
use of the word is figurative; and though it were, yet the thing imported
thereby, is such a sure ground, that if he miss it, it may cost him his soul.
We account not holiness and good works unnecessary; but only exclude them from
being any part of the Formal Objective Reason in our Justification. And though
he could not but know this; Yet he would maliciously calumniate us. Then he
tells us, that the word is sometimes used in Scripture of them, who arrogat
righteousness to themselves, though it do not belong to them, citeing Exodus
23.7, Job 9:20. and 27:5 Prove. 17:15. Esai. 5:23. Luk 10:29. and 16:15. Ioh.
11:2, 3, 22. Ier. 3:11. Ezech. 16:5. and 15:2. Ans. Though impertinency enough
might be observed here, Yet this satisfies us, that both in some of those
places, and others cited by us before, the word is not taken in his sense. I
wonder how he can say, that all these places speak of men Justifying the
ungodly, when the very first is spoken of God himself: And some of them speak
of a not justifying, as Job 9:20. and 27:5. Many of them speak nothing of
Justifying at all, as Esai. 5:23. Ioh. 11:2, 3, 22. Ezech. 16:5. and 15:2. So
unhappy is the man in his citations.

30. But Page 137. He comes to speak of the word, as used in those places of
Scripture, where the matter of Justification is handled; And in the very entry,
he ushereth his way with a false, ignorant, calumnious insinuation, as if we
held, that Justification were but supposititious and imaginary, and not real;
when as, by what we have already said, the judicious may see, that the
Justification, he pleads, for is no real thing; but a popish dream. And
another ignorant cheat he uses, saying, that the signification, which he
puts on the word, is genuine, and ours but figurative; Whileas our sense of
it is proper, ordinary, and for any thing I know, constant; sure he has given
no one instance to the contrary; and his is fictitious, forged at Rome,
confirmed by no appoven author. But says he, In paul's Epistles to the Romans,
Corinth. Galat. and else where, where this doctrine is handled, he says
frequently, that we are not justified by the Law, nor by the Law of Moses; and
here the word may be taken in its proper and genuine sense, without any
absurdity. Ans. But what is this proper and genuine sense? Is it that we are
made just by infused righteousness? Then this absurdity will follow, that the
Apostles meaning is, the Law does not infuse righteousness; and who dreamed,
that it did. Is it, that we are declared just, because of Inherent Holiness and
Righteousness; then this proper and genuine sense should be a perfect
contradiction to what Paul says: or his meaning must be, when he says, we are
not Justified by the Law, that we are indeed justified by Inherent Holiness, or
Conformity to the law. What more? The meaning of these words, we are Justified
by faith (says he) may by, we are made just by faith purifieing the heart.
Ans. Then the Apostles should contradict himself; for if we be thus made just
by faith, we are made just by works: and further, purifying of the heart,
cannot otherwise be understood, but of renewing the heart; but Justifying
signifies not making just. Again says he, When we are said to be Justified
by grace, by Christ, by the Spirit, what absurdity to understand this of making
just? Ans. Of being Justified by the Spirit* we read ^ot, for these words by
the Spirit mentioned 1 Cor. 6:11. are to be referred to washing, and
sanctification. When we are said to be Justified by grace it is by the gracious
and free favor of God (as our Divines make good against the Papists) and that,
with the circumstances of the places, are against such a Justification. Nor
must we any where so interpret any passage, as to make it cross or contradict
other passages. When we are said to be Justified by Christ, the meaning is
clear against his sense.

31. He cites again 1 Cor. 6:11. (not 11:6.) and then tells us, that Thysius
thinks, that Justification here includes sanctification, as its consequent,
and that Zanchius, in Ephesians. 2:4. thinks it is the same with sanctification.
And that Bullinger on the place says, the Apostle in diverse words expresses
the same thing. Ans. (1.) None of these Divines confound them, and make them
one, as this Quaker does; but distinctly and orthodoxly explain the nature
both of Justi^^cation and Sanctification. (2.) As I said above, though this
were granted, that the word Justify should import the same with sanctify, in
this or that place; Yet unless he made it manifest, that it always so
imports, and can never be taken in another sense, he could not make good his
Assertion and Opinion; So that in all this work, he is but beating the wind.
(3.) Thysius had no ground to speak so, seeing sancti^^cation is as well
expressed, as Justification, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified (4.)
Bullinger says no more than what Calvin; says, and yet Calvin distinguishes
them, in his Comment on the place, Zanchius says no such thing, in the place
cited.

32. In the next place Page 138. he cites with Bellarm. Romans 8:30. And says,
that either Sanctification must be excluded, or Justification must be taken in
its proper sense. Ans. (1.) There is no necessity for either; for
Sanctification is comprehended under Vocation, which is saving and effectual;
otherwise the linkes of this chain could be broken; for a common and
ineffectual call is not attended with Justification, and Glorification: And
effectual Vocation is by infusion of grace, and the Spirit of holiness and a
real change. (2.) Sanctification might be comprehended under the word
Justified, it being a necessary and inseparable consequent, and that without
any prejudice to the native, usual and constant import of the word Justified.
(3.) Thereafter verse. 33.34. the Apostle clears, in what sense he took
Iu^tified, when he opposes it unto condemned, a forensical term; and to
accused, another. His citing of some Protestants so saying. I pass, finding no
argument alleiged by them, to enforce this acceptance. Melanthon's saying that
to be Justified by faith, does not only signify to be pronunced just, but to be
made just. May admit of a saife interpretation: for he says not, to be made
just by inherent righteousness. And it is certain, that all that are Justified,
are first made just, not by inherent righteousness, but by the Imputed
righteousness of Christ. What he cites out of one Martinus Boraeus, I cannot
examine, having never seen the book, Bucer's words cited make nothing for him.
B. Forbes's words I will not justify, but judge that Cardinal Contarenus spoke
more orthodoxly, then he. The Fathers so taking the word sometimes moves not
me, more nor it did Calvin. Chemnitius and Zanchius, cited by himself. And
further, if to justify signify to make righteous; to accuse, and to condemn
(which are opposite terms) must signify to make unrighteous, or unjust.

33. After this. Page 140. he brings in his conclusion from what he has
said, and it is a bold one. Having now sufficiently (says he) proved, that by
Justification, must be understood, to be made really just. This is concluded,
like a Quaker, with unparalleled falsehood, impudency and boldness. He undertook
only to prove, that the word might, without absurdity, be so understood, and
how weakly he has done this, we have seen: But now he wonderfully concludes a
must be, from a may be, and that too no ways satisfyingly proved. But I have
said already, that the believer, who is Justified, may be said to be really
made just, but not in his sense, nor because, of the import of the word, as he
alleigeth; but because the judgment of God is according to truth, and God will
not justify an unjust man. The Justified person therefore is first made just,
not by Inherent Holiness and Righteousness, but by the Righteousness of Christ
Imputed to him, and Received by faith. What says he next? I do confidently
affirm from real and sensible experience (but the delusory sensations, or
impressions of an erroneous Spirit, on the minds of persons, given up to
strong delusion, is no demonstration to us of the verity of what they boldly
affirm) that the immediate, next and formal cause, whereby a man is Justified,
in the sight of God, is the revelation of Christ in the soul, who converteth
and renews the mind; and he, who is the Author of this work, being so formed
and revealed, we are truly Justified and accepted in the sight of God. Ans.
(1.) Who sees not, that these things, as here expressed, are not such, as can
fall under the inward sensations of the soul? Can the soul feel what is the
Immediate, Nearest, or Formal Cause, of God's acts? What needs more proof of a
desperate delusion? (2.) If the revelation of Jesus Christ be such a cause of
Justification, Justification cannot be a making just; for it is not, as he
says, the revelation that converteth and renews, but Christ revealed: and if
Christ revealed makes the change, ^ustification does it not; nor can
Justification be a declareing of one righteous because of inherent
righteousness; for here the man is Justified, upon the revelation; and yet the
man is not renewed, for he is not renewed by the revelation, but by Christ
revealed, and the Revelation of Christ, is before this Operation of Christ.
(3.) If the man be not justified, till Christ be formed in him, as his last
words seem to say, then the revelation of Christ cannot be the Immediate cause
of Justification because that is before this forming of Christ in the man, for
it is before the work of Christ reforming, and renewing the mind. (4.) I see
all this Renovation is but upon the mind, and this Formation of Christ is but
a Revelation in the mind; But where is the work of grace upon the will? This
would say, that the Papists opinion is more tolerable then this, for they
include graces seated in the will. (5.) Where does the Scripture speak of
Justification after this manner? We are often said to be justified by faith; but
never are we said to be justified by such a Revelation. (6.) Therefore I may as
confidently affirm, that this his sensation is but a sensible delusion of
Satan, the grand enemy of the Grace of God, and of the Gospel.

34. Yet he goes about to prove this, and tells us first, that this method of
salvation is set down by Paul Romans 5:10. for, says he, The Apostle does
signify, that reconciliation is made by the death of Christ. Ans. This is true
of that Reconciliation, which is actual, and is had by faith in the death of
Christ; but not of that Reconciliation, which he imagines; whereby, to wit,
God is prone to Receive and Redeem man. What next? He affirms Justification,
that is, Salvation, to be in Christ's life. Ans. And what ground is there for
this Interpretation, seeing the sense is obvious; to wit, that seeing by the
propitiatory death of Christ, believers, laying hold upon him by faith, are
brought into a state of Peace and Reconciliation with God, they need not fear,
but they shall be brought through all difficulties and steps, to the enjoyment
of life eternal, and full salvation, Christ being now alive, to bestow all that
he has purchased? What more? He says, That this life of Christ is something
inward and spiritual in the heart, whereby he is renewed and brought out of
death, where naturally he lay; and raised up, and revived unto God, the same
Apostle shows Ephesians. 2:5. Ans. This is nothing but a palpable perversion of
the words of the Apostle: for the life can no more be understood here of some
inward thing, wrought in man, than Christ's death can be so interpreted. And if
he had so expounded the words, he had spoke more like himself above; as also
more like other Quakers, who talk of Christ's sufferings and death, etc. as all
done within man. (2.) That the Apostle Ephesians. 2:5. is speaking of believers
being by grace quickened together with Christ, and risen together with him,
etc. is true: But what says this, for the corrupt gloss of Romans 5:10. where
the life of Christ is only spoken of; and that as it, by which believers may be
assured of their salvation? (3.) What is there in all this, for Justification
by the Revelation of Christ within, reforming the mind, etc, Has the man
forgote his Conclusion already? Ay but, says he, the Apostle mentions a
Revelation of this inward life, 2 Cor. 4:10, 11. and this inward life is that
whereby, he said, we were justified Ans. The life of Christ is indeed said by
Paul 2. Cor. 4:10, 11. to be made manifest, in and by its effects supporting
and carrying the persecuted Apostles, through so many miseries and deaths: But
who, except a Quaker, could say, that the Apostle says, we are justified by
this life? And what vestige is there of this, in the Apostles words?

35. In the next place he cites Tit. 3:5. And hence thus argues, we are
justified by that, by which we are saved. Ans. Yes, by the grace of God we are
freely justified and saved, and that without works of righteousness, which we
have done. Here the Apostle (says he moreover) does manifestly ascribe the
immediate cause of Justification, unto the inward work of regeneration, that is,
to Christ revealed in the soul, by which we are formally accepted of God. Ans.
(1.) What immediate cause is this? That a soul must be wrought up to faith in
Christ, before it can be justified, we grant; and that this faith must be
wrought by the operation of the Spirit, is also true: But that this faith, or
any other work of the Spirit in the soul, is the Formal Objective Cause of
Justification, the Apostle says neither here, nor elsewhere. (2.) To say, that
we are formally accepted of God, that is, as fully righteous, with a
righteousness answering the Law, in all points, and satisfying justice for
b^gones, (as he must mean, or he speaks not to the point) by this work of
Regeneration, is but a jejune begging of what is yet in question: sure, there
is no word of this here.

36. In the third place he cites 2 Cor. 13:5. And says, That it appears
here how earnestly the Apostle would, that they should know Christ in them.
Ans. The Apostle, to the end, that the Corinthians, who at the instigation of
false Teachers, were beginning to have undervalueing thoughts of him, might be
convinced, that he was an Apostle of Christ, and so continue in esteeming of
him as such, does here press them to go in to their own hearts, and see, if
there were any fruits and effects of Christ's living among them by his Spirit,
through his ministry, that, if not, they might not account themselves
Christians, but persons rejected. And what would this say? It appears hence
2. (says he) that the cause of reprobation, or of non-justification, was the
want of the inhabitation of Christ revealed: And, by the rule of contraries,
where Christ is inwardly known and revealed, there the persons are approven and
justified: And nothing can be more clear. Ans. (1.) By what rule, law, or
authority, does he make Reprobation, and No-Jus^ification equipollent terms?
This must be licentia Quakerorum, whereby they have a privilege, contrare to
Scripture, and all Reason, to coin words, phrases, and opinions, in divinity,
at their pleasure. (2.) The want of the effects, and evidences of Christ
dwell^ng in them by his Spirit, is not here given, as the cause of their being
in an evil state, re^ected and disapproved of God, but as a mark and evidence:
And marks and evidences are not always taken from the Immediate, Nearest, and
Formal cause. (3.) It is very true, that by the rule of contraries, where
Christ is indeed revealed and working in the soul, that soul is justified; but
it is most false, that therefore, Christ revealed in the soul is the Formal
Cause, or to speak more properly, the Formal Objective Reason, of
Justification; for himself said above, that good works were properly the
effects and fruits of ^ustification: and yet he knows, the fruits and effects
may be an evidence of the cause in being. (4.) And so, there is nothing more
plain and evident, then that this citation is impertinent, and his argueing
therefrom a non sequitur; and that he is still the old man, a Quaker-disputant.

37. As a parallel place he cites Page 142, Gal. 4:19. And says, this Christ
is the inward hope of glory, Col. 1:27, 28. And what is the hope of Glory, must
be that, to which we nextly and immediately lean unto in Justification. Answ.
And how is this proven? We must believe it, because he says it; and so there
is an end. When the Apostle says Phil. 1: v. 28. And in nothing terrified by
your adversaries, which is -- to you an evident toaken of salvation, he pointed
at something, which might be looked upon, as a ground for hope of glory; must
we also lean to that in justification? After some lines, wherein, after his
usual manner, he must extravage, he says, And such as feel Christ, after this
manner raised, and reigning in them, have a true ground of hope to believe,
that they are justified. Which is very true, because these works of Christ are
inseparable fruits and effects of Justification. After some few words again,
to no purpose, he tells us that Borhaeus and Claudius Albericus Inuncunanus and
Essius (three, whose books I never saw, and whose names I never heard, before I
read this Quakers book) are for Justification by this Revelation: And he
calls them Protestants: but if so I have read of some Papists more sound,
then they are, if their meaning be one and the same with this Quakers. And
finally he cites some words of Mr. Baxters Aphorisms. But he cannot be
ignorant, that Mr Baxters notions, in this particular, are little satisfying;
beside that Mr Baxter himself will have none citeing that book, as expressing
his plain and full meaning. And if he would put the matter to the issue of
trial by humane testimony, we should give him Twenty for one.

38. Now follows his Third proposition, wherein he asserteth two things,
first. That good works; seeing they naturally proceed from this birth, as heat
from the fire, are absolutely necessary unto justification, as a causa sine qua
non, and in which we are justified, and without which we cannot be justified.
Secondly, That such good works are pure and perfect. These he comes to prove
Page 144. etc. And they would appear to be a contradiction; for seeing good
works are the fruits of this birth, and by the birth we are justified, good
works must follow justification, and so cannot be a cause; no not a causa sine
qua non, for even a causa sine qua non must be before the effect. Again what
is that to say, in which we are justified? Is the meaning only, that these
works are approven of God, and we, upon the account of them, so far as they
are done according to a Gospel rule? What will this say, for justification of
State, whereof we are here speaking? finally, How can it be said, that without
good works we cannot be justified, seeing we are justified by the Birth, and the
Birth is but the cause of good works; and so it has been said, that good works
are the Effects and Consequences of Justification? This would suspend
justification until good works appeared, and so we should be justified by the
Bi^th only Initially, or in a preparatory way, but not fully. And further, in
this, he is worse then Papists, who will not say, that the good works by which
we are justified, are such as can stand before Gods tribunal, if He follow the
strick rigor of Law, and not the Gospels admixture of mercy.

39. Let us hear his proofs: The first is our of James 2. whence he frames
this Argument. If no man be justified without faith, and no faith be lively and
valide unto justification without works; then works are necessary unto
justification: But the former is true, etc. Answ. (1.) Though it be true, that
no man, at least come to years of discretion, is justified without faith, as an
instrumental cause laying hold on, and applying Christ and his righteousness;
yet this faith is not the Causa formalis objectiva of justification; and far
less can works be a part of this cause, seeing they are but fruits and
consequences of this faith. (2.) These words, and no faith is lively and valide
unto justification, without works, may admit of a double sense; either the
meaning may be, that no faith is valide unto justification, but that which is
true and lively, and apt to produce good works; or that no faith is valide unto
justification, but that which is actually produceing good works, and in so far
as it is attended with good works. If the first be the meaning, then it is
apparent, that good works cannot be said to be necessary unto justification, as
a cause thereof, for it may be in actual ^eing, when they are but in potentia.
If the last be the true sense, this place of James will not evince it; for
Abraham was justified before he offered up his Son Isaac: And then it would
follow, that no man is justified in his sleep, or when he is not actually doing
some good work. (3.) Thus we see, and the place of James is clear for it, that
good works are only necessary, in the person justified; and necessary to prove
the truth and reality of a justif^ing faith, to the man self, and to others:
And so notwithstanding hereof that is always true, that the Scripture says,
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, James 2:23.
Genesis 15:6. Romans 4:3. Gal. 3:6.

40. His second proof is from several Scriptures, as Heb. 12:14. Mat. 7:21.
John 13:17. 1 Cor. 7:19. Revel. 22:1^ and he thus frames it, If these only
shall enter into the Kingdom, who do the will of the Father; if these only be
called wise builders and blessed, that do the sayings of Christ etc. then good
works are necessary to salvation and to justification, The former is true etc.
Answ. Not to quarrel at the Proposition, as containing words in it, which are
not in the places cited. We shortly answ. that not one of these places speak of
Justification, or mention the necessity of works thereunto: But only of their
necessity unto final salvation; which we deny not: And if his Argument hold, no
man shall be justified, before he be in heaven: All therefore that can hence be
concluded is, that good works are necessary in the person justified, in order
to glory; but not that they are necessary unto justification.

41. These two are all his arguments, and how slender proofs they are of what
he undertook to prove, let any judge. He comes in the next place. 10. to
answer some Objections, The first is taken from Luke 17:10. When ye have done
all that is commanded, say, we are unprofitable servants. Which is a clear
proof, that our works, being but a doing of that, which is commanded, and so a
doing of duty; and such as bring no advantage unto God, as a reparation of his
Glory, or satisfaction to his justice for the wrongs done; and therefore can
have no interest in that, which is the causa formalis objectiva of our
justification; or in that, which we must lean to, as the ground of our
justification before God; or in that, upon which we may expect absolution from
the sentence of the Law, and freedom from the wrath and curse of God, due for
the breach of the Law. What says he to this Argument? He grants, they are not
profitable unto God; but yet he says, they are profitable unto us: he might
add, and to others too; and he might say, that they are useful to set forth
the Glory of God, and several things more might he say, of this kind; but all
is to no purpose, as to our present question. The second Objection is from Romans
3:20, 21, by the righteousness of the Law shall no flesh be justified etc. But
he might have cited to this end whole Chapters of that Epistle, as also of the
Epistle to the Galatians, where the Apostle in down right terms is disputing
against the interest of works, in the matter of Justification. But what
replyeth he? He says, the Apostle excludes the works of the Law, that is, such
as are done by man's strength and will, while he studieth conformity unto the
outward letter of the Law, which therefore are imperfect: but not the works of
the Gospel, done by the Spirit of grace in the heart, according to the inward
and Spiritual Law, which are therefore pure and perfect. Answer (1.) This
explication of Law works and Gospel works, is nakedly proposed to us here,
without any proof; and is an arrow out of Bellarmines quiver: all works done by
man's mere strength and will without the Grace of God, and the help of the
Spirit, are no good works at all, because not performed in the right manner,
nor flowing from a principle of grace. (2.) That Gospel works, even performed
by the Spirit, are not pure and perfect, (as he with Papists say) shall be seen
in due time. (3.) The Apostle excludes all such works, which are not that
Righteousness of God without the Law, which was witnessed to by the Law and the
Prophets: nor the Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all, and upon all, them that believe, Romans 3:21, 22: And all such as mar
justification freely by grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ
verse. 24 As also, all such, as darken that declaration of the righteousness of
God, who must be just, when he is the justifier of him, which believes in
Jesus, whereof mention is made verse, 25, 26. And all such works, as give ground
of boasting, which is only excluded by the Law o^ Faith verse. 27. And all such,
as are opposite to justification by faith verse. 28. (4.) Nay Abraham's and
David's works, which were done by the Spirit, are excluded Romans 4:2, 3, 6, 7, 8.
He goes about to confirm this distinction, from this, that Paul to the Galat.
speaks directly against such, as would press the observation of the legal
Ceremonies, upon the Christian Gentiles. Page 145, 146. Answ. Though that might
be the occasion of Paul's disput; and it be true, that Paul speaks much, and
particularl^, against the ceremonial Law; yet he does not insist upon that
hypothesis, or branch of the question, but takes occasion thereby, to discuss
the point in Thesi^, of all works in general, even such, as are done in
conformity to the moral Law; therefore he adduceth Chap. 3:10, 12. that passage
Deuteronomy. 27:26. and Levit. 18:5. which cannot be meaned of the ceremonial Law
only: and speaks against all Justification by works, which is opposite to
Justification by faith Chap. 3:11, 12. What he says afterward of the necessity
of good works, we stand to, in the sense maintained by Our against Papists,
that is, as antecedent adjuncts, and dispositions unto glory; not as any way
meritorious either of Justification, or Salvation: nor do we approve of the
Papists second Justification by works. He urges again Tit. 3:5. And thence
speaks thus, all grant that such as are saved, are Justified. True: what
more? Therefore when he says he has saved us he says also he has Justified
us. Ans. True, yet it will not follow, that all that is antecedent to
Salvation, is also antecedent to Justification; or that all, that is requisite,
in order to final Salvation, is also requisite in order to Justification. The
Apostle verse. 5. presupposing Justification, is showing what way the Lord
brings about their salvation, to wit, by washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; and that he may clear up the first step of the
work, he speaks to Justification verse. 7. that being Justified by his grace
etc. and this grace excludes all works, for what is of grace, it not of works,
otherwise grace is no more grace, and what is of works is not of grace,
otherwise works are no more works. Romans 11:6 and to him that works, is the
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt Romans 4:4. What he says afterward
Page 147. of the difference betwixt works done by persons unrenewed, and
persons regenerated, is not much to the matter in hand, and tends clearly to
disparage his own doctrine, concerning the Sanctification and Salvation of
Heathens. And withal I see no ground, to take in these last, into
Justification, as he would have us; for then, as no man is said until all
these works be ended; so also shall no man be justified, until he be glorified.

42. The third Objection is taken from the impurity of our best works: And he
answers with Bellarmine; That works done by the Spirit and grace of God, that
is, of persons regenerated, are perfect; Ans. His meaning must be, that they do
agree to the Law, in all points, otherwise a curse attends them Deuteronomy. 27:26.
Gal. 3, 10. And if so, why did David say Psalm. 143:2. and enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh be justified. And
Ps. 130:3. If thou Lord should mark iniquittes: O Lord, who shall stand? and,
why does Job say, Chap. 9:15. whom, if I were righteous, yet would I not
answer. And why says the church Esai. 64:6. all our righteousneses are as
filthy rags, which, though some, cited by this man, (not regarding the
interpretation of Bertius the Arminian) think, does not immediately prove, that
there is no merit in our works, as not being spoken of all mankind; yet does
abundantly evidence, that the penitent church, considering her best ways, saw
much defilement in them, that might make the Lord abhor them, as filthy rags;
and persons, in a penitent frame, use to get a better sight of sin, and of
their ways, than others have, or themselves formerly had. His saying, that
hereby is not meant these works, that Christ works in us; but the works,
which we ourselves do, in our own strength. Is vain, for such as are done, in
our own strength, cannot be called Righteousness. But then, says he, it would
follow, that all holiness must be cast away, as filthy rags. So they must be
cast away, in the matter of Justification; for we must not found our hope of
acceptance with God, and Justification before him, on these: but it will not
follow, that they must be laid aside in our practice, and not be studied and
endeavored, to God's glory, though we must always lament our shortcoming, and
run to the blood of Jesus, that the defilement, cleaving to our best works, may
be purged away; Nor do we think, that this hyperbolick expression of the
penitent church will warrant any, to ca^l all the work of the Spirit of God, in
his people, sordide and filthy rags. What is of God should be acknowledged good
and acceptable, though the defilements, that adhere to the best of God's works
in us here, because of our continueing corruption, and because of the lustings
of the flesh in us, should be mourned over, and keep us humble. One thing I
would further note here. That if our Gospel-works be such, why are we not
Justified because of them, as well, as in them? He further answers page 149..
12 That though it were granted, that the best of men are imperfect; Yet God can
produce perfect works in them, by his Spirit. Ans. the qustion is not what God
can do; but what he does. God can make all his perfect; Yet the supposition
made, says he does not so: He has thought it fit for his own glory, so to
work in his Saints, as they may have, so long as they are here, a body of death
to wrestle with, and occasion to pray daily, forgive us our sins, and to run
to the fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, that they may be washen. He proceeds;
The Spirit of God is not capable of a blot, and therefore all Christ's works,
wrought in his children, are pure and perfect. Ans. The Spirit, it is true, is
not capable of pollution; yet his works, as received by us, and as we are the
formal actors of them, are obnoxious to pollution. And does not the Scripture
tell us, that God first begins a good work, in us, and afterward perfecteth
it. Phil. 1:6.? How can then, all the works of Christ in us be perfect? And if
it were so, his children here should be as holy, as they will be in heaven; for
what is higher than perfection? Thus we see, this man, will outstripe Bellarm.
who confessed, that our actual righteousness was imperfect, because of the
admixtion of venial faults, and stood in need of daily remission: And will run
the length of bold Vasques, who thinks, that such have no need of remission.
in 1. 2. Disp. 204. c. 2. and 3. He further argues. It would then follow, that
the miracles and works of the Apostles themselves, as the conversion of the
Gentiles, gathering of Churches, writting of Scripture, and giving of
themselves to the death for Christ, were defiled with sin. Ans. we must
distinguish betwixt these works, which were extraordinary (I mean, as to the
manner of their performance) and so peculiar to such extraordinary persons; in
which they were not, in a manner, formal actors, but passive organs; such as
working of miracles, and writting of Scripture: in these the Apostles moved, as
they were immediately Acted, Inspired, and Led of the Spirit; so that these were
not properly their formal acts. And these, which are of a more ordinary nature,
and wherein they were more formal actors; through the assistance of the Spirit,
whether in works, belonging to their office, as preaching, and gathering of
Churches, or in works of Christianity, as giving themselves to the death, and
the like. As to the first sort, we may grant that they were undefiled, as being
pure acts of the Spirit, wherein the Apostles were but organs, used by the
Spirit, as he saw meet. But as to others, I see no absurdity to say, that they
needed to use that petition, forgive us our sins; The Apostle Paul had his
infirmities and weakneses, and a body of death, that made him cry out, woe is
me, miserableman; and was thereby made to do what he would not, and hindered
from doing what he would Romans 7: The Apostle James says, in many things, we
offend all Iam. 3:2. and the Apostle John says 1 Ioh. 1:8. that if we say,
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

43. Thereafter he gives unto works an instrumental part in Justification,
which is true of faith laying hold on the righteousness of Christ, the only
Objective Formal cause of Justification; but cannot agree to works. But he
cites some Protestants, assenting to this, as Polanus Symphon. c. 27. whose
words, if understood of after pardon, that is, of sins committed after
Justification, as they may, contain nothing but truth; and that truth, which
we question not, acknowledging, that even justified persons before remission of
after sins, must repent, confess, and mourn for their sins, and act faith
on Christ. Zanchius, in the words he cites, is expressly speaking of salvation,
not of Justification: and to this end, he might cite all the Protestants, that
I know of. Amesius is speaking of the same. As for Mr Baxter, I have told
already, that his notions about Justification, are not acceptable to all. As
for what he adds about the word merit, I shall not contend, only I would
say, that seeing it sounds so ill, because of the common and known abuse thereof
by Papists, the less we use it the better, seeing Verba valent usu.

44. Nor shall I say much against his conclusion of this matter; Only while he
tells us, that such may confidently appear before God, who, sensible of their
own unworthiness, and of the unprofitableness of all their works, and
endeavors, etc. did apply themselves unto the light within, and suffered that
grace to work in them, and thereby are renewed, quickened and have Christ risen
in them, and working in them to will and to do, having thus put on Christ, and
being clothed with him, and made partakers of his righteousness: When, I say,
he speaks thus, he but cheateth his Reader, giving him fair words, and no
more: for, as we have formerly seen, in the examination of his Principles. This
light, is but a Pelagian Grace, if not worse, common to all men, Scythian and
Barbarian. And by virtue of this light, without the least help of the grace of
God, (for of grace assisting, far less regenerating such as are in nature, and
so beginning every good work, there is not, in his writings, the least mention)
if the man will but yield, (and of power and full ability to do this, he makes
no question) he becomes regenerated, begotten of God, partaker of the divine
nature, and what not? And this is this Man's Sanctification, and foundation of
Justification; whereof Pagans and Barbarians, who never did, nor never shall
hear of Christ, are as capable, as such who live within the visible Church, and
that without any new grace communicated, by that which is borne with them: Let
the Reader now Judge, what a Regeneration, and Sanctification can flow from
this, which is in every man; and what Justification that can be, which is
founded hereupon; And whether or not, this be a sure bottom to stand upon, and
with confidence to rest upon, while we are thinking of appearing before God?
And what an antievangelick Justification, and Salvation it is, which Quakers
maintain. O what a dreadful Disappointment will such wretches, that live and
die according to these Principles, meet with, in end, when it will be too late,
to hel^e the matter by changing their thoughts? Let all, that fear God, and
would not destroy their own souls, beware of these men; for their doctrine is
damnable and devilish.

CHAP. XIV. Of Perfection, and a Possibility of not sinning.
1. WE heard, toward the end of the preceding Chapter, how he pleaded for the
Perfection of the Saints, and of the work of grace in them. Here in his S.
Thesis, and its explication, he gives us his mind more fully. In his Thesis
he says, That this holy and immaculate birth, when it is fully produced in
any, the body of sin and death is crucified and taken away, and their hearts
become subject unto and united with the truth, so that they obey no
suggestions, or temptations of Satan, and are freed from actual sin, and
transgressing of the Law; and in that respect they are perfect. But yet this
perfection admits of an increase; and there remains always, in some
respect, a possibility of sinning, if the mind does not diligently and
vigilantly attend unto God. And so high and confident is he, in this matter,
that he accounts the answer given to the 149. Question, in our Larger
Cathechisme, Impious, and spoken against the power of divine grace; because it
is there said, No man is able, either of himself (Iam. 3:2. Ioh. 15:5. Romans
8:3.) or by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the
commandments of God Eccles. 7:20. 1 Ioh. 1:8, 10. Gal. 5* 17. Romans 7:18:19.)
but does daily break them in thought (Genesis 6:5 and 8:11.) word and deed (Romans
3:9. to 21. Iam. 3:3, to 13.) But whatever he thinks, we are not ashamed of
this Answer, nor of what is said Conf. of Faith Chapter 16. 5. toward the end,
That our best works, as they are wrought by us, are defiled, and mixed with so
much weakness and imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of God's
judgment, (Esa. 64:6. Gal. 5:17. Romans 7:15, 18. Psalm. 130:3. and 143:2. And
ibid.. 4. They, who in their obedience attain to the greatest hight, which is
possible in this life, are so far from being able to supererogate, and to do
more, than God requires, as that they fall short in much, which in duty they
are bound to do, Luke 17:10. Neh. 13 22. Job 9:2, 3. Gal. 5:17. Nor yet of what
is said Chap. 13. 2. This Sanctification is throughout in the whole man, yet
imperfect in this life; there abides still some remnants of corruption in
every part (1 Ioh. 1: verse. 10. Romans 7: verse. 18, 23. Phil. 3: verse. 12.)
whence arises a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh lusting against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5:17. 1 Pet. 2:11.

2. This Perfection is commonly maintained by them all. Mr Hicks in his 1.
Dial. Page 50. tells us, that they hold a perfect freedom from all sin, in this
life: saying too, Alas for thee! where would thou be perf^ctly free from
sin, if not in this lift? Mr Stalham also in his book against them Page 138
etc. manifests it by their own words and arguments. And though it may be
matter of amazement to some, to hear men speak so, who of all others, one would
think, have least cause to preach this doctrine, without a public declaration
withal, that they are not the men, who are thus Perfect; and consequently
according to their own doctrine are not Christians, upon the account that he
shall not ordinarily meet with, in any heretics writings, so much Ignorance,
Boldness, Foolish Confidence, Abusing of Scripture, Untruth, Heresy,
Blasphemy, Reproaching, Revileing, Calumnies, Scolding, etc. As is every where
to be found in theirs. Yet, when we consider what blasphemous grounds they lay
down, we shall see, that it is a native consequence of their doctrine. For Mr
Hicks in his 2. Dialog. shows us, that Edw. Buroughs calls Sanctification,
Christ himself; and hence concludes, that to say Sanctification is imperfect,
is as much as to say, Christ is imperfect: But Christ is perfect, therefore
Sanctification is perfect. And again. The Law in the mind is the Spirit of
God: To say the Law in the mind is imperfect, is error in the highest degree,
this is an abominable corrupt principle of error: the new man is perfect
Peace, and perfect Sanctification. And Mr Clapham in his book against them
Sect. 4. affirms out of a book called Readiness errand to Damascus that they
maintain themselves to be equal with God; And that Hubberthorn in his book
against Sherlock Page 30. does alleige that place Phil. 2:5, 6. to confirm it.

3. It might also seem strange, to hear men asserting their own Perfection, who
pretend so much to spiritual inward experiences, and to so much acquantance
with their own hearts; for who, that will not wilfully put out their own eyes,
may not see, and be assured of the deceitfulness of their heart above all
things, and find corruption riseing up on all occasions, and setting forward
to sin, or hindering from good: But when persons are given up of God to strong
delusions, as a punishment of their Pride and Vanity, what high thoughts may
they not have of themselvespunc; seeing such a doolful state is attended with
more pride, puffing them up, and that blinding their eyes, that they cannot see
their spots, nor see what the Law of God requires; and all this attended with
ignorance of God, and of his holy and Spiritual Law and worshipe? And it may be
this man supposes, with some Papists, that venial faults, as they call them,
are not against the Law of God; or that command, which they violat, is not
properly a command of the Law.

4. What the truth is, in this matter, is declared above, out of our Confession
and Catechism: and the passages of Scripture, which are there cited to
confirm the truth, may be there seen and considered: But before I speak any
thing more for clearing of the Truth, in this particular, I would have the
Reader take notice of one thing: To wit, That it cannot but be a stupenduous
and astonishing thing, and a manifest demonstration of the dreadful power of
delusion, when the Lord gives up any unto that Spirit, to hear men, who
pretend to Reason, and to Religion, and have not yet openly renunced all Faith
of a God, and all natural and humane Reason, talk at this rate, upon such
grounds; and assert, with such boldness and confidence, a Perfection of
Degrees, or a possibility of not sinning, attaineable, upon the principles and
grounds, which they lay down: what these are, we have, on several occasions,
hinted, and now shall do it yet once more: The first rise and beginning of all
their Religion and Perfection, is a Light within every man, which serves both
for an Internal light, and for an Objective Light; so that it is, in their
account, both Grace and the Bible, and serves instead of both: To this they
give big names, and no less name give they to it, then Christ, or the seed of
Christ, and they call it saving, yea and sufficient to salvation; hence is it,
that they always press people, to look and hearken to the Light within, as if
they needed no other Teacher, nor Bible; This is the theme and subject of their
preaching. Now this Light, that is within every man, can be no saife, saving
nor sufficient light, it has no affinity with the grace of Illumination, being
nothing but that natural Light of a Natural Conscience, which is truly
natural, being planted in man, in his very creation, and abideing yet after the
fall, in some measure, in all men; and flowing from the principles of nature,
giving testimony of and assent to, in a greater or lesser measure, according as
it is more or less freed from prejudices, prevailing wickednesses, corrupt
education, and the like) maxims or principles of moral duties, according to
the Law of nature. What natural Aptitude or rather how great an Ineptitude is
and must be* in this natural light, now through the fall so much weakened, to
understand and discover the saving truths of the Gospel, which are not written
in the book of nature, but are a mystery revealed by degrees, according to the
good pleasure of God, who may not see? Especially considering, how since the
fall, the mind and all the powers of the soul, and whole man, are stated
enemies to God and his grace, and will not submit to, nor believe, his very
Revelations, so often inculcated; nor indeed can they understand them, or
submit unto them, until the mighty power of God be exerted, in working a
change, in mind, will and affections: And yet, though these things be certain,
attested both by the Word and by Experience, in all ages; behold, this
generation of Quakers will cry up this Light as saving, and sufficient, though
it never came from the grace of God, in a Mediator, nor was never promised in
the Covenant of grace; but is, as the soil it grows in, Flesh, Blindness,
Enmity to God, Natural and Sensual, savouring nothing but the things of the
Flesh and of Nature. This is the first ground stone of their building. The next
is this, When the motions dictats and workings of this Light are yielded unto,
then does that same Light become a new birth, Christ formed within, and what
not? And thus the man, is a Regenerated man, a New creature, Partaker of the
divine nature, Spiritual, Sanctified and Justified, Effectually called,
Adopted, and what not? Though not one ray of divine Illumination has shined
into his soul, nor one act of grace has reatched either his Intellect; Will or
Affections, to cause this change: Nay, though he has had no touch of
assistance from the Spirit of God, to draw or move him hereunto: Nay more,
though he has never heard, whether there was a Christ and a Spirit, or not;
and whether there was a Covenant of Grace, or not; or what are the terms
thereof; and thus the man is borne again, not of watter, not of the word, nor
yet of the Spirit; but of this Light, and of his own will; that is, of the
Will of the Flesh, of the Will of Man, and not of God. Upon these two pillars,
do they raise this high toure of Perfection: And now, let the Christian Reader
judge, if this can be any thing else, tha^ a Pagan Perfection: Or if this
Perfection of theirs have any the least affinity with the smallest measure of
true Christianity.

5. Though this might be enough to satisfy all true Christians, concerning the
Wickedness and Unreasonableness of this Assertion of theirs, upon their grounds
and principles yet, that we may give some light in this matter, and help
others to answer their cavils, and to discover their cheatrie; We shall
propose a few things to consideration. As first. The Hebrew word, which is
sometimes rendered Perfect, (...) and (...) signifies an Honest, Plain, and
Simple Disposition, without guile or wickedness; and therefore is sometimes
rendered simplicity or integrity, as Genesis 20:5, 6. 2 Samuel 15:11. 1 King. 22:34.
see the magine; answereable to what is imported by the greek (...) and in this
sense, we find the word frequently taken, as denoting Uprightness, Sincerity,
Singleness, as Genesis 6:9. and 17:1. Deuteronomy 18: verse: 13. Job. 9:22:2. Sam. 22:33.
Psalm. 18* 32, and 64:4.119:1. And so it donoteth a truly godlyman, who is no
hypocrite, nor dissembler; but is serving God in sincerity, truth and
uprightness of heart; and this same is imported by that expression of a Perfect
heart Psalm. 101:2. So the other hebrew word usually joined with heart (...), as
we see 1 King. 8:61 and 15:15 2 Chronicles. 15:17. 2 King. 20. 3: Esa. 36:3:1 Chronicles.
12:38. and 2^:9. and 29.9, 19. 2 Chronicles. 16:9. and 19:9. and rendered by us a
perfect heart, has the same import; for it properly signifies Peace,
Prosperity, Saifty, and Integrity; so that this, perfect heart, is an heart
satisfied, quiet and at peace with it self, in doing this, or that; So the
greek word (...) is observed to have the same import with the hebrew (...), and
to donote an Upright, Sincere, not Dissembling person; for it is used by the
70. Deuteronomy. 18:13. and it often signifies, one come to age, or no more a child,
but come to just maturity. Heb. 5:14. And it may denote also one Devoted,
Initiated in holy things, and consecrated, as the verb it comes from,
signifies to consecrate as Heb. 2:10. and 10:14. and 11:40. and to be
Immolated, or Offered up in sacrifice Luke 13:32. see Exodus 29:33, 35. as
translated by the 70. and D. Own on Heb. 2:10: And Pareus in Romans 3. tells us,
that (...) does most frequently signify Sincerity.

6. But leaving these things, let us in the next place consider, how and in
what respects, Believers may be called perfect, or perfection may be ascribed
unto them. And (1.) They may be called Perfect, as being Initia^ed in the holy
things of God, as devoted to his service, and Consecrate to him, and Sanctified
by the holy Spirit: And why it may not be so taken frequently in Paul's
Epistles, I see not, says D. Owen de ortu etc verae Theologiae Page 8. See
also Heb. 10:14. and Calv. on the place. (2.) They may be called Perfect, as
being Tru^ly, and Really what they profess themselves to be, that is,
Christians, and not Dissemblers, Hypocrites, and Made persons. So the word is
used 1 Ioh. 2:5. But who so keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God
perfected, that is, in him is the love of God truly, and really, and not
feignedly, or by mere profession. See Beza on the place: As also 1 Ioh. 4:12.
where the word has the same import: And the ground is clear, because,
obedience to God's command must flow from love, and love to God and our
neighbors, is the sum of all the commands: Hence love is the fulfilling of
the Law, Romans 13:10. So James 3:2. the same is a perfect man, who shows, by
bridling his tongue, that he offends not in word, that he is a real Christian:
For the Apostle is here, in the first verse, meaning men, like our Quakers, of
a supercilious spirit, masterly, quarreling with, and superciliously inveighing
against all, though it be a certain truth that we offend all in many things:
And therefore he says to such, that if they would show themselves good and
excellent Christians, who are so ready, to be masters in their reprehensions of
others, they would first bridle their own tongues. I wish Quakers would learn
this. See Calv. on the place. (3.) They may be called Perfect, in regard of the
Uprightness, Sincerity, Honesty, godly Simplicity, and Singleness, that is in
their way: thus the word frequently signifies, as we saw above, and is
rendered b^ the Dutch, and in the margin of our Bibles, Upright, Genesis 6:9. and
17:1 Deuteronomy. 18:13. Job 2:3. and in several places it is rendered so in the text,
Ps. 18:23, 25. 2 Samuel 22: verse. 24, 26. Job 1: verse. 1:8. and 12:4. Psalm. 19:
v. 13. and 37:18, 37, and elsewhere. Hence often, Perfect and upright, are joined
together as Job 1:1, 8. and 2:2. (4) They may be and are called Perfect, in
regaird of Perfection of Parts, as being compleet, and wanting nothing of the
integral parts of Christianity; thus a child may be called a perfect man, as
having all the Essential and Integral parts of a man, though but in their
infant and tender grouth. The saints are thus perfect, as having the Spirit,
and thereby the seeds and beginnings of all grace. In regeneration, the whole
man is changed; so that he is newborn, a new creature, sanctified wholly, in
Mind, Heart, Spirit, Affections, Conscience, Memory and Body, though but in a
small degree and measure. See 1 These. 5:23. (5.) They may be called Perfect,
because Respecting all the commands of God, Ps. 119:6. and yielding impartial
obedience, through the grace of God, unto all God's precepts, waving none. (6.)
In that their good works have all the Essential Parts requisite, as proceeding
from a right principle, done for a right end, etc. though not in the degree
called for by the Law. (7.) They may be called Perfect, in regard, that the
state, whereinto they are, is a state, that certainly tends to perfection;
they are advancing thereunto, and shall certainly reach that top of perfection
in end, which they look for, and strive to attain, Ephesians. 4:13. Phil, 3:15.
For as the several lusts of the body of death are more and more weakened and
mortified daily; so they are more and more quickened and strengthened in all
saving graces, Romans 6:6, 14. Gal. 5:14. Romans 8:13. Ephesians. 3:16, 17, 18, 19. And
so are perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7:1. and advanceing Phil.
3:12, 13, 14. (8.) They may be called Perfect Comparatively, in respect of
others, who are yet lying in nature: And they may be so called, in comparison
of what sometimes they were themselves, while Blind, Ignorant, Dead and
Lifeless, lying in the state of nature, which is indeed a fearful state of
imperfection, misery and woe. (9.) So in respect of young believers, weak in
knowledge, and babes in Christ, Others, who are further avanced, may be, and
are called Perfect, as having attained an higher degree, and measure of grouth
in grace. Thus Beza thinks the word is taken, Phil. 3:15. 1 Cor. 2:6. And it
is clearly so taken, 1 Cor. 14:20. Heb. 5:14. Ephesians. 4:13. where each has his
own stature, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, verse. 7. Romans
12:3, 6. and its meaning and import we may see, 1 Cor. 3:1. where such an one
is only called spiritual, and 1 Cor. 13:11. where such is called a man. (10.)
Why may they not also be called perfect, in regard of Justification; seeing the
Righteousness wherewith they are clothed, and which is imputed unto them; upon
the account of which they are justified, is a Perfect Righteousness, being the
Rghteousness of Jesus Christ; And seeing the sentence pronunced upon them, to
wit, of Absolution, in their Justification, shall never be recalled, and they
brought again into Condemnation, Rom 8:1. As also seeing the state they are
brought into thereby, is an unchangeable state, so that once in a justified
state, always in a justified state?

7. But all this will not satisfy our Quakers; who (with Familists,
Antinomians, and Libertines, will have this to be the privilege of all
Christians, after their Mode, that they be as Perfect, as Adam was in the state
of innocence, free of all sin, and from yielding to Temptation, or Corruption;
and this taketh-in much, if not a Perfection of parts and degrees: Now to
assert this Perfection, which even Papists are ashamed of; and to assert this,
as common to all them, in whom this new birth is fully produced, as it must be
in all Justified and Sanctified Persons, according to his own principles, is
false and dangerous. For (1.) There are in Christ's house diverse syzes, and
degrees of persons, some babes 1 Cor. 3:1. Heb. 5:13. or children, or little
children, 1 Ioh. 2:12, 13. and others young men, and old men, or Fathers 1 Ioh.
2:13, 14. (2.) Christians are exhorted to grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. last: and to put off the old man, which is corrupt,
according to deceitful lusts, and to put on the new man, Epes. 4:22, 23, 24.
And to mortify their members, which are upon the earth, Col. 3:5. But to cry
up this perfection, is to render all Gospel comman^s useless, whereof we have
abundance in the Epistles. (3.) This takes away the exercise of Repentance; for
where there is no sin, there can be no sense of, nor sorrow for sin; and the
exercise of Faith, in running to the fountain for washing; and the exercise of
Prayer, in seeking grace to withstand Temptations, to strive against
Corruption; and in seeking for pardon, in the blood of Christ. And (4.) So this
makes these petitions in the Lords prayer useless, forgive us our sins, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. (5.) This says that
either believers are fully freed from an indwelling body of death; contrary to
Romans 7:11, 17, 18, 23, 24. or that the motions of this body of death are not
sin, or sinful; contrary to Romans 7:5, 7, 8, 15. Gal. 5: v. 17. Iam. 1: ver. 14,
15. (6) This tends to foment Pride, and Security; and to shake off Diligence,
Watchfulness, holy Fear, Humility; contrare to Iam. 4:10. 1 Pet. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Mat. 18:4. and 23:12. Micah. 6:8. Col. 3:12. 1 Cor. 16:13. 1 These. 5: verse. 6.
1 Pet. 4:7. Mat. 24:42. and 25:13 and 26:41. Mark. 13:33, 35, 37. and 14:38.
Luke 21:36. Act. 20:31. Col. 4:2. 2 Pet. 3:14. and 1:5. Heb. 6:11. and 12:15.
Tit. 3:8. (7.) This takes away the usefulness of the Ordinances of Christ;
such as Reading the Scriptures, Preaching, and Sacraments, which are instituted
for the edification and building up of the Church; as also the Ministry:
Hence we ^nde these Quakers proud and vain boasters, crying down all these
Ordinances, as now useless; as we shall hear more afterward. (8.) This makes
all the commands to endeavor after perfection useless, as to Christians;
contrare to Heb. 13:21. 2 Cor. 13:11. Mat. 5:48. 2 Cor. 7:1. Heb. 6:1. All
Prayers for it useless, contrare to 1 Pet. 5:10. And so cutteth off all
Endeavors after it: For what a man has already, he does not earnestly seek.
(9.) See Psalm. 130:3. and 143:2. Job 9:2. Psalm. 19:13. Iam. 3: ver. 2. 1 Ioh.
1:8. as also Prove. 20:9. who can say, I have made my heart clean? I am pure
from my sin? But this Quaker will contradict this. Eccles. 7:20 For there is
not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not: The Quakers will
contradict this too; and that also, which this same wise King says, 1 King.
8:46. and 2 Chronicles. 6:36. For there is no man that sins not.

8. Enough, by way of proof, of the vanity and falsehood of this fond conceit
of these proud Phanaticks, which the experience of saints, in all ages, has
confuted, and all tender Christians will abhore; and was never owned but by
Phanatick heretics, such as of old were the Cathari, followers of Novatus, who
was excommunicated for his errors, by a Synod at Rome. See Eusebii histor.
lib. 6. c. 42. Pelagians, (as we shall show) and Donatists, some Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Familists, and the like of late, with Socinians, (of whom
afterward) Arminians, and the Papists, who own it to set off the better their
other corrupt doctrines, and lay their ground for works of supererogation,
though some of them, as Stapleton and others, must yield to the truth which the
Orthodox own and maintain. Let us now come and see, what this man says for
explication and defense of this untru^h. He lays down five Positions, for
clearing of the Controversy Page 153. The first is this, we place not (says
he) this possibility (to wit of not sinning) in man's own will and capacity, as
he is a son of Adam, or as in a natural state, and Ans. But what if his
Perfectionist be never translated out of the state of nature? And sure,
according to his doctrine, we cannot see, how such can be said to be translated
from darkness to light: For the Scripture tells us, that that cannot be, without
the infusion of new habites, and faith in Jesus Christ; and also that this
cannot be without the powerful operation of God's Spirit, on Mind, Will and
Affections, discovering to them their Sin and Misery, and the Necessity of
Christ, and Christ's Fullness, Sutableness, and Readiness to help; As also
Persuading, Bowing, Inclineing, and Determineing the Will unto an Acceptance of
and Closeing with Christ, for union and communion: And therefore if such be
capable of this Perfection, who are strangers to this work, it rises only from
the Will of corrupt man, and is founded on mere Nature. But what says he next?
We ascribe it wholly unto man, (says he) as he is renewed by Christ, whom he
knows to be reigning in him, and leading by his Spirit, and revealing within
the Law of the Spirit of life, whereby power is obtained to be rid of sin. Ans.
(1.) But we have not yet heard, that Renovation and Regeneration by Christ
explained to us, according to the Gospel; but rather according to Pelagius, as
was manifested several times above. (2) What is ascribed wholly unto man, even
as renewed, is not ascribed immediately to God, and to his grace. (3.) If it be
ascribed to man as renewed, it must be ascribed to all renewed persons; and so
is not a privilege of some, but is common to all Believers; and consequently
none are believers, but such as are thus perfect: and so, no man that sins,
or yields to temptations, is a regenerat man; and therefore David was not
regenerated, when he fell with Bathsheba; Nor any man, that yields but to a
sinful thought, or word. What shall then be said of Quakers, whose books are so
full of Railings, Lies, Slanders, Errors and Blasphemies, beside their other
practices? (4.) It is not true, that every renewed person knows always, that
Christ is reigning in him, and ruling him by his Spirit, etc. (5,) Though power
be had from Christ, living and reigning in the soul, whereby sin is resisted,
and striven against; Yet not in such a measure and degree, as the sou shall be
fully freed from its lustings and oppositions, Gal. 5:17.

9. What is his third Position? By this perfection (says he) we understand not
that, which cannot receive daily increase; neither that, which is as just and
perfect as God is; but a proportionable perfection, answering the measure of
every one, whereby they are kept from sinning and strengthened for fulfilling
the Law. Answ. (1,) If he understand not such an absolute perfection, he
contradicts other Quakers, as we heard above. (2.) Howbeit every renewed man
has not the same proportionable perfection, or perfection of degrees; yet
every one has that measure of degrees, that makes him love God, with all his
Heart, Mind, Soul, and Strength, and fulfill the whole Law, and do no sin, in
Thought, Word, or Deed, in this Quakers judgment; and this belongs even to
Babes in Christ; as an Infant has all the proportioned members of a man: and
then it is clear, that no regenerated person can sin; and no man that sins,
is regenerate. And so freedom from sin must be essential, or proprium quarto
modo, unto the Regenerate. Give us an instance, in all the Scriptures, of such
a Regenerate person? (3.) The Arminians speak of a perfection consistent with
some small sins; but this Quaker excepteth not the least sin. The Arminians
also speak of a perfection, that admits degrees Apol. Fol. 128. b.

10. What is his fourth Position? Albeit (says he) some may attain unto this
freedom from sin, and all should endeavor after it; yet he who once gets
it may afterward loss it, through the temptations of Satan, unless he
diligently attend to the Light within. Answ. (1.) These some, who may attain
to this, and should endeavor after it, are not among the renewed ones; for
they all have it already: As we heard. (2.) If he afterward come to loss it, he
loses also his state of Regeneration; for to sin, were it but in a wrong
thought, or in coming short in the least measure of the right manner of doing a
duty, is inconsistent with regeneration, say our Quaker; and yet he says
within a line or two, that every sin does not destroy a spiritual condition.
These things cannot hang together; a person, wanting a leg, or an arm, cannot
be called a perfect man, as to his integral parts; gold having dross admixed,
cannot be called pure.

11. His last Position is, That he will not affirm that such a state is not
attaineable here, in which, to do righteousness becomes natural unto the
regenerat soul, that in the stability of that state they cannot sin. Answ. This
is an higher degree of Perfection, than what he mentioned before, for the
former was such a state, in which one was able not to sin, though he might also
sin, possit non peccare, Item and possit? But this is such, in which he cannot
sin, peccare non possit. And as to this, he ingenuously confesses, he himself
has not yet attained it, in which his modesty and ingenuity is commendable.
But he dar not deny, but there may be such a state, seeing it seems to be
expressly affirmed by the Apostle 1 Ioh. 3:9. Answ. But if he so interpret the
words of the Apostle John, as importing this highest degree of perfection, he
must also grant, that this highest perfection is not only attainable in this
life; but that it is common to all renewed persons; for John speaks this as a
truth of all, that are borne of God, and of all that have this seed in them;
and this is true of all that are truly Regenerated; all such are borne of God,
and Gods seed is in them. What will the man now say? Though he will say, that
he is in such a state, wherein he is able not to sin, possit non peccare; yet
if he dar not say, that he cannot sin, non possit peccare, he must
acknowledge himself not to be yet borne of God, and to be void of the seed of
God. This passage, if it prove any thing for perfection, will utterly destroy
this Quakers first kind of Perfection, which is a possibility of not sinning,
and that as common to all Regenerat persons: But neither the one nor the other
is asserted hereby the Apostle; who only says, that he that is borne of God
cannot make a trade of sin, and be wholly taken up therein, as his constant
work and exercise, wherein he is delighted, and finds pleasure and full
satisfaction; as a man does in his daily trade and employment. He does not say,
that such have no sin; for he had said the contrare Chap. 1:8. but that they do
not (...)* trade in sin, and this is opposite to that which is their trade and
occupation 1 Ioh. 2:29, -- they do, work, or trade in righteousness (...).
This doing working, or tradeing in sin, is peculiar to such as are of the
Devil, as the doing, working and tradeing in righteousness, is peculiar to Gods
people 1 Ioh. 3:7, 8, 9. He that commits sin is of the devil -- whosoever is
borne of God does not commit sin: so that such as are borne of God do not
commit sin, as do such as are of the Devil, and do the works of the Devil: And
this committing of sin is opposed to the work of purifying, or studying of
sanctification, which lively hope sets the believer upon verse. 3.4. and
imports a fixed set purpose and resolution, to work in sin, with full purpose
of heart; and to give up themselves to the trade of sin, as delighting therein,
and as devouted thereunto: add, that such sin not so as to fall away, and
lose the seed, nor unto death. See Chap. 5:16, 17.

12. Thus we have seen his Opinion, which in short is this. That all the
Regenerat are in such a state, as that they are able no^ to sin, or transgress
any of the commands of God; but to keep them in all points, and walk up to full
conformity to the Law; yet they may also sin, through their own fault and
unwatchfuln^ss; for it is not impossible: But some may come unto that hight of
perfection, as that it is impossible for them to sin; they cannot sin. Let us
now see, ere we examine his grounds, what affinity this opinion of his has
with the Old Pelagians, and with the late Socinians, and Others: as to the
first, Vossius, his Historia Pelagiamsmi Lib. 5. Part. prior. Thesi prima Page
460. gives us their opinion, thus, They said, the Saints led their life
without sin; which they labored to prove from the instances of those, who in
Scripture are said to have kept the Law perfectly: Yet they distinguished
betwixt such, as never sinned all their days, and such as at first were
sinners, but afterward left off to sin, The first they gave to Abel, the last
unto Paul. See what he cites to verify this. He sets down the Antithesis of
the orthodox Page 462. thus, That none by the power of nature could fulfill the
Law: That none by strength of grace, did live all their days without sin: That
none attained that measure of holiness, in this life, that he could live any
long time without sin. The perfection, ascribed to some in the Scripture, was
not from nature, but from grace; Nor for all their days; Nor at any time full
and absolute, but which might increase, and was mixed with evil deeds; and so,
was a perfection of parts only, not of degrees. And this he clears out of
Hierom, Justin Martyr, Ambrose, Gennadius, Chrysostom. Beda, Origin, Cyprian,
Macarius, Optatus, Augustine Ivo Carnatens. Lombard. He tells us moreover Page
4^8. That unto these instances out of Scripture, urged by the P^lagians, They
answered, that by perfection was meaned Sincerity, or a true, not feigned,
study of obeying all God's Laws; and actual obedience, according to the
measure attained in this life, and in comparison with others* but not any full
or absolute perfection: As an house is said to be perfect, which is yet but in
building, in respect of the beginnings, by a synecdoche of parts; or of desire,
by a metonymie of the end. 2. In comparison with rubbish, or with an house, not
so far advanced. 3. In respect of promise, when the builder undertaketh to
complete it. And so the righteousness here was perfect. (1.) Inchoatively, in
respect of the beginnings, and desires. (2.) Comparatively, in respect both of
the ungodly, and of the godly, who are more imperfect. (3.) Evangelically,
whereby all is said to be done, when that which was not done is pardoned. And
this to have been the Judgment of the orthodox, he prove^h out of their
writtings as of Hierom, Orosius, August Gelasius, Bernard. The Reader may see
more in his 2. Antithesis Page 473. etc. out of Nazianzen, Tertullian, Optatus
Millevit, Hierom, etc. For the better maintaining of this Perfection, the
Pelagians said, that sins of ignorance were no sins, (I know not, whether
our Quakers will homologate with them, as to this, or not) as the same Author
shows ibid. These. 3. He shows also These. 4. how that at length, the
Pelagians in disput were brought to speak only of a posse, and not of an esse;
that is, that man might perfectly keep the Law, though they would not say, tha^
they did keep it perfectly; and that he might easily keep the Law. And in the
Antithesis Page 485. He tells us, that the orthodox answered, That if man could
so easily keep the Law, some would be found, who had done so: And if none could
be found beside Jesus Christ, God-man, who had done so, there was no ground for
ascribeing so much power to man. At length (as the same person shows Thesi
5.) Pelagius was driven to retract what he said of the facility of fulfilling
the Law; And was content to say simply, that we could keep the Law. And because
his making no mention of grace, gave offense; therefore, he helped the matter
by saying, that by the Grace of God we could be without sin. But, as is clear
in the Antithesis, this did not satisfy the Orthodox, because the word grace
was but a cheat, for Pelagius put another meaning on it, than they did: and
they maintained, that no saint did ever attain to that measure of grace, as to
live without sin; for that should take away the necessity of Christ's death: and
say, that Salvation might be by the Law; and further to say so, were to make
themselves equal to Christ.

13. Thus we have seen; how this Man agrees with these wicked Pelagians, The
same Author Vossius Page 510, 511. tells us of some called Begardi and Beguinae,
in Aleman or Germany, who maintained such a degree of Perfection as we could
advance no higher; and were condemned by a Council of more than 300 Bishops
conveened at Vienna: some of their opinions condemned were these- 1. That man,
in this life, can acquire such a degree of perfection, that he shall become
wholly impeccable; and cannot advance further in grace. 2. That a man attaining
to this degree of perfection, needs no more to fast and pray; because then
Sensuality is so perfectly subject to the Spirit, and to Reason, that he may
let his body do what he will. 3. That such, as have attained to this degree of
Perfection, are no more obnoxious to man's Law; for where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty. 4. That man may be as happy, in this life, as in heaven.
6. That it is the part of an imperfect man, to exercise himself in acts of
virtue. The 5, 7. and 8. article condemned in them we mention not, as being
concerning other heads. Hence we see, what affinity our Quakers have with these
Beguards and Beguines: Let us next see, how they agree with the Socinians.

14. As to the judgm^nt of the Socinians, in this point of Perfection, the
learned D. Hoornbeek Socinianismi confut. Tom. 3. lib. 1. Cap. 3. Page 61.
gives us a short sum of it, which he fully thereafter clears out of their
own writtings. They distinguish betwixt an Absolute perfection, and
Comparative: by That they understand immunity from all sin, and full conformity
to the whole Law, by which a man never commits the least sin: this they say,
was peculiar to Christ. By this, comparative perfection, they understand a
perfection either as to the habit, or as to the act: as to the habit, they
say, it is that whereby some never all their life time, contracted the habit
of any sin, and so needed not to repent thereof; and which all the regenerate
partake of: as for perfection, as to the Act of sin, they think all the
regenerate do not attain it, but only such as attain to the highest degree,
which some may attain unto, yea and it i^ possible for all to attain unto.
Smalcius contra Frantzium disput 6. Page 176. not only admits degrees, in
that perfection, which is called Comparative; but in that also, which is
Absolute, The highest degree of which is peculiar to Christ, who never sinned;
but an inferior degree he yields to others, whereby they sin no more,
after they have attained unto it: As to the other perfection, which they call
Comparative, they give us three degrees thereof; One of those, who, having
shoken off the habit of sin, set about Obedience, but with much inward
struggling of mind. The Other of those, who do this with less struggling. The
third of those, who obey without any struggling at all, yea with great delight,
joy and complacency, and so sin no more. And Socinus himself praelect Cap.
26. Page 169. condemns them, who say, that perfection, which the Cathari held
necessary, is not attainable here, that is, who deny, that it can be, that any
man can advance, so far in this life, as to sin no more.

15. The same D. Hoornbeek ubi supra Page 64. shows us, that the Arminians,
in their Apology Cap. 11. say, there are some, who do their duty without any
inward battle, and with the highest of joy and cheerfulness, and Cap. 17. We,
by the grace of God, can do and fulfill all the commands of God. And that
Episcopius Ad quaest: 19. said Man could perfectly do the commands. They will
not grant, that all the regenerat, especially such as are in the second and
third order (they give us three orders or degrees of Regenerat persons) have
any ba^tel in them betwixt the Spirit and the flesh. See Apol. fol. 128. etc.
It is true, the^ say, that they speak so in respect of Evangelical Perfection,
not of Legal; by this understanding a most absolute and full immunity from all
sin, and that dureing a man's whole life; or all impeccability, and that for
ever, which excludes all imperfection, infirmity, and inadvertancy; and this
they think morally impossible: But as to the Other, which they say has its
degrees, they grant the highest degree thereof may be attained, consisting in a
doing of the commanded duty, in a most perfect manner, so far as is required,
by the Gospel and covenant of grace But as D. Hoornbeek well observes all
perfection is in respect of works, and can no other way be judged, than by the
Law, which commands them; And if that be called Evangelical Perfection, which
admits of defects and imperfections, it is no perfection to all, but only
catachrestically so called: What agreement our Quakers have with these Men, the
sequel will evince.

16. We are commanded, even in the Gospel (which does not destroy the Law, nor
weaken its obligation; for Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it) to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, strength and mind: and
this, sure, takes in the highest degree and intension of love, and what is
short of this, is, in so far, defective; and therefore imperfect. I cannot
assent to that, which D. Baron says, in his Disp. de peccato Mortali and
Veniali part. 1. sect. 4.. 6. to wit, That the Gospel does not strickly and
precisely oblige to perfection in degrees; but only to an Endeavor after this
perfection; for then we were under no obligation to repent of, and ask pardon
of our shortcomings, in the name of Christ, nor to run for cleansing, by faith
unto the fountain of Christ's blood; and this neither can tender Christians
assent to, nor will their practice comply therewith.

17. I think, a serious pondering of these Rules, for the right understanding
of the commands, set down in our greater Chatechisme quaest. 99. might make
all, who knew themselves, sober in this matter. Who dar plead for this
Perfection, who believes, That the Law of God is perfect, and binds every
one to full conformity, in the whole man, unto the righteousness thereof and
unto entire Obedience for ever, so as to require the utmost perfection of every
duty, and to forbid the least degree of every sin Psalm. 19:7. Iam. 2:10* Mat.
5:21. to the end. That it is Spiritual, and so reaches the Understanding*
Will, Affections, and all other Powers of the soul, as well as Words, Works and
Gestures Romans 7:14. Deuteronomy. 6:5. with Mat. 22:37, 38, 39. Mat. 5 21, 22 27, 28,
36. That where a duty is commanded, the contrary sin is forbidden Esai. 58:13.
Deuteronomy. 6:13. with Mat. 4:9, 10. Mat. 15:4, 5, 6. And where a sin is forbidden,
the contrary duty is commanded Mat. 1:21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Ephesians. 4:28. That
what God forbids, is at no time to be done Job 13:7, 8. Romans 3:8. Job 36:21.
Heb. 11:29. That under one sin, or duty, all of the same kind are forbidden,
or commanded, together with all the Causes, Means* Occasions, and Appearances
thereof, and Provocations thereunto Mat. 5:21, 22, 27, 28. and 15:4, 5, 6. Heb.
10:24, 25. 1 These. 5:12. Iud. verse. 23. Gal. 5:26. Col. 3:24. That what is
forbidden or commanded to ourselves, we are bound, according to our places, to
endeavor that it may be avoided or performed by others, according to the duty
of their places Exodus 20:10. Levit. 19:11. Genesis 18:19. Josh. 24:15. Deuteronomy. 6:6,
7. That in what is commanded to others, we are bound, according to our places
and callings, to be helpful to them: And to take heed of partaking with
others, in what is forbidden them 2 Cor. 1:24. 1 Timothy 5:19. Ephesians. 5:11. Who, I
say, that rightly considers these particulars; and how the Law requires,
That obedience should be performed thereunto, in the most high and intense
degree, without the least remissness of zeal, and fervor; That the manner of
our obedience be spiritual, from a right principle, to a right end, in an
heavenly and spiritual manner: that it may done in the Spirit Gal 5:16. 1 Cor.
14:14, 15, 16. And that there be no corrupt Motion, Affection, or Inclination
to evil; no tickling of delight in the thing, nor any discontent, at our
restraint from the evil, even though our formal assent be not given thereto. So
that the very involuntary motions of the mind to evil, though not assented to,
are prohibited, as being against the holy Law, and as flowing from a corrupt
fountain; Yea and the very in-being of that body of death, which is the spring
of evil motions: He, I say, will in sobriety speak of a perfection attainable
here. But the only remedy here is to curtail the Law, that seeing they cannot
conform to it, it may conform to them, as did the Pharisees of old: whence it
is usual for such perfectionists, to call the motions of Lust and Concupiscence
within, no sin; and to plead for venial sins, and to give us a gross
exposition of the Law, and of the duties therein enjoined. One might wonder,
that these forementioned should be for perfection, who of all persons, would
seem to have least ground: But the cause is; They are all devoted to the
exaltation of Free will, and enemies to the grace of God; and know no other
holiness, but what Free Will has a chief hand in, and whereof they are whole
masters.

18. Now we come to examine what he says against our judgment, which is. That
in the best of our actions, which we here do, there is some admixture of sin
and corruption; and none of them so perfect, as to abide the strick examination
of divine justice: For his representation of our opinion, That the saints
neither can be, nor ever shall be delivered from sin, in this life; And that
the Saints are under a perpetual necessity of sinning, is ambiguous and very
indistinct, as might be shown, if it were worth the pains. His first Reason
is. That it is contrary to the wisdom, glorious virtue, and majesty of God,
who is of purer eyes, then he can behold iniquity. Ans. Is it against these
attributes of God, that sin should be in the world? Then we must say, by this
argument, that all wicked men are P^rfect and sinless: Yea that the devils are
perfect; for the pure eyes of God can not behold iniquity in wicked men, (of
whom these words are spoken by Habbakuk) no, nor in devils: or is it only
against these attributes, that any remnant of corruption or sin should be in
the Godly? then, this will prove the last Perfection, to wit, an impossibility
to sin, to be common to all the godly, which yet he dust not say, and not only
the first perfection viz. a possibility of not sinning. Let us see, if what he
adds can make him any relief. S^ing (says he) God would gather a people to
himself, to worship him, and be his witneses on earth, without all doubt, he
sanctifies and purifyeth them. Ans. True, he sanctifies and purifieth them by
degrees, till He bring them to the full perfection, he has appointed for them
in glory; but himself will not say, that he sanctifies them, always in the
hi^hest degree, and that as soon, as they are Regenerated. Is there no
sanctification, but that which is perfect? or is there no sanctification, where
there is the least sin? Then he must say, that all the saints are as holy, and
as free of sin here, as they will be in heaven; then he must go higher, then
ever Pelagians, Socinians, Papists, or Arminians went; and must join himself to
the old Beguards and Beguines. We grant with him, That God delights not in
iniquity, but abhors all sin; and that he delights not in man, as he
joyneth to sin. Yet he delights in man, as joined unto Christ, and as turning
from sin by Repentance, and as fighting the battles of the Lord against the
body of death within, and as delighting in the Law of the Lord, after the inner
man: And (says he) if man were always to be joined unto sin; he should be
always disjoined from God, according to Esai. 59:2. But on the contrary, they
are partakers of the divine nature 2 Pet. 1:4. and are one Spirit with him 1
Cor. 6:17. But what is impure cannot be so, for there is no agreement betwixt
light and darkness 2 Cor. 6:14. Now God is Light, and all sin is darkness.
Answ. (1.) All this would plead for a sinlesness, from the very first instant
of Regeneration, Yea and for the highest degree of Perfection. (2.) Though
corruption abides, in the Regenerated man, as a vanquished enemy, struggling in
the dead thrawes; yet is not the Regenerated man joined thereto, but separated
therefrom, in Mind, Will and Affections, in so far as regenerated; and is
fighting and lusting against it, as his greatest enemy. (3) It is sin delighted
in, and unrepented of, loved and entertained in the soul, that separateth
betwixt God and the soul: and that text Esai. 59:2. speaks of soul-wasting
and land-destroying sins, to which that people had given up themselves, and
would not turn from; as we see verse. 3, 4* 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15. And yet
we see there verse. 16, 17. What soveraignity of free grace can do to, and for
such a people, for the glory of his name. (4.) What is impure, as impure,
cannot be one Spirit with Christ: But believers are reckoned, according to what
has now the throne, and the heart, and the dominion in the soul, with their
free and sanctified consent; for now they are married to a new Husband, and are
engadged in warfare under a new Captain, They are dead unto sin, but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; and therefore they are under an
obligation to strive against all that would labor to set sin again upon the
throne, and wrong the interest of their new Lord and Sovereign. Romans 6:11, 12,
13. And though they be risen with: Christ, and are dead, and have their life
hid with Christ in God; Yet they have members to mortify upon earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness etc. Col. 3:2, 3, 5. (5.) God has no f^llowshipe with
corruption, more then light can have fellowshipe with darkness, yet he can have
fellowshipe, with his own work of grace in the soul, and with the soul, as
sanctified, and renewed.

19. But says he further, Is it not against the wisdom of God to say He could
find no other method, whereby he should be served, than by such actions, by
which the devil is no less, yea more, served; for he that sins is the
servant of sin? Romans 6:16. Ans. It is not fit for man to stand up, and disput
wickedly for God: and under a show of zeal for and patronage of his Wisdom,
condemn the same: His folly is wiser than our wisdom. What methods God could
have found out, whereby He might have been served by men, what proud man will
take upon him to determine? The method he has chosen should satisfy us. But
to the matter, when God's people are serving Him, with some measure of
sincerity and uprightness of heart; howbeit the devil opposes, and by his
temptations and the co-working of corruption, prevails much, to hold back, or
to cause the soul move slowly; Yet, the heart, and the renewed part of the man,
being for God, and for God only, and directly against Satan and all his ways,
doings and designs, there is no formal service performed unto Sa^an; for the
Lord regards the heart: And though often times there be more corruption in the
work, than grace; Yet, the heart being upright in the main, the denomination is
from the better part: And albeit, how more sin be in the action, that is gone
about, by the honest Believer, in weakness, Satan be the glader; Yet in that,
the believer cannot be called his servant: For the Apostle, in the place cited,
says not, he that sins, but he that yields himself up as a servan^, to
obey sin, is the servant of sin. No doubt, if the Lord had seen it for his
glory, he could have so ordered it, that his children, from the day of their
new birth, should never have sinned more; but He has thought it good, that
they should be exercised with a spiritual warfare, all their days, against
Satan and a wicked world, without; and a body of death, and its members,
within; that his power might be made perfect in their weakness; that they might
live by Faith, and get continual proofs of God's Power, Love, Care,
Faithfulness, Grace, Mercy and Tenderness; that they might daily have use of
the blood of Christ, to wash in; and so exercise Humility, Godly sorrow,
Repentance, Faith, Patience, Submission, Watchfulness, Diligence; and might
groan under the body of death: that they might see, through daily experience,
the riches and worth of their Redemption, and read their great Obligations to
their Lord Ransomer, and Sovereign King. And if we were sober, we might here
mark wonderful wisdom, and see a piece of the manifold wisdom of God. But
when we be come distracted, (as doubtless we are, when we will be wise above
what is written) no wonder we become blind, and speak as fools: as this man
does here, and in the following words, which I shall not so much as honor with
a transcribing.

20. He says, our doctrine is repugnant to the justice of God, requireing them
to abstain from all sin, and not enabling them hereunto; and requireing more
then he gives ability to do. Ans. (1.) The man runs so hard, that he
runs himself blind: Sees he not, that if this argument prove any thing, it
will prove that all the wicked world are perfect, for God requires of them
obedience to his Law: and it may be a question, if hence it may not likewise be
proven, that the damned, and the Devils, are all perfect, and without sin;
seeing it may be a doubt, if they be loosed from the Law of their Creation. But
(2.) Though it were granted they had power, I mean moral power, for no other
can be here understood, yet this will not prove their perfection, or freedom
from sin: many may have power, and yet not use it: Adam had power to resist
Satan's suggestion, yet did it not. His perfect ones may grow slack in their
watch, and so sin, though he will grant they have power to do otherwise. (3)
This is old Pelagius's argument, as V^ssius clears to us, Hist. Pelag. lib.
5. part. 1. These. 6. where among other evidences, he cites Hieron. adv. Pelag.
bringing-in Critobolus, as a Pelagian, reasoning thus. Either God gave
commandments that were possible, or that were impossible: if possible, it is
in our power to do them, if we will; if impossible, we are not guilty, if we do
them not, seeing we cannot. And thus, whether the Lords command be possible, or
Impossible, man may be without sin, if he will: Our Quaker is yet worse; for
the Pelagian would hence prove but a possibility of Perfection; but he will
hence evince the real being of Perfection, and that common to all believers.
(^) God made man upright, and able to fulfill all his Law; and when he has
dilapidated his stock of strength, must God be unjust, if he require due debt?
Or does man's inability dissolve his obligation? Seeing God is pleased of his
grace, to help his own to performance of duty in part, upon a new score, let
them mourn for shortcomings, and flee to the blood of Christ, conform to the
Gospel, that there they may get extracts of pardon; and be thankful, that the
Lord has so secured the matter, that they shall never come into condemnation.

21. As to the saints he reasons further thus; Their imperfection is either
from themselves, or from God: If from themselves, then it is because they use
not the power they have for that effect, and if they have a power, it is not
impossible; if from God, as not giving them that measure of grace, whereby they
may be enabled to do all his will, then He should be unrighteous. Ans. Thus
reasoned the Pelagian Caelestius of old, and Crellius the Socinian of late. See
Hoornb. ubisupra. Page 103. And we say. (1.) This will at most conclude only
for a possibility of Perfection, or immunity from sin: and so will not serve
his point. (2.) If he mean a culpable cause, I say, it is from themselves, and
that not because they have any moral power now, for keeping the whole Law
perfectly, (though I grant withal, that they have more, than they make good
use of) but because that power, which was once given, was sinfully cast away.
(3.) It is false, that God should be unrighteous, if he gave not that measure
of grace, whereby they should become perfect. Nay, says he, God shall be more
unjust than are the vilest of men, who will not give to their children asking
bread a stone, nor a serpent to them, when asking for fish. Ans. The Lord
rebuke this blasphemous tongue! what ground is there for this? They confess,
says he, that they must ask of God deliverance from sin. Very true: And yet
such a thing is never to be expected. The Lord forbid. We expect and hope for
growing deliverance, and final and full deliverance in end, when the saints
shall say and sing, O grave where is thy victory, and O death where is thy
sting? And they shall come unto the upper mount Zion, the city of the living
God, -- and to the Spirits of just men made perfect; and when all tears shall
be wiped away from off their faces. But it seems our Quakers expect all their
heaven here. Where is now the stones that God gives instead of bread, and the
serpents he gives instead of fish? His following calumnious insinuation has
been spoken to already elsewhere.

22. His third argument follows Page 156.. 5. He says, our opinion is
injurious to Christ, and his sacrifice: Christ was manifested chiefly for this
end, to take away sin, and gather a people to himself, zealous of good works
Tit. 2:14. and to bring in everlasting righteousness, that is, Evangelical
perfection Answ So hot is this man in his pursuit, that to reach us, he
cares not though he pierce his own bowels; for by this one argument, he
destroys all that he said of Universal Redemption; as we cleared above Chap.
VIII. But as to us, it reaches us not; for we grant, that Christ came to take
away sin, both as to guilt, and this he did by the sacrifice of himself; and as
to the stain and being of it, and this he does by his Spirit, piece and piece,
till in end he give full victory; and so he has a people redeemed from the
guilt and power of iniquity, though not fully from its presence and stirrings;
and a people zealous of good works, which is not inconsistent with the
stirrings of a crucified body of death. That that everlasting righteounsess
mentioned by Daniel Chap. 9. is to be understood of Evangelical perfection, is
said, but not proved. Again, he says, It is said 1 Ioh. 3:5, 8. that the Son
of God appeared for this end, to take away our sins, and to destroy the works
of the devil. Answ. True; and so he has done, by taking away the guilt, and by
destroying daily the works of the devil in his people, mortifying lust and
corruption, and carrying on the work of grace, till at length it be perfected.
Ay but, he says, it is added, he that is borne of God does not commit sin,
that is, does not break the Law, in thought, word or deed Answ. What that is,
to commit sin, we showed above; and also that by this passage thus interpreted,
he shall prove, what is against himself; to wit, that that highest degree of
Perfection, which whosoever has attained, cannot sin any more, is not peculiar
to some, but common to all, that are borne of God. Is not Christ sent (says he
further) to turn a people from sin unto righteousness, and from the Kingdom of
Satan, unto the Kingdom of his dear Son? Answ. Yes. Are not these thus
converted, his servants, children, brethren, friends? Ans. They are. Are they
not as he in the world, holy, pure, and immaculate. Answ. The text says not
this, Read again 1 Ioh. 4:27, Does not Christ watch over them, care and pray
for them, save them by his Spirit, walking in them and among them? Ans. This is
all true, and ^hence we infer, that they shall certainly be perfected in end,
and shall persevere unto the end; contrare to what he says, as we shall see in
the next Chap. But all this will not prove a sinless Perfection common to all
the saints. But will not Christ have them perfect: or is he not able to make
them perfect? Ans. Yes* But he will do it in his own time and way. He himself
will not deny, but Christ is able to make them all perfect, in the highest
degree, so as not to be able to sin any more; yet for all that, he will not
say, that it is so. He cites also Ephesians 5:25, 26, 27. But nothing to his
purpose, for we grant, that the Lord will present his Bride to himself one day,
fair and clean without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; and that he is
about this work, bringing all his forward unto this state of perfection,
washing them, and cleansing them in his blond, and by his Spirit sanctifying
them more and more. But says he, if they do sin in thought word and deed
daily, there is no difference, betwixt the holy and profane, the clean and
unclean, etc. Answ. Notwithstanding of this, the difference is great; for what
the profane does is nothing but sin, and in nothing accepted of God, through
Christ; and is done with full purpose of heart, without any contrary lusting of
the Spirit: all they do, as it flows from an evil principle; so it is done
for an evil end, and in a corrupt sinful manner; and so is wholly defiled. But
it is not so with the child of God, He mourns over and repents of his
shortcomings, and striveth against sin; The other not: So there are many more
differences, too many here to be insisted upon.

23. His fourth Argument Page 157. 6. is, That our doctrine makes the work of
the ministry, preaching, prayers, etc. useless; while as Paul says Ephesians.
4:11. that pastors are given for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. till we all
come unto the unity of faith etc. Answ. (1.) Hence we see the necessity of a
standing Ministry, which yet he and is brethren are against, as we shall
hear. (2.) The Ministry is to bring them on toward perfection; and is for the
edifying and building up of the body, and of particular souls, till we all come
at length into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
How is it proved, that this ultimat end is attained here? And further, we told
above, that there was a perfection comparative, and in parts, here attainable
and attained, according to the measure of grace, and of the gift given to every
man Ephesians. 4 7. 1 Cor. 12:11. But not a perfection of degrees, which excludes
all increase and grouth, contrare to 2 Pet. 3:18. Phil. 3:12:2 These. 1:3. not
such a perfection as excludes all sin. He adds Page 158. does not the
Apostle say, that the Scriptures are given to make the man of God perfect 2 Timothy 3.17. Answ. Yes: And they do that, in their own manner, as a perfect and
complete Rule, giving full instruction and information in all things necessary
to salvation, contrare to what himself taught above: so that the the man of God
neede^h to hearken to no Dreams, Enthusiasms, or Precepts of men, to learn
what is God's will. How does our doctrine make Prayers useless? Are not these
prayers (says he) useless and without faith, that are made for preservation
from sin, if withal they believe that God will not give them, what they ask.
Answ. So said Crellius the Socinian. But the doctrine of Perfection seems
rather to take away all use of such Prayer; for who will pray for that, which
they have? (2.) If saints pray for a sinless state here, they pray without
warrant. He that taught us to pray, that we be not led into temptation, taught
us also to pray for forgiveness of sins. But says he, what shall we say of
the prayers of the Apostles Col. 4:12. 1 These. 3:13. and 5:22 etc. Did they
pray so without faith. Ans.. This is another of Crellius arguments: But we say,
The Prayers of the Apostles were not for a sinless state; nor did they believe,
that the Saints here could be in such a state, as to sin no more: Nay, while
they prayed thus for the saints, they supposed, that the saints had not yet
attained to it. Epaphras (not the Apostle Paul) is said Col. 4:12. to labor
fervently in prayer, that the Colossians might stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God; that is, might set the will of God only before them, as
their Rule; and hang upon no man, as to their Christian conduct, but walk in
sincerity, as becomes Christians, following the rule of Gods Law; and might
not be always c^ildren tossed to and fro, with every wind of doctrine, and
spoiled through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after
the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; as there was ground to fear,
as we see Chap. 2. Paul. 1 These. 3:12, 13. is clear against this imagined
Perfection; for he prays, that God would make them to increase and abound in
love, (so that th^re was yet some shortcoming) to the end he might establish
their hearts, unblameable in holiness -- at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. So that he shows not, what a measure of love and holiness, they will
attain unto here; but prays, that it might always be growing, until it
attain its full perfection, at the coming of the Lord. The same is clear from
2 These. 5:23. Which makes against this imagined perfection, and speaks only
of a perfection of parts, not of degrees.

24. In the fifth place he reasons thus Page 158.. 7. Our doctrine is
repugnant to common sense and reason. Why so? for these two opposite principles
in the children of darkness, and in the children of light, are sin and
righteousness. And as men are respectively fermented with the one or the other,
so are they to be called justified or reprobated; seeing he that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the just; even they both are abomination to the
Lord Prove. 17:15. Ans. This argument would prove as well, that full perfection,
which he denies to be common to all the Regenerat, to be essential to the
state of Christianity; and therefore he must answer it, as well as we. But
(2.) That there are contrary principles, in the godly, and wicked, is true; and
it is as true, that there remains sin in the godly, which flows from a
principle of corruption; yet the Godly man is not fermented (to speak in the
dialect of the Quaker,) or rather (to speak in the dialect of the Scriptures)
is not under the dominion of that principle, nor given up thereunto, as the
wicked are. with full will, consent and pleasure, without any reluctance or
lusting of a contrary principle. (3.) It is not saife, to call all not yet
justified, reprobat (4.) The Lord justifies none, upon the account of their
Inherent Righteousness; and indeed this man's opinion, tends to a setting up
of Justification by the works of the law, or inherent righteousness; for if man
can abide in all things, that are written in the Law, he should be free of the
curse. Gal. 3:10. But this is contrary to the experience of the best of Saints.
Psalm. 130:3. and 143:2. Job. 9:3. and 4^:5. 1 Cor. 4:4. And the Law should not
then be weak because of flesh, contrare to Romans 8.3. And contrare to that Iam.
2:10. He who trangresseth in one, is guilty in all: and contrary to these
Scriptures, Gal. 3:21, 22. and 2:21 and 3:10. further says he Then a man
should be called just, who sins in all his actions, Ans. No man is calle^
just before God, in point of Justification, because of his Inherent
Righteousness, but because of the perfect righteousness of Christ, imputed to
him by God, and received by faith. And as to sanctification, such may be called
just, because of Integrity, Sincerity and Uprightness of heart, and because of
Endeavoring after conformity to the Law, in the strengh of the Lord; upon
which account the man is approven of God; but not because he is sinless; for
then no man should go under that denomination. But says he, the subject is
donominated by the accident, that adhereth. Ans. Yet a wall is called white
though the whiteness be not perfect: but mixed: And God gives the denomination
according to grace, that is, according to the better part, though it sometimes
should be the lesser part. He asks, where are then the children of God, and
of light, the sanctified and purified ones? Ans. Even where these are, who are
groaning under a body of death, and running daily to the fountain, and giving
Christ much work (to speak so) to wash and make them clean from their daily
pollutions, and defilements, and have renunced the works of darkness; and are
now serving the Lord with singleness, though with much weakness and many
failings.

25. In the next place Page 159.. 8. He comes more directly to confirm his
own Opinion. And his first argum. is the old Pelagian argument, formerly
rejected, and which is used by Volkelius the Socinian lib. 2. c. 22. viz. That
the commands of Christ and the Apostles, suppose it to be possible, or in our
power. He proves, that this perfection is not only possible, but necessary,
from several Scriptures: such as Mat. 5:48. Which only proves it our duty to
endeavor after Perfection; and to mind all duties, even such as the corrupt
pharisees, thought no duties, such as to love our enemies, to bless them that
curse us, etc. verse. 44, 45, 46, 47. As for Mat. 7:21. Ioh. 13:17. 1 Cor. 7:19.
they can make nothing for him, unless he suppose, that no man shall be saved,
who ever sinned: And further, seeing he will not deny, that some of these
passages, at least, concern the unconverted, he must also grant, that even
they also may attain to this Perfection. As for 2 Cor. 13:11. and 1 Ioh. 3:2
-- 10. we have spoken to before: And by this last, we know to expound that, 1
Ioh. 2:3, 4, 5, 6.

26. His next argu: is from Romans 6:14. Which speaks only of the dominion of
sin, from which, we grant, all believer are delivered; and if he know no
difference betwixt a state of freedom from the dominion of sin, and a sinless
state, he is ignorant of Christianity. He cites also Romans 8:3. which is
directly against him; And if he look to verse 4. that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. It can make nothing for him: for it is not said,
by us, but in us, that is, in our nature, when Christ came in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and fulfilled all righteousness, and so answered the Law, by
doing, as well as by suffering; which righteousness, consisting as well in his
obedience, as in his suffering, is imputed to believers, and by virtue thereof,
they come to have a right to the crown, and to life, which was lost by the
breach of the Law, which required full obedience, and satisfaction in case of
transgression; and that notwithstanding of their shortcomings, which are many.
But how then, says he, is the Gospel differenced from the Law, which made
nothing perfect? Ans. The Law pointed out Christ to come, in whom alone, all
was to be had; and without him, its ordinances made nothing perfect: And the
Gospel exhibiteth this Lord Jesus, in whom dwells all fullness; and who is
able to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him. Page 160. he
says That Paul proves this through the whole 6. Chap. to the Romans. Ans. The
contrary is most manifest, for he is encouraging believers to holiness, and
dehorting them from a continuance in sin, which supposes, that persons may be
believers, and yet have need of such dehortations, and encouragments: for where
this Quakers perfection takes place, all these are laid aside, as utterly
useless. He speaks not of sinlesness, but of a living in sin verse. 2. which
is opposite to a being dead to sin, that is, freed of sins Dominion and
Law-power; and which is opposite to a walking in newness of life, verse. 4. And
verse. 6. he says, though the old man was virtually and legally crucified with
Christ; Yet it is not actually killed, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
in due time; and then infers. that henceforth we should not serve sin, as
our Master and Lord. And this he turns into an exhortation verse. 12. Let not
sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof, verse. 13. neither yield ye your members, as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin: And for their encouragment, tells them verse. 14. For
sin shall not have dominion over you: he says not, for sin shall have no being
in you. And again verse. 16. he dehorteth them from a yielding of themselves,
as servants to obey sin, and verse. 19. he presses them to yield their members
as servants to righteousness, which is opposed to a becoming servants of sin
verse. 20. And to press this the more, he minds them of their state, to wit,
that now they were not the servants of sin, having obeyed from the heart that
form of doctrine, whereinto they were cast and molded: and verse. 22. that
they were made free from sin, etc. What our Quaker speaks afterward of the
way of attaining this perfection, by laying aside the outward Law, and looking
only to the Light within, we look upon as a Quakers dream: And when he says,
that our looking to the outward Law, and finding an impossibility of keeping it
perfectly, put us to wrest the Scriptures, to seek after an imputative
righteousness. He but declares the true genius and nature of that
antievangelick and diabolical Spirit, that acts them. And what follows Page
160. is but a confirmation of what we said, viz. that all the Perfection, they
would bring us to, by harkening to the Light within, is but a paganish
perfection. And his great promises Page 161. we account delusions, being
resolved to go to the Law and to the Testimony; and to abide by the
declaration of God's mind, in his word, and not to follow the Light of nature,
nor the hellish enlightenings of the devil, who was a liar from the beginning,
in this great matter.

27. In the last place Page 161. for a proof of this, he adduceth some
instances; as did the Remonstrants in their Apology Chap. 17. before him. Such
as Enoch and Noah, who are said to have walked with God, and to be perfect Genesis
5. and 6. Ans. They were Sincere and Upright, and had a Perfection of parts,
though not of degrees, and so walked with God: and by all their perfection,
they were not justified: but by faith, which leads a man out of himself; and
so became heirs of the righteousness, which is by faith Heb. 11:5, 6, 7.
Moreover we read of Noah's sin. As for Job, though he was a perfect and
upright man, yet his book declares, that he was not sinless; and Elihu
evinceth it; yea God lays to his charge Chap. 38:2. that he darkened counsel
by words without knowledge: And himself Chap. 42:2. confesses, that he uttered
what he understood not, things too wonderful for him, which he knew not: for
which he abhorred himself, and repented in dust and ashes verse. 6. As for
Zacharias and Elizabeth, Augustine of old answered, de gratia Christi contra
Pelag. Cap. 48. that this was to be understood of their unblameable
conversation, in the eyes of men; and the Lord accounted them such. And Justin.
Matyr, in Quaest. and Resp. orthodox. Quaest. 141. distinguishes betwixt
irreprehensible and sinless. It is said of them indeed, that they were
blameless, as all Pastors should be 1 Timothy 3* 2. an^ all Christians Phil. 2:15.
but not that they were sinless. And August. lib. cont. Caelest: distinguishes
betwixt esse sine peccato, and esse sine querela; and he says, this may be
said of some; but that of none, but of Christ. What he says from Ephesians. 2:5,
6. is true, viz. that such as sit with Christ, to wit. Actually, sin no more;
but now they sit not actually there, but only in Christ Jesus, their head. As
for Heb. 12:22, 23. whatever beginnings there may be thereof here; Yet its
fullness is above. Revel. 14:5. speaks not of Perfection here, but of their
blamelesness, that is, their Sincerity and Uprightness. And this is all that he
adduceth, to prove his Opinion by: and how slender his grounds are, let any
judge.

28. He comes at length to answer some of our arguments. 9. Page 161. etc. And
to that brought from 1 Ioh. 1.8. if we say, we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. He wondereth that we are so blind and
partial as to alleige this place, against which, so much might be said. Let us
hear what can be said? He says That we does not include the Apostle, as we see
Iam. 3:9, 10. Ans. That place of James takes in all, even the Apostles, though
not for the present time; and that was sufficient to prove, what a member the
tongue was. And he might say as well, that the Apostle is not included, 1 Ioh.
1:7, 9, 10. Nor Chap. 2:1, 2, 3. But n^xt, be it so, that the Apostle is not
here expressly included; it is sufficient for us, that it is spoken of
believers, to whom John wrote, that their joy might be full verse 4. and who
have interest in the blood of Christ, verse. 7. and are children Chap. 2: verse.
1. and have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous ibid. and
are brethren verse. 7. who had their sins forgiven them, verse. 12. and knew
the Father verse. 13. and among these come in also the young men, and the
Fathers, mentioned verse. 13, 14. What says he next? Here it is not said, that
we daily sin, in word and deed, far less, that all our best works are sinful,
for the following verse shows the contrary, where it is said, that such as
confess their sins get pardon, and are washen: and this cleansing cannot be
meaned of remitting the guilt, for that was expressed by forgiving; otherwise
there should be a tautology here. Ans. (1.) It is sufficient that this place
proves, that believers are not so perfect, as to be sinless here. (2.) It is
true, believers confessing their sins, and fleeing to Christ by faith, obtain
remission of their sins: and it is also true, that Christ's blood cleanses
them, from guilt and stain: but that cleansing from the stain and filth is
not perfect here; for then there were no need of remission; and believers might
say, they had no sin, contrare to what is here said verse 8. and Chap. 2:1. In
the 3. place he distinguishes betwixt sinning, and having sin, (as Volkelius
the Socinian lib. 5. c. 19. did, to elude this place, betwixt having of sin,
and being accustomed to sin) and then tells us, that because all have sinned, it
may be said of them, that they have sin Just as Smalcius the Socinian said
disp. 6. de Bonis Oper. Page 178. But we Ans. That the Apostle expressly says
both, that we have sin verse. 8. and that we have had sin verse. 10. And he that
sins in the present time, he has sin, in the present time: And beside this
having of sin, he supponeth that they may sin, saying Chap. 2:1* My little
children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not, that is not, that ye
have not had sin: And if any man sin, that is in the present and future time,
We have an advocate with the Father, etc. And it is observable, that the
Apostle clears verse. 9. what he meaned by having of sin, verse. 8. by saying
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: For
here he can mean no other, than such sins, as need foregiveness; and not
such, as were formerly was hen away by the blood of Jesus verse. 7. Moreove^ he
tells us, that sin may be taken for the seed of sin, that for some time
remains even in such, as are redeemed from actual sin: and when the children
of God resist the temptations that come from this seed, it is not their sin,
but the Devils, that tempts. Ans. (1.) This seed of sin is sinful, and as
lon^, as this seed of sin is in them, they cannot be perfect. (2.) The Apostle
is speaking of actual sins (not excluding this seed and body of death) which
must be confessed, before they be actually pardoned, and they cleansed from the
guilt of them, verse. 9. (3.) In so far, as the godly resist these temptations,
they do well; but even these sinful motions of corruption, within them, are
transgressions of the Law, and should be mourned for; and are evidences, that
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so that they do not what they should do*
every way as they ought to do: What he says in the last place, to wit, That
this place should not be so wrested, as to speak against what the same Apostle
says frequently, in the same Epistle. Is founded upon his presumption, and
false supposition, that he has proven this Perfection, from this Epistle; the
contrary whereof is shown.

29. To 1 King. 8:46. and Eccles. 7:20. he answers, That there is nothing
here said of sinning daily; Yea Sal^mon, in that place, two verses thereafter,
speaks of them, that turn from their sins, with all their heart; which
insinuates a possibility of relinquishing sin. Ans. It is express in
Ecclesiastes, that there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not, clearly importing, that even in their doing good, they sin; and
so, that they sin daily. What follows 1 King. 8:48. speaks only of their
Repentance, which we deny not to be possible: but nothing of this possibility
of not sinning. He answers 2. Though it were granted, that at that time,
there was no man that sinned not; yet it will not follow, that there are none
such now, or that it is Impossible there should be any such. Ans. (1.) Then he
must say either that, at that time, there were none Regenerate, no not Solomon
himself; or that his position is false, which makes this common to all
Regenerate persons. (2.) We have proven it, not only under the Old Test. but
also under the New: and what needs more? (3.) We do not speak of a simple
impossibility, as if it surpassed the power of God, to cause such a thing; but
of an ordinary impossibility, matters standing as they are, in the wise
ordination of God, who will so have it. In the 3. place he comes to criticize,
and tell us, that (...) is taken in the potential mood; and so it signifies,
who may not, or cannot sin, as Ps. 119:11. Ans. And why not also ought not,
seeing this Mood is used to express that? This is but vanity, for the Hebrew
has not properly potential moods. And though interpreters do usually render it
so, as more congruous latin; yet the sense abides the same: and the Dutch
translate it, as we have it. And what will this say to other places? Nay, the
very scope of Solomon evidenceth, our translation to be right, and his gloss to
be but vanity; as is obvious to every Reader.

30. To that argument from Romans 7:14. etc. he answers the same, that
Socinians and Arminians answered of old, to wit, That the Apostle is not there
speaking of himself, but of an unregenerate person. While as all the
circumstances of the text evince the contrary; to wit, that he is speaking of
himself, and that in the present time; for he uses always from verse. 14. and
forward, verbs in the present tense; and he distinguishes betwixt the Old and
New man, in himself, ascribeing to each their proper work; and speaks many
things of himself, which cannot be spoken of the Unregenerat. as (1.) To will
and approve what is good, and to nill and disapprove what is evil, and that
always; and to approve all good, and disapprove all evil, discovered to be
such. (2.) To consent unto the Law, that it is good; and to delight therein,
and that according to the inner man, which is the Regenerat part, opposite to
the Old man. (3.) Not to do evil, not I, it is no more I; and that was
according to the Renewed part. (4.) To have an inner man, which is proper to
the Regenerate Ephesians. 3:19. (5.) To feel a strife and war betwixt the Flesh
and the Spirit, which also agrees to the Regenerate Gal. 5:17. (6) To hate
evil, which no Unregenerate person can do. (7.) To approve of the Law, as
Spiritual. (8.) To have will present unto good, even when he finds not how to
perform what is good. (9.) To be brought into captivity to the Law of sin;
while as the wicked are willing slaves. (10.) To be groaning under this body of
death, and accounting himself wreatched because of it. (11.) To have a Law in
the mind, against which the Law in the members makes war. (12.) To be
expecting full delivery in Jesus Christ. (13.) To be thankful to God, upon
that account. (14.) To be serving the Law of God, when the flesh is serving the
Law of sin. (15) And Chap. 8:1. being an inference from wha^ is said Chap. 7.
he infers, that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, which
supposes, that he was speaking of one, that was in Christ; otherwise his
Inference had not been pertinent.

31. These things are clear, and might be further explained and confirmed, if
it were necessary. Let us see, what he says against this. 1. He says The
Apostle declared the contrary Chap. 6 2. Answ. No such matter: for what he said
there, and what he says here, can well agree; for he that is thus resisting
sin, striveing and protesting against it, when he can do no more, is abundan^ly
evidencing, that he is dead unto it, as to its dominion: and that he is not
living therein. 2. He says, Paul could not call himself a carnal man, as verse.
14. Answ. So said Schlightingius the Socinian, So Arminius: But we say, Paul
does not call himself simply, and every way, carnal, but only in a certain
respect, distinguishing betwixt his better part, which he owneth as himself,
and this Flesh verse. 18. And we find also, that Paul called the Corinthians,
who were babes in Christ, carnal in some respect 1 Cor. 3:1, 2. He says 3. The
Apostle Chap. 8. says, he was made free from the Law of sin and death, and so
he could not be then carnal. Answ. Neither say we that he was carnal in so far,
but spiritual. 4. He says, That Paul Chap. 8:35. says who shall separat us
from the love of Christ and verse. 37. that in all these things, we are more
then conquerours. And verse last, nothing can separat us. But where sin is, and
is continued in, there there is a separation: for all sin is contrary to God 1
Ioh. 3:4. Answ. That sin, where it is striven and wrestled against, as Romans
7:15. etc. will make a separation from God, I deny. (2.) That sin is contrary
to God, I no where read; that it is a breach and transgression of his Law, is
true*

32. To the instances of the failings of Noah and David, He says, They are
nothing to the purpose. Why so? The question is not, says he, whether good men
cannot sin, number non possint peccare; but, whether they be able not to sin, number
possint non peccare: And this may be true, though they have sinned. Answ. But
our Argument lies thus; If these men, whom the Spirit of God styles Perfect,
and men according to God's heart, have had their failings, and these failings
are registrated for our use; then we have no Scripture warrant for such a
Perfection here, as is not attended with sin: But the former is true. Let him
of now apply his answer to this argument, and see what it will say. Or thus we
may frame the Argument: If we find no instances in Scripture such persons, as
were so perfect, as that they did not sin, then to imagine such a perfection is
but a groundless fancy and a dream. But the former is true. Or, If we find sin
consisting with a state of Regeneration, than it is false, that all Regenerat
persons are in a sinless state. Hereby also is that, which he adds in the
second place, obviated. And further we say, that from these instances, we do
not prove, that the godly sin, in all they do, because of a body of death, and
corruption cleaving to them; other Arguments evince that: But from these
instances, we show, that his sinless state is but a Quakeristick dream.

33. To that argument. That this doctrine takes away the study of
Mortification, and Usemaking of the blood of Christ, and Praying for remission.
He very civilly tells us, That because of its absurdity, he had almost forgoten
it. As if he had answered all the arguments, we use against this error. But
wherein consists its absurdity? Is (says he) mortification of sin useless when
its end is attained? But he mistaketh, after his usual manner, our argument;
which in form runs thus. If mortification be a duty pressed on persons
regenerated; then persons regenerated have sin, and corruption in them to be
mortified, and so are not sinless. But the former is true. Therefore etc. May
it please him, to show the absurdity of this argument. When all sin is
mortified, there is no more need of this duty of studying mortification: and if
all sin be mortified in the regenerate. they have nothing to do with that duty:
and so this stu^ying of mortification is incumbent only to unregenerat persons:
does the Scripture speak so? Why does he not then show it? This would be more
pertinent to the purpose, than his extravagant discourse that follows, which
I have nothing to ^o with. But what says he to prayer, He answers with
Smalcius the Socinian against Frantzius disp. 6. Pa. 181. and disp. 9. Page
289. That wen we are to pray, forgive us our sins, the meaning is not of
daily sins, but of bygone sins. Ans. Why will he not say also, that when we
pray, give us this day our daily bread, it is meaned of long since, before
conversion; what vanity is this? But he says next. This militateth as much
against perfect justification. Ans. The man understands not our doctrine of
Justification; He supposes we say with Antinomians, that in Justification all
sins, not yet actually committed, are actually pardoned; while as from this
petition we prove the contrary: and yet assert a difference betwixt
Justification and Sanctification, as he may see in the larger Chatechisme
Quaest. 77. cited above.

34. He cites some sayings of Hieron. and of Gelasius; and bids us see some
places of Augustine. But if he will be pleased to read what Vossius has
gathered out of these, and many others of the Fathers, against Pelagius, upon
this head, which we hinted above, he may see his folly, and blush. Does not
Augustine, in his book against Celestius, frequently use that very argument,
forgive us our sins? And does he not say, De Spirit. and liter. 36. Multum ille
in hac vita profecit, qui quam long sit a perfectione justitiae proficiendo
cognovit: A grave saying, that is. He has advanced very far in this life, who
has so far advanced, as to know, that he is far from perfection. And Hierom,
in the very place cited him, to wit Epist. ad Ctesiphontem, says. This is men's
perfection, if they know, that they are imperfest. And against his conclusion,
as it stands, I will not be so morose, as not to assent to it, unless he mean
the last words hereof viz. that passage Revel. 3:12. to him, that overcomes,
will I make a pillar in the temple of m^ God, as fulfilled in this life: and if
so, he must mean the same of all the rest of the promises made there Chap. 2.
and 3. to Overcomers, which would make him ridiculous enough. If he would have
cited Ancients to his purpose, he should have cited the old Begardi, who
maintained this; and said, that a perfect soul being reduced to God, loses its
own will, so that it has no other will but the divine will, which it had from
eternity, in that ideal being, which it had in God; which being supposed (they
say) they may do any thing, which their affection puts them upon, without sin.
And so the reason why such persons cannot sin, is because all sins, even
unclean mixtures (as they also said) are no sins. He should have cited also
the old Alumbradoes, who had the same opinion, and practices suitable.

CHAP. XV. Of Perseverance.
1. In his ninth thesis, he lays down his judgment concerning that question,
first brought upon the stage, by the subtle adversary of the grace of God,
Pelagius, concerning the final Perseverance, or full and final Apostasy of the
Saints; and has since been agitated by Jesuits, Socinians, and Arminians: and
he asserteth two things, first. They in whom the light, the seed, the gift of
God, the inward sufficient grace, (for it has many names) has wrought
something to their purifying, tending forward to a perfecting of them, may go
backward, and depart from it by disobedience, That is, in plainer terms (for
these men must have liberty to speak in their own dialect) They who are
Regenerated, Purified and Sanctified, may Apostatize, and fall from that state
of Regeneration and Sanctification: and in this he takes part with Pelagians,
Jesuits, Socinians and Arminians, against the orthodox. Next He asserteth,
That some may attain in this life, to such a measure of fixedness and
stability in the truth, that they cannot fall away from it.

2. It is observable, that all such, who, in the doctrine of grace, err from
the right paths of the Lord; and so speak and write of it, as to exalt Man,
and Free will, and acknowledge nothing, in the way of grace's working in souls
first and last, but what may consist with their project, and resolution of
setting the crown upon man's head, as making himself to differ from others; do
also, in correspondency with their other principles and positions, assert this
full and final Apostasy of the Saints: for, as they put it in man's power to
accept or reject grace when offered; so they put it in his power to stand in
grace, or depart from it, as he pleases: that man may be Lord of the whole,
and wear all the glory of it. And therefore as they would admit nothing to be
said, concerning the Lords working of grace, in the souls of his people, that
might in the least seem to encroach upon the Free Will of man (though the
Gospel doctrine of the grace of God rather advantageth, than disadvantageth,
true Free Will) so will they admit nothing to be said, concerning the further
progress of the work of this grace, in the soul, to the end, that will not
consist with Free Will's absolute Lordshipe. Smalcius has said the matter
fully, in few words, Refut. lib. de Error. nov. Arian. lib. 1. c. 1. p. 7. as
it is free for all men (says he) to believe, who before were infidels, when
they have occasion to believe; so again it is free to all men, after they have
once believed, to fall from faith.

3. I cannot in the least wonder, why this man should be for the Apostasy of
the Saints, when I consider what his Saints are, and what his Principles,
formerly examined, savoure of. Nay, I rather wonder, how it comes to pass
that any of these, he calls or supposes to be saints, should ever come to
that measure or fixedness of stability, in good, as not to depart therefrom.
Only because, in his former Thesis, as we heard in the former Chapter, he
asserted such a perfection attaineable, as might put men out of all hazard or
possibility of sinning; he could not but now assert, that such a state and
degree of perfection, that took away all possibility of sinning, would also
exclude a possibility of defection; sin being that, which only can make souls
stagger, and fall from their stability; and defection being only by sin. All
the Grace and Regeneration and Sanctification, which his saints attain unto,
is, as we saw above, the pure and mere result of Natures Light, and of the
power of Nature, without the least assistance, as necessary, of the outward
sound and knowledge of the very letter of the declaration of God's mind, in
the Gospel, or of the bare report of a crucified Savior; let be of the
effectual operation of the Spirit of grace, renewing the whole man, and working
him up to an union and closeing with Christ, conform to the tenor of the
Gospel, that thereby he may come to the actual participation of the great and
saving benefits which Christ has purchased by his blood. What can we then
judge or say of this state, let us imagine it to be in its perfection, but that
it is a pure state of Nature, and as the perfection of this state, formerly
mentioned, can be nothing, but corrupt Nature (the constant and irreconcilable
enemy of the grace of God, and of the Gospel,) in its strongest fort of
opposition, and resistance to the Gospel Grace of God, and in its strongest
citadel of security, wherein it is freest from the invasions and attacques of
the grace of God: whence experience has proven it true, that none have been
greater enemies to the Gospel Grace of God, and furthest from a yielding
thereunto, than such as have attained unto the highest improvement of nature,
as they supposed; and were accounted the wise men of their age; for to such
wise men the preaching of the cross was foolishness. And who sees not, that
even within the Church, such remain most disobedient to the call of the
Gospel, and unperswadable by all its Reasons, Motives and Allurements, who
suppose themselves to have attained to some more then ordinary Improvement of
the Light of nature, or correspondence, in their walk, with a Natural
Conscience, and Principles of morality; especially if this be seconded, or
attended with an outward compliance with the outward ordinances of the Religion
they profess; for these, seeking to establish their own righteousness (which
is a piece of the heirshipe of corrupt nature, which all have from Adam)
cannot, and will not submit themselves unto the righteousness of God Romans 10:4.
Wherefore, Perseverance in such a state, can be no advantage, but a manifest
fixedness, in the way of death: and nothing can annul a perseverance in this
state, and cause a falling therefrom, but the strong hand of the grace of God.
And that state of stability, of which he talks, and from which there is no
falling away, can be nothing but the Lords holy and judicial giving up to
blindness and unbeleefe, and closeing their eyes, that they should not see, and
stoping their ears, that they should not hear, and hardening their hearts,
that they should not believe, conform to Esai 6:9. Ioh. 12 verse. 40. Math. 13:
verse. 14, 15. Luke 8: verse. 20. Act. 28: verse. 26. Romans 11: verse. 8. Mark. 4:
v. 12.

4. His saints then, being such as we have mentioned, and not such as we hold
with the Scriptures to be saints indeed, that is, Such as being by nature
children of wrath, and dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2:1, 2, 3. are in
due time effectually called out of nature, into grace, by the mighty power and
operation of the grace of God, having their Minds and Understandings
graciously Illuminated by divine Light, and their Wills Renewed and powerfully
Determined unto a closeing with Christ, offered in the Gospel, Ephesians. 2: verse.
5. Phil 2:13. 1 Cor. 2:10, 12. Act. 26:18. Ezech. 11:19. and 36:26, 27. Ioh.
6:45. And hereupon are made partakers of the Spirit of Christ, that dwells in
them, and renews their whole soul more and more, so that having a new
Principle of life, and new spiritual supernatural Habites, whereby they become
wholly new creatures, acting from new Principles, for new Ends, upon new
Motives to the glory of God and their Redeemer Ephesians. 2:6, 8, 10. Gal. 2:20. 1
Ioh. 5:12. 2 Cor. 5:17. 1 Ioh. 3:9. 1 Pet. 1:22, 23. And thus translated into a
new state, from death to life Ephesians. 2:2. 1 Ioh. 3:14. Col. 2:13. from darkness
to light Act 26:^8. Ephesians. 5: v. 8. 1 These. 5: v. 4. from sin to holiness 1
Cor. 6:11. Ezech. 36:25. Ephesians. 5:6. Tit. 3:5. from enmity to friendshipe
Ephesians. 2:12, 13, 14, 15. Col. 1:21 being now Justified, Accepted of God, having
their sins pardoned, and b^ing Adopted as heirs of the inheritance Romans 5:1.
and 8:1. Col. 2:10. Romans 8:32, 33. Ioh. 1:12. 1 Ioh. 3:1, 2, And all this upon
the account of the merits and purchase of Christ, the Mediator, in pursuance
of the Covenant of redemption, betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator; and conform
to the Covenant of Grace, exhibited in the Gospel. The saints, whereof he
speaks, not being such as these, described to us in the Gospel of Christ, we
need not think ourselves concerned in the vindication of their stability and
perseverance; for we own only the perseverance of such, as are thus
effectually Called out of nature into grace, and endued with the Spirit of
Christ. Esai 59:21. Romans 5:5. 1 Cor. 6:9. Ioh. 14:16, 17. Gal. 5:22. Psalm.
51:11. Ezech. 36:27. to lead, act and guide them, Romans 8:9, 11. who differ far
from his natural pagan-saints; and have no affinity with them, nor with
natural, outward-Christians* And thus might we let this whole matter, whereof
he treats in this Thesis, and in his Vindication thereof, pass without any
further animadversions.

5. Yet, lest he, according to the Genius and usual manner of that Seck, should
boast, and say, that we durst not contend with him, upon this head, and so
triumph among his admirers; we shall examine h^s doctrine with patience. The
truth, which we own, is shortly and fully set down, in our Confess. of faith,
Chap. 17. thus, They, whom God has accepted in his beloved, effectually
called, and sanctified by his Spirit, can neither totally, nor finally fall
away from the state of grace: but shall certainly persevere therein to the end,
and be eternally saved (Phil. 1:6. 2 Pet. 1:10. Ioh. 10:28, 29. 1 Ioh. 2:9. 1
Pet. 1:5, 9) This perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own free
will, but upon the immutability of the decree of election, flowing from the
free and unchangeable love of God, the Father (2 Timothy 2:18, 19* Ier. 31:3.)
upon the efficacy of the merit and intercession of Jesus Christ (Heb. 10:10,
11. and 13:20, 21. and 9:12, to 15. Romans 8:33, etc. Ioh. 17:11, 24. Luke 12:32:
Heb. 7:25.) the abideing of the Spirit and seed of God within them (Ioh 4* 16,
17. 1 Ioh. 2:27. and 3:9.) and the nature of the Covenant of grace (Ier.
31:40.) from all which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof
(Ioh. 10:28 2 These. 3:3. 1 Ioh. 2:19.) Nevertheless they may, through the
temptations of Satan and of the world, the prevalency of corruption remaining
in them, and the neglect of the means of their preservation, ^all into grievous
sins (Mat. 26:70, 72, 74.) and for a time continue therein (Psalm. 51. title
with v 14. whereby they incur God's displeasure (Esai 64:5, 7, 9. 2 Samuel,
11.27.) and grieve his Holy Spirit (Ephesians. 4:30.) come to be deprived of some
measure of their graces and comforts (Psalm. 51:8, 10, 12 Rev. 2:4. Cant. 5:2,
3, 4, 6*) have their hearts hardened (Esai 63:17. Mark. 6:52* and 16:14) and
their consciences wounded (Psalm. 37:3, 4. and 51:8.) hurt and scandalize others
(1 Samuel 12:14.) and bring temporal judgments upon themselves (Psalm. 89:31, 32.
1 Cor. 11:32.

6. Whence we may take notice of these things remarkable (1.) That we assert
not the Perseverance of any, that are not truly Regenerated, and Sanctified by
the Spirit, whatever fair profession they may have, in the eyes of the world;
whatever rare and excellent Gifts and Enduements, or Common graces of the
Spirit, that are not saving, they may be endued with, Heb. 6:4. What ever
Inward, and Real change, they may feel, that is not saving, and the work of
Regeneration, such as Illumination of the Mind, wordly Sorrow, Legal
Repentance, a temporary Faith, and an outward Amendment of life 1 Samuel: 10:10.
2 Pet. 2:20. 1 King. 21:27. 2 Cor. 7:10. Mat. 13:20. and 17:3; 4, Mark. 6:20. 2 Timothy 2:20. (2.) We assert not such a stoical inevitable necessity of
Perseverance, as adversaries suppose; as if persons were to persevere though
unwilling, and lying in sin and carnal security, and resolved to continue in
sin; but such a necessity as joyneth end and means together. (3.) Nor do we
assert an Absolute Impossibility of falling away, like that Impossibility,
whereby God cannot lie; but Conditional, in regard of the decree, and firm
purpose of God, etc. (4.) We assert not a Perseverance, depending upon the will
of man. Nor (5.) do we say, that believers, con^idered in themselves, can not
fall a way finally and totally; but upon the account of the Decree of God,
Purchase of Christ etc. (6.) We speak not here of a falling away from Duty, and
work commanded, for it is confessed, they may fall from that, into many and
grievous sins; but of a falling from State. (7.) Nor speak we of a falling away
from State, as to what is not of the essence thereof, but belong to it, as
concomitants, or consequences thereof; such as Sense of grace, and of the
Favor of God, Inward Assurance and Persuasion of our good state, sweet and
easy Actings of grace, Strong Habites, Comfort, and Peace of conscience; for as
to these there may be a remitting, as to some; and a privation, as others: but
of a falling away from a state, as to what is essential thereto; that is, a
falling out of the favor of God, and state of Reconciliation with him, and a
falling from a State of Holiness and Sanctification, by a total privation of
the Spirit, and of all his gracious Workings. (8.) We speak not of a
Perseverance for a certain time, but unto the end. (9.) Nor do we acknowledge,
with some Lutherans, a Total Apostasy, though not final; as if the saints
could wholly and totally fall from their state of Reconciliation and grace,
though not for any long time, far less to the end. But (10.) We maintain such
a Perseverance, as is opposite to both a Total Apostasy, and a Final Apostasy.

7. What are the grounds, whereupon this truth is built, was briefly declared
in the Confess. of faith, formerly cited. We shall reduce what might be said in
confirmation of this, unto a few heads. And first. If we consider God the
Father in this matter, we shall see it clear: for (1.) He is unchangeable in
his electing Love, his Decrees and Purposes are unalterable, and his Will is
irresistible. See Mal. 3:6. Iam. 1:16, 17, 18. Romans 11:29. Esa. 40:27, 28, 29,
30, 31. and 44:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 46:3, 4. and 50.6. Romans 8:28, 29,
30. Ier. 31:3. 2 Timothy 2:19. Romans 9:11. Esai. 46:9, 10, 11. Psalm. 33:9, 10, 11.
Ioh. 6: v. 37, 38, 39, 40. Esa. 42:1. Mat. 24:24. Ephesians. 1:3, 4, 5. 2 These.
2:13, 14. (2.) He is True and Faithful, his Veracity stands engaged, having
made so many promises hereof. Deuteronomy. 30:8. Ezekiel. 36:27. Josh. 1:5. Heb, 13:5. 1 Samuel 12:22. Psalm. 23:4, 6. and 125. throughout and 37:28. Esai. 54:7, 8, 9, 10.
Hos. 2:19, 20. Mat. 16:18, Ier. 32:38, 40. 1 Cor. 1:8, 9. 1 These. 5:28. Phil.
1:6. Mat. 12:20. 2 These. 3:3. 1 Cor. 10:13. (3.) His Omnipotency and Power is
engadged to through and perfect his saints, and finally save them Ioh. 10:28,
29. Romans 8:35, 37, 38, 39. Iud. verse. 24. 1 Pet. 1:5. 2 Timothy 1:12. Ephesians. 1:19.
2 Cor. 12.9. and 13:4. Deuteronomy. 33:3. (4.) His Oath Heb. 6:17, 18. is engadged.

8. Secondly, If we consider, what Christ has done, and does for them, this
point will be clear: For (1.) He has Redeemed them by his blood, and bought
them out of the hand of Justice, having made full and complete satisfaction,
for what could be required of them; and so has taken away sin and guilt, that
caused the alienation, and feud betwixt God and them Heb. 9:12. Ephesians. 1:7.
Col. 1:14. Dan. 9:24. (2.) He has Redeemed them out of Satan's hands, Heb.
2:14. Col. 2:15. and 1:16. Romans 16:20. 1 Ioh. 3:8. Mat. 12:19. (3.) He has
Redeemed them from sin and the power thereof, 2 Pet. 1:18, 19. Romans 6:5, 6, 7,
8. (4.) He is absolute Dispensator of all the good things, purchased and
promised; for he rose again for their Justification, Romans 4:25. and all the
promises are in him yea, and in him amen, 2 Cor. 1:20. and all power in heaven
and earth is given unto him, Mat. 28:18. (5.) He has Purchased and will Bestow
the Crown of life, Gal. 3:29. and 4:7. Romans 8:17. (6.) His Power keeps them
Ioh. 10:28, 29. (7.) His Love continues unchangeable toward them, Ioh. 13.1.
(8.) He is gone to pepare a place for them, Ioh. 14:2, 3. (9.) He has taken
possession of glory, in their name, and they are said to sit with him in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 2:6. (10.) He Interceedeth for them, Heb. 7:25. 1 Ioh.
2:1. Ioh. 11:42. Romans 8:34. Heb 9:24, 25, 26. Ioh. 17:11* 12, 13, 14, 15, 20,
21, 22:23, 24. Luke 22:32. (11.) He stands in several Relations unto them
assuring this; He is a Husband, and must have a wife; He is an Head and must
have a body; He is a King and must have subjects; He is made unto them of God
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1:30. (12.) He
has Purchased and Promised the Spirit, Ioh. 15:26. and 14:16, 17. and this
Spirit abides, to perfect his work Ioh. 14:16. 2 Cor. 1:22. Esai. 59:21.

9. Thirdly, If we consider the Spirits work and Interest in carrying those
sons unto glory, we will see this truth confirmed: For (1.) He is Promised to
his people Ezech. 11:19. and 36:27. Esai. 59:21. Ioh. 4:14. comp. with Ioh.
7:38, 39. (2.) It is affirmed, that he is in them, and abides in them, Psalm.
51:11. Romans 8:9, 11, 15. 1 Cor. 2:12. Gal. 4:6. 1 Timothy 3:14. 1 Ioh. 2:27. Romans
5:5. (3.) He Seals them unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1:23. and 4:30. 2
Cor. 1:21. (4.) He is a Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8:15. Gal. 4:5, 6.

10. Fourthly, If we consider the Covenant of Redemption, betwixt Jehovah and
the Lord Mediator, this will be abundantly evinced: For (1.) The Father has
given a number to Christ to save, Ioh. 17:2, 9, 11, 12. and 6:37, 39. And
Christ has undertaken to save them, Ioh. 6:37, 39, 40. (2.) The Father has
undertaken, that Christ shall see his seed, Esa. 53:10. and see of the travel
of his soul, and be satisfied, Esa. 53:11. Psalm. 72:8. (3.) Christ had a
commission to go about this work, and to bring many sons unto glory and was
qualified for this end, Esai. 61:1, 2, 3. Esa. 42:6, 7. and 49:9. Heb. 2:10.
(4. The Father has promised to give Christ what he asks Psalm. 2:8. and
89:2^, 27, 28. (5.) Yea, He has sworn, that he shall have an issue, Psalm.
89:35, 36. Act. 2:30, 31. Psalm 132:11, 12. 2 Samuel 7:12. 1 King. 8:25. Luke 1:61.

11. Fifthly, The consideration of the nature of the Covenant of Grace will
con^^rme this: for that is an everlasting and unchangable Covenant, and ha^h
the promise of Perseverance in its bosom, Genesis 17: verse. 7. Ier. 31: verse. 31,
32, 33. and 32: verse. 38, ^9, 40. Ezech 11:17, 18, 19, 20. Hos 2:19, 23. Ioh
6:54, 56. Esai. 54:10.

12. Sixthly, The Grace infused in souls, according to the Covenant of grace, is
of an enduring nature; especially considering how it is Watered, Preser^ed, and
Cared for: It is a remaining seed 1 Ioh. 3:9. sown in good ground Luke 8.15.
by the rivers of water Psalm. 1:3. And watered every moment Esai. 27.3. See Ioh.
4:14. and 7:38. And so is differenced from Gifts and Common graces, and from
temporary Faith, and grace that evanisheth in the day of trial 1 Ioh. 2:19.
Luke 8:18. Ioh 2:23, 24. Mat 13:21. Ioh. 17:9. what this true faith is, see
Tit. 1:1. 1 Timothy 1:5 Gal. 5 6. 2 Pet. 1:1.

13* Seventhly, The consideration of the hurt and damage, that the Asserting
of the Apo^tasie of the Saints, brings necessar^ly with it unto Christians,
may have its own weight here: For (1) Then they could not in faith and
confidence pray for it; for what is purely in the power of man's Free will, and
is not the sole work of God and of his grace, we cannot, we need not pray for,
contrare to Ioh. 14:13, 14. Ephesians. 3* 17, 18. 1 These. 5:23, ^4. and the Lords
prayer teaches us to pray, that his Name be hallowed, that his Kingdom come,
and that his Will be done in earth, as in heaven. (2.) This would destroy their
Hope and Confidence in God for preservation, in the times of trial and
temptation, contrare to Romans 8: verse. 35, 38, 39. (3.) This would take away
their joy of the holy Ghost, an^ Consolation; and give ground of continual
Anxiety, Doubts, Fears, etc.

14. Eighthly, The consideration of the blow that this doctrine would give unto
many articles of our Faith, and undoubted truths of our Religion, may confirm
us against it: As (1) It would render the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ
null and useless: for he should then suffer and die, and no man might be saved
or healed by his stripes and death. (2.) It would also render his Resurrection,
Ascension and Sitting at the Fathers right hand ineffectual: For
notwithstanding thereof, no man might be saved. (3.) It destroys his Death,
as the Death of a Cautioner; for no man can be said to have died with him,
risen with him, and to sit with him in heavenly places, contrary to Romans 6:3,
4, 5, 8. Ephesians. 2:5, 6. Col. 3:1. nor can he be said to prepare mansions for an^,
contrare to Ioh. 14:2, 3. (4.) It makes the grand promise of the Spirit null,
and of no effect. (5.) It takes away the Catholic Church, that shall
certainly come to mount Zion, and to the innumerable company of angels, etc.
Heb. 12:22, 23, 24. (6.) It would null that Christian Communion, and sweet
Fellowship of Saints. (7.) It would make Remission of sins of little comfort.
(8.) And take away the faith of Life Everlasting.

15. Having premised these things, for clearing and confirming of the truth; we
come to examine what he says against it Page 167.. 2. He reasons from Iud
verse. 4. and supposes. that these, that turned the grace of God into
lasciviousness, had once grace; not knowing, that this was not grace inherent,
or the true grace of God placed and planted in the soul, and wrought there by
the Spirit of grace; but external grace, held forth in the Gospel offer, even
that grace, that should have taught them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts;
and to have lived soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world Tit.
2:12. It is that grace, which is outwardly spoken and preached Act. 14:3.
Ephesians. 3:2. 1 Pet. 4:10. Next, He reasons from 1 Timothy 1:19. supposing, that
that faith, which some made shipewrak of, was true and saving faith. contrare
to 2 Timothy ^:17. and 4:14. while as it was nothing but the doctrine of faith; as
the word also is taken 1 Timothy 3:9. and 4:1. Gal. 1:23. and 3:2, 5, 23, 25. Act.
6:7. Romans 1:5, 8. In the third place, he reasons from Heb. 6:4, 5. Not so
much as noticeing, that the words are but Conditional, and not Absolute; if
they fall away: And that there is nothing here, no not one expression, that is
necessarily to be understood of true and saying grace, and not of mere gifts
and common graces, given in a more than ordinary measure: no one expression
here of Regeneration, of true Sanctification, of Closeing with Christ, of their
being Justified, or Adopted, or Elected, etc. Nay, the Apostle compares them
to ground, upon which the rain falls, and yet bears nothing, but thorns
and briars verse. 8. and distinguishes them from those, to whom he wrote, and
of whom he expected better things* that accompany salvation verse. 9. and from
true believers verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19. When our Quaker, out of
his friends, the Socinians and Arminians, shall say any thing, to prove that
these expressions import true and saving grace, we may then think it time to
sp^ak more of this; but seeing he is pleased to give us no more here, but his
naked assertion, we have said enough, and so proceed.

16. The next thing he alleigeth against this truth, is a supposition, that he
has undermined the ground thereof, viz. Election; But how superficially this
was attempted, we have seen. But he says, that this our doctrine is
contradicted by daily experience. Wherein? In that preachers (says he) exhort
many to believe, and lay hold upon salvation, who cannot, if they be reprobate.
Ans. But do Ministers know certainly who are reprobate? What if their design
be most to save the elect? But then, says he, their preaching is vain, for
these shall certainly be saved. Ans. Where is it said, that they shall
certainly be saved without the means? Knows he not, that by the foolishness
of preaching, God saves them tha^ believe? Knows he not, that God has
appointed the means, to keep his Elect believers constant and steadfast in the
faith? He tells us that Vossius Hist Pelag lib. 6 p. 587. says, that this was
the common opinion of the ancients. Answ. But I find the contrare manif^stly
made out by D Owen, in his preface to his book of Perseverance; from Clemens
Epistle to the Corinthians a piece of undoubted antiquity, from Ignatius, from
Tertullian* from Macarius Aegyptius, from Chrys^stome; and from the Opposers of
the Pelagians and Semipelagians, such as Prosper, and chiefly Augustine, with
whom accorded Hilary and Fulgentius. So from Gregory, from Bradwardine, yea and
from Thomas Aquinas. These h^ may be pleased to consider at his leisure.

17. But Page 168.. 3. He replieth to that answer, given to 1 Timothy 1:19.
Saying, that it must be true faith, that is there meaned. As if we said, that
the doctrine of faith were a false faith. But he supposes, that we meaned an
hypocritical faith, that was not in truth, but in show only: And yet he must
know, that a Temporary faith is not properly a false faith, but is true, in its
kind: It is true, it is not a saving faith; and yet is distinguished from a
false faith: But the faith, we said, that was there spoken of, is the doctrine
of Faith, which they should not have put away, but adhered to, and preached
faithfully, with all good conscience. But, when it is said, they put away a
good conscience, (says he) it is supposed, they had a good conscience, which
cannot be without true faith. Ans. Paul says Act. 23:1. that he had lived in
all good conscience before God, unto that day; taking in, (as is very probable)
even the time that he was a pharisee, and so without true faith in Christ: see
Phil. 3:6. (2.) The word (...) there used, does not signify always a putting
away what we have; as we see Act. 7:27, 39. and 13:46. And so it only imports
that they did not serve Christ in the Gospel, in truth and in sincerity; but
for filthy luc^e, or such like corrupt ends: and hence it came to pass, that
at length they cast the profession of the truth over board, and would follow
that doctrine no more.

18. To our proofs from Phil. 1:6. and 1 Pet. 1:5. he Answers. These can no
otherwise be understood, than in so far; as we fulfill the condition, upon
which salvation is offered. Ans. But these texts speak expressly of God's
beginning and perfecting the condition, the good work, and keeping by faith. So
that, the man knows not what he says, when he thinks this answer can be
made use of here.

19. He comes next Page 169.. 4 to speak of the second thing, as^erted in his
Thesis, to wit, That there is such a measure of grace attainable, from which
there is no Apostasy; and in this, he leaves his friends, the Socinians and
Arminians, and thinks hereby to answer all the arguments, whereby
Perseverance is proved; but in this his folly is too manifest: for all our
arguments conclude for such, as have the least measure of true and saving
grace: and upon the other hand, answer all that is brought against
Perseverance, by alleiging that these cannot reach such, as are attained to
this highest degree: But as this will not satisfy the Adversaries, so it is
but loose and groundless work, having no foundation in the word. And if he will
interpret that Heb. 6:4, 5, 6. of true and saving grace, he will find
difficulty to limite it to beginners, and not to mean it especially of such,
as have attained unto an higher measure of perfection, than ordinary.

20. But Page 170. from that place 1 Cor. 9: verse. 27. he says that Paul
supposes here a possibility, that he might become a reprobate. Whereby he
destroys what he is about to assert; for he cannot with any color of reason
deny, that Paul was advanced above many, and arrived at as high a degree of
perfection, as any Quaker is capable of; seeing himself says, that Paul was
come to that state^, from which he knew, he could not fall; and the matter is
clear Romans 8:38. 2 Timothy 1:12. and 4:7, 8. But he mistaketh the import of that
word (...), 1 Cor. 9:27. which only signifies, not approven, or not accepted
of, in the service he was employed about, as the whole scope an^ context
clears: and though it were taken in his worst sense; what can he hence
infer? will the careful use of means to provent such a thing, prove that
such a thing was possible, not only in it self, but also in respect of God? The
Lord's determination and purpose kniteth the ends with the means, and secureth
the end together with the means leading thereto. But it is an ordinary mistake
with Arminians, to think that if the end be secured, means are needless. Was
not the life of Christ secured until the time appointed? did he for all that
neglect the use of means for his life? or did he hearken to Satan, tempting
him to cast himself headlong from the pinnacle of the temple? did Hezekiah
neglect to eat and drink etc. notwithstanding of the full assurance he had of
living fifteen years longer?

21. What he says afterward of assurance, which some attain unto, though I
judge it not clearly proven from Revel. 3:12. that place being meant rather of
what the Lord will give hereafter in glory: Yet I assent unto the truth, and
shall recommend the Reader unto Chap. 18 of our Confess. of Faith, where he
shall find the matter fully explained and confirmed, so that he needs not
take any notice of what this Quaker says, on that head.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Church.
1 WE proceed unto his Tenth thesis, wherein he treats of the Ministry. But
in his Apology P. 172. etc. he thinks good to speak something of the Church,
of which, he made no mention in his Thesis, but did presuppose it. What we hold
concerning the Church, is distinctly set down in our Confess. Chap. 25: Where
more of the clear truth may be in a few words seen, than readily will be found
in several Treatises, written against Papists upon that head: there it is said;
The Catholic or Universal Church, which is Invisible, consists of the whole
number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under
Christ, the head thereof; and is the Spouse, the Body, the fullness of him, that
fills all in all (Ephesians. 1:10, 22, 23. and 5:23, 27, 32. Col. 1:18.) The
visible Church, which is also Catholic or Universal, under the Gospel (not
confined to one Nation, as before under the Law) consists of all these,
throughout the world, that profess the true Religion (1 Cor. 1:2. and 12:12,
13. Psalm. 2:8. Revel. 7:9, Romans 15:9, 10, 11, 12.) together with their children
(1 Cor. 7:14. Act. 2:39. Ezech. 16:20, 21. Romans 11:16. Genesis 3:15. and 17:7.)
and is the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ (Mat. 13:47. Esai. 9:7.) the house
and family of God (Ephesians 2:19. and 3.15.) out of which there is no ordinary
possibility of Salvation (Act. 2:47.) Unto this Catholic visible Church,
Christ has given the Ministry, Oracles and Ordinances of God, for the
gathering and perfecting of the Saints, in this life, to the end of the world:
And does by his own Presence and Spirit according to his promise, make them
eff^ctual thereunto (1 Cor. 12:28. Ephesians. 4:11, 12, 13. Mat. 28:19, 20. Esai
59:21. Add hereunto Quaest. 63. of our Larger Catechism: What are the special
privileges of the Visible Church? Ans. The visible Church has the privilege of
being under God's special care and government (Esai 4:5, 6. 1 Timothy 4:10.) of
being protected and preserved in all ages, notwithstanding the opposition of
all enemies (Psalm. 115. throughout Esai 31:4, 5. Zech. 12:2, 3, 4, 8, 9.) and
of enjoying the Communion of saints, the ordinary Means of Salvation (Act.
2:39, 42.) Offers of grace by Christ to all the members of it, in the ministry
of the Gospel, testifying that whosoever believes in him shall be saved (Psalm.
147:19, 20. Romans 9:4. Ephesians. 4:11, 12. Mark. 16:15, 16.) and excluding none
that will come unto him (Ioh. 6:37.)

2. Here is our doctrine laid down in few words. What would this man now say?
He gives us first the Etymology of the greek word, that we render Church; and
thence tells us, that an Eccl^sia, or Church, is nothing else but a company of
such as God has called out of this world. Against which I have nothing to say:
only, for clearing the matter, I would add; That there is a company called out
of the world by the grace of God, and power of his Spirit, to worshipe him in
Spirit and in Truth; and this is that company, which is called the Church
invisible, because their union with their Head, and with one another, is by a
bond of true and saving Faith, and sincere Love, which are not obvious to the
eyes of men. As also there is a greater company of persons, called out of the
world, to profess the Name of Jesus, and to worshipe Him outwardly, according
to his word, and to own him for their King, by submitting to his Laws,
Ordinances, and Officers, by an outward profession. And this is that company,
which is called the visible Church, because both their exercise, and their bond
of union with this King, and with one another, is outward, and obvious to the
eye; to wit, an open Profession of the true Religion, and outward submission to
and following of the ordinances and institutions of Christ: But as to this
visible Church, in his following words, he seems to take no notice thereof;
for he describes to us the Church Invisible; and then tells us, that without
this Church there is no salvation. But this is impertinently spoken; for that
Church is made up only of the elect; And if we should speak of the Invisible
Church, as now existing in this world, we could not say, that any elect
belonged to it, but such as were effectually called; for the rest were not yet
called out of the world, or out of their state of nature; and he told us, that
a church is a company of persons called out of the world. To say th^n, that
there is no salvation, out of that company, that are already affectually
called, is neither pertinent, nor truth; for there are many, who are not yet
called, whom God, will in due time call and bring home; and these whom he has
elected, he does bring into the visible, Church where they may enjoy the
ordinances, which God has appointed ^or Conversion: And therefore we say, that
out of this visible Church there is ordinarily no salvation: But all this is
said by him, to make way for his Church, that will take in Heathens, Pagans,
Turks and Tartars, that never heard, nor never shall hear a word of Jesus
Christ; which Church, as he would delineate it to us, has not the least
relation to Christ, as Head and King; nor any advantage of, or interest in the
Institutions of Jesus Christ. And what a Church this shall be let any sober
Christian judge.

3. But let us hear himself speak: He calls the Church a company of such, as
God has called out of this world, that they may walk in his light and Life.
One might readily suppose, that this were good: but hear more. Under this
notion, says he, of the Church, all these are comprehended, of what Nation,
Kind, Tongue or Family they be, (though far removed from, and strangers to
these who profess Christ, and Christianity in words, and enjoy the Scriptures)
who obey the divine light and testimony of God within them, so as by it they
become sanctified and washen. Ans. That is, in short, All Heathens and Pagans,
who have never heard of Christ or of Christianity, belong to this Church of
persons, called out of the world, to walk in God's Light and Life; if they have
obeyed the Light of Nature and of a Natural Conscience, teaching to abstean
from gross sins. This is the Quakers Church, and the Church of persons
effectually called out of the world, which they mean: which is nothing else,
but a Church of moralized Pagans, A pagan-Church, without the Knowledge of
Christ, Profession of Christ, Faith in Christ, Worshipe of Christ,
Acknowledgment of Christ, Union with Christ, without the Gospel of Christ, and
the Spirit of Christ. An^ though he call this, the Catholic Spirit, and the
secret life and virtue of Jesus; Yet it is in truth nothing but Catholic
nature, which cannot understand the things of the Gospel. This is further
confirmed by what he adds. Therefore (says he) they may be members of this
Catholic Church, who are Pagans, Turks and Jews, and of every seck among
Christians, if they be good single hearted men, though they be ignorant and
superstitious. Thus we see the Quakers Church is erected according to the
Covenant of works, and that now broken, founded upon the Law of Nature,
directed by the Light of Nature: and to it belong all civil outwardly moral
persons, whatever Religion they have, and how superstitious soever they be: Yea
though they worshipe stocks and stones, and the Devil; for there is no
exception here. Reader, what think thou now of this Church, of this
Profession, and of this Religion? It is Catholic, I confess, alas too
Catholic! Hence we see, how false it is that he says afterward Page 174. that
this Church has sometimes been Invisible, though he, after the Quakers manner,
misapply that Ier. 3:14. and 1 King. 19:18. For alas, it has always since
Adam fell, been too visible.

4. Next. 3. He speaks of a particular Church; and here seems to word the
matter better; but, he having already given us the Key, we shall be the more
able to unlock his cabinet. We must (s^ith he) consider a Church, as it
signifies a certain number of faithful persons. That is, Persons only taught by
the Light of nature, though as for Religion, they may be worshipers of the
Devil; for this particular Church needs but be a part of the Catholic
Church* what more* Gathered together (says he) by the Spirit of God, and the
testimony of some of his Ministers That is (say I) by the Light and Law of
nature, and the testimony of Quakers, or such Ministers, as preach nothing of
the Gospel, nothing of Christ, revealed in the Gospel, nothing of the mystery
of God and of Christ, therein revealed. What more? And brought unto, (says he)
the faith of true principles, and the doctrine of the Christian faith. That is,
such principles and doctrine of Christian faith, as may be among them, that
never heard of Christ, or of Christian Faith; that worshipe the work of men's
hands, and possibly the Devil. Whose hearts (says he further) united by the
same love, and their understanding illuminated with the same truth, meet
together, to attend upon God, adore him, and unanimously give testimony against
error, though they suffer therefore. But (1.) Do not their bodies meet
together too? (2.) Can that love be true Christian love, which may be among
Pagans? (3.) What illumination of truth can they have, who never had another
teacher, than a Natural Conscience within, or the Law written upon the works of
creation and providence? (4.) What attendance upon God, or adoration of him,
without Christ, known and believed in? (5.) What testimony against error can
they give, who never heard of the Gospel, or of Christ? (6.) I know that here
he is giving us a description of Quakers Conventicles, which really are
Synagogues of Satan. He tells us further, that all the members of those meetings
teach and instruct one another. And so they are all officers, all eyes, etc.
and so monsters: No organical Church. Then he closes with an untruth, saying,
that such were all the primitive Churches, gathered by the Apostles. While as
the Apostolic Churches consisted of persons, who called upon the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1:2. They were Churches in God the Father, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1:1. 2 These. 1:1. that is, such as acknowledged and
worshipped the true God, and that in Jesus Christ: which neither Pagans, nor
Jews as such did.

5. Having thus spoken of a catholic and of a particular church, he comes. 4;
to speak something of the qualifications of the members of both, which I judge
superfluous, seeing that was sufficiently done already. Yet because his words
here are of a finer-like dress, let us hear him. That one (says he) may be a
member of the catholic church, it is necessary, that there be an inward call
of God by his light in the heart, and that the heart be fermented by his nature
and Spirit, so as he leave off unrighteousness, and turn to righteousness; and
that, as to the inward part of his soul, he be cut off the wild olive of nature
and planted in Christ, b^ his word and inward Spirit. And all this may be in
them, that are ignorant of the history of Christ, as was proved in the 5. and
6. Thesis. Ans. These are fine words, to deceive the simple; had he not
sufficiently explained himself above, in the place by himself cited, and just
now also given us a clear view of his Catholic Church, and of its members, we
might readily have been deceived: But, according to his own interpretation of
himself, and a narrow inspection of his words here, We find (1.) That one can
be a qualified member of the Church Catholic, who has never heard of Christ,
or of the Covenant of grace in Christ, nor learned any more of Christianity or
of the Gospel, then what nature could teach: and how dissonant this is from the
whole Gospel; let any, that ever read it, speak. (2.) All this inward call of
God is by the light, that is in the heart of every man by nature: is this any
thing else, but natures dim light? (3.) All this fermentation (to speak in the
Quakers dialect) is effectuate by the power of this light, and this is it he
means by the Spirit, as he hinteth here, and leargly told us before. (4.) All
the effect of this work is but an outward turning from unrighteousness, which a
natural wretch may do, upon the information of a natural conscience: This is
nothing of true Sanctification. (5.) It is impossible that all the operation of
nature can bring a man off nature, and plant him in Christ. (6.) The Spirit of
God works in and with the word, and this word is the preaching of the Gospel;
and where the Gospel is, there is the history of Christ. So that where there is
nothing of the history of Christ, there is not the word of the Kingdom, there
is not the special working of the Spirit of Christ, This word therefore, and
inward Spirit, whereof he speaks, is but he word and Spirit of Nature, that
is, nature under new names; the Paganish-word and Spirit.

6. But what is requisite to a member of a particular christian church? He
answers Page 175. Beside this inward work it is necessary (says he) there be
an external profession, and faith in Jesus Christ, and these sacred truths
delivered in the Scriptures, when the inward light, and testimony of the
Spirit, shall naturally incline and compel such, as are subject and obedient to
it, to give assent and credit to the truths delivered in the Scripture Ans.
We heard before of a Catholic Church, whereof all the members must needs be
saved, and of a Particular Church, much of the same complexion with the
Catholic; but now we hear of a new Church, called a Particular Christian
church; the complexion of which seems to differ from the former: But the
matter is this; Christianity, with him, is not necessary to sal^ation: th^re
may be particular Churches, were there is nothing of the Christian Religion:
Pagans, that are somewhat Moral and Civil, belong to the catholic Church, and
shall be saved; as well as Christians: But because, where the word of the
Gospel is come, there must be some respect had to it, and to the word of God;
therefore a little more is necessary in this case, though not in it self, to be
found in such as live in such places, where the word of God is; for it were a
shame to say, that no more were required of a man, borne and living all his
days, where the word of God and the Gospel is, than of a pagan, that never
heard of Christ. But now what is required? An External profession etc. This is
good, and enough to declare, that the Quakers Churches, are not Christian for
they believe not the holy truths set down in the Scriptures, because they
oppose and contradict them; Nor do they believe in or make profession of Jesus
Christ, revealed in the N. Testament, because they oppose him, and all his
Institutions. But how is this faith wrought? is it by the Spirit of God? No:
the inward light alone does it: that is, it is a faith of Christ and of the
truth of the Scriptures, that nature can sweetly and naturally incline, yea
compel unto. But this can reach no further, than the truths, that corrupt
nature can teach; and what affinity these have with the Gospel of the grace of
God, let Christians judge: And thus we have run round, and are again, where we
begane.

7. He infers, from what he has said, That the inward work of holiness and
laying aside of iniquity, is every way necessary, to constitute a member of the
Church of Christ. Yet it is but such a work of holiness, that nature can
produce and effectuat. We acknowledge, true holiness, wrought by the Spirit of
God subdueing and overcoming nature, to be necessary in all that are members of
the Invisible Church; but not necessary to constitute one a member of the
visible Church, general or particular. What more? That outward profession is
necessary, to make one a member of a particular congregated church, though not
of the catholic church. Then the particular Church is not an homogeneal part
of the Catholic; but of a different complexion. Then members of the Catholic
church, cannot be members of a particular Church, without some more be added.
It seems then, these particular Churches are Visible Churches, but the
Catholic is invisible. Yet (says he) this external profession is every way
necessary, where God gives opportunity to know it, and the outward testimony
is to be believed, when and where it is revealed. Then it is no way necessary
otherwise: and so, without any Knowledge, Revelation, or Acknowledgement or
Profession of the Gospel, one may be a member of the Catholic saved Church:
are these things consonant to Scripture?

8. Next. 5. He tells us, that the devil, working in the mystery of iniquity,
taught his followers to say, That none, how holy so ever, was a member of the
church of Christ, without an outward profession, and unless he were initiated
with some ceremonies. Ans. And what can it be else, but the devil, working in
the mystery of iniquity, that taught him to say, tha^ Pagans, Turks, and Jews,
who are enemies to the true Christian Religion, can be members of the Catholic
church, without either Profession, or Knowledge of Christ? (2.) Himself said,
that this profession was necessary to particular Christian Churches: And are
not these, Churches of Christ? (3.) for the external ceremonies, used in the
Church of Rome, we own them not; but such as Christ has instituted in his
word, if the Spirit within him, be not contrary to the Spirit speaking in the
Scriptures, he also should own. And again (says he) That if one have an
outward profession, though inwardly ungodly and irregenerate, he may be a
member of the true Church of Christ Ans. That such an one may be a member of
the Church Visible, we own it, as the truth of God; and, when he shall be
pleased to form a disput upon this head, shall make it good: And, at best, he
is but mistaken, when he adds, that this is to put light for darkness; as if
God did more regard words, than works; For the Lord calls for both Rom 10:9,
10. He is also mistaken, when he says, that Antichrist did build his structure
upon this foundation; For he applies all the privileges of the Invisible
Church, unto his visible Synagogue of Satan; and distinguishes not betwixt the
Visible and the Invisible Church; as neither does this Quaker; and
non-churcheth all, who are not of his combination; and how near this Quaker
approaches to him, in this, he can judge, if he will.

9. What he speaks of the degenerating of the primitive churches, is true;
but when among these corruptions, he reckons Page 176. this as one, that men
became Christians; that is, members of the visible church, by birth; he is far
out; for if that be a corruption, the Apostles and first primitive Church were
guilty thereof; for we own it from them: Peter told the Jews, that the promise
was to them, and to their children Act. 2:39. And Paul told the Corinthians 1
Cor. ^:14. that the children of believers were holy: and under the Law,
children by birth enjoyed this privilege; and this privilege was never taken
away from them under the Gospel. What he says of the reformed churches: though
there be too much truth in it, yet it ill becomes him and his party, to
upbraid them; seeing all their design, as has been often observed, is to make
them, and us all, mere pagan churches. And, instead of true holiness, to press
upon us Natural, Dead, and Antievangelick Morality.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Ministerial call.
1. OUr Quaker, having thus dispatched what he had to say, of the Church,
comes to speak to what he had mentioned in his Thesis, concerning the
Ministry, where we find several things spoken unto, which we shall examine
severally. In the beginning of his 10. Thesis, he tells us, That as by this
gift, grace and light, all the true knowledge of God, in spiritual things, is
received and revealed; so by the same, as it is manifested, and received in the
heart, by its power and efficacy, every true Minister of the Gospel is
constituted, prepared, and furnished for the work of the ministry: And by this
moving, leading and drawing, must he be led and commanded, in his misterial
work, as to places where, the persons to which, and times when he is to be
employed. That which here we are to take notice of, is that which constituteth
a Minister; and with this Quaker, the only thing that makes one a Minister, is
Inward Light (which he calls also grace and a gift,) as it is, received, in
its power, in the heart. This is all his call unto the weighty work of the
Ministry: What this Light, Gift and Grace is, we discovered above
sufficiently; and after examination of all that he said of it, found it to be
nothing else, but the dim Light and Law of Nature, or the Relicques of that,
which once was glorious and illustrious, while Adam stood; because nothing else
can be supposed now common to all Adam's sons, or all that are Rational
Creatures, whether borne without, or within the Church, whether Pagans,
Barbarians, Cannibals, Shythians, or what you will. And this he makes both the
Preacher, or Revealer of Spiritual things, and the Mean by which this
Revelation is received; for by it all the true knowledge of God, in Spiritual
things, is (says he) both revealed and received: so that it is Preacher,
Bible, and all: and when this Light and its Teachings are received in the soul,
then the man is Called Minister; but for what I know not, unless for to teach
natural, dead-morality and civility, amongst Pagans, that they might be more
civilized; for, sure I am, all this light can never qualify him to be a
Minister of the Gospel, to declare the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, to
Minister the Gospel of God, to be a Minister of Christ, and a Steward of the
Mysteries of God, to Prea^h the unsearchable riches of Christ; and as sure I
am, it can be no call to a man, to undertake this work. This being so clear and
manifest from what is said above, we might let him rant here at his own,
liberty, and be quiet; for when the ground is found naught, the superstructure
falls of its own accord.

2. Notwithstanding hereof, we shall take notice of what he builds upon this
sandy foundation; that the opinions of the Quakers, concerning the Ministry,
may be in some measure detected, and confuted. In his Apol. P. 177. 6. He tells,
us that the errors, which Protestants retain, concerning Ministers and
Pastors, are a chief cause of Lamentation. I shall not deny, but errors, in
this matter, are of dangerous consequence, being as sensible, as he is, that a
false and corrupt ministry will quickly cause or occasion the corruption of
all. He says, that all things, concerning this matter, are at present in
confusion: The Ground, the Call, the Qualifications, the Maintenance, and the
whole Discipline is, says he, diverse from, and wholly opposite unto the
ministry of the primitive Church, and do necessarily tend to exclude a
Spiritual Ministry, and to introduce and establish a carnal ministry. Answ.
This is a hard charge, and had need to be well founded; yet it is no new
charge: He has but barrowed this from the Familists; from whom he has many
other things. But the calumnies and bitter speeches of Quakers, and the like,
are not much to be valued, especially when, they are directed not against one
particular place, where, it may be, much corruption has creept-in, or is
introduced; but against the Ministry every where, excepting, I suppose, what
is among themselves, and among themselves only. He mentions five heads of
corruption here, but in his following disput, we find but three of the five
spoken to: for as to the first and last; the Ground and the whole Discipline,
he passes them by, upon what account, I know not; possibly because, he thought
the speaking to the rest, was sufficient.

3. In the first place Page 178.. 7. He comes to speak of the Call of Pastors
or Doctors, in the Church of Christ; and to show, what it is. But before I
consider what he says, I must take notice of this. That while he speaks of a
Call, and takes upon him to acquant us with the nature of a true Call to the
Ministry; he cannot but in reason suppose these Ten things following: first,
That there is, and must be a visible Church continued, and kept up in the
world: for the Ministry, of the call whereunto he speaks, has an undoubted
relation unto the Visible Church; it is in the Visible Church that this
ministry is set and placed by God 1 Cor. 12:28. It is over it that overseers
are set by the Holy Ghost Act. 20:28. It is such a Church, that they must feed,
by dispensing the Ordinances of God: It is to such a company, that they must
act the part of Watchers, Messengers, Ambassadors, Dispensators or Stewards,
Co-workers with God, Fathers, Rulers, Overseers, Nurses, Teachers, Stars,
Angels, Paranymphs or friends of the Bridegroom, Laborers, Pastors, Builders
and the like: all their administrations are for such a company; and their work
being to Convert Strangers, to Confirm and build up Believers, to Instruct the
Ignorant, to Strengthen the Weak, to Bring home Wanderers out of the way, etc.
As also to Keep up and go before others, in the public worshipe of God, it is
manifest, there cannot be a Called Ministry without a visible Church. Secondly,
That there is and must be a standing Ministry, in the Visible Church: For
where there is a Call, and the manner of a Call to the Ministry spoken of,
there a Ministry is presupposed: a Call to an Office, supposes the Office,
otherwise the call should be to a non ens: And it were ridiculous to debate
about a call to an Office, if the Office it self be called in question, or not
presupposed by both sides: Take away the office, and all debate about the call
to that office cease, of will. Thirdly, That this standing Ministry, or
Office in the house of God, is necessary, and must not be laid aside, or
annulled: for when he makes so much debate about the Call to this Office, and
lays so much stress upon the right manner of this Call, he cannot but
presuppose, that the right call, or right manner of a call here, is of very
great advantage; and if this be so, certainly the Office it self cannot but be
necessary. Fourthly, That this standing and continueing Ministry, in the
Church, is an Ordinance and Institution of Jesus Christ, and must be owned as
such, preserved and kept pure, as such: For if it were a mere appointment of
Man, What necessity were there, that we should make any debate about the manner
of a call thereunto? If it were not of Christ, it were no great matter, though
it were quite laid aside; and all debate about a call unto it, were utterly
needless. Fifthly, That None ought to take upon him this Office of being a
Pastor or minister in the house of God, without a Lawful Call: For seeing it is
necessary to know, what is the right manner of a Call to this Office, it is
manifest, that there must be a Call unto this Office: and if there must be a
Call unto this Office, none can cloth himself with that Office who is not
called thereunto; if every one, who pleased, might take on him this office,
what necessity were there of a call to it? A call says that some peculiar
persons, and that in an orderly way, must alone be empowered hereunto; and that
every one, who will, may not, at his own hand, assume this Office. Sixthly,
That as none way take this Office upon themselves, without a lawful Call
thereunto; so none may take upon them the Work, proper to such an Office, but
such as are called to the Office: For the call to the Office is only appointed,
for this end, to lay a bar in the way of others, from doing; or taking upon
them to do, the work belonging to that Office: if any, who pleased, might do
the work, to what end should there be a special Office for that work, and a
special Lawful call to the Office? Seventhly, That neither the Office, nor the
Work proper to the Office, is common to all the members of the Church; for if
the Work be common to all, of what use can a special Office be for this work?
And what necessity were there for a call, authorizing some to the doing of the
work of that Office? Eighthly, That Officers and Church members, as such, are
different and to be distinguished; so that all Church members are not Church
Officers. This is clear from the preceding. Ninthly, That a Call differs
from Gifts and Qualifications: for a call to an office, if it be right, and
such as God will approve, who sends not a message by the hand of a fool, does
presuppose, that the person called is fitted and qualified; and that this
qualification was not a sufficient ground, for him to take upon him the office,
or to perform the proper work of the office; for if his qualification had
sufficiently warranted him for the office, and for the work, the call had been
useless wholly superfluous; when then our Quaker speaks of a Call, he must
mean a proper, real and formal call, not a false, imaginary and supposed one;
nay nor yet what may be said to be a virtual call. Tenthly, When he speaks thus
of a Call to the Office of a Pastor, or Doctor, he must needs suppose, that
there are real and sure Rules, Grounds and Evidences of a lawful call, laid
down in the word. Whereby a true call may be distinguished from a false and
supposititious call: and that the solution of this question, what is a right,
and what is a wrong call; does not depend upon our imaginations and phancies,
but must be had in the word: And therefore if he would describe or lay forth
unto us, what is a right call unto the office of a Pastor, in the Church, he
must not think it enough to tell us his dreams, and suppositions, but he must
give us grounds from the word, whereupon we must rest. That by the question,
which he here moves, he must presuppose all these Ten particulars, as
unquestionable truths, is from what is said, I judge, most clear: and if so,
how he shall, in several of these, agree with other Quakers, I leave it with
himself to judge: and how, as to some of them at least, he shall agree with
himself, in what follows, we may have occasion to remarke, as we go on.

4. When he speaks of a Call to a Ministerial Office, we may observe, that he
is very indistinct, and confused, holding himself in the general, that he may
the more easily inveigle his Reader, and leave the matter still in the dark. He
cannot but know, that our Divines make mention of several sorts of calling to
the Ministry, not to mention that, which commonly in our language, goes for a
call, and is performed by the people inviteing, making choice of, and
submitting to the Ministry of such or such a person, which is more prop^rly
called Election; and is contradistinct from that, which is called Ordination;
but to speak to that, which is otherwise called mission, or missio potestativa;
that is, that, which formally impowereth the person called, to perform the
Work belonging to that Office, and legally authorizeth him thereunto: for Paul.
Gal. 1:1. saying of himself, that he was an Apostle, not of m^n, nor by man,
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, gives ground to distinguish of calls,
not to mention that which is imported by the first expression, of men, which is
commonly taken for an unlawful call, that is merely of man, of themselves, or
others; such as the false Prophets had of old, and the false Apostles, in the
primitive times: to wit. That there is one call Immediate by God, and Christ,
without the interveening of Man: There is another Mediat, which though also of
God, yet it is by the Intervention of some deed of man and so is said to be by
man. The first is attributed unto the Apostles and some others; whom Christ
immediately sent forth; adjoining that call of Matthias, Act. 1. which, as to
the person, on whom the lot fell, was immediately from God. The other unto other
Church officers, appointed to their office by them, and so forth in succeding
generations, according to the way and method set down in the word. The Mediat
call is that, which we are now to enquire after, and to look for; seeing the
Immediate call is ceased with these extraordinary persons, who were called by
it, and were with alendued with extraordinary gifts; as we see Mat. 10:1. 2
Cor. 12:12. or had some other extraordinary thing in their mission, which did
abundantly evince it to be immediately divine. We may note further, That there
is a Mediat call, which may be called Singular and Rare, or not very ordinary;
as when a Church is in erecting, and not yet constituted, and all things are
out of order; so that, through necessity, many, or several things requisite in
an orderly call, must be passed by* and dispensed with: And there is a Mediat
call, which is Ordinary, and is usually to be followed, according to the rules
set down in the word. Again, it may be noted, that there is an Outward call,
and an Inward call. The Outward call or mission, is that which is done by men,
according to the appointment of Christ after examination and trial of the
person, separating him and setting him apart with solemn prayer and imposition
of hands, for the ministry; and that is a committing of the work unto faithful
men; and an appointing of them to the work of the ministry. The Inward call is
the Lords signification of his mind and will inwardly to the man's self, of his
calling and appointing him to the Ministry, not only endueing him with gifts
and qualifications requisite, but also powerfully and sweetly inclineing his
mind, and determining his will, to a willing susception of this Employment,
for holy and pure ends; and by other passages of his providence, manifestly
signifying that to be his mind, that the man shall serve him in the work of
the Ministry. These considerations are considerable in this case, and others
might be mentioned; but our Quaker loving confusion, walks in the dark, and
tells us not what call he means; Nor whether he means all sorts of calling,
or only one kind; and if one, he tells us not, what that one is.

5. Let us see, if his answer will help us to understand the question. His
answer is this. He ought to be instructed by the inward power and virtue of
the Spirit of God, in his heart. A suitable answer for such a question; that
is, a confused answer to an indistinct question. He should have told us, what
is the nature of a Pastors Call; and his answer is concerning a qualification:
Afterward he speaks of qualifications; and how, I pray, shall he difference
this from what he handles there? Next, I would enquire concerning the meaning
of this answer; whether he thinks, that all, who are instructed thus, are
called to be Pastors; or only, that this is a qualification requisite in
Pastors? if the first be his meaning, he destroys the distinction betwixt
Officers and Church members; for then all Church Members, must be Officers,
seeing with him all Church members must be thus qualified. If the last be his
meaning. Whether thinks he this qualification essential, or not? that is, so
necessary, that one that wants it, cannot be accounted a Pastor, neither
before God, nor before men; neither in foro poli, nor in foro soli? Again I
would enquire, what he means by this qualification? if we interpret it by
his former doctrine, (and why we may not, Yea must not do so, I know not) this
will be a good qualification for a Pagan-preacher, but no qualification for a
Gospel-minister; for it is nothing else, than the power and efficacy of Natures
Light and of a Natural Conscience, informing and enlightening concerning duties
required by the Law of nature: it has no affinity with the sanctifying Spirit
of Christ, promised in the New covenant, bestowed upon the elect and chosen
vessels of mercy, and principling the believer to new obedience. Howbeit this
might suffice for an answer: Yet I shall say more to clear the matter unto the
Reader. I confess holiness is required of Gospel ministers; The Apostle tells us
Tit. 1:8. that he must be a lover of good men, (or of good things, as it is in
the margin) sober, just, holy, temperate: And he must be blameless Tit. 1:7. 1 Timothy 3:2. vigilant, sober, and of good behavior ibid: And therefore all, who
are to be employed in the examination and trial of ministers, should be careful
in the searching after this, as well, as in the trial of their gifts and other
qualifications: and when clear and manifest evidences appear of their hatred of
good things, and of the godly, of their insobriety, injustice, unholiness,
intemperance, want of vigilance, and of their evil behavior, they ought to be
laid aside from that holy function, as well as when their want of gifts and of
other requisite qualifications clearly appears. Yea, if there be not some
positive probable evidences of this love, and of seriousness in the matters of
God, giving fair and probable ground of concluding them to be faithful men,
they ought not to commit the word unto them. See all this fully cleared and
confirmed by worthy and learned Mr Durham, in his exposition of the Revelation
Page 198. etc. Yet, because grace, and the saving workings of the Spirit, are
latent, and hid in the heart, and there is no outward sign and evidence
thereof, whereby others can certainly or infallibly discern and judge of the
same, in all; and so hid, that the man, in whom it is, and is more privy to
his own spirit and heart, than others can be, will not always be in case to
discern the same; I dar not say, that the real being of grace is such a
qualification, as that the want thereof shall render the man no minister, and
all his performances null, before God, or man; though the person, being a real
stranger to grace, can expect no acceptance of God through Jesus Christ, for
what he does* Christ's employing of Judas in the ministry, will sufficiently
verify this, and I need say no more. See Mr Durham, in the place cited.

6. What adds he? For, says he, seeing true knowledge, in things spiritual,
is received by this gift and grace, he that is purified and sanctified by the
same, is at length also called by it, and moved to ministrate to others, and is
made capable of showing to others, what by real experience he has himself
found, 2 Cor. 5:11. And his words and ministry, proceeding from inward power
and virtue, penetrat into the hearts of the hearers, and obtain their
approbation and subjection. Ans. (1.) This gift and grace, being but natural
and Pelagian, as was shown above, can never give true knowledge, in things
spiritual, saving and evangelick. (2.) Nor can it ever purify and sanctify a
man according to the Gospel, whatever it may do, as to outward civility and
morality. (3.) Qualifications are no call. (4.) Then, it seems, there is no
Outward call requisite; and so this man joyneth with Socinians and Arminians,
laying aside all outward call by men, as not necessary, in the Church of God;
and saying, that all, who understand the truth of the Gospel, and are able to
Instruct others, may and have a right to teach. See Smalcius Page 379. though
Page 377. he confesses, that this outward call, is decent and comely in a
constitute Church, which this man does no where acknowledge. See also Apol.
Remonstr. Cap. 21. and Episcop. disput. 26. private. These. 4. and 5. (5.) Every
motion to tell others what we know in the things of God, is not a call to the
Work and Office of the Ministry. See Psalm. 66:16. private persons, in their
private capacities, may and ought to seek to promove the edification of others,
1 Pet. 4:10, 11. (6.) Is this telling of what they have found in their own
experience, the whole work of the Ministry? Or is this the preaching of the
Gospel? The divideing of the word of truth? 2 Timothy 2:15. Is this speaking,
exhorting and rebuking with all authority, Tit. 2:15? Is this be seaching as
Ambassadors, in the name of God, and in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5:19, 20? Is
this that, which Paul lays upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 4:1, 2. I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his
appearing and his Kingdom. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine? Or that
which we ^inde 1 Timothy 4:13, 14, 15, 16. -- Give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine, Neglect not the gift, that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them -- take heed unto thy
self, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: For in doing this, thou shall
both save thy self, and them that hear thee. But I should have remembered, that
these men are against Preaching. (7.) Some may think, that by this gift and
grace, which he mentions, he can mean, at most, nothing, but what the Papists
call gratia gratis data, and which is different from gratia gratum faciens; but
I see no ground, to judge him so orthodox.

7. He goes about to prove, that this qualification is absolutely necessary:
and his first argument is thus. That which is necessary to make a man
Christian, is much more necessary to make one a Minister of Christianity. But
this inward call, power and virtue of the Spirit, is necessary to make a man a
Christian. Therefore, etc. Ans. This argument is easily answered by a
distinction, thus. That which is necessary to make a man a Real, Upright and
Sincere Christian, or true member of the Invisible Church, is also necessary to
make a man, a sincere and upright Minister before God, and approven of him, in
what he does; but is not simply and absolutely necessary, to make one a
Minister, before men, who cannot certainly know this, nor walk by an infallible
rule, in judging of this. That which is necessary to make a man a member of the
Visible Church, a professing Christian, that I grant is also necessary to make
one a Minister, both before God, and men; for men can judge hereof, and have a
certain and fixed rule whereby to judge of this profession, whether it be true
or not, though not to judge, whether it be sincere, or not. (2.) That the
inward work of the Spirit of grace is necessary to make one a true and gracious
Christian, or member of the Invisible Church, is true; but this is not
requisite to make one a member of the visible Church: And he would know, that
Ministers are set in the visible Church, and are to covert such, as are not yet
members of the Invisible Church; and this shows the inconsequence of his
argument. (3.) The Inward Power and Virtue of the Spirit, which he must mean,
can make a no man a Professor, let be a Christian, in truth and reality; for
it may be, where there is no knowledge, or hearing of Christ, of the Gospel, of
the Covenant of grace, or of any such thing, even in an Heathen and Pagan, who
is yet without, as such are called, 1 Cor. 5:12, 13. 1 Timothy 3:7. and is without
Christ, being an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger from the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2:12.

8. His next argument is this: All the Ministers of the N. Test. are Ministers
of the Spirit, and not of the letter, 2 Cor. 3:6. And therefore such must be
called by the Spirit, and must know, that he is led and moved by the Spirit,
and be sensible of the work of the Spirit, and of his inward vocation. Ans.
(1.) It is most true, that Ministers of the N. T. are Ministers of the Spirit,
opposed to such as cried up the Law, and preached it as separated from Christ;
as the Jews commonly did, and as our Quakers, Pagan-preachers, do, and must
do, according to their principles; for they know no Gospel, but are sworn
enemies to it, and plain subverters of it, and all the Ordinances thereof; and
are worse then the allegorical teachers, of whom Beza makes mention, on 2 Cor.
3:6. (2.) They may be said to be called by the Spirit, who are gifted with the
gifts of the Spirit, fitting for preaching of the Gospel; such as the word of
Wisdom, and the word of Knowledge, 1 Cor. 12: verse. 4, 7, 8, 11. Whereby they
are apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3:2. and fit to take care of the Church, verse. 5. And
those gifts, in themselves considered, are different from true and saving
grace, and yet come from the Spirit, and are given to profit withal; and so
must be laid out to edification, according to the way prescribed in the Gospel.
(3.) What means he by this, must be called by the Spirit? Is this an inward
Inspiration, or Enthusiasme, saying to the man, he must go preach? We reject
all such phancies, which he and other phanatick persons dream of, and lean
unto; and account them plain delusions of Satan, which the very doctrine they
deliver puts beyond all question, Mat. 24:24. 2 These. 2:9. Deuteronomy. 13:1. Gal.
1:8, 9. Let him show, if he can, any true ground, warranting us to look for
such immediate calls? Is there a promise for this? Or a command to expect it?
(4.) His last words null his former argument and position; for there he
required only that they have the inward working of the Spirit; but here he
requires more; to wit, that they know that they have it, and are led and moved
by the Spirit, and are sensible of his work in them: Or he must say, that none
can have grace, but he must also know and feel that he has it; And
consequently that such as feel not this, to their own satisfaction, must
peremptorily conclude, that they have it not: a dangerous position, and untrue.

9. A third argum. follows Page 179. If (says he) the testimony of the
Spirit be not essential and necessary to a Minister; the Gospel Ministry
should be postponed to the legal; for there the people knew, who were officers;
and beside these ordinary, there were extraordinary ones, called by the
immediate testimony of the Spirit. But now we are uncertain, and must have
Pastors, without all certain assent of Gods will. Ans. (1.) Then the thing he
means by a Call, is a testimony of the Spirit, such as the Prophets of old
had; or at least such as may be plain and notoure, not only to themselves, who
have it, but to all; so as they need no more doubt of it, than the Jews needed
to doubt of the Priests and of the Levites, or at least of the extraordinary
Prophets, that God sent among them: And thinks he, that this is had of his
Quaker-Teachers, and Pagan-Preachers? No sure, their speech and their erroneous
doctrine publicly declares, that the testimony, which they have, is the
testimony of a lying Spirit, and of a Spirit of delusion, that can easily
deceive the possessors. (2.) Thinks he that there is no way now, to know who
are the lawfully called Servants of God? He was pleased, while speaking of the
Scriptures, to affirm some such thing, that he might thereby implead their
Perfection; but we manifested his folly in that attempt, there. See Chap. IV,.
31. (3,) Will he tell us, what that certain assent of Gods will, or this
Testimony of the Spirit is, whereby every one may know, who is truly called of
God, who not? Does the Spirit, when he calls one to this work, speak to the
senses of all beholders; and witness also to them, that such an one is indeed
called of the Spirit? Is such a Testimony of the Spirit, which every one can
hear, necessary to make a Christian* Is this the inward Power and Virtue of the
Spirit, that he talked of?

10. His last Arg. is from Christ's word's Ioh. 10. They are thieves and
robbers that come not in by the door. Which is very true: But how will he
prove, that all such, as want this testimony, and this call, which he speaks
of, are such as Christ there means? They that enter by the way, which Christ
has appointed, come in by the door, which he has set open for them, to enter
by; and have his warrant and approbation, though they want this, which he
pretends to.

11. He tells his Reader. 8. That against his doctrine we Object the Succession
of the Church, as sufficient: And upon this his mistake, he runs out in many
words, to no purpose. That Christ sent his Apostles immediately, is certain and
undeniable. That these Apostles ordained other ordinary ministers is
unquestionable Act. 14:23. That they laid injunctions on these whom they had
ordained, to commit the same to faithful men, is clear 2 Timothy 2:2. Tit. 1:5. 1 Timothy 3:1 -- 15. and 5:21, 22.. And the practice of the Church thereafter
evinceth, that this course was constantly followed: and though, through
corruption, base and unworthy men entered sometimes into the Ministry, yea and
though afterward the Ordinance was corrupted through Antichrist, by his
manifold additions, and other corrupt appendices; yet the Ordinance of Christ
is not to be rejected, but rather to be purged from these corruptions, annexed
without Scripture warrant, that the ordinance may be observed, and preserved in
its primitive Integrity. And though, by reason of such corruptions, there was
an interruption of the conveyance of the ministerial power, in the order and
manner appointed by Christ; yet the Ordinance might be taken up again, and
some usual circumstances, dispensed with, in such a case of necessity, without
the least impeachment of the Ordinance it self. We need not then trouble
ourselves to enquire after such an uninterrupted succession of Persons so
ordained, one after another; if we find ministers now settled, according to the
Ordinance of Christ, we are to be satisfied. But the thing that troubles him
is, that we say, such as are ordained by Pastors, according to the rule of the
word, are Pastors, and to be owned as such: Nor will it satisfy him, that we
say, that beside this, such as are called must have an inward call also of God,
inclineing them to that work, as we formerly hinted; because, as he thinks,
there is no enquiry made after this; and yet, if he would look our directory
for ordination, he might find as much, as might satisfy a reasonable man
concerning this, which is not obvious to men's trial and examination, but is hid
in the heart. As to what he says. 9. and 10. because it concerns them, who
plead for the necessity of an uninterrupted Succession, which I see no
necessity for, I need not trouble my self to Answer; though I see nothing said
by him, which is of any force; and elsewhere I have said something to it. See
my book against Velthusius Assert. 9. toward the end, and I shall recommend to
this Man the serious perusal of Voetii Desperata Causa Papatus.

12. He comes. 11. Page 187. to speak to Others, who lay not so much weight
upon this Succession, as conveyed through Papacy; but assert, that in
extraordinary cases of necessity, somethings may be done, which ought not to be
done, in other ordinary cases, when the Church is settled and rightly
constituted, or purged from destroying corruptions. And what says he here?
Forsooth, to vindicate himself and his fraternity, for taking upon them the
Ministry, at their own hand, he has the face to say, that he can accuse us
of many errors. And what will his bold saying so do, when we have evinced that
Quakerisme is but a Cento, an Hotch potch of errors; so that they are become
the very Kennel, in which all the filth of other errors and heresies run; and
are become one standing puddle of abomination? And as to their being Ministers,
what, I pray, have they to show, but what the false Prophets, and Apostles did
pretend unto? He talks of an Immediate Revelation; but who sees that, but
themselves, who have the false light of an ignis fatuus to enlighten them?
Shall we think, that the Immediate Revelation of the Spirit of God would act
men, as they are acted, and prompt them to at rampling, upon all the holy
Ordinances of Jesus Christ? The Comforter, whom Christ promises to send, will
guide into all truth Ioh. 16:13. and not, sure, into all error, and will
glorify Christ verse. 14. while as the evil Spirit, in these Quakers, cannot do
more than he does, to vilify Christ, and render him most contemptible, in his
Person, Offices, Work and Ordinances. He tells us, that this immediate
revelation of the Spirit is as necessary in a Church constituted, as in a
Church to be constitute. But what means he by this Immediate Revelation?
Means he nothing else, than what is necessary to all true Christians, and is
acknowledged by us, that is, the inward working of the Spirit, sanctifying the
soul? No sure, it is plain Enthusiasme, of which we spoke enough above Chap.
III. And who says, or how will he evince it, that our first reformers were
called to the work of the ministry by such an Euthusiastick Call, as were the
Prophets of old; or such an immediate outward call, with an audible voice, from
Christ, as the Apostles had? I deny, that any such thing is necessary, or to be
expected, even in extraordinary cases; seeing the Lord can, in a more plain and
obvious manner, give intimations of his will, then by Enthusiasmes or audible
voices, such as Paul had; which he would not have us now look for, having the
Canon of the Scriptures now complete before us, to regulate us, in all cases
Ordinary and Extraordinary, and having the constant significations of God's
will in his providence, to help us to understand his mind in particulars,
conform to the general rules, in his word: And by these we may learn, what is
to be done, or not done, in this or that case, without Dreams, or Vive Voices
from heaven, or Enthusiasmes; which whosoever would expect might fear, that
God, because of their tempting of him, might give the great Tempter leave to
deceive them; as experience has proven.

13. As to that which some say, That such, as boast of an Immediate Call, should
confirm the same by Miracles. He answers Page 181. That as this was Objected
by the Papists, unto our first reformers, so their answer may suffice: to wit,
That was not necessary for them, seeing they preached nothing but the doctrine,
that was already confirmed by miracles: And beside, John the Baptist, and some
true Prophets did no miracles. Answer, Though I do not own the Objection, as
it is here simply set down: Yet take it thus, and it will prove too hot for
his fingers. They who have had immediate calls from God, were able to give
evidence of the same by miracles, or some other evident testimony of the
Spirit, that it was so, which to contradict, or not to receive and believe, had
been iniquity, and utterly unreasonable. Now what can these Quakers show, to
justify their Immediate Call, to be of God; They alleidge an Immediate Call;
but who can see any grounds to believe it. Their saying so, is not enough; for
false Prophets said it. Their doctrine can not evince it; for if their call be
to be judged by their doctrine, I know no heretic, that ever breathed, that
had not better ground, upon this account, to pretend to an Immediate Call; for I
defye any man to name me any Seck of heretics, or erroneous persons, since
Christianity was heard of, that maintained such a bundle of Errors, and
Heresies, as these Quakers do: to speak nothing of their blasphemous
expressions and practices; let any but read the examinations of James Nayler,
and his carriage about Bristol, and their daily expressions in their books, and
judge. But to wave these, let us consider but this man's doctrine, who seems
to be one of the most sober, among them all; have we found any thing hithertil,
but Pelagianisme, Secinianisme, Arminianisme, Enthusiasme, Antiscripturisme;
Yea and Paganism, etc? have we seen any thing, that does not directly enough
tend to overthrow the whole Gospel? And what further we are to hear, a little
patience will help us to see. He talks, that they teach no new doctrine. But
doctrine more diametrically opposite, yea contradictory to the whole Gospel of
the grace of God, a man shall find no where else, in such an heap: So that,
albeit they should pretend to Miracles, as they do to Immediate Revelations of
the Spirit of God, and should do somethings more then ordinary, like wonders, I
should account them but lying wonders; and their coming to be after the working
of Satan, according to 2 These. 2:3. Yea, though an angel from heaven should
come to head them, and preach the doctrine, which they preach, I should
remember that word of Paul's, Gal. 1: verse. 8, 9. And therefore must account
these Quakers no more Christians; but an Antichristian, and Antievangelick
brood of men, acted and led by an evil Spirit, designing the destruction of the
Gospel, and the setting up of Paganism. What he says. 13. about the
Independants, and their gifted Brethren, is not worth the noticeing, for as to
the matter, he refers us to what he had said before upon the Scriptures, and
we have e^amined Chap. IV. Only I would enquire, If, as he says, no man can
know by the Scriptures, that he, in particular, is called to be a Minister, and
therefore must recurre to an Inward and Immediate Testimony of the Spirit, he
must also say, that no man can know that another is a Minister, but by the
Inward and Immediate Testimony of the Spirit; and therefore he cannot be
offended at us, that we do not believe, that he and the rest of the Quakers,
are sent of God, because we have no Inward and Immediate Testimony of the
Spirit, concerning this; and we are confident never shall have from the Spirit
of God. And though the Scriptures do not particularly and expressly tell us,
that Robert Barclay is a false Teacher, and ought to be shuned, as a false
Teacher, it says that, which is enough to us, concerning him, and his
accomplices, when it says that all that bring another Gospel, are to be
accounted accursed; and the whole Scripture, that points forth and declares
the Truth, and condemns their Errors, as we have seen and shall see, is as
good to us, as an Immediate Testimony, saying, the Quakers, and particularly
Robert Barclay, are deceivers; yea and better, and more sure; for some men can
take the dreams of their own head, and the impressions of Satan upon their
fantasy, for immediate testimonies of the Spirit of God: but enough of this
above Chap. III.

15. But he has something Page 190.. 14. that would seem to answer that
question, we just now proposed; for after he has again nakedly told us, that
this extraordinary call (for he names it so here) is as well necessary, when
the Church is settled, as when it is under a general Apostasy; he says, that
such as are thus called, are made manifest in the minds of their brethren, and
their call is verified in them, who by the sensation of that life and virtue,
that flows out by them, are d^yly edified in their most holy faith, and
become the signs of their Apostleshipe, according to 2 Cor. 13: v. 3. Ans.
(1.) But as yet there is no Inward Testimony of the Spirit directly saying,
that such men are truly called; and without this, in his judgment, they cannot
be said to be taught and led of the Spirit, nor can they believe without this.
(2.) Is this manifestation always at every discourse, or sometimes only? Is it
upon all their hearts, or upon some only? It may be, there lies an answer, in
these words their brethren: But the signs of the Apostleshipe of Paul were
among strangers, whom he converted, and brought in to the faith: And if this
manifestation be always and upon all present, he lays down a ground to
question Christ's Apostleshipe and Call; for his preaching had not always this
effect, as is notoure. Nor Paul's and Barnabas theirs, among the Jews, as the
book of the Acts shows, and 2 These. 2. Nay, let that word be considered 2
Cor. 2:15, 16. for we are unto God a sweet savor in Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish; to the one the savor of death unto death, and
to the other the savor of life unto life: And that Esai. 49:4. Then said I, I
have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain;
surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God: and that Esai 53:
Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed; and
if he think it enough, that this manifestation be made sometimes, upon the the
minds of some. Alas! Poor man, thinks he that there are none of all the
servants of Christ, who dar not be so bold, as he is, to pretend a Divine
Immediate Call, through an Extraordinary and Immediate Revelation, that can say
the same, and that upon a more just account? As for his brethren, they are
under the same delusion with their Teachers; and the sensation they have of
life and virtue, is but the sensation of the workings of delusion; and no
edification, or building up in the holy faith, but in opposition to that faith,
which was once delivered to the saints; as is manifest to all that hear them,
and read their books; and as this book, which is now under examination, has
made more manifest to me, than all that ever I heard, or read of them before.

15. He adds. This is that, which gives the true and substantial call and
title unto the Minister, whereby he is a real successor of the virtue and
power, that was in the Apostles. Ans. (1.) Then the extraordinary call was no
true and substantial call or title. Then Ezechiel, who was sent to a rebellious
house, that would not hear, had no true and substantial call; nor Moses, when
he was sent unto Pharaoh. (2.) They, who are a savor of death unto death to
some, may yet for all that, be successors to the Apostles. (3.) But I see,
what this man would be at: The Quaker-Preachers (though as we have manifested
above, nothing in truth but Pagan preachers) must be the only successors of
the Apostles, and Possessours of the power and virtue, that was in them. What
more? Such Ministers stand not in need of the ceremony of Ordination and
Imposition of hands. Ans. Why then were hands laid upon Paul and Barnabas, Act.
13:3. And why had Timothy the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy
4:14. If such made use of this ceremony, shall any Minister now a days think
it below him, to do the like? But says he, Our adversaries, who use it,
confess that the power of communicating the holy Ghost is ceased among them:
And is it not ridiculous to imitate the shadow, when the substance is away? Ans
We say not, that the holy Ghost was always given by imposition of hands: let
him look (not to mention instances in the Old Testament, where it had no such
use) Mark. 10: v. 16. and 16: v. 18. Luke 13:13. And even where it was used
toward Church Officers, it did not always carry alongs with it, the giving of
the holy Ghost; as we see, Act. 13:3. it was used toward Paul, who before that
had been filled with the holy Ghost, Act. 9:17. The same also we read of
Barnabas, before this time Act. 11:24. So then though this power be not, and
this use of imposition of hands be ceased, yet its use in Ordination, and
Ordination it self, must not be cast away, by such, as would be followers of
Christ, and of his Apostles, seeing its principal use in Ordination remains,
not only to declare, who the person is, who is to be set apart, for the
Ministry; but to declare the solemn Dedication and Consecration, or setting
apart of the person, for the work, and the conveyance of the Ministerial Power
and Office, with a charge to go about the work with all care and diligence, But
it is little wonder, that our Quakers trample this Ordinance under foot, when
there is not one ordinance of Jesus Christ, that they value, or will regard.
And what Christians these are, let every one judge: And whether or not, I had
not ground to say, and again to repeat it, that they are a company of the most
desperate Antichristian opposers of Christ, and all his Appointments, that ever
the sun shined on.

16. It is observable, that in his whole discourse, he speaks nothing of
infallibility, which other Quakers require, in Ministers of the Spirit. See
Fox. mystery p. 72. and some plead for, in all, as W. Pen in his Spirit of
truth p. 32 etc. and why he is not so plain and full, as others are, he
knows himself.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Ministerial Qualifications.
1. WE proceed now, to examine what he says, about the Qualifications of
Ministers Page 190. etc.. 15. Though what he began to say of the Ministerial
Call, was rather concerning the Qualifications, as we observed; yet now seeing
here he begins to speak directly, and ex professo, of these Qualifications,
we shall follow him. And first he tells us. That as he placed the true call, in
the motion of the holy Spirit, so also (he says) the power, virtue and life of
the Spirit, and of grace, proceeding from him, is the principal and most
necessary qualification, without which he can neither discharge his duty,
acceptably unto God, nor profitably unto men. Ans. Wherein he placed the call,
we have heard, and have heard it several ways expressed; And here we have it
in a new distinct manner expressed; for here nothing is mentioned, but a simple
motion of the Spirit; and every motion of the Spirit is not extraordinary. But
(2.) What he says here of a necessary qualification, seems only to relate to
the better and more profitable discharge of the duty, as to men; and so to
respect the been esse of the Office, and not the simple esse of it. As for what
he says of God, that it cannot be performed acceptably unto him, is nothing;
for an unsanctified Magistrate cannot perform his office acceptably every way
unto God, unless we mean only, that the substance of the work, when done
according to justice and equity, is approven of God, though the person be not
accepted in it, (3.) We have here good words, Power, Virtue and Life of the
Spirit, and of grace: But these must not deceive us; for by all these good
words, according to his principles, formerly considered Chap. X. he cannot
understand what is imported thereby in the Scriptures; but only what an Heathen
or Pagan, that never heard of Christ, nor never shall hear of him, is capable
of: And whether this be fitter to be a necessary qualification of a
Pagan-preacher, than of a Gospel-Minister, let any judge who will.

2. He says next, That we affirm three things concur to the constituting of
a Minister, to wit, Natural parts, that is, that he be not an idiot; acquired
parts, that he be learned in the tongues, in Philosophy, and scholastic
theology; and finally the grace of God: The first two belong to the essence of
a Minister, the last to his been esse. Ans. Who stateth the question thus, I
know not; for my part I cannot well approve it. Of the grace of God, I spoke my
mind, in the beginning of the preceding Chapter: As to the knowledge of the
languages, wherein the Bible was originally written, I think that very
convenient, in some measure at least, and he has let us see here and there, in
this his Book, what use he could make of it: but as to the knowledge of the
original languages, and use of commentaries, I think it no wonder, he should
think it utterly useless, seeing the knowledge of the Scriptures themselves, is
of so little an account, with him. That skill in Philosophy is useful, in some
measure, I shall assent; but for the knowledge of Scholastic Theology, I
account it not so necessary; And I suppose the knowledge of other Theology
much more necessary; though all these be very requisite, in a Professor. On
the contrary, as not having said enough before, he says, That without grace,
no man can be a true or lawful Minister. And I suppose he means, neither
before God, nor Man, This I judge too far said. His first Argument for this is
the same with the first he brought above, for his call, and was there answered.

3. His 2. Arg. is much like the former, being this; No man can be a minister
of the Church of Christ, which is his body, but he that is a member thereof.
But he who wants the grace of God, cannot be a member of that body. Therefore
etc. Answ. Had he understood the difference betwixt the Church Visible, and
Invisible; and had he known, that Officers are set in the Church Visible, and
not in the Church Invisible, which is made up of homogeneal parts, he had seen
the vanity of this argument: Christ is an head to both, and communicates by
his Spirit suitable nourishment, whether of gifts, or of grace, to the members
of both, according as he thinks fit Ephesians. 4:7.11, 16. 1 Corinthians. 12.
throughout: and while he applies these things wholly and solely unto the
Church Invisible, he bewryeth his ignorance. His 3. Arg. is from 1 Pet. 4:10,
11. and he translateth the words thus, as every man has receives grace, so
etc. but the word in the original is (...), which we find always rendered
gift, or free gift: but it is like, that gift and grace are one thing with him,
with whom the highest grace is a most common gift, whereof even a Pagan, as
such, can be capable. It is true, the Apostle adds, as Stewards of the
manifold grace of God: But that by grace is meaned a gift is notoure from the
whole context, and scope of the place; for it is that only, which can be
ministered, and communicated by speaking; let him consider, what this word
imports Rom 1:5. and 12:3. Gal. 2:9. Ephesians. 3:8. and 4:7. Phil. 1:7. 1 Pet.
1:10. 1 Cor. 3:10. 1 Pet. 5:12. But says he, this cannot be understood of any
mere natural virtue, for by these God should not be glorified. Answ. Let him
therefore see to this, who gives us no other grace, but what rises out of the
puddle of Nature: But we acknowledge spiritual gifts, which yet are distinct
from grace, that is saving, 1 Cor. 12:1, 4, 9, 28, 30, 31. and 14:1. Heb. 6:4.
Act. 8:20. and 11:17. 1 Cor. 1:7. and 13:2. His last Arg. is from 1 Timothy 3:2.
Tit. 1:8. Which show indeed, what is very requisite, and what should mainly be
looked after; so as such, who give clear evidences or pregnant presumptions of
the contrary, should not be admitted unto the ministry; but because real grace
is hid in the heart, and can not be infallibly demonstrated unto others, so as
they can judicially pass sentence thereupon; we cannot say, that the want of
true grace does really null all their Ministerial acts, both before God and
Man. What he cites from a nameless Author, as also from one Franciscus
Lambertus, says nothing against what I say; nor proves his point.

4. He Page 194.. 17. Answers contrary Objections, the first whereof is. That
then all ministers should be saved. And instead of answering, and saying (which
he might have done, with some show of reason, according to his grounds) That
none others, but such as should certainly be saved, were true and lawful
Ministers; finding this, it seems, too hask, he chooses rather to say, That
there may be a total falling away from grace; the contrare whereof we have
shown above Chap. XV. and so he yields the Argument. Another objection taken
from their Principles, he proposes thus. Seeing they affirm, that every man
has a measure of saving grace; it is not necessary, that that should be a
special qualification of ministers. To which he answers (his mentioning a
call, as requisite to ministers, is nothing to the point in hand) That by
grace, which is the qualification of Ministers, he understands not that mere
and naked measure of light and grace, as it is distributed to convince and to
turn to righteousness; but as it converteth the soul, and works strongly in
it, and as men are fermented into its nature, and bring forth the fruits of
temperance righteousness and piety etc. To which I shall onl^ say, That all
this is a confirmation to me, that this ministerial qualification, is but a
Pagan Qualification; such as is produced, by Natural strength, and the power of
Free Will, out of that seed of grace, which is in Pagans, and in all by nature;
which is nothing but mere Nature, and has no affinity with the true grace of
God, which is saving, brought to light by the Gospel, and wrought by the Spirit
of God, according to the New Covenant of Grace: And if this be all, that he
pleads for, (as it is,) it is only fit for a Pagan Preacher, such as he is.

5. He says That Arnoldus Professor in Franeker objected the example of the
false Prophets. Whether it be so, or nor, I know not: I should not press that
Instance so generally. But what shall our Quaker say unto the Instance of
Balaam, calle^ a Prophet (not a false Prophet) by Peter 2 Pet. 2:16. And to him
God came Numb. 22:2, 10. and spoke to him verse. 12, 20 and Chap. 23:4. and put
a word in his mouth verse. 5.12, 16. See his Prophecy Chap. 24:3. etc. And yet
was but a wicked wretch? What says he to the Instance of Judas? He says 1.
That his commission was not purely Evangelick, but limited to the house of
Israel, Mat. 10:5, 6. Ans. This will make Christ himself to have been a legal
preacher. But their commission was verse. 7: to preach saying the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand. And their being limited at first unto the House of Israel,
will not alter the nature of their work or commission, which being after
enlairged, was still the same, upon the matter. See Act 13:48. He 2. says,
That this case was extraordinary, because he was immediately called by Christ,
and endued with power to preach and work ^iracles. Answ. All this does but
strengthen the Objection; for if Christ called him, as the rest, to be an
Apostle, and endued him with power to preach, who yet was but a graceless man,
at the heart; though not yet openly scandalous, or declareing his wickedness;
we can hardly say, that the want of grace does make a Minister, no Minister.
What he adds, that it is not proven, that at that time, he had no grace. Is
but founded upon his error of the Apostasy of the Saints: and therefore
deserves no new consideration. What he says of our leaving the other Eleven,
and choosing him for our patron. Is but a calumny: and his inference, that the
most part of our Pastors are most like unto him, is of the same nature, and
deserves no further answer.

6. The last Objection, which he proposes to answer, is a gordian knot to
him; and therefore, because he cannot loose it, he must cut it. It is this,
That hereby people should be in doubt, whether any of their administrations, as
of the Sacraments etc. were valide, because they could not infallibly know;
whether they were gracious, or not: An Objection it is, that might be further
improven, for hereby Ministers themselves should frequently be in doubt,
whether they should go about their work, as doubting of their state (which can
and often be falls the best Christian) and consequently doubt of their call,
and of their being true Ministers; And hereby Satan should play his game, to
some purpose; and prejudge the Church of the labors of the best of her
Ministers What says he now to this? He says, this Objection does not touch
them, for the worshipe, which they own, is not attended with such external
institutions. That is, They own no such Worshipe, nor no such Administrations:
They reject all: They have nothing to do with any, or all of Christ's
Institutions, whereof we will hear more afterward: And what could a Pagan have
said more?

7. In the next place Page 196.. 18. He shows, that he does not exclude all
true learning, from the qualification of Ministers, But what sort of learning
owneth he? He owneth that, which comes from the inward instructions and
operations of the Spirit, whereby the soul learneth the secret ways of the
Lord, and knows the inward labors and exercises of the mind etc. and such,
says he, as are thus taught, can teach, and opportunely admonish, and by
certain experience witness for God, as did of old the Prophets, and the
Apostles of late 1 Ioh. 1:1. Ans. By this it seems, that all ministers
learning, of what soever kind, that is useful, must be immediately taught them;
and they must have all by inward Instructions of the Spirit; And it will not be
enough to him, that the Spirit teach us by ordinary means, as he did Daniel
Chap. 1:17. comp. with verse. 4* but it must be by Immediate Inspirations, and
Revelations: and I would feign know, if he learned his Latin, Greek and Hebrew
so? But who sees not, what a tendency this has to banish all learning out of
the world, and to introduce palpable Paganism, Darkness and Ignorance, whereby
people may become a prey unto such seducers, as he is? If so, away with all
Academies, and Schools of learning; though even when Immediate Revelations were
more ordinary, there were schools of the prophets, and young prophets, having
others over them 1 Samuel 19.20. and we hear of the sons of the prophets 2 King.
2:3. and of master and scholar Mal. 2:12. See also 1 Samuel 10:5, 10. 2 King.
2:5: and 22:14. Away then with all Reading, Studying, or Searching of the
Scriptures; away with learning so much as to read, and with all study of arts
of sciences, that might help in the least to understand the Scriptures;
contrary to Deuteronomy. 17:19. 1 Timothy 4:13. and 5:17. 2 Timothy 2:15. Revel. 11:3. Ioh.
5: v. 39. for we have no more to do now, but to wait for Immediate Revelations
of all things, which I should judge a manifest tempting of God, and an
exposeing of our selves to delusions, which God, in his righteous judgment,
might give us up unto. Does not the Spirit, in Paul's making use of the sayings
of heathen poets. Act. 17:28. Tit. 1:12. teach us, that a good use may be made
of humane learning, even for carrying on a spiritual work? Nay, this principle
followed forth, would destroy all Teaching, all Interpretation of Scriptures,
all Means of learning; all Instruction of parents, and all Ministry. And what
have we then to do with the Quakers teachings and writtings? This is no new
thing; it was the doctrine of the old Anabaptists.

8. Then. 19. and forward, he comes to speak in particular, to three parts of
literature: as if there were no more; nor none more excellent and useful: and
the first is the Knowledge of tongues, Latin, Greek and Hebrew; And he says
we judge the knowledge of these necessary, that we may read the Scriptures, in
the original languages, which Scriptures, he says, we take to be our only
rule. Thereby declareing, that he owneth then not as such: and sure, seeing we
own the Scriptures for our only Rule, it is but rational, that we study these
languages, in which they were first written, that we may thereby come the
better to understand their meaning; seeing no translation can so fully and
emphatically express the original, in all points, as were to be wished: But why
mentions he the Latin for this end? Thinks he, that any part of our Rule was
originally written in Latin? Belike he would foist-in some apocryphal books
into our Canon, or give us the Popish vulgar version, for the only
authenticque? And if so, we should not stand in great need of the Knowledge of
Hebrew and Greek. He says, this study was commendable in the primitive
Reformers, because darkness before had overwhelmed the whole Christian world.
Answ. (1.) Then it seems there was then a Christian world, contrary to what
he said above (2.) If it was needful to dispel darkness, it cannot be
unnecessary to keep out darkness. (3.) But why might not the Spirit, without
their study, have taught these things? And why did they not wait till the
Spirit taught them immediately? (4.) How came it, that the Spirit gave a
blessing to their endeavors? Will God bless sinful means? But he adds. That
true reformation was not placed in that knowledge; for though Papists, out of
emulation, set up that study, yet we see that they are as much obdured in their
errors, as ever Ans. who says, that true reformation was placed in this? It
was a mean in it self to help toward the knowledge of the Scriptures; And if
Jesuits, and other Papists, do not improve the same to a right end, shall
therefore the mean be condemned altogether? This man tells us, that Jesuits
and all men have a light within them, which, if well improven, would prove
saving, and because they, and many others, do not make a right use hereof; will
he think, that it should be laid aside altogether? I suppose not. Therefore,
says he further, this will not prove the necessity of this science unto
ministers. Whence does he conclude this? It is a conclusion without premises;
for that which he said last, would rather infer the contrary. Far less, will
it evince (says he) that it is a qualification more necessary, then is the
grace and Spirit of God; seeing this can supply the want of that, in rusticks,
and in ignorant persons. Answ. I shall be far from saying, that it is more
necessary; Let each have its own place and I am satisfied; things subordinat
can well consists; but this man will have these two contradictory. What the
Spirit may help illiterate persons to know, by hearing, in the things of
salvation, is nothing to the purpose; for we are speaking of Ministers, who
should be knowing persons, and able to teach others. And Peter tells us, what
unlearned Persons are apt to do with the Scripture: But says he Page 198. all
the knowledge, that is had by that learning, is without the Spirit, and so is
fallible; when as a rustic, hearing the Scriptures read, can say, that it is
true, by the same Spirit, and also understand it, and if needful interpret it,
by observing how his own condition agrees with the condition of the saints
recorded in Scripture Ans. It is not without the Spirits ordinary assistance:
and we look not for immediate infallible Motions and Inspirations. (2.) Why may
not the rustic, if acted by an infallible and immediately inspireing Spirit,
tell all this, without hearing the Scriptures read? And how should he even have
heard them read, in his own language. If they had not been translated? And how
had they been translated, without this knowledge? (3.) May not the rustic
mistake his own condition? and consequently misinterpret the Scripture? or may
he not misapply that passage, and wrest it, contrare to its native scope, and
that through ignorance even of the letter of the Scriptures; and so suppose an
harmony, or similitude, where there is no such thing? Such a thing, I suppose,
is not impossible: And what does his argueing then evince? But he has a
sufficient experience in some of his Quakers, particularly in a shoe maker, or
cobbler, correcting a Professor, in a citation of some passage of Scripture,
affirming, that there was no such passage to be found Ans. This man has his
fables ready at hand, for we had such another before: but few of his Readers
can know, whether he speaks true or false: all that I shall say, is that this
fable is impertinently here brought in, for the question is not, whether a
Professor or Doctor, may not have a failing memory? Nor whether a mechanic
cannot have a more happy one? and what more is in this fable, I cannot see,
unless he would hence infer, that the Spirit teaches them, without book,
hearing or reading, the very letter of the Scripture, even the very translated
words. And if this be true, it is little wonder, they are at no pains in
reading the Scriptures, let be in studying of them. But till I know the truth
of this mystery better, I crave his leave to suspend my belief.

9. The next point of learning is Logic and Philosophy. But whether is it
Natural or Artificial Philosophy, that he is against? Though I judge, that a
man may be a minister, and yet be no profound Philosopher, nor expert in that
which goes under that name; Yet I think some measure of knowledge thereof, can
not well be wanted, especially in such as have to do with wrangling sophisters,
like this Quaker, that would pervert souls, and propagate error; and it has
its own profitableness to other uses also. But what has this man against it?
It is (says he) the root and original of all contention. How does he prove
this? we know, the best things may be abused, but the abuse of a science, may
bear its blame, and the science it self be blameless. It draws men away from
that clear understanding of things, which reason it self might furnish. This,
if so, is but its abuse. He that is not very wise can be a perfect logician.
This may be doubted; And it may be, he will not deny, that one not very wise
may be a good Christian: does it not help in defending of truth, and refuting
of heretics? The truth, that is in men truly rational, needs not this help,
and it will not convince the obstinate; but teaches them many artifices and
distinctions, to oppugnate the truth, says he, Ans. What means he by that
truth, with is in men truly rational? is it natural truth, or supernatural;
common, or saving? Me thinks, he had need of some science, whereby to explain
himself; for his language is dark (2.) Though truth, in it self, should not
need this help; Yet it may stand in need of some such help, to fix it in a
subject, that is doubting, either because of the darkness of his own
understanding, or because of the contrary argueings of Adversaries. (3.) This
science is only used, as an instrumental medium to convince, or if not to
convince, yet to confute their errors, and to defend truth from their
exceptions, and that in such a rational way, as may be convinceing to such, as
will not be obstinate. (4.) If any use its distinctions to oppugn the truth,
they must bear the blame for this abuse: the distinctions may however be good.
Truth (says he) comeing from an honest heart, and taught by the Spirit, will
sooner penetrate, then thousands of demonstrations; as the Instance of the old
man convinceing the heathen Philosopher, whom all the Bishops of the Council of
Nice could not overcome, with their disputes. Ans. This is only when it
pleases the Lord, to concur with his blessing: And such rare examples are
not ordinary; and are to teach us in all these ways to depend upon the Lord
for the blessing, and not to loose us from the use of the means. What says he
to natural logic He does not deny the use of this, because every man in his
wits has it* and he has also used it in this treatise. Ans. But if natural
logic be so useful, why is artificial or acquired logic so noxious, seeing it
only serves to accomplish and polish the other? Though every man in his wits
has this, yet I suppose some have more and some have less; and such as have
less may be allowed to take some help to increase it. If he has only used that
logic here, I could wish him, to take some more of artificial logic to help
it; and yet, I think he has not wholly renunced it in this Treatise, though by
neither, nor by both, has he been able to gain his point, whether in
confirming his errors, or in darkning of the truth. What says he to other
parts of Philosophy? That part, says he, which is called the Ethics, may be
better learned out of the Scriptures. Which is very true, they being a full and
perfect rule in all morals: But I think, that this study should not be
unprofitable for him, who will not own the Scriptures as a Rule; and
acknowledges the light of Nature, for a guide, and only rule, which is in all
heathens, and by which light alone they wrote their morals or Ethics: so that*
I think, if he would make use here of his natural logic, he might see, how
consequentially he should speak to his own principles, if he would recommend
to all the study of Aristotiles Ethics, or the morals of some other Hethenish
Philosophers, instead of the Scriptures. For Physics and Metaphysics, says
he, they may be reduced to Medicine and Mathematicques. But not to be too
Philosophical, in disputing here with him, why may not the knowledge of them;
Yea and of Mathematickes too, be of some use, to whatsoever art or science they
may be reduced? I would feign hear, what reason his natural logic could give
us, to convince us, that they could not be useful, because of that? As for my
dull natural logic, it can perceive no reason, nor show of reason. In fine He
cites Col. 2:8. and 1 Timothy 6:20. which speak nothing against the innocent and
profitable use of philosophy, which is all we defend: we speak not of that
philosophy, which is vain deceit, after the tradition of men; and which, as
Beza on the place thinks, is that Theology, which is the product of humane
vanity, leaning only to Custom and Enthusiasmes: let him consider this, and
what Calvin on the place, thinks this Philosophy to be, and it may be, he may
see his own Theology comprehended under it, if not mainely understood. What is
this Philosophy then, in Calvines judgment? Even, w^atever men devise of their
own head, while they think themselves wise in their own opinion, and that not
without some specious pretext of reason: And, a persuasive discourse
insinuating in the minds of men, with fair and plausible arguments: And,
nothing else then a mere corruption of spiritual doctrine: And, all adulterous
doctrines which breed in men's brains; whatever color of reason they may have.
This is enough for Col. 2:8. And as for 1 Timothy 6: verse. 20. The science falsely
so called there spoken of, is not Philosophy, but a science of coineing and
uttering new and vain bombast words, giving a sound without substance, tending
to corrupt and darken the simplicity of the Gospel: A science wherein I know
none more expert and skilled, than are our Quakers. He may read Calvin on the
place, if he will. And for a close to this, How great a prejudice so ever he
has against Philosophy; yet in the primitive times, Christians, who had been
Philosophers, was not by their Philosophy less fitted, but more, to defend the
truth against heathen Philosophers; as Justin Martyr against Valentinus,
Tertullian against Marcion; Origin against Celsus; Chrysostom against
Libanius; and Prudentius against Symmachus.

10. The last part of humane literature, which he inveigheth against, is that
which is called Scholastical Theology, by which I suppose, he means that
only, which now commonly goes under that name, as distinct from Polemick
divinity, handling controversies, debated betwixt the orthodox, and heretical
or erroneous persons, such as Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Quakers, and the rest; And as to it, I shall say no more, than I
have said Chap. 1.. 12. and suffer him to go on in his ranting. Only I must
take notice of some expressions, which he has here and there, in this
discourse. Though I cannot understand, how Origin should be among the first,
who by this art gave himself to interpret Scriptures; nor how hereby Arius fell
into his error; seeing this Theology is commonly commenced from Peter Lombard;
yet I am glade to hear him Page 201. calling that heresy of Arius, (who denied
the Son to be equal with the Father in power and glory and of the same essence)
horride; for many of his Brethren the Quakers either doubt of, or directly deny
the Trinity: Yea Mr Clapham, in his book against the Quakers Sect. 3. tells us,
they call this doctrine a lie, and cites for it Readiness errand to Damascus p.
12. and the sword of the Lord drawn p. 4. And in this, if he thinks as he
speaks, I would know, how he will reconcile himself unto them: but it may be,
he takes Father Son and holy Ghost, for one Person, as well as for one
essence; as some other Quakers do. He speaks like a Quaker, that is,
calumniously, when he says. 22. that this* knowledge is accounted a necessary
qualification for a Minister, when the pure teaching of the Spirit of truth is
contemned. He may speak thus, if he thinks good, against his old friends the
Jesuits; for we are for the teaching of the Spirit, and prefer it to all
other whatsomever: but we are for the teaching of the Spirit, in the way he
has appointed, that is, by waiting upon him, in his ordinances, meditating on
his word, and useing all other lawful means to come to the right understanding
of his meaning, in his word, especially prayer: But we dar not, with this
deluded bold generation, tempt the Lord, by looking for immediate Revelations,
and laying aside all Means and Ordinances, in coming to the saving knowledge
of his Name, as revealed in the Gospel of his Son, Jesus Christ. We account it
also a calumny for him to say, ibid. that he who is to be a Minister, must
lairne the airt of playing a hookster in the word; because we say, he must
attend unto reading of what is written, for the understanding of Scripture. And
whereas he thinks the Devil could make as good a sermon, as the most learned:
I only demand; and may he not also make as good a discourse, without book, as
they do? I fear he has too great a hand in all their discourses, and
scriblings too.

11. What he says Page 202.. 23. is but a groundless commendation of their
way, and of themselves, as the only men raised up of God to be witnesses for
him. If they have shaken the foundations of Babylon, as he says, how comes
it, that Babylon and they are so well agreed, and that in principal matters, as
(1.) In vilifying the Ministers of Christ and calling them deceivers. (2.)
Denying our Churches to be true Churches. (3.) In calling the Scriptures but a
dead letter. (4.) In denying it to be the judge of controversies. (5.) In
refuseing to have all Spirits tried by the written word. (6.) In crying up the
sufficiency of a common light within. (7.) In maintaining Free will. (8.)
Perfection. (9.) Apostasy of the Saints. (10.) Justification by inherent
holiness. (11.) In confounding Justification and Sanctification. (12.) In
mocking at the ^mputed righteousness of Christ. (13.) In placeing holiness in
outward observations of their own deviseing. (14.) In Pretending so much to
Revelations, Visions, Raptures, etc. (15.) In pretending to Infallibility? As
for the Increase of their number, whereof he boasts, it is a clear
verification of that. 2 These. 2:9, 10, 11, 12. who^e coming is after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceivablenes; of unrighteousness in them, that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, That they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. What he talks further of his own experience of the power of
their discourses, is but a further demonstration of what we said; to wit, of
his being given up to strong delusion; as this volumne of his puts beyond
all question, with such as believe the Scriptures. And for a recompense of his
exhortation to us, in the close, I shall also obtest him in the Lord, to
consider his ways over again, and search after the procuring cause of this
dreadful judgment of the Lord's giving him to up to those delusions; that he
may repent, and be saved; for what high thoughts soever he may now have of that
way, he will find his delusion in end, either here, (which I shall wish) or
when it shall be too late, which the Lord prevent in mercy.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Ministerial Office.
1. WHen our Quaker begins to speak of this matter Page* 203.. 24. he
follows his usual manner, of crying up themselves, and loading all their
Opposites with what expressions of disrespect and contempt, he thinks meet:
We are the men, with him (as the orthodox were of old with the Swenkfeldians,
Familists, and Antinomians,) who always adhere to Externals, following our
External Rule and Methods, devised by our carnal and humane Wisdom; because we
follow and desire to cleave unto the Rules and Methods, and all the Orders,
prescribed by Christ, to be observed in his own House: And upon the other
hand, They are the men, who follow the ways of the Spirit, and his immediate
Help and Influence: and he leads them (as he says) in such an Order and
Method, as becomes the Church of God; though this order and method of
theirs, wherein they suppose the Spirit leads them, be no prescribed Order in
the word; but the mere Invention of their own fantastic ^raine, blasphemously
Fathered upon the Immediate Teaching and Leading of the Spirit of God; for we
know no ground to imagine, that the true Spirit of God will lead any in Courses
Opposite unto, and Reflecting upon the holy Institutions of Christ; because he
is the Spirit of Chirst, and sent by him from the Father, and was to testify
of him, Ioh. 15:26* and not to counterwork Him, and trample upon his
Appointments; It is also said, that he would glorify Christ, and receive of
His, and show it unto the disciples, Ioh. 16:14. But the Spirit, that leads
them, is wholly set in them to dishonor and cry down Christ, and to reject all
his Ordinances, not one excepted; as we have seen already, and shall see more.
Nay, this evil Spirit, that acts them, destroys and casts away these very
Orders and Ordinances, which the Scripture tells us, the true Spirit of God has
appointed and established: and is such an enemy to all Gospel Order, that it
cries up only Paganish and develish Confusion.

2. What he says of the Papal and Prelatical Hierarchy, I have nothing to do
with: but what can he say against that Order, which Presbyterians maintain to
be Instituted by Christ, by Officers of divine appointment, and the Courts and
Judicatories, which they own, Superior and Inferior? Whatever contention be
among these, concerning the Order to be observed in the house of God, there is
no warrant for him and his party to cast away all Order, and bring in the
confusion of Babel, instead of that beautiful and edifying Order, which Christ,
the Supreme Head and King of the Church, has wisely, for his own glory, and
for promoving the good and edification of his Subjects, Appointed, and signally
Blessed.

3. But says he Page 204. speaking of his party, We say the substance is to be
enquired after, and the Virtue, Life and Spirit, who is one, in all these
different names and offices, mentioned in the Scriptures 1 Cor. 12:4 Ephesians. 4.
Answ. We say also, the Substance is to be enquired after, and the Spirit's
Blessing, Power, Efficacy, and Presence to be sought; but so, as the Ordinances
and holy Appointments of the Spirit be religiously Observed; for the Spirit of
God has not taught us, to see any repugnancy here; whatever that evil Spirit,
which acts and leads them, does. Sure, had there been any such Repugnancy
or Inconsistency, as these Fanatics dream, the Spirit had never appointed
these Orders; nor instituted these Ordinances and Officers; nor prescribed
Rules to Regulate these Officers, in the right and edifying manner of the
discharge of their duty, and Administrating the appointed Ordinances. Himself
cannot but confess, that the Spirit did appoint Officers, in the house of God;
the Scriptures, by him cited, are so clear and plain, to which others might
be added: And I would feign know of him, why this was done? was this to divert
the primitive Church from enquireing after the Substance, and after the Virtue,
Life and Spirit, of these ordinances? He dar not say this. The Spirit then,
that acts them, cannot be the same with that Spirit, that ordered matters in
the Primitive Church; but an enemy thereunto; and consequently the Spirit of
the Devil, directly Opposeing and Counter working the Spirit of God: let him
think on this; for it will be found so.

4. He goes on to tell us, That it was never the mind of Christ and his
Apostles, that Christians should establish the shadow and form of these
Officers, without the power, efficacy and Spirit of Christ. Answ. The Power,
Efficacy and Spirit of Christ, is not in Christians power to Establish: the
Spirit blows where he lists: I understand not that Spirit, which falls
under the establishment of men, and of these Quakers; It is not the Spirit of
God, that is so under their power, and at their devotion, and can be
established by them, as they please. (2.) We plead not for Shadows and Forms;
but yet we own the Ordinances, and desire religiously to observe such, as
Christ has appointed to remain and continue, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ Ephesians. 4: verse. 11, 12, 13. even to the end of the world. Mat. 28:20.
especially seeing we have no ground to think, that all these Offices and
Officers were appointed only for that time and age, the work being of the same
necessity now, as then; and no restriction or limitation to that instant being
declared: It is true, there was a special piece of work called for then; to
wit, the founding and settling of Gospel Churches, and of Gospel Order, Laws
and Ordinances, to which extraordinary Officers were called, qualified and
empowered; which is not now necessary: the foundation being once laid, there is
no more required, but a continual building upon that foundation, to which
ordinary Officers, and a standing ordinary Ministry is sufficient and
necessary, that the Ordinances of perpetual use may be administered, according
to Christ's appointment, for the constant edification of the Church: And against
this, these Quakers set themselves with all their might; that when the Church
is denuded of her Officers and Watchers, she may become a fitter prey for these
grievous wolves, who now enter in, not spareing the flock, and speak perverse
things to draw away disciples after them.

5. This is (says he) the work of Antichrist. and the mystery of iniquity,
erected in the dark night of Apostasy. Answ. Then Christ and his Apostles
wrou^ht the work of Antichrist and the Mystery of iniquity: And the dark night
of Apostasy was in the very first Primitive days of the Church: But what
blashemy this is, and what an Antichristian Spirit this must be, that speaks
in these men, let sober men judge, Let us hear more: But says he, in the true
Church of Christ, which is gathered by God, not only into the doctrine of
truth, but also into the life, power and Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God is
Governor and Regulator; as in every individual, so also in the general: And
when they meet together, to worshipe God, then such, as God separateth to the
ministry by his own power and influence, opening their m^uthes, and giving
unto them, to exhort, rebuke and instruct, in the power and Spirit of the Lord,
cannot but be heard, received and held in honor for their works sake, by their
brethren, seeing they are thus ordained and put into the ministry by God: And
thus there is no monopoly hereof unto a certain kind of men, called the
clergy (who for this cause are educated, and taught this art, as other carnal
trades are) that all the rest may be despised and excluded as laics; but the
matter, is left unto the free gift of God, that he may call whom he will, poor
or rich, servants or masters, old or young, men or women: and who are thus
called, verify the Gospel 1 These. 1:5. and they cannot but be received and
heard by Christ's sheep.

6. Here we have plain dealing, and a full discovery made of the principles
and practices of these men; and a demonstration given of the Opposition of that
Spirit, which is in them, unto the whole Ordinance and Work of the Ministry,
appointed by Christ. And for Answer, a few things may serve. (1.) Was the
primitive Church, Instituted and gathered by Christ and his Apostles, a Church
of Christ, and gathered by God, or not? He dar not say, not* Then I ask, how
came it to pass, that this way of their was not Universally and Constantly
practiced? Was not the Spirit of God Governor and Ruler in their Assemblies?
He dar not deny it: How then dar he speak thus? (2.) Were there no distinct
Officers, particular individual Persons, separated and set apart for the work
of the Ministry, in the days of the Apostles? If there were, it is manifest,
that their Order and Way is Diametrically opposite to the Order and Way, used
in the Apostolic Church. If there were not: what were the Apostles? What were
the Evangelists? What were the other Ordinary inferior Officers, ordained and
settled in the Churches Act. 6: v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 14: v. 23. 1 Cor. 12:
v. 28, 29, 30. Ephesians. 4: v. 11. Phil. 1: ver. 1. and 4:3. and 2: v. 25. Col. 4:
verse. 7, 12, 17. 1 These. 5:12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 3:1 -- 15. and 4 v. 14, 15 16.
and 5: v. 17, 22. 2 Tom; 2:2. and 4:1, 2. Tit. 1:5 -- 9: Heb. 13, v. 7, 17.
Iam. 5: v. 14. 1 Pet. 5:4. Revel. 1:20, and 2: and 3. (3.) This destroys the
whole Order of the Ministry; for hereby it is declared, that there is no such
thing, as Officers, established in the house of God, distinct from other
Church Members, contrare to the places already cited, and to Romans 12:6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 12. thoughout. Act. 15:4, 6. and 21:18. 2 Cor. 5:18, 19. The contrary
whereof is further evinced from the Titles, Styles, or Peculiar Designations,
which we find given to peculiar persons, set over others, in the ^ew
Testament; such as Pastors Ephesians. 4:11. 1 Pet. 5 20. Act 20:28. Doctors 1 Cor.
12:28. Ephesians. 4:11. Teachers Gal. 6:6. Stewards 1 Cor. 4:1 Tit. 1:7. Preachers
Romans 10.14. Overseers Act. 20:18. 1 Pet. 4:15. and 5:2. Angels Revel 1:20. and
2 1, 8, 12, 18. and 3:1, 10, 15. Stars Rev. 1:18. Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5:19, 20.
Such as are set over others Heb. 13:17. Rulers 1 Cor. 12:28. 1 Timothy 5:17. As
also from the special Work imposed upon them, and called for from their hands:
not only included in the forementioned Titles, and the like; but expressly
mentioned; such as Preaching of the Gospel, Administration of Sacraments, Care
of the Poor, exercise of Disciple etc. As is clear from Mat. 28:19. 1 Cor: 9
16.17. and 10:16. Romans 12:6, 7, 8. 2 Cor 12.15. 1 Timothy 4:13, 14, 15, 16. and
3:5. 2 Timothy 2:25. and 4:2. Act. 6:2, 4. Likewise from the duties required of
others, in reference to them. See 1 These. 5:12. Gal. 6:6. 1 Timothy 5:17. Heb.
13:7, 17. And from the Qualifications required in them 1 Timothy 3:2. 2 Timothy 2:2
6. Tit. 1:^. And Orders given about their Trial and Ordination Act. 6. 1 Timothy
3:10. and 5:11, 12. Moreover this is evinced from the special Commands and
Injunctions laid upon them, to mind their work aright 1 Timothy 3:5. 1 Pet. 5:2,
3. 1 Timothy 4:14, 15, 16. Act. 6:2, 4. 2 Timothy 4:2. and 2:25. 1 Cor 9:16, 17 2
Cor. 12:15. Heb. 13:17. To which may be added the Promises of God's presence
and assistance, in the discharge of this work, Mat. 28:20. Revel. 1:1. and his
Approbation of them in it Mat. 16.19. Ioh. 20.23. Mat. 10:40. Luke 10:16. Ioh.
13.20. 1 These. 4 8. (4.) Hereby the work, which God has peculiarly committed
to these Officers, is made common; And thus this man joyneth himself to the
Socinians in this; for upon this ground they go, inveighing against a special
Call, which Officers ought to have. See Hoornb. Socinian. conf. lib. 2. c. 4.
Sect. 3. Where their words are adduced and confuted. Nay this Quaker does
outstripe the Socinians; for he will have every man, according as his own
spirit (falsely called the Spirit of God) moves him, setting to this work;
while as they seem to be more for some Order; and for orders sake will allow
something like a Call from the people or others, though they look not upon
this, as a divine Institution. But that the Lord has restricted this work, in
ordinary, unto the peculiar Officers, is not only manifest from their
Institution, and their call thereunto, already cleared; but also from express
Prohibition of any such Encroachment Romans 12:3, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. throughout
1 Cor. 7:20. 1 These. 4:11. and from the Titles mentioned, which, not being
common, show that the work thereby imported is not to be made common; and
Qualifications not common show that the work is special, and not common; so
also the Duties required of the rest, in reference to these Officers,
abundantly show, that all are not promiscuously called to the work, because it
is upon the account of the work, that these duties are to be performed unto
them. This I have abundantly elsewhere spoken to, in my book against
Velchusius Assert 7. Page 67. etc. and need say no more to it here. (5.) We no
where read of men separated to the Ministry, and Ordained for one particular
Act, at one season; but for a constant and continued Exercise, in the work of
the Ministry, Act. 6. and 14* 23. Act. 20:28. 1 Cor. 12:28. Tit. 1:5. so that
their ordained Teachers are not of God. (6.) These Preachers of theirs take
upon them to be Officers without previous Trial and Examination, contrare to
the order established in Christ's house (7.) Though we acknowledge a
distinction betwixt the Officers appointed in the house of God, and Others,
over whom they are set; yet we own not these Popish denominations of Clergy
and Laics; as he cannot but know, though malice prompteth him to speak thus
(8.) That God is free to call whom he will, we know; but he has told us by his
Servant Paul, that he will not call women to this public Ministry; and seeing
he ha^h appointed an ordinary and settled way, whereby persons are to enter unto
this work, we have no warrant to think, that such as come not in by the door
that he has set open, but creep in at windows, or such like unlawful ways,
are called of the Lord; but do rather run unsent, in contempt of God and his
established Order (9.) we think it no wonder, that their Brethren, who are
under the power of that same delusion, receive such, hearken to them and
honor them: and so it is rather a confirmation of their delusion, then an
argument evinceing the lawfulness of that way (10.) That these, thus called,
can say what the Apostle said 1 These. 1:5. is but his naked and groundless
assertion; for their discourses and writtings are plain demonstrations of the
power of error and delusion. (11.) It is not the nature of Sheep to follow
ravenous Wolves; And Christ's sheep know his voice; and will not follow a
stranger Ioh. 10:4, 5. far less thieves, that come for to steal, and to kill,
and to destroy (12.) The ground of all this we disapprove; to wit, the laying
aside of the word of God, our only Rule, and betaking themselves to Immediate
Inspirations as the only Warrant of all their actions: the iniquity of which we
have sufficiently discovered above Chap. III. and IV.

7. He tells us. 25. Page, 205. That these mentioned 1 Cor, 12:28, 29. and Romans
12.6. were not distinct officers, but only different operations of the same
Spirit, that could coincede in one and the same person, as the rest of the
duties mentioned thereafter, to wit, of love, charity etc Ans. (1.) That the
Apostle 1 Cor. 12. is speaking of the Church, as an Organical body, none, that
once read the text, can deny: for as the body is one, and has many members,
and all the members of that one body, being many are one body: so also is
Christ verse. 12. And after a further enlargment upon this similitude, he says
verse. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. Then verse.
28. enumerateth diverse kinds of Membe^s or Officers, and not Operations only,
saying God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers; and then names Helps, Governments, which not only denote
Operations, but Officers appointed for these Operations and Administrations.
Were not Apostles, Prophets and Teachers, Officers in the house of God? or do
these names only import Operations? Then Christ, when he instituted twelve
Apostles, did institute twelve Operations: and Matthias Act. 1. who was
numbered among the twelve, was nothing but an Operation, and Paul was another?
And when Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers Ehes. 4.11. he gave nothing but Operations,
common to all the Church members, contrare to what the Apostle expressly says 1
Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. To one, to another, to another, to another etc. and verse. 29.
are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? etc. which question is a
vehement denial (2.) So what the Apostle says Romans 12:4, 5. is clear for us;
for, as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same
office: So we being many are one body in Christ. And what these Officers or
members of this one body in Christ were, he shows first generally, and then
more particularly, pointing to every one their several duty and work, according
to the gift of function laid upon him, saying verse. 6, 7, 8. having then gifts
differing according to the Proportion of faith, or ministry, Let us wait on our
ministering; or he that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on
exhortation, he that gives, with simplicity, he that rules with diligence, he
that shows mercy with cheerfulness. So that here are Officers plainly
decyphered, Teachers, Exhorters, Rulers, Givers and Shewers of mercy; and their
peculiar work named; and the manner of their discharge of this employment
pointed forth; and all this, as distinguishing them from others, whom they were
to Teach, Exhort, Rule over, Show mercy unto, etc. (3.) The plain and obvious
scope of the Apostle in both places, being to suppress that levelling humore;
that was ariseing in these Churches, where proud persons were not satisfied
with their own station, but would encroach upon the function of others, is
more than enough to confute and rebuke the levelling humore of this Quaker, who
is sick of Corah's disease Numb. 16: verse. 1, 2, 3. (4) We say not, that none
of these Offices could coincide in the same persons; for we know the Superior
Officer could do, what the Inferior did; though the Inferior could not do
what the Superior did The Apostles could have done the work of Pastors and
Teachers, though these could not have done the work of the Apostles. (5.) There
is a vaste difference betwixt these Official duties, incumbent to Officers: and
presupposeing special Official gifts, and a peculiar call; and the common
christian duties, mentioned Romans 12.9, 10. etc.

8. Next he says, That all grant, that Pastors and Doctors are one and the
same, and so may the rest be: Prophecy, though it be a distinct gift, yet they
reckon it not for a distinct office, as it imports a declaration of future
things, which may be common to others, even to laics: And if it be taken as
importing to speak from the Spirit of truth, it is common to all the saints.
Ans. (1.) It is false, that all grant Pastors and Doctors to be the same,
though one man may perform both these Offices, as one may perform both the
office of an Elder and of a Deacon. (2.) The Prophets were extraordinary
officers, having a special Function and Employment in the Church, at that time;
And though some now may have a gift of foreteling some future thing, that will
not constitute them Church Officers, or Prophets. (3.) Though these Offices
might coincede in some persons; Yet they remained distinct Offices: And though
we should grant (which we cannot) that all the Offices were common to all the
officers; Yet this would plead nothing for his Babel, who will have no distinct
settled Officers, at all; but makes all the Offices and Work, common, or
indifferent to all the Members, man and woman, young and old, without any
difference.

9. But says he Page 206. Though to instruct, teach and exhort be proper to
such, as are peculiarly called to the work of the ministey; Yet it is not so
peculiar unto them, as that it may not also be common to such, as are moved by
the Spirit, when the saints are gathered together. Ans. (1.) Then it seems,
he will grant that there are some peculiarly called to the work of the
Ministry; and that it is proper to them to Teach, Admonish, and Exhort: And if
so, how can others take upon them to perform the work peculiar to such an
Office, who are not empowered thereunto, by being called to the Office? We
speak not here of Private admonishing and exhorting, but of that which is
Ministerial; and is to be with Ministerial Authority, as by persons clothed
with Official authority. His instance of hearing and seeing, which are proper
to men, and yet common to other creatures, is of no use here, where we are
speaking of work, peculiar to an Office, and ought to be performed by none, but
such as are clothed with that office. (2.) God will move none, in ordinary
cases, to violate the Order established in his own house; and because of this
Order, which Christ has established, we judge, that all such persons, as
suppose themselves moved by the Spirit, to teach publicly, in the Assemblies
of the Saints, are moved by their own spirit, and not by the Spirit of God, who
is a God of order, and not the Author of confusion; or rather by the Spirit of
Satan, in contempt of Christ's order.

10. He cites 1 Cor. 14:31. Ye may all Prophesy: and thinks that this was
meaned of all, because Paul says verse. 33. (he should say 39.) covet to
Prophecy. But these all, were only the Prophets: for he had said verse. 29. let
the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; but that these two or
three may not exclude the rest, he says verse. 30. If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his peace: And his reason is, verse.
31. for ye may all Prophecy, one by one, and again verse. 32. the Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. To imagine then, that this was common
to all the members, is to contradict the plain scope of the place, and to do
violence to the text; yea and to make the Apostle contradict himself; for he
had told them that all were not Prophets, more then Apostles Chap. 12:29. And
that which he cites from verse. 39. can enforce nothing, but that it was their
part to desire earnestly such offices whereby they might most edify the
Church, yet s^, as not to disparage others; therefore he adds and forbid not
to speak with tongues, and so, as not to evert the order of God's House; for he
adds verse. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. And does he not
expressly prohibit woman to speak in the Churches verse. 34?

11. He next speaks of Evangelists: and thinks that all that preached the
Gospel were such. Answ. It is true, these that wrote the History of the Gospel,
are commonly called, in our language, Evangelists; and in some sense, all that
preach the Gospel may be so denominated: But he knows, we are here speaking
of a certain Officer, frequently mentioned, and called Evangelists, and that as
distinct from others; even from Apostles, who being above them, might do their
work, as we hinted above; and from ordinary Pastors and Teachers, etc. He
should prove, if he could, that there was no such Officer, and that it was a
mere Operation, that goes under that name; and such an Operation, as was
common to all Church members. As for the Apostles, of whom he speaks next,
though the name, as to its etymology, may denote one sent; yet he knows, that
it is in a special manner given unto those, whom Christ sent forth, who at
first were twelve in number, and after Judas's death, were again made twelve
by the election of Matthias, to whom at length Paul was added, and some suppose
Barnabas also; and though, he sees, we make no strick limitation, as fixed
unto the number, yet we hold, that they were distinct and superior Officers,
named with with a first 1 Cor. 12:28. But he most boldly and impudently says
Page 207. That they were not distinct officers, but only names. What? did God
set Names in the Church? did Christ, when he ascended, give only Names to the
Church? What names were they? Such names, as the Scripture diversely uses to
express the more eminent emanations and influences of divine grace, says he.
But why does he not give instances of this diverse use of the word? Why does
Paul so often style himself, an Apostle? Why does he so carefully vindicate his
Apostolic office, chiefly in his Epistles to the Corinthians? What may not
that man dar to do, who dar thus play with the Scriptures? It is (says he
further) as if some now should call him an Evangelist, who had converted some
heathen Nation, as the Jesuits call their Emissaries to the Indians and to
Iapon, Apostles; and as John Knox was frequently called the Apostle of
Scotland. Ans. This is so far from helping, that it quite overthrows his
designs; (not to mention, how absurd it is, to reason from men's abusive
language, and usage of words, to the affixing of such an Abusive sense, to the
same words, used in Scripture, contrare to the whole intendment of the Spirit
of God, in the places, where these words are used) for, (not once to take
notice of the Jesuitical perversion) such expressions, being used by way of
allusion, because of some resemblance, in some one point or other, which the
work of these of late, had, or might have, with what the Apostles and
Evangelists did of old, do evidently say, that there were such Officers, in the
primitive times, to whom these names did most properly appertain; and that
these names did point out, certain, known and distinct Officers; and not
emanations of divine grace; as this man says, who speaks he knows not
what; but cannot speak ill enough, against Christ's Ordinances.

12. From this, he concludes very learnedly and candidely, That Ministers
Pastors, and Doctors design only one office, and that there is no precedence
among them; by virtue of any distinct office, which is proved by others against
the diocesan prelacy Ans. (1.) What says this to other Superior and
Extraordinary Officers, which were in the primi^ive times, such as Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists? (2.) What says this to other Ordinary and Inferior
Officers, such as Elders and Deacons? (3.) What does all this say to the point
in hand? Be these one, or be they diverse; yet this is certane, they are
Officers, and Officers clothed with authority, and power, and have their work
committed to them, and are distinguished from the flock, over which they are
set; and every one of the flock, may not, as his own Spirit movet^ him,
encroach upon their office, and assume their work, to the overturning of all
Order, established by Christ, and to the rendering of Offices appointed by him
null, and of no effect: Which is the design this man drives at, and the only
intendment of his discourse here.

13. But. 26. page 207. Though he plead for liberty of prophesying by the
Spirit, unto all, when they are moved thereunto; yet he says, the Quakers
believe and affirm, that there are some more especially called to the work of
the Ministry, whose work is constantly and particularly to instruct, exhort
and watch, to whom such obedience and subjection is due, as is held forth Heb.
13: verse. 17. 1 These. 5: verse. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 15: verse. 17. 1 Pet. 5: verse. 5.
Answ. (1.) In this pleading for liberty of prophesying, he joyneth with
Socinians and Arminians, his old friends, whom he has no will to forsake, in
such an advantageous point: but we have shown above, that this liberty
destroys the Office; for if the work be common, there needs no Office be
appointed for that work; and if there be an Office for that work, no man must
meddle with the work belonging to that Office, who is not clothed with the
Office. What way are these men more peculiarly called, than others? Others, we
heard, were placed in the ministry and ordained of God, when moved to the
work, and were to be obeyed and subjected unto, as such, according to these
places of Scripture, now cited. Why does he not show us, wherein this
peculiarity consists? Whether is it in some thing inward, or in something
outward? if inward; what can it be more, than Gods calling and ordaining? if
outward; Is it imposition of hands of the Presbytery; or a potestative mission,
by Church Officers? (3.) But he says, They are more fitted and fournished,
than others. True, yet this is not before the call, but after it, and a
consequence of the call; for he says, and therefore they are more fitted, to
wit, because peculiarly called; and wherein this peculiar call consists, I
would know. (4.) He tells us also, that their work is, more constantly and
particularly to instruct etc. But can they instruct at any time, without a
special motion of the Spirit? if they can, why does he inveigh against our
Officers for doing the same? If they cannot, how can this be said to be more
their work, than it is the work of others, who do the same, upon the like
motion? or does their special Call consist in their receiving more frequent
motion, than others? But this speaks only of more work, but nothing of a
distinct Office. So that all this concession of his is just nothing (5.) I
would know, if these specially called persons, be wholly separated for that
work; and that statedly, and fixedly, so as they are in all time coming looked
upon, regarded and submitted unto, as officers over others; and how this work
of separating of them is done? Beside these he tells us also of Elders, who
albeit they be not frequently called to declare themselves in words (by this I
suppose, he means their way of preaching) yet having had experience of the
work of truth on their hearts, they watch over and privately instruct the
younger. Ans. But yet if the Spirit move them, they may, they must, do this in
Public too. (2.) we heard before, that this experience, or something like, was
all that he gave us, for a call to the highest employment. (3.) whatever these
Elders be, they are not the Scripture Elders; for these are apponted for
Government or Ruleing the Church, hence called Governments 1 Cor. 12:29, and
said to Rule 1 Timothy 4:17. Romans 12:8. (4.) He confounds these Elders with
deacons, telling us that they care for the poor, widows, and orphans. Nay
more, he says, they take care that peace, unity, concord, and love and health
be preserved in the Church. But what way is this done? And how are they called
hereunto? And whether does all this declare them to be distinct Officers, or
not? and over the people, or not? And whether, is this their peculiar work,
that others of the common people may not meddle with? Let him answer these,
and reconcile himself with himself, when he is at leisure.

14. But Page 208. he tells us, that they refuse that distinction of laics and
clergy. And knows he not, that we disapprove these terms? But the thing
that they refuse, is That none, (as he speaks) should be admitted to the work
of the Ministry, but who are educated in schools, and instructed in logic,
etc. and he who is thus educated must not learn another honest tread, for his
leaving. But why does it offend them, that men take pains to be instructed and
qualified for the work; and that none be admitted, but such as are qualified?
It seems that the work of the Ministry is a light business with them; and
may be discharged by such, as have no learning or qualifications; but why then
did the Lord qualify his Apostles, by teaching them several years, and by
extraordinary infusion of knowledge? It seems they would have all waiting for
such miracles now: but we must first see a warrant; and seeing experience tells
us, that the Lord does not take this way now, why are they offended, that we
use ordinary means for attaining to knowledge? (2.) He may know, if he will,
that we exclude none from the Ministry, if they be qualified, though they have
not learned their philosophy, etc. at ordinary schools. (3.) As for their
learning of an honest trade, we find none of the Apostles doing so, after they
were called to that work; and we look upon the work of the Ministry, as such
as will take up the whole man, and his whole time, if he be faithful and
diligent. And yet some men have learned physic, after they have been
Ministers, that they might be helpful to the poor; and no man condemns this,
providing that thereby they take not occasion to neglect the Ministry, which
is of greater consequence.

15. But hereby, says he, it comes to pass, that Parents, seeing what honor
and gain attends the Ministry, assign their children to that office from
their Infancy, and educat them thereunto of purpose, etc. That Parents dedicat
their children to the service of God, cannot be condemned: if they do it, upon
a corrupt design, and as moved by the corrupt ends, that is but their own
fault. Those (says he) being educated in pleasure and idleness, think it below
them afterward to work with their hands, satisfying themselves to bring out of
books, what they may Preach. Ans. Who ever think serious study an easy work,
is not acquanted with it. And if a Minister think he has time enough to follow
an ordinary calling, he knows neither the weight, nor the worth of the
Ministry. He that must bring all his preaching always out of books, must
either preach seldom, or he will find little time to follow another trade.
But all these things, and what he says further of corruption, in admitting
corrupt and carnal men into the Ministry, is nothing to the purpose in hand;
for no sober man will approve such corruptions; And yet we need not run away to
the Quakers way of prizing extemporary non sensical discourses, after self
motions, and self impulses, as the whole work of the Ministry. But says he
next Page 209. when men are not admitted to the Ministry, that are not so and
so licentiat, according to their rules, the Spirit is exstinguished and
prophecies are despised, contrare to 1 These. 5:19, 20. Ans. What Papists do, in
this, I regard not: Protestants will I suppose, not refuse to admit any man, to
the Ministry, that is found after trial really qualified, upon any such
account; howbeit the places by him cited be ill applied: but we must not stand
upon every punctilio, but shall go on.

CHAP. XX. Of Woman Preachers.
1. OUr Quakers, that in all things they may be like themselves, that is,
opposite to all the Appointments and Ordinances of Christ in his house; plead
for Women speaking or preaching, in the public assemblies of the Church, as
did the Anabaptists of old, and Famalists. And that notwithstanding Paul has,
in two distinct places, expressly prohibited the same; as first, 1 Cor: 14:34.
Let your women keep silence, in the Churches: we might think, that this were
indeed enough to satisfy us; but see what the Apostle adds further to
enforce this, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, to wit, in the
Churches; as if he had said, they have no allowance thereunto, permission, or
tollerance; And as if all this were not enough, he adds; all that is
permitted unto them, is to be under obedience, as also says the Law. Whereby
he gives us to understand, that woman their speaking in the Churches is
inconsistent with that subjection, that the Law of God has laid upon them; And
withal he insinuates, that speaking in the Churches is an authoritative
thing, and therefore no way allowed unto Women, whose proper deportment,
according to the institution and Law of God, is subjection and to be under
obedience. Nay he will not suffer them so much, as to ask questions, under
color of learning, in the Churches; lest that should make way for their
usurping of Authori^y, and taking upon them to speak wi^h Authority, for he
adds verse. 35. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands
at home. And so even at home he en^oyneth them to ask; contrare to what was
practiced by Mrs Hutchison in N. England, called by some, the American Iezabel,
who had her weekly lectures in her own house, and there broached her
Familistical and Antinomian errors, to the no small trouble of the Church of N.
England. Nay, he adds that it was contrary to that modesty and shamefastness,
that is the ornament of women, for, says he, it is a shame for women to speak
in the Church. What Patrons and abettors then of Immodesty and Shamlesness,
must Quakers be, that plead for Women's speaking in the ^hurches?

2. It is considerable also, what the Apostle adds, in the following verses
to confirm this injunction concerning Women; as also his former directions,
which he had given to regulate the abuses of that Church. What? says he, came
the word of God out from you? Or came it unto you only? Are ye the first, and
the last, and so the only Christians, that are? Or must ye give Laws to all the
^hurches of Christ? And must they all follow you? Let the Quakers look to this;
who* as to the particular we are now about, would make us believe, that the
word of God came out from them, and that it came to them only, and not to any
Church, Primitive, or Subsequent* beside themselves. Further verse. 37, he
says, if any man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things, that I write unto you, are the commandments of
the Lord. Let our Quaker ruminate upon this; and let all of them take notice of
it; for when they contradict this express injunction of the Apostle, they
declare themselves, say what they will to the contrary, to be neither Prophets
nor spiritual: and further we see, that what Paul spoke, concerning this
silence of women in the Church, was the commandment of the Lord. And therefore
is obligeing to all Churches, who will own any relation to Christ, their Lord
and Head: and consequently the Quakers, rejecting this commandment of the
Lord, renunce, in so far, their Interest in, and Relation to the Lord, as their
Head and Lawgiver. And the next words verse. 38. But if any man be ignorant, let
him be ignorant, have their own weight also; as if he had said, if any will
not yet, for all this, acquiesce, let him take his pleasure; no more needs be
said, for his conviction: he is wilfully ignorant; and he must remain so: And
so say we, in this particular: if the Quakers will remain ignorant, we cannot
help it; we must follow our rule, and declare them inconvinceable; and so
leave them.

3. Another express passage we have against this Practice and Opinion of the
Quakers 1 Timothy 2:11 -- 14. Let the women learn in silence with all subjection,
but I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to
be in silence. Where we may see, That Teaching publicly is an act of
authority; and that it is inconsistent, with that silence and subjection, which
is enjoined to women: And therefore, the Apostle, as a faithful servant of
Christ, will not give way to it; and acquants Timothy herewith, that he may
suppress any such practice, where it is; or hinder it, if men would set it up.
Nor is this all; for he adds his reasons; saying, for Adam was first formed,
then Eve. Whereby he teaches us, That such a practice is contrary to the Law
of Creation, the Law writ^en upon the Creation, and the Way and Method of
Crea^ion, which the Lord was pleased to follow; and th^reby give Documents and
Significations of his will to man. This practice then of the Quakers must be
unnatural, and a plain saying; that God created Eve first, and then Adam. And
further the Apostle adds, And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived, was in the transgression. That is, the woman, being immediately and
first deceived by Satan, was the cause and occasion of Adams transgressing; and
therefore was her subjection to the man laid further upon her, as a more
grievous weight and burden, as a part of her punishment. The Quakers then, who
would have women usurping Authority and Teaching, in the Church* do seek to
annul the sentence past upon Women by the just Lord, for Eve's being the cause
of Adam's sinning: and do in a manner declare, that that sentence was unjust;
and that Eve was not the devils instrument, to cause Adam sin. Let them see
to it; for it draws deeper, than they are aware.

4. Let us now see, what he says for this. Seeing (says he Page 210.) male and
female are one in Christ: and seeing he gives his Spirit to one, as well as to
another, when the Lord moves in women by his Spirit, we think it no way
unlawful for them to preach in the meetings of God's people. Answ. (1.) That
there is neither male, nor female, as there is neither Jew, nor Greek but all
are one in Christ, we grant, in reference to the privileges of the Covenant,
now under the Gospel dispensation, in opposition to what was under the Law; for
of this Paul speaks Gal. 3:28. But that therefore, women may as well Preach in
the Assemblies of the Church, as men, is a Quakers consequence, having no
connection, nor appearance of reason. (2.) That God gives his sanctifying
Spirit to women, as well, as to men, is very true: but that he moves in them
for any such end, as he here mentions, is simply denied: And by this we may
see, what sentence to pass, upon these irregular motions, which they talk so
much of. If the Spirit of God move in women, it will be to prompt them to duty,
that is, to keep silence in the Church, and not to Teach there, or to usurp
authority, but to learn in subjection, remembering what her sex is called to,
by the law of God, and what that punishment is, that is put upon all women, for
Eva her carriage.

5. He thinks the passages we have cited out of Paul's Epistles do not oppugn
their doctrine. And yet a more plain contradiction is not imaginable. But what
is his reason? Women, says he, have Prophesied and preached in the Church.
Ans. That the Lord has made use of women to be Prophetisses of old, we grant;
for he is free to make use of whom he will. His rare and extraordinary acts are
no rule to us; but his Law is our Rule, and to the Law must we go and to the
Testimony. He is absolute, and not bound by the Rules and Laws, he prescribes
unto us, Otherwise, says he, that of Joel had been ill applied by Peter, Act.
2:17. Ans. That is wonderful and strange! What says the Prophecy of Joel, as
it was applied by Peter? Were there any women preachers among that company
converted by Peter? Nay, Peter's applying of that Prophecy of Joel to that
present dispensation and exigent, wherein we hear not of the least appearance
of any women-preachers, is a manifest declaration of the contrary.

6. But he says further, That Paul himself in that same Epistle to the
Corinthians gave rules how women should demaine themselves, in their public
preachings and Prayers Answ. Thus the Man would have the Apostle contradicting
himself, in that same Epistle; Is it not saifer for us to say, that wh^tever
rules he gave, they were such as did well consist, with this plain peremptour
and enforced prohibition of their Preaching, Teaching, or Speaking, in the
public meetings of the Church? But what were the rules he gave concerni^g
women? He said Chap. 11:5. But every woman that prays or Prophecieth with her
head uncovered, dishonors her ^ead. This he takes to be meaned of the
women's carria^e, when they were Prophesying or praying publicly, before
others, in the Assembly; but his mistake is manifest, for the Apostle is only
showing, what the carriage of both men and women should be, while they were
present in the public Assemblies, and at the time of public worshipe, while
the word was spoken and explained, and public Prayers used, not by themselves,
but by others appointed thereunto.

7: He tells us next, That paul speaks of a certain woman, that labored with
him, in the Gospel. Ans. where he speaks of a certain woman that labored
thus with him, I know not: but I find Phil. 4:3 that he speaks of women in
the plural number, that labored with him, in the Gospel. And all the question
is, what way they did this? He imagines, that it was by public preaching, in
the Assemblies; but what ground is there for this? what hint is there given of
this? or thinks he, that there is no laboring in the Gospel, but by public
preaching? It is written, says he, that Philip had four Daughters, that
Prophesied. It is true, we read so Act. 21:9. But where read we, that they
preached, in the Public Assemblies of the Church? To Proph^sie and foretell
things to come is not to preach in public. Finally he tells us, that it is
observed, that this day, God has converted many to himself by the ministry
of women, and frequently comforted the minds of his sons: which manifest
experience puts the matter to us beyond all controversy Ans. (1.) That God
may make use of women, for this effect, and has often blessed their honest
endeavors, to his end, we most willingly acknowledge; but the question is not
about their pains and labor in private, and in their particular and private
stations and capacities, but about their public preaching, in open and public
Assemblies of the Church. (^.) Or means he all this, as done in the public
assemblies of the Quakers? If so, I shall suspect that work of conversion, and
take it rather for perversion, or delusion. (3.) Such experiences, being false,
and fasly founded, can evince nothing against the standing and binding laws of
Christ, in his Church. This man speaks much, on every occasion of their
experiences; and it seems, these are all the Quakers bible* or their maine
topic, from which all their arguments are brought, to defend all their
erroneous and irregular practices; But we judge it saifest, to examine
experiences by a standing rule; and if they agree not therewith, to account
them delusions of Satan; or, at best, the result and acts of the power of their
own vain imagina^ions* And if men will steer their course by such a Compass,
we think it little wonder, they dash on rocks, and make shipwreck of truth.
Enough of this; seeing I suppose truth could suffer no detrim^nt, though I
should give way to women to speak in their meetings; for I cannot account them
lawful Church Assemblies, but disorderly Routes.

CHAP. XXI. Of Ministers Maintenance.
1. WE come now to the last particuliar touched upon by him, in this his Tenth
Thesis, wherein he is some what large; and indeed it is one of the mai^e Common
places, that the Quakers, on all occasions, make use of, in crying down the
Ministry, as thinking they have some popular advantage in this, and ground, to
cry out against them, as hirelings, and what not? Wherein they join with
Anabaptists and Levellers; little knowing or considering, how much hereby they
are playing the Devils game. Julian the Apostate, when he was seeking to
extirpate the Christian Religion by wiles, thought this a very effectual mean
to accomplish that desperate design by viz. to reduce the Ministry to Contempt
and Poverty, by withdrawing their immunities and stipends, as we read Sozom.
Hist, tripart. lib. 6. c. 4. And who sees not the manifest tendency of such a
design? The Egyptian Priests were more carefully looked to Genesis 47:22. When
the Levites, his ministers, were neglected, the Lord accounted it a robbing of
himself Mal. 3:8, 9, 10. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say,
wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings, ye are cursed with a
curse, this whole nation etc. Ought not Quakers to fear this curse? But they
fear nothing said in the Scriptures; If the light within be their friend all is
well.

2. What would this man be at, in this matter? He tells us Page 210.. 28. That
they willingly confess, that they, to whom Ministers are sent, if need be,
should supply their necessities. This is, me thinks, a poor allowance; to have
only their necessities, which some may possibly contract to little bounds,
supplied; and that not absolutely either, but if need be. The necessity then
that must be supplied, must be very necessitous, and extreme; yea a double
necessity, and very constringing; and possibly he will allow no more, than will
serve to put away the greatest extremity of hunger and misery. This is given
with a very niggardly hand. Secondly, he says, that it is lawful for them, to
take what is necessary. And who would call this in question, seeing hunger, we
say, will break through hard walls. Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to
satisfy his soul, when he is hungry Prove. 6:30. would not this Quaker pity a
Minister, if he were driven to this strait, to take something, to satisfy his
hunger, though it were not formally given him: and will he allow no more, then
that he take what is given, for the supply of his necessities, which may be
very pinching, before some ill-willers, like our Quakers, will let them pass
for necessities? He tells us therefore, that he will not oppugn a necessary
aliment. Wherein he is wise; for it may be the Quakers themselves both get and
take more. What will he then oppugn? an aliment that is limited and compelled;
and then, what is superfluous and sumptuous. But what if that, which some shall
account superfluous, and sumptuous, be, in it self, all things considered,
nothing else then necessary? who shall be judge in this case? must the Quakers
only sit on the bench, as judges, here? If so, some might possibly suspect them
of partiality, and accuse them of cruelty. If the Supreme Magistrates of the
land be judges herein, (and who can reasonably refuse their umpirage and
determination?) Will it not satisfy him, if Ministers rest satisfied with
their decision? No, it will not satisfy him, for against this he rages, as
thinking it superfluous and sumptuous: and I shall not deny, but as to so^e it
may be so, and therefore shall plead rather for others, who have but whereupon
to live honestly, as becomes Men of such a function; and it may be scarce
that. But, be it what it will be, he will not have it limited; And yet some way
or other it must be limited, that it may answer the case of necessity, by a
geometrical proportion, for an arithmetical proportion will not so well answer
the necessity, which cannot be supposed to be alike in all. Who then shall make
this limitation? Shall the givers only do it? But what if their allowance be
too scanty? must the honest minister perish for want? Shall the Magistrates? He
will not yield to this; for then that would bring in a compelled maintenance,
which he will also oppugn. But if there be not some legal compulsion, (I own
no illegal, unjust and iniquous compulsion) what shall some Ministers do, who
have to do with such hard hearted persons, as would rather suffer the Minister
and all his household perish with hunger, before they would give what is just,
yea or what is necessary, if they were not compelled by law: How shall they get
their necessities supplied? These things, we see, can not well hang together.

3. He tells us, that only this (that is, a necessary aliment) and no more, is
included in these passages of Scripture, Gal. 6:6:1 Cor. 9:11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5:16. We must then alittle consider these passages, that we may come to
some clearness herein. The first is Gal. 6:6. Let him, that is taught in the
word, communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. But let us read
the following verses too, where this matter is pressed, Be not deceived, God is
not m^cked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap: For he that
sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary
in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. As we have
therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them, who
are of the household of faith, Gal. 6:7, 8, 9, 10. It is like, there were some
of our Quakers principles, even in these days, who dealt unworthily with the
Ministers of the Gospel: And it has been Satan's way, in all ages, to have men
superfluously large in their allowance to superstitious courses, and to
Idolatry; but niggardly spareing in the maintenance of truth: But Paul
considering, what an open door this was, to let-in ignorance, if the laborers
in the word were thus dealt with, sets himself against this evil, and will have
every one, whom the Minister catechizeth and instructs, to communicate unto
the Minister, in all good things; this is not to contribute with others, to a
bare supply of his necessities; but it is questionless a larger allowance; and
that not in this, or that particular good thing, but in all good things: And
because many might, and possibly did, pretend, that there was no great
necessity, the Minister had enough, and more; and they had little enough for
themselves, and their own families (as worlds wretches, who love the mammon of
this world, better than durable riches in heaven, can devise many such things;)
therefore the Apostle adds, Be not deceived, God will not be mocked. It was
with Him, and not with man only, they had to do; and he knew the truth of all,
as he knows what really prompteth the Quakers to this opposition, whatever
plausible pretexts they may allege. And further he says, whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap. To tell us, that this communication should not
be with a niggardly and spareing hand; as we say, men must not hunger the
ground, they must sow liberally, that their harvest may be the richer; and they
would sow, as exp^cting an harvest upon their sowing; and not suppose, that all
that is given away to Ministers, is cast in the wind, seeing it will have an
harvest following it. Moreover he tells us, that the communicating of their good
things, after this manner, is a sowing to the Spirit, which shall be followed
with a reaping of life everlasting; not that this did exhaust the whole import
of the expression, which the Apostle does here thus accommodate, nor as if all
such, as are thus liberal unto Ministers, shall have ground to expect life; but
that the honest and conscientious liberal dealing of such, as are thus
beneficial upon a good account, for maintaining of truth, and of the preaching
of the Gospel, the means of propagating the Kingdom of Christ, and of the
great design of the Spirit, is in it self a sowing to the Spirit; and if their
hearts be upright in the maine, and if they thus sow to the Spirit, they shall
certainly of the Spirit reap life everlasting. But, on the other hand, what is
keeped-up to the defrauding of laborers, of what they should have, is in God's
account, a sowing to the flesh; and the harvest thereof shall be corruption;
and thus their very niggardliness, shall destroy their substance. And lest some
might think, that too often giving might tend to poverty. He adds verse. 9. and
let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not: To show, that there should be no sitting up here; and that folks fainting
and drawing back their hand prejudgeth themselves of the harvest, that would
follow in due season* Upon which consideration, he presses a more universal
beneficence, not only to dispensers of the word, but to all persons; especially
to the household of faith; and that when ever opportunity is offered. What
liberality can they show to any, or to any household of faith, who withhold from
Ministers, what is requisite?

4. Let us consider next 1 Cor. 9. from verse. 4. and forward, where the Apostle
professedly is proving the lawfulness of Ministers taking maintenance not only
for themselves, but for their families also, saying verse. 5* have we not power
to lead about a sister a wife, as well as other Apostles? And the proof hereof
he prosecuteth at large, in the following verses. Who goes (says he verse. 7.)
a warfare, any time, at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyaird, and eats
not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of
the flock? Soldiers have their pay and stipend; and the Roman Laws included
herein, not only what was necessary for their maintenance, as provision for
back and belly; but even the kindly gifts and gratuities, which were given, as
further encouragements. And he who is at pains to plant a vineyaird, may in
reason expect to eat of the fruit hereof; so he also that keeps and feeds
a flock, should share of the milk. Natural equity pleads for these things;
why are Quakers thus unnatural? But they would not have stipends and salaries
fixed and limited: and yet the salary of soldiers uses to be fixed; and if
not, I suppose few would hazard their lives in the war, unless they were in
expectation of some greater benefit, than a fi^ed pay. Ministers are warriors
1 Timothy 1:18. 2 Timothy 2, 3.4. Therefore they should have their wages, as this
word is rendered Romans 6. last. Ministers are laborers in the vineyard, and are
laboring husband men 2 Timothy 2:6. Luke 10:2. 1 Cor. 3:9. And therefore they
should have their hire, 1 Timothy 5:18. They should have some fruit for their
pains. So are they Shepherds, feeding the flock of God, and therefore should
live of the milk. But the Apostle goes on to prove this, from other grounds,
than the common Law of nations and equity, even from the Law of God verse. 8, 9,
10. Say I those things as a m^n? Or says not the Law the same also? As if he
had said, Suppose you, that I have no other ground for this, but common usages
among men? Nay, I have the Law of God pleading for me also: For it is written,
in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads
out the corn: Does God take care for oxen? Or says he it altogether for our
sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he that ploweth, should
plow in h^pe, and that he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his
hope: Where he adduceth a testimony out of the Law, the moral equity whereof
binds us, under the Gospel; and thence reasons from the less to the more;
if oxen trading out the corn should not be muzzled, but have liberty to eat of
the corn, about which they are laboring, much more must Ministers be
maintained in their labors: And this he further amplifieth from the
similitude of laboring men, who plow and thresh, that they may share of their
hopes. But lest some should think, that these arguments were not apposite to
the Gospel, or to Ministers, who ministered spiritual things, and therefore
should only share of that, as laboring men do of the fruit of their labors;
and not of carnal things; the Apostle therefore, both to obviate this, and to
press the point further, says, verse. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? Arguing from
the more to the less. As if he had said, Common equity and commutative justice
would require some more, by way of compensation, than what we require; we sow
unto you spiritual things, and we reap but your carnal things: and do you
grudge us that? Our Quakers then are very cruel and unjust, that would have the
mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn, muzzled; and would not suffer
such, as sow spiritual things, so much as reap carnal things. Neither yet has
he Apostle said all, for he adduceth another Argument (beside that, that was
more ad hominem, as we say, verse. 12.) verse. 13, 14. Do ye not know, that they
which Minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they
which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Where
he reasons from a parity. As the Ministers of God under the Law were
maintained honorably in their service, so should the Ministers of the Gospel
be: and further adds, that the Lord has ordained it. How the Priests and
Levites were maintained under the Law, is abundantly set down there. See Exodus,
29: 26. and 22:29. Levit. 2:3, 10. and 5:13. and 7:7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 32. and
10:13. and 27.30, 32. Number. 3:48, and 5 9, 10. and 18:18 -- 31. and 35:2. Deuteronomy.
12:2. and 14:22: and 18:1. Josh. 13:14 and 21:2. 2 Chronicles. 31:4. Neh. 10:32. to
the end and 13:5 -- 15. Ezech 44:30. and 45:4. And this livelihood of theirs
was no mean thing, barely accommodated to their necessities; nor was it left
to the option of the people, whether to give it, or not; but was determined by
the Law of God.

5. Come we in the next place to take a view of 1 Timothy 5: verse. 17, 18 Let the
Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the word and doctrine: for the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzle
the ox that treads out the corn; and the labourer is worthy of his reward.
Whether by this double honor, we understand, with some, Reverence and
Maintenance, or a double Portion of that honor, or Maintenance, that he
allowed to widows, spoken of in the former part of the Chapter; or with
others, all respective duty and encouragment: still Maintenance is included,
as a special part; and this is held forth as due to all Rulers of the Church,
even to such, as labor not in word and doctrine, (which the Quakers did not
see practiced, amongst us) and chiefly to such, as Preach the Gospel: And
against this they rage, though the Apostle confirms it, as formerly 1 Cor. 9.
from the Law; an^ again further from that received sentence, The labourer is
worthy of his reward. But they grant, what is requisite for necessity: And yet
the Apostle mentions a double honor, signifying, that he would have it a
honorary indeed, and a double honorary; that is large, as the word double
imports in Scripture: see 2 King. 2 9. Esai. 40:2. Ier. 17* 18. Mat 23:15.
Revel. 18:6. So then there is more here imported, then what is for mere
necessity: for what is for mere necessity is but an alms, no honorary; an
honorary must respect the Place, Dignity; Office and Work of the person; and
must have a correspondence therewith: And it can never be called an honorary,
which is purely for necessity. They will not have this honorary fixed and
limited, nor the persons constrained to give it. Why then does the Apostle
add, the labourer is worthy of his reward? Is the laborers reward left to the
discretion of the giver? Why then says James Chap. 5:4 behold the hire of the
laborers, which have reaped down your fields, which is of you keept back by
fraud, cries; and the cries of them, which have reaped, are entered into the
ears of the Lord of Sabbath. It is an hire, we see, that cannot be kept
back, but by fraud; and when it is kept back, it cries. Is the laborers
reward unfixed? Or may not Law and Justice compel an unrighteous man to give
the labourer his hire?

6. Let us add to these, the saying of our Lord and Master Mat. 10:10. and
Luke 10:17. -- The workman is worthy of his meat, and in the other place it is,
is worthy of his hire. Our Lord is sending forth his 70. Disciples, upon a
message and work, that was not to endure long, and disswadeth them from anxiety
or fear of want, seeing the labourer is worthy of his meat and hire, and that
they might expect: and by Meat in Matthew, he means all things necessary for
their accommodation, and for fitting them for the work they were about: for it
was to supply their own provideing of gold and silver in their purses, and
scrip for their journey, and shoes and stays, These things he would not have
them provide for themselves, because they should be provided of them, by those
among whom they labored. And in Luke it is called an hire. And that it might
appear, that he would not have them entertained as almouners, he adds, go not
from house to house. If then Christ's allowance was such to them, who were but
employed in that particular message, to go before Christ, toward Jerusalem,
as his forerunners; what shall we say of Quakers, that will allow so little
encouragement to such, who must be employed in this work all their days, and
give themselves wholly unto it, and must not entangle themselves, with the
things of this life, but must mind this work alone, and be instant in season
and out of season. They will allow them an alms, and hardly that, unless great
necessity require it: but where is the hire, the wages, that justice calls
for? They have no heart to this.

7. Add to these (1:) That Christ himself not only made use of the service of
women, that ministered unto him of their substance Luke 8:3. and so had
provision of that kind, wherever he came; but we read, that He and his Company
had a bag, which Judas carried Joan. 12:6. out of which they provided
themselves, as they thought fit Ioh. 4:8. and 13:29. and gave also to the poor
ibid. and if they had to give to the poor, they had more, then their own urgent
necessity called for. But our Quakers would have ministers to exercise no
charity to the poor* (2.) It is required of Ministers, that they be given to
hospitality, 1 Timothy 3: v. 2. Tit. 1:8. But if they have no more, than what
their own necessity requires, their hospitality must needs be slender. (3.)
Had Ministers only what Quakers do allow, it were to be feared, that many, to
procure the favor and good will of their hearers, and so obtain a larger
allowance of their benevolence, would flatter too much, reprove faithfully too
little, use too little ministerial boldness; many would be put to wrestle with
no small difficulties, and strong temptations, perturbations of mind, anxiety
etc. that would very much unfit them for their work. (4.) This were an high way
to render the Ministers, and consequently, the Ministry contemptible. (5.) Few
would be encouraged to enter upon that painful work, and have all outward
discouragements to expect too. (6.) Nature taught heathens a far other thing.
(7.) Shall Superstitious Idolaters be so extravagant: and shall Christians be
so spareing? (8.) It may be, Quakers themselves take more, than for mere
necessity. And whence soever it comes, some faithful Servants of Christ, are
not so well provided for, as all of them are.

8. Let us now proceed and hear what this Quaker says. He says we are forced
to run to the example of the Law, which we use, as a refuge in defending many
of our errors and superstitions, which are contrary to the nature and purity
of the Gospel. Ans. We look upon this, but as a calumnious untruth, uttered by
a Quaker, who speaks without ground, and thinks hereby to make himself and
his party to he looked upon, as the only pure Gospellers: When yet wise and
understanding persons will see them to be the most desperate Enemies to the
Gospel, that ever appeared. (2.) We see the Apostle made use of the Law; and we
may do the like. But what infer we from the law? That the tithes belong to
Ministers under the Gospel. And what says he to this? Nothing can be hence
collected, but that as the priests under the Law had their assigned aliment, so
ministers now should have. The comparison should not be so far extended, as to
say, that Ministers should only have the same, that is, nothing but the tithes.
As for Ans. I shall wilingly grant, that if there be any who thus argue their
ground is not good; and who they are, that plead for the tithes, as the only
way of maintaining the ministry, I would feign know of him. He knows, sure,
that this is not the only way in Scotland. If the Ministers have a quota
allowed, proportionable to what the Priests and Levites had; I suppose, many
will be satisfied; and I am sure, this will be a far greater allowance, then he
will willingly condescend unto. The Ministers of old had more than the tithes;
they had many gifts, much of the sacrifices, many whole Cities, forty eight
in number, with their suburbs. But to make short with him, I shall not plead
for the tithes, as the only necessary way; Let there be a competent honorary
granted, whether in lieu of the tithes* or otherwise, I am satisfied; yet where
tithes are settled by Law, as the way, I see not, what he or any can say against
it, His following reasons conclude not this to be simply unlawful, and
therefore I let them pass; for I do not plead for it, as only necessary.

9. But even, as to the aliment, he says Page 211. that if the people will not
willingly give, Ministers must not receive it, nor compel the people to give
it. Ans. I confess, if the people will not give it, it can hardly be received?
but if people may not be compelled to give it; how shall Ministers live? How
shall their necessities be supplied? How is it the Laborers hire and wages?
But he proves it from Mat. 10:8. -- freely you have received, freely give: and
adds yet it was free for them, to take meat and drink from such, as willingly
gave it. Answ. But how could they take so much, as that, if that sentence be
applied to the necessary aliment? It is not said, freely give to all, that will
give you nothing; but not to all, who will give; you must not give them freely,
but take from them. So that this reason destroys it self But the true meaning
of the words is, you have received freely the extraordinary gifts of healing
the sick, of cleansing the lepers, of raising the dead, and of casting out of
devils; freely use these gifts: and who would have ministers selling to the
greatest offerers their pains, in ordinary ministerial employments, which yet
has cost them pains and study? No, that were the hight of baseness; they
should freely serve their Master in the Gospel, with a free and generous mind;
yet this takes not away their aliment or honorary, which Christ ensured to
these 70. Disciples, for that short work. They should live of the Gospel, as we
have seen; and if people be that unjust and inhumane, as not to give, when
able, what the Laws of the land allow and have settled, as an honorary; justice
should compel them; f^r the labourer should have his wages: and this comporteth
well with a free giving in the Minister, otherwise Christ had not joined them
together, in the same discourse. If this Quaker cannot see a consistency
betwixt these two? he must either profess his own ignorance, or blame Christ.
He adds. Hence it is clear, that Ministers may seek nothing. Ans. Might not
the disciples have sought a cup of cold water? Sure; Christ did as much, as all
that himself Ioh. 4.7: But says he, They may seek nothing by violence or
compulsion. Ans. Fair Law and justice is neither violence, nor compulsion.
They may not covenant before hand, how much they must have by year. Ans. True;
and he may know, that our Church laws account such dealing Simony. As for
Arnoldus's answer, which our Quaker confirms with an oath, saying ex animo,
or speaks bad latin, I leave it to Arnoldus to vindicat. His saying Page
212.. 29. that the passages of Scripture here adduced, are of the same nature
with such, as press bounty to the poor: Is convicted of falsehood, by what was
said upon these places. But he adds, Albeit Christians be bound to give
outward things to Ministers, yet there can no determination be made of the
quantity, without the consent of the giver. Ans. This makes against him; for
when the owners of the land did willingly allote the tithes to Ministers, as
their honorary, the determination of the quantity, was made with their consent;
and what is thus determined should stand; and cannot be diminished, but by
fraud and iniquity: He cannot say, that the present possessours of the Land
have power to make a new determination; for, beside that that were sacrilege,
in devouring sacred things, once devouted to pious uses; it were the hight of
injustice: for when they purchased that Land, they paid nothing for the
tithes, but made their purchase cum hoc onere as is done in all purchases of
Land, burdened with any public thing. He is mistaken, when he says, that
there can no more any limitation be made here* then in acts of bounty and
hospitality; for the Scripture told us, that this is the workmans hire; and
reward, and no gratuity. His following objection is none of mine; and therefore
I may let the answer pass.

10. He tells us that Paul did prohibit this unto the Elders of Ephesus Act.
20: v. 33, 35. Answ. No such matter appears there. He says ind^ed verse. 33.
That he coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel. And I grant all Ministers
should be in case to say the same; and not only ministers, but all Christians;
yea all men, by virtue of the Tenth command. He says moreover verse. 34. Yea,
you yourselves know, that these hands ministered unto my necessities, and to
them, that were with me. This is true 1 Cor. 4:12. 1 These. 2:9. 2 These: 3:8.
Will our Quaker think, that this obliges all Ministers? Why then will ^e allow
his Brethren, to take so much as a bit of bread from any? Why did Christ allow
his 70. Disciples to take bread and drink both? Did Paul thus every where? He
took more then bread from the Church of Philippi Phil. 4:10, 15, 16. Nay he
tells the Corinthians 2 Cor. 11: v. 8. That he robbed other Churches, taking
wages of them. Had he done so every where, and to every Church, he had hardly
freed himself of the imputation of avarice. He says next verse. 35. I have
showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to support the weak and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, it is more blessed to
give, then to receive Hence indeed it is clear, that the Apostle willed these
Elders of Ephesus, to follow his example, in supporting the weak, and in giving
no offense unto them; for the word properly signifies, an holding up with the
hand such as otherwise would fall through weakness; and so, if the case fell so
out with them, as it did with himself, in the Church of Corinth. 1 Cor. 9:15. 2
Cor, 11:10. that before they stumble the weak, and hinder the course of the
Gospel, they should rather work with their own hands, than be burdensome to
any: And I shall willingly say the same of every Minister of the Gospel, that
is placed in the like circumstances: But this will say nothing against the
Equity and Justice of an honorary, as we have seen Paul proving at large; nor
against a Minister seeking his due by Law, o^ what is established upon him by
Law, when thereby he shall give no just ground of offense, or stumbling. And it
is observable that these who lay at a catch to have some thing to say against
Paul, for taking maintenance, were very like our Quakers, pretending to be
Apostles, and yet were but transformed after the manner of Satan their Master,
and were deceitful workers, whose end should be according to their works, 2
Cor. 11: v. 13, 14, 15. And as for these words of Christ, it is more blessed to
give, than to receive, they held true of the Ministers under the Law, yet they
had their set salary, and might seek it. It holds true also in all
Christians; and yet notwithstanding thereof, the workman has right to his
wages, and may seek it; and a person may justly crave his debt. But this is
indeed a noble argument to dissuade from avarice, and to press to
bountifulness.

11. He says Page 213.. 30. That a limited and forced maintenance makes the
Ministers of Christ like these mercenaries, that the Prophets so often
reproved. Answ. I should rather think the contrary; But let us hear his reason.
If one (says he) be hired to preach to such or such a people, for so much
yearly, so that he would not preach without it, it is clear that he should then
preach for a reward, etc. This may be all granted, for it touches not the
question: Our Ministers are not hired for so much yearly: they must preach,
whether they get their aliment, or not: If any be so mercenary, that he will
not preach, without so much as he can bargan for, either for longer or shorter
time, I will not defend the practice; but a settled maintenance by Law
preventeth all this. And we have seen, how many of the Lord's worthies preach,
and have preached withal readiness of mind, though they have had nothing of
that settled maintenance, now for several years.

12. He comes afterward to speak of Superfluous maintenance; And I shall not
much speak for it: Only I think his description of it is too faulty, when he
calls that Superfluous, which is more then is necessary: that is, is more
then food and raiment; for he cites 1 Timothy 6:7, 8, 9, 10. as the only
confirmation of this: And yet this place is impertinent; for it is not meaned
of Ministers only, but is applicable to all. And I suppose Quakers have
something more themselves, than food and raiment: Report wrongeth them, if the
most part of them be not richer then ordinary: However I do not envy their
riches, but wish it be all lawfully gained: And I find not the Apostle in that
place simply condemning riches, but a will be rich, and a love of money, and a
coveting of it.

13. What he says. 31. of the excessive rents and revenues of Bishops, both
Popish and Protestant, I meddle not with. I plead only for a competent
honorary, as due to all, that labor in the Lords vineyard. As for the
objection; which thereafter he starteth, I desiderate ingenuity in it. He
should not have said Christians, in general, or indefinitely (for these times
have given proof of the liberality of many, in supplying richly the wants of
Christ's necessitous servants and Sufferers, which is on record in heaven.) But
at most, Some members of the visible Church are so hard, that if Ministers had
not a certain and fixed maintenance, they should die for hunger: That is, if
the Lord did not otherwise provide for them; What answers he to this? This
says something for the carnal Ministry, consisting of natural men, who have
no life, nor power; and so must have such a maintenance: but it says nothing
for them, who are called of God and sent; he sends none upon their own
charges, and who go forth for him, in his power and authority, to turn people
from darkness to light, such can confide in God, he will provide for them.
Answ. This is one of the popular insinuations of our Quakers; but has little
in it either of Sense, or Reason: For (1.) Paul did not plead for a carnal
Ministry, when he reasoned for their maintenance; but for such, as were sent
in the name of the Lord, and were to serve him in the Gospel of his Son, in
turning people unto God. (2.) The Priests and Levites were called of God, to
their work; and yet for all that, they had their fixed and settled maintenance.
(3.) When Christ sent his 70. Disciples, he said, the labourer was worthy of
his hire: And though Christ did provide for them; Yet that was by means of
people: And he supposed there would be some, who would not make them very
welcome, for a testimony against whom, they were to shake the dust off their
feet. (4.) Baals Priests, in the days of Iezabel, were very richly provided
for, when the lawful servants of God were put to great straites: shall we
therefore say, that these Priests of Baal were the only called of God, sent
forth in his Power and Authority; and that the Servants of the Lord were but a
carnal Ministry? This were to argue carnally with belly arguments, as our
Quakers do. (5.) Knows he not, that Idolatrous and Superstitious Priests are
better cared for, after this manner, ordinarily, then the true and faithful
servants of God? must they therefore be the only spiritual men? A noble
argument for Heathens and Papists and the Turkish Muftees. What follows is
but a rabble of Quakerish and confused discourse, having neither head, nor
tail; And his conclusion, for taking away all settled maintenance, because of
the abuses, which he says, (not telling when, nor where, nor by whom) some
have committed in that matter, is like himself: and is as if one should have
reasoned against all the settled maintenance of Ministers under the Law,
because the Sons of Eli where chargeable with abuses therein: And this could
have been said with more color of reason, after our Quakers logic; for these
abuses were certain and notoure; but our Quakers allaigances may be false; and
though true, as to some circumstances; Yet, as to other circumstances, utterly
impertinent. As for the sum of his discourse, upon this Thesis of the
Ministry, which he lays down Page 218. etc.. 23. I need take no notice of
it, the Falsehood, Groundlesness, and Impertinency of these particulars, being
already discovered, and his vanity made notoure un^o all, by what we have
discoursed: Nor need I tell the Reader, that howbeit they use great swelling
words of vanity, in crying up their Ministry, as only spiritual, and what not;
Yet, at the bottom, they are but Pagan-preachers, prompted, called, qualified,
moved and acted by corrupt Nature, designing Paganish Antichristianisme, this
being manifest from what is hitherto said.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Quakers silent worshipe.
1. THe sum of his Eleventh Thesis, which is concerning Worshipe, is That all
acts of worshipe, must be performed, as to manner, duration, times and places,
by inward Inspirations, and immediate Enthusiasmes, which are the only rule and
principle thereof: And that all worshipe, that is otherwise performed, is but
will worshipe and abominable idolatry; which now, in the day of Christ's
Spiritual Resurrection, is to be rejected and separated from, howbeit, it has
pleased the Lord (who wincked at the times of ignorance, having respect to the
simplicity and integrity of some, because of his own innocent seed, buried in
men's hearts, under the mass of superstition) to breath upon these, raise up
an^ hear some groans, for a little, until the day should clear up] Whereby
he would give us to understand, that Christ's spiritual resurrection was never
till now; and that God never was worshipped aright, till the generation of
Quakers arose; but hithertil Superstition and Idolatry has raged, in all the
Churches, no times, no places excepted, though God was pleased to breath upon
some, here and there, raise up some groans in them, and hear them, (possibly he
means the Anabaptists of Germany, or some such like Phanaticks, that History
gives us some account of) and to winck at the rest until now, because of his
seed, that is in the heart of all Pagans, as well as Christians, and lay
burried under the rubbish of Superstition and Idolatry. The maine thing, which
according to what is held forth in the Thesis, we might expect to find
cleared, and confirmed in his Apology, is, the being acted and moved to, and in
all acts of worship, by Immediate Inspirations and Enthusiastical motions of the
Spirit; and the unlawfulness of entering upon Worshipe, at what time, in what
place, and upon what occasion so ever, or continueing in it, without these
Previous Physical, and Immediate Inspirations, Impulses, and Enthusiastical
Motions: but we shall see some other things spoken to, and more insisted upon
by him; and but little spoken to this, which mainly called for proof.

2. However, we must see what he says; and leaving his preamble, wherein,
according to his usual manner, he lays an imputation on the Reformed
Churches, as keeping still the root of false worshipe, when they cut off the
branches of Romish worshipe: We shall consider what he says, for clearing of
the Quakers way: first he tells us Page 222.. 2. That he speaks here of
worship now under the Gospel, and not as requisite, under the Law. Yet I
suppose he is speaking of worshipe, as a moral duty, or in reference to what is
moral or natural, which has place in all ages of the Church; and of what is
essentially and necessarily requisite to all moral worship: for he says here
expressly, that the ceremonies under the Law were not essential to true
worshipe, nor necessary of themselves. I suppose also, he should speak of
Institute Worshipe under the Gospel; but all that is by the Quakers rejected
and denied; as we shall hear. He tells us next. 3. That they do not condemn all
prescribed times and places for worshipe; for they have such. But may I not
ask, whether they assemble, at these times, and in these places, by the
Immediate Acting, Motion and Impulse of the Spirit, or not? It seems not; but
when they are assembled, they must wait for these motions: But is not that a
limiteing of the Spirit, as if he could not Act and Move to public worshipe,
at other times, and in other places? And is not the time of their abode
together, at these several occasiones, limited also?

3. What do they then condemn? They condemn our having a Preacher to preach,
excludeing others: But the lawfulness of this we evinced above. Next they are
not satisfied, that these ministers come not to meet with the Lord. Neither am
I. and attend not unto his inward motions and operations. Nor am I satisfied
with this. Nor pray not, preach not, as the Spirit moves and breaths in
them, and gives utterance. What if I say, that I am not satisfied with this
either, more then they? But the mystery of the business is; They acknowledge no
Motion or inward Breathing of the Spirit, but what is Extraordinary and merely
Enthusiastic, without all previous study or preparation, and abstract from all
means; as if the Lord could not move and operate, in and by the means, and
could not help a minister, who had studied his sermon, by his breathing and
inward assistance, to preach the Gospel, and give utterance and help to the
carrying on of the work to edification. This is to oppose the Spirit of God and
his motions, to all means of his own appointment; condemns all study and
meditation on the Scriptures; takes away all pains and labor for abilities;
and puts men upon a sure way of tempting of God, and of inviteing the devil
to deceive and delude, as was shown above.

4. That nothing may be wanting to complete their Systeme of error, they
proclaim all days alike, and so reject the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath;
concerning which, if this man have any mind to dispute on that head, I will
wait his Answer, to what I have said on it elsewhere. What he says Page 225..
5. of their charity toward many living in Popery, is no very great business,
seeing he will grant as much to Pagans, notwithstanding of their palpable and
manifest Idolatry and Heathenisme: But why will he not give us charity too?

5. He comes more home to the business Page 226.. 6. and tells us, that when
they assemble, every ones work is, to attend on God, to go out of their own
thoughts, and imaginations, or rather to thrust these away, to feel Gods
presence, and in his name to acknowledge that assembly, where He is in the
midst, according to his promise: And where every one is thus assembled in
Spirit, as well, as in body, the secret power and virtue of life is known to
refresh the soul, and they feel pure motions and breathings of the Spirit of
God flowing, from which issue words of declaration, prayer and praise, and thus
acceptable worshipe is performed, by which the Church is edified, and God is
pleased, -- yea though not one word be spoken or heard outwardly, yet true
spiritual ^orship is performed, and the Church is edified. Answ. This is a
short account of their manner of worship, which, in his following discourse, he
largely labors to explicat and vindicate. I shall only propose these few
exceptions against it. (1.) Spiritual worshipe, which only is acceptable with
God, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, being a matter
of no small difficulty, for sinners to get performed aright, would require some
preparation before hand, that the heart might be put in some frame for such an
high and noble work, being made sensible of its distance from, and
unsuteableness for approaching unto such an holy and spiritual God, and of the
necessity of some impression of that divine Majesty with whom they have to do,
and of divine help for the right discharge of that duty: now I find no mention
made by them of any such thing, or of the necessity of wrestling with God in
private for a right frame of Spirit, in going about that work, and for the
assistence of his grace and Spirit, in the discharge of it, and for his
blessing upon it. It seems their heart is always in a like good frame, and
they are always in case for this solemn address unto God; or they come
together, to get preparation and all, from the inward motions, without which
nothing must de done. (2.) When the members of the Church are assembled, and
public worshipe to begin, Nature it self would teach, that there should be a
solemn address made unto God by Prayer, acknowledging their unworthiness of
such an honor and favor; their unfitness for such a solemn work; their
necessity of his divine help and assistance therein, and his blessing
thereupon, that He may be glorified, and they edified: but here no such thing
appears; no invocating of the great God, no supplication made to him, no
prostrating of themselves in prayer before him, at the entry of their work: can
this then be accounted an assembling for the solemn Adoration, Worshipping and
Invocation of God? (3.) No word is there here, in all their Assemblies, of the
Scriptures, as the Law of God, which should be read, interpreted, and applied
for the Instruction, Reproof, Consolation and Edification of the people: No, as
the Scriptures are no rule to them, in their walk, so nor are they any rule to
them in their worship: as their worship is not grounded upon the Scriptures, So
nor have the Scriptures any place, in their worshipe, contrare to the practice
of Christ and his Apostles Luk 4: verse. 16. -- 21. Act. 17:2, 3. and 8: verse.
4, 25, 35. and 9: verse. 22. and 10:43. and 13:5, 15, 16. etc. 33, 34, 35, 36,
37, 40, 41. and 18:28. (4.) Though there be no approaching now for sinners unto
God, but in and through a Mediator, and all our service, and worshipe must be
performed in him, and through him Col. 3:17. Ephesians. 2:18. Ioh. 14:6. 1 Timothy 2:5.
Ioh. 14:13, 14. 1 Pet. 2:5. Yet I hear nothing of Jesus Christ, in all their
worshipe: It can therefore be no Gospel Worshipe, which they go about; for as
all that, must be in the name of Jesus, the Mediator, as having his warrant, so
it must be offered to the Lord through him. Hence (5:) all their Solemn
Worshipe is nothing else, then may be gone about by Pagans and Heathens, that
never heard of Christ: for there is no Gospel Worshipe, no Gospel Duty, no
Gospel Ordinance to be found in all their most solemn service, neither
Preaching, nor Prayer, nor Praise, nor Administration of sacraments, nor any
Duty instituted in the Gospel. (6.) Nay, in this they seem to come short of the
orderly devotion, that is exercised by some Heathens, who have their Priests
and public Officers, to carry on their worshipe with a piece of order and
solemnity; But they know no such thing, their worshipe, we see, is carried on
without the orderly leading and foregoing of any Person, peculiarly designed
thereunto unto. (7.) They speak of going out from their own thoughts, or of
expelling them; and it is convenient and ne^essary, I confess, that all carnal
and worldly thoughts be laid aside, when we are to approach unto the great and
living God; for our minds ought then wholly to be abstracted from all
Impediments, and taken up alone with God: But how comprehensive their own
thoughts may be, I know not, and whether he may not mean a laying aside of all
use of Reason and Humanity, that so they may be fitter receptacles of the In
workings of Satan, and of the Impressions of his delusions: we may possibly
hear something hereafter, which may give ground for this supposal. (8.) He
tells us, that when they are thus conveened, they meet with a secret virtue and
power of life, refreshing their souls etc. But is this common and ordinary to
them all? and is it so at all times? Then they are all, and that always, while
about the worshipe of God, in a good frame; and the Spirit, who blows where
and when he lists, never withdraws from them; but is always present, in
Love and in Power; But what is this Life that has such Power and Virtue? If we
call to mind the principles of the Quakers, formerly considered and examined,
we will find, that it is not the true and real Grace of God, bestowed upon
them, through Jesus Christ; and wrought in them by his Spirit; but the mere
Operation and Product of nature: and therefore all the refreshing of soul, that
they feel thereby, must be but Natural and Carnal, how sensible so ever it may
be. (9.) He talks of Motions and Respirations of the Spirit of God, which flow
forth: but whence flow they? From their own Spirits; or from that refreshing
of soul, or from the power and virtue of that life, he spoke of? But the chief
thing I would have noticed here, is, How shall we know, or how do they know,
that these Motions and Breathings, are the motions and breathings of the Spirit
of God? The reason of the enquiry is, because they have laid aside the
Scripture, the only sure test for trial of Spirits, and of the motions of
Spirits; and not only so, but they are now gone out of themselves, and are no
more Men, having laid aside Humanity and all the Cogitations and Imaginations
of Men: How shall they, how can they, or any other, know whether these motions
be motions of the Spirit of God, or of the Spirit of darkness? Cannot Satan
play his game in persons thus prepared for, and laid open unto his workings and
insinuations? Has he not thus wrought in many, who thus gave up themselves
unto his Power and Delusions? (10.) when these, who are thus acted and moved,
by a Spirit (blake or white) utter words of declaration, prayer or praise; how
shall it be known, that these words are words of truth and righteousness? It
seems all is good coin that comes that way, and no doubt is to be made
thereof; no examination or trial is to be made, all is to be received by an
implicit faith: and sure, if these Declarations, Prayer and Praises be
suitable to, and corresponding with their Doctrine and Principles, we have
ground to think, that they are such: as no Christian can with a good conscience
receive, or join with: and though he think, that what is so spoken, is
delivered in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and of power; yet if
we judge by the Scriptures of truth, we must say, that it is rather in the
evidence and demonstration of the Devil. (11.) When one is so moved and
speaks, what do the rest? Must they attend thereunto, and join there with?
But what if they be, at that very instant, prompted by what is within them, to
utter words of declaration, prayer or praise? (and this is not impossible) must
they all speak together? where is then order and edification? or must they be
silent, and listen to what the other speaks, till he have done? How will he
salve this from a limiting of the Spirit? But next can the rest hearken and
join, without an inward motion thereunto? If so, then that part of worshipe is
performed by them, without the previous inward motion of the Spirit. Or must
the rest wait for their proper and particular motions? then there is no
public worshipe performed by the Assembly. (12.) But, as to that mumry and
dumb service, when nothing is uttered, how can that be called a Public
Worshipe of God? what public worshipe is there and then performed by the
Assembly? and where does he read of any such Public Worshipe performed unto
God, in all the Old, or New Testam? How differs this from the dumb service of
some Heathens, performed to their Idols? And what mutual edification is there
had hereby? He tells us, it is true, that even then, their souls are exceedingly
satiated. But where with, or whereby? Not by any public exhortation, prayer or
praises; for there are none; and that which is not cannot edify. He tells us
also, that their hearts are wonderfully replenished with the secret sense of
the divine power and Spirit. But how is this brought about? This power (says
he) is transmitted without words from vessel to vessel. Sure this is no usual
way of the Lord's working: and why should he imagine, in this case, a
transmission from vessel to vessel? Can not the Lord work immediately upon every
vessel? But thus, it seems, it must be, that it may be called at least, a
joint worshipe; for other ways the Lord might work immedatly upon them all,
when asunder in their own particular houses.

6. But it were good, we heard more of this, that we may come to know it
better: And he promises to speak to us of it from his own certain experience.
Let us therefore listen. None can, says he, thus wait upon God, till he lay
aside his own will and wisdom, and be content wholly to be subjected unto
God. This I should well approve of, were I sure, that it were a real waiting
upon God; and not rather, a laying themselves open unto the Enthusiasmes of
Satan. None attaineth to this, (says he,) or performs it, but he that
knows, that no outward thing, no ceremonies, no words, not the best words,
nay nor the words of Scripture, can satisfy their weary and languishing souls;
for, though these be all present, the power life and virtue, that makes them
effectual, can be away. Answ* It is like he has learned this out of the popish
books, styled Theologia Germanica and the Bright Star, commended to us by
Randal, a Familist. But though those outward things cannot do it alone; Yet he
is not waiting upon God aright, who lays these outward things, appointed of
God for this end, aside; as they do: As God will be worshipped, so will he be
waited upon, in the way he has prescribed, and no other. They must be, says
he, abstracted from all external things; and be silent before God, and turn
within unto the inward principle within them, as unto the most excellent
doctor. Answ. This is plain: And so I see, that all their waiting upon God, is
to renunce all his Appointments, and betake themselves wholly unto the blind
guide of Natural Light, which is within every man; and this is their God, and
most excellent Doctor; And that the Devil may have a fairer opportunity to work
upon their phancies, and plye the darkened Light within, they must become no
Christians, renuncing all the outward means; and no Men, renuncing the use of
Reason and Humanity. What will this excellent Doctor of theirs teach? He will
teach them, says he, to attend upon God, in the measure of life and grace
received, and so to cease from their own words and acts, in their natural will
and comprehension, and to feel this inward seed of life, that thereby they
might be moved, or acted whether to pray, preach, or sing. Ans. That is,
Nature, the most excellent Teacher, seconded with Satan's Operations, teaches
them to attend upon, in the strength of Nature, and according to the measure of
that Light (rather Darkness,) and to feel what this Natural thing, or worse,
working on the fancy, will prompt them to do: So that this can be nothing else
but Heathenish, or Pagan-worshipe, taught and regulated by silly Nature, made
alittle active by a strong Fancy, together with the concurrence of a Spirit of
delusion, blinding the very eyes of Nature, and stirring up to utter this, or
that, false or true, as the rarefied brain, and tickled fancy is first
inclined unto: And till this be, they sit mute as so many stones: and this is
the ground of their silent sitting so long, as he says himself: What judgment
to pass upon this Worshipe, so Founded, so Regulated, so Principled, so
Carryed-on, and Issued, the Christian Reader needs not long deliberate.

7. When one is thus moved to speak, what comes of the rest, who are yet busy
entering within themselves and consulting their Demon, their Teacher and Bible?
The life, says he, the riseing whereof some do thus perceive and possess, as
it prevails in every one, so as afloud of refreshment, it runs over the
whole Congregation -- for Gods name is one in all, and his glory breaks out
and flows forth, and covers all, and such a reverence and veneration
possesses all, that if the natural part should arise in any, or man's wisdom,
or any thing, that is not one with this life, it would presently be depressed
and condemned. This is indeed wonderful and strange, that the various degrees
of Natural Power and Light should be screwed up to such an exact harmony, that
in all the Congregation there should not be one jarring sound: but who would
not suspect the hand of some cunning artist, tuneing all these strings, to his
own advantage? We cannot suppose this to be the work of the Spirit of God,
thus constantly making life break-in and overflow the whole Congregation, upon
the riseings thereof in some one particular person, or other; for there is no
promise of any such thing; and we have no example or instance of any such
dispensation: And beside it is manifest enough, that the Natural part
predomineth here, and that which has no affinity with, but is opposite unto,
the kindly workings of the Spirit of life: Their doctrine, and after practices
sufficiently declare it.

8. But you may say, This cannot be, for he adds Page 228. The form of this
Worshipe is so naked and devoide of all external and worldly glory, that it
cutteth of all occasion, whereby man's wisdom should be excercised: and
superstition and Idolatry have no place. Answ. Its being naked, as to all
external and worldly glory, is not my quarrel against it, but that it shuts
out all the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ. And though all external
pomp be away; yet Carnal Wisdom has a fair occasion to work, when the
prime and only rise of all this devotion is Nature; and all the conduct thereof
is by Nature; save where it is spirited and principled by a superior malignant
ghost. We know, there is Inward Superstition and Idolatry, as well as Outward:
and here I can see nothing but the Superstitious and Idolatrous exercise of
the carnal heart, doteing and depending upon, adoreing and worshipping a natural
created thing within, which, at best, is not God, but the Light and Power of a
Natural Conscience, impregnated by the Spirit of error and delusion, the
Spirit that works in the children of disobedience. What else can this
^ntroversion be, whereof he speaks? Where are we commanded thus to turn
in-to a light within us, that we may find God, and worshipe and adore him? Is
not this, at best, to make that light, or whatever name he will give it, our
Idol or Image, in the worshipping of God? He tells us next, that they get hereby
such washing and nourishment, that they have no use for baptism, or the Lords
supper. Which is a plain and palpable demonstration, that their way of
worshipe has no correspondence with that, which was in use, in the primitive
times, and has been in use in the Church, ever since, and was instituted by
Christ; but is merely Paganish.

9. Yet to persuade us, that this is all the work of divine power: he tells us,
That if it happen at any time, that one enter among them, who is not vigilant,
nor entered within himself, with the rest, he is no sooner entered, then that
power, if it be a little raised in the meeting, lays hold upon him, and
begets in him the sense of this virtue, to the softning and warming of his
heart; just as fire will warm a man, and burn combustible matter, that is
near. Answ. Here is a further confirmation of the power of that deluding
Spirit, that acts in their meetings: But how is it known, that that person
was not entered within himself? Does this Introversion cause such an alteration
on the body, that all on lookers may see it? Why might not this Power, if it
were indeed a divine power, work this effect, howbeit it were not as yet
alittle raised in the meeting? What are the consequences of this softning and
warming of heart? Are they only a confirmation of them in their errors and
delusions? We see no ground then to think, that all this is of the Spirit of
God. And it is known, how easy it is for the Devil to play the Ape, and
transform himself, as to the manner of his operations, into an Angel of Light,
that he may deceive poor souls, that foolishly give up themselves to be led and
acted by him. All which is sufficiently confirmed by what he adds; yea, says
he, if it happen, that many of these that are assembled wander in their minds,
and be turned out from the measure of grace, and wander in their imaginations,
one, in whom the life is raised. shall feel labor for the rest, by
co-suffering with the seed, that is oppressed in them; and if he abide
attending upon the Light, and persisting in the divine work, the Lord often times
hears that secret labor, and the secret breathings of his own seed by such
an one, so that the rest may find themselve secretly pricked, albeit there be
no words spoken; and hereby that one is as a midwife unto the rest, to produce
life in them, by the secret labor of his own soul, Who sees not hereby the
strength and power of Satan, working in the souls and imaginations of Men,
given up to strong delusion? Who ever heard of such Operations among men, not
under the power of the Devil? The midwife here must have the childbirth
pains. Nay more he tells us, That if all the meeting be introverted into the
life (pardon these terms, for they are his own, as near as I can translate
them; an uncouth Religion must be set forth to us in uncouth and unintelligible
terms, which the Spirit of God never taught us) and the life be a little
raised, though not one word be spoken, but all be silent, yet a stranger, come
to gaze, it may be, or to mock, is so terrified, that he cannot resist, but the
power of darkness is depressed by this power and virtue; which, if his day of
visitation be not gone, will penetrate into the measure of grace within him,
and raise it up to the redeeming of his soul. That is, makes him convert after
their manner, viz. without the Spirit of God infuseing the seed and habit of
grace, and turning him from darkness to light by a new creation. But whence can
this wonderful change come? It is when, and not before, the whole meeting is
introverted, and all of them are now formally under the terrible Power and
Movings of the Devil, which causes such a change on their countenances, and
such shakeings in their bodies, as we shall hear, that on-lookers cannot but
be affrighted: and the Lord may, in his righteous judgment, for a further
judicial upgiving of them unto a reprobate mind; and for a punishment of such,
as out of a sinful curiosity, and without a call, did cast themselves within
the reach of a rageing Devil, suffer some such curious spectators to be carried
away with the same Spirit of delusion; whereof this man is a manifest instance,
as himself relates in the following words. But withal it is remarkable by what
he says, that if a person be not thus changed, at the first sight of them, in
this condition, his day is gone, and it is impossible he can be saved, should
he be present an hundred times thereafter.

10. If we enquire at him, whence their quakeing and shakeing of body comes,
which is the ground of their being called Quakers. He tells us P. 230.. S. That
when the mind is introverted, and looking for the apparition of the Life (this
is no other, then their waiting for the operation of the devil) and the power
of darkness is resisting in the soul (whereby you may judge of their
perfection) then the good seed (this is either blake nature, or worse) rises
up, and is felt working like medicine; and by these contrary workings, there is
a struggling felt in the soul, as really in the mystery, as Rebecca found the
striveing of the twines in her womb; and such a travail and labor in the soul
that the outward man is affected, and the body wonderfully agitated, many sighs
and groans sent forth, yea the very pains of a woman in travail is felt: And
this comes not only upon one, but sometimes upon many, yea upon all, Which may
further confirm any sober Christian, that there is at least much of the work
of the Devil here, these being the very passions of the old Phythonicks; and
the Devil dealing with them, much after the same manner, as he dealth with the
Old Pagan Prophets and Priests. Where read we of the Lords exerciseing thus his
people, in all the New Testament, who were meeting about his solemn worshipe.
All this struggling can be nothing, but the struggling of contrare humores in the
body, if it be not more immediately, by Satan, who uses to be a merciless
Master even to such, as formally serve him; such a hater is he of mankind, and
such delight takes he to afflict and torment even those, who pay him all
homage and devotion, as has been demonstrated, by many instances, in America,
and other parts of the world: And this cannot but be looked upon, as a
righteous judgment in God, giving them so up unto this cruel handling, who,
wearying of the easy yoke of his Ordinances, and Institutions, shake all off at
once, and so declare themselves to be no more Christians. We need not forget
the Story of Gilpin, in the Town of Kendal, attested by the Magistrates thereof.
Where read we, that the true Prophets of old, even in their Trances and
Ecstasies, wherein their outward senses were bound, had such wild, anticque and
unnatural motions of body, as these Quakers sometimes have, who will foame,
swell and froath at the mouth, like persons in an Epilepsie? Where read we of
any such bodily shakeings, quakeings, tremblings, and that from any such cause,
as is here given, in all the primitive Churches, or in any orthodox Church
since, meeting for the solemn worshipe of God? I do not say, that the deep
exercises of the mind will have no influence on the body; but such have no
resemblance or affinity with the Quakers unnatural and anticque motions, at
their set times and solemnities, which are here spoken of. But I wonder whence
this power of darkness comes unto them, to cause this inward battle, and
occasion this quaking? we heard before that he said, they were freed from the
body of death, and it was taken away, so that they were made free from the
Suggestions and Temptations of Satan, and from actual sinning. See his Eight
Thesis, and our Chap. XIV. of Perfection: or he must say, that the immaculate
birth, he spoke of, is not yet produced in them; and consequently, that they
are not yet Justified, nor Sanctified; and so not yet Church Members, according
to his former doctrine: But seeing he will not acknowledge this; But rather that
they are the purest and only Church of Christ, and are Justified and
Sanctified, yea and Perfected, whence, I say, can this power of darkness come,
to oppose the workings of life, and that when they are most devote, turning-in
unto themselves to wait upon God, and upon the light; and never but then, when
they are about this their solemn worshipe? (for we hear not much of their
quakings, at other times:) or is there always a battle, but they feel it not,
till they be about this Introversion? And comes this trembling always, upon
their retireing inward? or if not, whence is it, that it comes more at one
time, that another? Is it from the greatness of the opposition made by the
power of darkness, or from the greater sense thereof? or both? And whence does
the one or the other come, more at one time, than at another? These things I
would have cleared, if he thought fit. Again, is there no striveing betwixt
light and darkness, grace and corruption, flesh and the Spirit in any, beside
them? If not; then all others must eitheir be all flesh, or all Spirit; and if
this last, these must be more perfect, then they are: If yea, how comes it,
that that combat in others causes not such trembling and quaking, as in them?
Is it because corruption in them is more violent, then in others? then their
perfection is less; Or is it because they are more sensible, and their life is
more quick, and their minds more agitated, and their spirits more stirred? Yet
I am sure there might be trembling and quaking of limbs and joints, more or
less, proportionably to the opposition, or to the sense of it, in others: But
the truth is, whatever he feign, this trembling and quaking has another
cause, and may confirm all rational men, that their way is more of the Devil,
than of God, let themselves think what they please.

11. We have now heard of all the parts of their solemn Worshipe. (1.)
Silence, which is always necessary, and begins the action. (2.) speaking,
praying or singing, as is immediately suggested: but this is not necessary: for
it may be wanting, and yet the whole solemn Worshipe be performed to
edification; neither is their speaking, praying or singing such as is used in
the Churches, as we will hear afterward. (3.) Their Trembling and Quaking: and
though this, it may be, is not always necessary, yet it is peculiar unto them.
Let us hear how he explaineth, or confirms these: for, it may be, no other
confutation will be necessary. He says. 9. p. 23. That their worshipe does not
consist, in silence, as silence. Wherein then? but in an holy and humble
dependence of soul on God; from which necessarily flows silence, in the first
place. Ans. Dependence on God is good and necessary, and is a part of inward
worshipe; but we are here speaking of Outward and solemn worshipe; and this
silence must make a necessary part thereof; for he says afterward, we judge in
the first place, that there is a necessity of silence, for some time, both for
speaker and hearer: And he told us before, that this silence may be continued
all the time, and not one word spoken, and yet the worshipe be solemn and
edifying; and he says the same immediately thereafter. Must not this be a
fruitless and unedifying silence to others, at least present? But when he
calls it thus necessary, there must be some thing more in it, then we can at
the first see or he, will think fit to acquant us with, as yet. What more? life
(says he Page 232.) might flow in every one, and be increased, so as words may
also well be spoken, by the influence of life; and yet because it was imposed
upon none necessarily, they might all for the time, rather choose to possess
God in quietness, Ans. What this life is, and what the flowings and increasings
of it are, we have seen: But as to this Silence, we say, how comes it, that
such, in whom this life flows, do not speak? Is not this a call sufficient?
how then dar they sit and disobey this call? how dar they follow their own
choice? Or is it no call, and that because a necessity was not imposed? why
then says he, that words might well be spoken by the influence of life? Might
words be spoken without an inward impulse and call? no certainly, according to
his principles. Where are we then?

12. He goes about to prove this their silence. 10. And for this end, he tells
us, that to attend and wait upon God is a duty incumbent upon all, and is a
part of Worshipe. And who denies it? Yet he cites a number of Scriptures,
whereof none speak of such a waiting, as he has before pointed forth unto us,
accompanied with silence, in the public Worshipe of God: for Ps. 27:14.
speaks of a waiting opposite to fainting, through unbeleef, or doubting to
see the goodness and deliverance of God in the land of the living: Psalm. 37:7,
34. speaks of a waiting opposite to freting because of the prosperity of the
wicked, and a freting to do evil; and so is a waiting for Gods pleading the
oppressed man's cause; and is accompanied with a keeping of Gods way v. 34. not
his waiting, that lays aside Gods way and Ordinances. Prove. 20:22. speaks
of a waiting opposite to recompensing of evil. Esai. 30:18. is meant of a
waiting for God^s coming with redemption to Zion, Hos. 12:6. speaks of a
waiting accompanied with keeping mercy and judgment, which is more than doing
nothing. Zach. 3:8. speaks nothing of waiting. These are out of the Old T.
whereby I see, that O. T. Scriptures will prove N. T. worshipe. Now follow
passages out of the New Test. Mat 24:42. and 25:13. and 26:41. Mark. 13 33, 35,
37. Luke 21:36. 1 Cor. 16:13. 1 These. 5:6. 2 Timothy 4:5. 1 Pet. 4:7. which speak
of Watching, of and such a Watching, as is accompanied with Prayer and all
Christian Duties. Col. 4:2. speaks of a watching in Prayer; and not of a
wai^ing that puteth away Prayer. Act. 1:4. is a waiting at Jerusalem, till the
promise of the Father came. Act. 20:31. is a watching over the flock, that it
mi^ht be keept from wolves. The same line may be drawn over the rest, to wit
Ps. 25:3. and 37:9. and 69:6. Esai. 40 v. 31. and 42:23. Lam. 3:25. His
concordance has helped him here to no purpose. He must not think for all this,
that I speak against that noble duty of waiting on the Lord, in all our ways;
which is accompanied with a care to keep all his ways. I speak only against
his Waiting, which is not upon the Lord; but a waiting for an unhallowed motion
of an evil Spirit; like those of ol^, who were consulting the Oracles of the
Devil; and waiting for Enthusiasmes, and diabolick Inspirations: which needs
no other confirmation but this, that this waiting is pleaded for, to shut out
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; and to give God no more, for all the solemn
Worshipe and service, which he requires, but a dumb mumtie Nay, this is such a
waiting as, first requires that the man lay aside all Christianity, yea and
Rationality and Humanity, that he may become a perfect prey to the Spirit of
Delusion: for he adds, that this silence is not only outward, but inward,
from all imaginations and thoughts; So that the man must lay aside his very
sanctified intell^ct (if he have it) and rational faculty; and so first un-man
himself, that the Devil may make him a beast, or worse. What he says of the
two seeds in men, has been spoken to long ago, and what he says further of
natural men, and of their various kinds, or actings, is nothing to the
purpose; for we confess that a natural man, for all his parts and enduements,
cannot Worshipe God in the Spirit; And for any thing I can find, in all this
man's writing, concerning Regeneration, I must needs say, that if it be really
with the Quakers, according to this man's doctrine, they know no more of
Regeneration and true Sanctification, than a Turk or a Pagan does. Further what
will all his speaking Page 235. of a necessity of a natural man's retireing from
himself, as such, and going into his good seed (which is a non-ens, and nothing
but the ill and wicked se^d of Nature) avail here? Can a natural man do this
of himself? Can the blakamore change his color, or the Leopard his spotes? And
finally, what says all this for the dumb Worshipe, that he calls for, even
from the Regenerate? Though the rambling discourse, which he has Page 233. be
utterly impertinent; Yet I wish him to take notice of some expressions. He
says, that one kind of spiritual wickedness, is when a natural man, in
matters of Religion, affirms and proposes from his own conceptions and
divinations, erroneous notions and opinions. And whether he be not guilty of
this, let all sober understanding persons judge. And again he says. It cannot
be said, that there is so much, as a form of goodliness, where there are
erroneous opinions and notions. Let him look to it. And I must retorte his own
words Page 234. upon himself. This kind of Idolatry, whereby a man loves, and
Idolizeth the Conceptions. Inventions and Products of his own brain, is so
incident to him, and so seated in his lapsed nature, that, while his natural
Spirit is his leader and chief Governor, and while he is acted, moved and led
by it, in the Worshipe of God, and attends to no other, he can never act any
spiritual Worshipe, n^r produce any thing, but what is the fruit of his
corruption; For, reflecting upon his false Principles, and Carnal Natural
grounds of Religion, opposite to all true Religion and Christianity, I know
none, beside himself and his party, of whom this may be more truly verified.

13. He imagines Page 235. that God is speaking in every man, as one man is
quietly talking in the ear of another, or as a Master teaching his schooler,
or a Prince is speaking to a person; and that therefore the natural man should
not be so rude, and indocile, as not to be silent and hearken, and retire from
all the operations of his soul, that he may hear, and the good seed may rise
in him. Ans. That is, the natural man, that he may hear and learn of God, must
lay aside all his senses, inward and outward, all his operations as a man, good
and evil; and so fall into something like or rather deeper then a trance and
ecstasie, that he may receive the visions of God; And till this be done, he can
go about no act of commanded Worshipe. Is not this a noble phancie? We are
waiting for the proof of this: and how long shall we wait till we see it? Is
this the meaning of all these passages of Scripture, that spoke of waiting and
watching: Is not this like Socrates his Demon, that attended him, and to which
he must Introvert to hearken? What shall the renewed man do? Is not God as well
talking thus in and to him? and must he not also retire from his Humane or
Christian acts, and lay all aside, that he may hearken? Sure, it is not seemly
even for a courtier, to be talking to his Prince, while his Prince is speaking
to him: he should wait till his Prince had done. And so, because we may
suppose that the Lord is always speaking, the whole Worshipe shall be this
silent hearkening, And indeed Page 236. he taketh-in with the rest of the
actions, that must be laid by, Sense and Fear of sin; Thoughts of Death, Hell
and Judgment, thoughts of Glory, Prayers, and other Religious Exercises. Have
we not then a clear delineation of this Quakeristick ecstasie; and of this
silent Worshipe of theirs? And as if all this were not enough, he says again.
This great duty of waiting upon God, must be exercised in denying of
themselves, and in sole and mere dependence upon God, within and without, in
being abstracted from all operations, imaginations and ejaculations of their
soul, that being made void of themselves, and wholly crucified to their natural
productions, they may be fit to receive God. Is not this a clear thing? The man
then must become no man, nay not an animal; he must not be a living wight, such
an ecstasie must he give himself up unto. But I am yet to learn, if this be in
man's own power; or if the Prophets of old were so far master of themselves, as
to fall into a trance or ecstasie, (to speak nothing of such an ecstasie as
this is, which takes away all the use of the intellect, and inward motions of
soul,) when they pleased; And yet more, if this was called for at their hands
always, when they went to Worshipe God; or if this was their solemn worshipe,
or a chief part thereof. Will this Quaker do me the favor, to prove these
things, and clear his way from Devilrie by undoubted marks of distinction.

14. But now let us suppose the man is brought to this state, either by his
own wonderful dexterity of metamorphosin^ himself, or by some superior
Spirit, or other; what next? Then, says he Page 236. the little seed of
righteousness, which God planted in the heart, and which Christ procured for
man; that is, the measure of grace and life, gets place to arise, and
becomes an holy birth in man? And that divine aireis it with which man's Spirit
is fermented, and in which waiting he is accepted in the presence of God, and
is fitted (this word I must supply, or his words have no sense) to stand in his
presence, to hear his voice, and to observe the motions of his holy Spirit.
Answ. But (1.) We have evinced above, that there is no seed planted by God in
all men, or purchased by Christ, that is a measure of saving grace and life.
Nature, and its light and power, we grant to be in all; but this will never
become a new birth. (2.) Then this work being the same with Regeneration and
Sanctification, as we saw above, every man must fall into an ecstasie, and
become no man, as to any operation, before he be converted. (3.) Then (and this
is the maine thing here considerable:) Every Quaker, at every time he comes to
worshipe God solemnly, (it is of this he knows, that we are now speaking)
must have this change wrought in him; for it is to this end, that he must
retire within him self, and be abstracted from all his Operations, that he may
be in case to worshipe: But then observe what will follow; Quakers, before they
come to worshipe, are unregenerated, without the holy birth; and as often as they
come to worshipe, they must be regenerated, and get this divine air to ferment
their spirits: But how agrees this with the state of Perfection, he talked of,
one degree whereof was; they were able not to sin; and the other, wherein they
could not sin? I suppose man, even a Quaker, is in case to sin, and cannot but
sin, till he be regenerated. Where is this man now? I see, though persons
dreaming see not the inconsistency and repugnancy of their dreams, persons
awake will see, and smile at fancies, hanging together like ropes of sand.

15. He denies Page 237.. 11. That we can wait upon God, in prayer and
preaching; For, says he, waiting rather denotes a passive dependence, than
any action. Answ. I confess his waiting is a very passive thing, and
inconsistent with any action of Soul or Body; but we are waiting for proof of
such a waiting, as he talks of. We know, Prayer and Preaching is one thing, and
waiting on God by Faith, Patience and Hope, in these duties, is another thing;
And if he think these inconsistent, he knows neither Religion, nor Scripture.
To pray and preach (says he) by the Spirit, presupposes this silent waiting,
that the motions, leading unto these, might be felt. Answ. This is the thing,
that is under debate: How can the godly pray for the motions and leadings of
the Spirit, if they must first feel them and have them, before they pray for
them? Or must they not pray that prayer at all? But the mo^ions of the Spirit
they pray for, are not these they have, but others, fitting them for other
duties, he will say. I answ. The saints even pray for the Spirit to teach them
to pray. But he will say; They must have the motion of the Spirit for the first
prayer, or it will not be accepted. Answ. They may have it, and yet not feel
it; and so these motions are not their Rule, The Law of God is the Rule, and
what is, not done in obedience to a Command, is no Obedience; for obedience
respects a command; And thus the Quakers destroy all Obedience. If they
cannot Pray, nor Preach without a previous impulse of the Spirit; how can they
wait without such a previous motion? Waiting, sure, is a commanded duty, as
well as Prayer, and cannot be performed without the Spirit, aright and
acceptably, more then Prayer. And if they cannot wait without the previous
motion of the Spirit, how shall they wait for that previous motion to wait? I
see not how this man can loose this knot.

16. But he proves, that this silence is a special and principal part of
divine worshipe, and that necessarly (though he told us before Page 23^. that
worship did not consist in silence, as silence) because in many places, where
prayer is commanded as, Mat, 26:41. Mark. 13:33. Luke 21:26. 1 Pet. 4:7.
watching is prescribed, as previous and preparatory. Answ. But how proves he,
that that Watching is the silence and waiting, he speaks of? That Watching is
not a turning inward but a looking outward also, and a looking to all hands,
from whence temptations can come: It is a Watching joined with Prayer, and a
Christian Vigilance and Circumspection, taking in the lively exercise of all
graces, and is accompanied with all Christian duties, as was cleared above, so
far is it from having any affinity with his mute Mumry.

17. The more to enforce this Silence, he tells us Page 238. 12. that it has
this excellency, that nothing else has, to wit, It is impossible for the devil
to simulate it; and therefore no soul in this exercise can be deceived by him.
This is wonderful if true: but how proves he it; I would be afraid, that when
a Man has laid aside not only his Senses outward and inward, but his very
Rational Judgment, Intellect and all that he has as a man, or as a Christian,
the Devil should then most play master; and I am not sure, but it is so with
them. Let us therefore hear his reason. The devil can only work in and by a
natural man. I had thought that he could also work in a Spiritual man, as in
Peter, when the Lord said to him, get thee behind me Satan; or else he must
say, that Peter was then but a carnal man: And what was the messenger of Satan,
that buffeted Paul 2 Cor. 12. what more? Therefore, says he, where the natural
man is silent, he (that is the Devil) must stand. But why must he stand off,
when the natural man is silent? and how proves he, that there is nothing of a
natural man acting in this silence? When the soul (says he) is come to this
silence, and, as to its own operations, brought, as it were, to nothing, then
the devil is excluded. How is this confirmed? for he cannot endure the pure
presence of God then ariseing and the clearness of his light, says he. But we
doubt; if the pure presence of God then arise, or such a light, as shall quite
banish the Devil away. This is the maine thing to be confirmed; nay the sequel
proves to us, that all this presence and light is but of the Devils own
making: and how that shall banish him away, I know not? But moreover, though it
were granted, that this were the pure presence of God, and a light, that the
Devil could not stand before, but behoved to flee from seven ways; yet he
might stay until that light appeared; and according to this man's own doctrine,
this cannot be; until the seed get room to arise, and become an holy birth, and
this is not always at the beginning of this silence: but this silence may
continue a while, before this birth be, and so though the new bith will
affright the devil away; yet he may stay while it is out a forming, and so may
work his work, and play his game, in the time of that silence. Himself
grants Page 232 that this may be, while there is but a silence as to words;
but when they once introverte, and receed from all things, then they are in a
castle, and feel themselves to be without his reach. But this is the maine
thing to be proved: and I am ready to think, that then they are most in his
power; for when the strong man keeps the house, all is in peace. Let them see
to it then, that this their greatest security, be not their greatest bondage.

18 The next excellency of this silence, is, That it cannot be hindered, nor
interrupted by the Devils malice, which he labors to clear. 13. p, 239. for
says he, when we are scattered and separated, one from another, every one, as
he introverteth to the measure of life within himself, keeps a secret union
and communion with the rest; which neither the devil nor any of his instruments
can hinder. Ans. So can all true Christians have union with one another, in the
Spirit, without this wild introversion; and so this is no peculiar excellency
of theirs: But yet sure, their public worshipe is in so fair impeded and
hindered, Again he says, Their worshipe cannot be interrupted, when
assembled, even by outward molestations, which interrupt another worshipe. And
what wonder, seeing it is no worshipe, but a silente mutenesse; and a man may be
mute in the midst of the greatest confusion. But all the public worshipe, that
we read of in the N. T. was such, as could have been interrupted by wicked men.
Such as are possessed with a dumb and deaf Devil, can hardly be made to speak,
or be interrupted in their silence: is this therefore the excellency of their
Condition? He adds Page 242. That as Christ's kingdom is not of this world,
neither is his worshipe; and so it needs not the wisdom, glory, riches and
splendour of this world. This is true; yet his solemn worshipe cannot be
performed without visible and audible actions, which can also be impeded and
interrupted by Satan's and men's malice. It needs not a carnal arm to defend,
protect and establish it: Yet the Lord has promised that Kings should be the
Churches nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers: And when Readiness
persecution was at an end, it is said Act. 9:21. Then had the Churches rest-and
were edified, and were multiplied. And Paul exhorts, that supplications,
prayers and intercessions be made for kings, and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peacable life, in all godliness and honesty 1 Timothy
2:1, 2. Quakers, need not do this, for they can enjoy all their public
worshipe, who will, who will not; for no man can hinder their silence: and yet
he compleaneth elsewhere of wrong done them, by such hindrances. The worshipe
of Christ's followers, says he, is Spiritual, defended by the Spirit; but
carnal worshipe has need of a carnal arm to defend it. Spritual worshipe does
not stand in need of a carnal arm to promove it, but only to hold off injuries
of wicked men, interruptin^ its free and public exercise: and as to this, all
the public worshipe, that ever God appointed, whether in the Old or New Test.
had this necessity: But the Quakers worshipe seems to be that, wherewith the
Devil is well pleased; and so cannot interrupt, because he will not; for a
kingdom, divided against it self, cannot stand.

19. He thinks. 15. to prove this silent worshipe from Ioh. 4:23, 24. Let us
see how, Worshipe now, says he, is not to be in outward observations, gone
about by man, in his own will and proper strength, at certain times. Answ. And
what then? Does Gospel worshipe put away all external actions? then their
Speaking, Praying and Praising is no worshipe; and so all their worshipe is
perfect silence: When Christ preached and prayed, he performed no Gospel
worshipe, if this be true: Nor the Apostles, in any of their outward actions;
and yet Paul says Act. 24:^3. that after the way, which his enemies called
heresiel, so worshipped he the God of his Fathers. And we find that by external
actions worship was performed to Christ Mat. 2:11. and 8:2. and 9:1^. and
15:25. and 14:33. and 28:9, 17. Mark. 5:6. Luke 24:52. Ioh. 9:38. We find in
the book of the Revelation, the worshipping of God, opposed to worshipping of the
Beast; and the Beast was worshipped by visible works and actions. But says he,
God has now instituted a spiritual worshipe, opposite to the ceremonial
worshipe under the law. Very true, but has God discharged now all outward
actions in worshipe? or cannot God be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, w^ere
there are any outward actions performed? Beside, that this argueing supposes,
that God got no spiritual service under the Law, which is manifestly false; we
desire him to prove, that spiritual worshipe is inconsistent with any outward
action; and consists only in silence; and that Christ means no other Ioh.
4. for all this we deny; and this he undertook to prove: but instead thereof he
confuteth himself; For he tells us, in the end of Page 343. that God now takes
the heart of every Christian to be his temple, and there instructs, how he
will be worshipped in some (N. B.) external actions. Now external actions are no
silent worshipe. We leave this self confutation, and proceed.

20. He tells us Page 244. 16. That this way of worshipe of theirs was of old
practiced by some, who therefore were called Mysticks; and he cites some
sayings of papists: And though I find nothing in the words by him cited,
giving countenance to his opinion; yet I am apt to think, that his way owes
its original more to the Monks Cells, than to the Apostles and primitive
Churches; and am ready to fear, that as it came from thence, so it may lead
back thither again. And though these mystic Monks and Friars had some ground
to speak against the necessity of the Popish Observances, which were but
inventions of Men; I can see no ground, why he and his fraternity should
enveigh so much against the appointed Ordinances of Christ: And though they
call themselves Witnesses for the Truth, and for God; yet it is manifest, that
they are real witnesses for Error and for Satan.

21. In the last place. 17. Page 246. etc. he comes to answer some Objections
The first is, That its a very unprofitable thing to do nothing, and that it is
better to be occupied in meditation and good exercises. And this is very true.
What answers he? That is not unprofitable, which is absolutely necessary,
before any duty be done acceptably. This is very true too; but he has not yet
proved his Silence to be such a necessary Antecedent. They must (says he) have
but carnal apprehensions of God, who think, men can please him by their proper
operations; when we have shown, that the first progress unto pleasing of God
consists, in ceasing from our own imaginations, that we may suffer God's
Spirit to work in us. Ans. we have seen all that he has shown; and have seen
for all that, no proof or demonstration of what he undertook to prove: That
Introversion is an Action, Operation or Imagination of a man, though it be
attended with a Real or Imaginary, Humane or Satanical Abstraction from all
Operation or Imagination. The man, who thus introverts, is not passive, but
active; else he should not be said, to introvert, but to be introverted: so
that I wonder that this man did not so word his notions, that they might not
destroy themselves. We must first cease to do evil, says he, before we do
good: Yet ceasing to do evil is not without all action of the mind and will,
otherwise one might be said to cease from evil, in order to a doing of good,
when he sleeps, or when he is bound hand and foot, and his mouth stopped,
though the Devil be rageing in his Soul, Intellect Will, and Affections.

22. The 2 Objection is. If this be all their worshipe, why have they set times
and places of meeting; seeing they might do all that at home, in their several
houses? He answers. It pleases the Lord, to make use of the outward senses
of his people, while here, in communicating of spiritual life; and suitable
means, as speaking, praying and praising. But all this is inconsistent with
pure silence, which is often all their worshipe: and with them, Speaking,
Praying and Praising a^e not so necessary. He adds, God has appointed
Assemblies to preserve an outward visible testimony for his name. But there is
no visible testimony given to his name, when the duties, which he has
appointed for that end, are not performed, nor the Ordinances observed. He
makes his life (says he) to abound more unto his own, when they meet
together to wait upon Him. Answ. Well; but that is not by their simple seeing
one another faces, which may be in the market place, and on the streets; but
by faithful and conscientious observation of his ordinances, and not by mute
mumrie. What he says of Assemblies from Mat. 18:20. and Heb. 10:24. is true;
but makes nothing for their mute service, of which all the doubt remains.

23. The last Objection is, That this mute way of worshipping is not found in
the Scriptures. And sure, if it be not prescribed, it must be will worshipe. He
answers. That they make not silence the only substance of their worshipe. Yet
he confessed, that sometimes it is the whole of their worshipe: And though it
be not the only substance of their worshipe; Yet if it be a substantial part,
it must be instituted, and warranted by a word of Institution, Mat. 15.9. Make.
7:6. Esa. 29:13. In the primitive times, says he, they prayed and preached by
the Spirit. And if so, what absurdity is it, if we suppose, that the Spirit did
not sometimes move them to these outward acts, and that then they were silent.
Ans. I read of their worshipping in the Spirit Phil. 3:3. but of their praying
and preaching by the Spirit. I read not: and though I will not much quarrel
about the phrase, yet I think Scripture phrases are best: and I shall add,
that neither name nor thing is found in the Scripture, in the Quakers sense. If
they did all in worshipe, by such previous immediate Impulses, as he dreameth of
(which I doubt if ever he shall prove) it must necessarily indeed follow, that
they were silent, when they had not such motions; or went on without them: But
in this case, their silence was but a pure non-action; it was not a positive
part of worshipe; nor such a positive active silence or Introversion, as he
phancieth. That men must be silent, when they speak not, nor imagine not, is
very probable; but that the Silence of the primitive Church, was such a
Silence, that not only was without words, but also without thoughts and all
imaginations, will be hardly proved by him; And when that is proved, which I
look upon as very improbable, he has not proved his Conclusion; till he
withal prove, that this silence was gone about, as a principal part of
worshipe. How long time will he take to prove this? How much less shall he ever
prove, that the positive part of his silence, I mean the Introversion, was
observed as a necessary part of worshipe? He adds, Act. 2:1. It is said, they
were all in one place, and then it is added, suddenly the Spirit came; but we
read not, that any were speaking at that time: And what absurdity, if we say,
they were silent? Ans. It is not said, suddenly the Spirit came, but suddenly
there came a noise; it is true, the Spirit came, in his glorious Effects: Read
we, that they were all silent? Read we that they were all Introverted? Where is
then his Institution, or Example for his Introversion? Though they had been
silent, that will not say, that they did Introvert; nor will it say, that their
silence was a principal part of their worshipe. The man I see must bring forth
such proofs, as he has.

24. He starteth Page 248. that Objection, That there is no instance of such a
silent assembly, in all the Scriptures. To which he Answers. That though this
be not written, yet such an assembly might be lawful. But we are seeking a word
of Institution, or an approven Instance of their silent worshipe: And he can
give neither. But he thinks that a proof by consequence from other duties
pressed in Scripture will suffice; And it is well, that he will admit of
Consequences, in this case. What is this Consequential proof? The Scripture,
says he, commands us to assemble together. This is granted. What then? And
forbids us, while assembled, to pray or preach, but as the Spirit moves. Where
is this said? why does he not show this, that we may consider it? we must take
it on a Quakers word. What is his Conclusion? If being assembled we are not
moved by the Spirit, it necessarily follows that we must be silent. Tru^ly
this is probable; but it is nothing to the point, seeing every silence is not an
Introversion: but where is the Conclusion, That this Introverting silence is a
principal part of worshipe? He must leave this, until the next occasion. Yet I
must take notice, that consequentially (if he reason by consequences, he must
give us leave to do the same) he here destroys all that he said above, upon
the head of the Scriptures; for there he denied, that they were our Rule; and
yet here, he places them for the only Rule of worshipe, and would feign seek
footing for his way of worshipe in them, were it but by a Consequence; while
as, according to his principles, formerly laid down, he had no more to say,
both to this and the former Objection, then that they were not bound to seek
after either Precept or example of their worshipe, in the Scriptures; and this
had been a short cut. But instead of this, he is runs through the Scriptures
to seek for an instance, and he pitcheth upon some in the Old Test. forgeting
what he said in the beginning of this debate about worshipe; to wit, That he
was only speaking here of divine worshipe now under the Gospel: And he knows,
that Instances of worshipe under the Old Testament will not be pertinent to
prove this, though he should produce multitudes. Could he get no one instance,
in all the N. Test.? what if I help him to one? See Act. 21:40. -- Paul stood
on the stairs, and beckened with the hand unto the people: And when there was
made a great silence, he speak unto them. Here is a Silence, and a Great
Silence, and a Great Silence in an Assembly: But I confess this Instance will
not help him; for neither was it worshipe; nor was there an Introversion here,
nor had it on their part, any good issue; as we see Chap. 22:22, 23. And yet I
think their silence is hardly so justifiable, as this was. But let us look upon
his Instances out of the Old Test. His first is of Job's friends si^ting seven
days in silence. But was this a meeting for worshipe? was Job's friends all
these days Introverted? How came it, that when the seed at length got room,
and the^ were prompted to speak, they spoke no more consonantly to truth? It
would seem, that all the light of God, that shined to them, while thus seven
days long introverted, did not dispel all their darkness, nor banish the Devil
away wholly. But the text it self gives the reason of their silence, to wit,
for they saw, that his grief was very great. He cites next Ezra. 9:4 But most
impertinently, for this was a silence, not for worshipe, but arising from
astonishment, grief, sorrow and heaviness, caused by the sin of the people:
Here was no Introversion, to seek after the light within; nor Abstraction from
all thoughts and conceptions, for his heart was filled with sorrow, and
thoughts of the grievousness of the sin. Ezechiel 14:1. speaks nothing of
silence, nor Chap. 20:1. But of the peoples coming and sitting before him: and
if he say, that dureing this time, they were Introverted, he must say ^lso (and
not speak far amiss, I grant) that persons may Introvert, and yet set up their
idols in their heart, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before
their faces, as Ezech. 14: verse. 2. and be such as God will not be enquired of
Chap. 20: verse. 3. If these be his instances, much good may they do him, and I
wish he may see in them, his own picture, and learn from henceforth, to
abhore himself, and his diabolical way.

25. Some time after I came this length, I called to mind something I had read
of the fanaticisme of the Church of Rome, in D. Stelling fleet, which will
help to inform us, concerning the nature and rise of this doctrine and manner
of expression, used by our Quakers. D. S^^llingf. tells us Page 327. of his book
of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, that the Papists have their
abstractedness of life, mental prayer (i. e. our Quakers worshipe) Passive
unions, a Deiform fund of the soul, a state of Introversion (whence we see from
whom our Quakers have borrowed this expression) divine Inspirations. He tells us
moreover, that, as they speak, the Perfection of this state, lying in an intime
union with God, whereby the soul is Deified, is to be attained only in the way
of unknowing and of self annihilation: This is the very sum of the Quakers
doctrine. And Page 328. etc. Out of Mr Cressy, a popish fanatic, his Mother
Iuliana's Revelations; and preface, to Sancta Sophia, and the book it self, he
cites several passages, which we may take some notice of, such as these. The
only proper disposition toward the receiving supernatural Irradiations from
God's holy Spirit, is an abstraction of life, a sequestration from all business
that concern others (though ^t be their salvation) and an attendance to God
alone in the depth of the Spirit -- the lights here desired and prayed for, are
such as do expel all images of creatures, and do calm all manner of passions,
to the end, that the soul being in a vaculty, may be more capable of receiving
and intertaining God in the pure fund of the Spirit. But what is this fund? He
tells us out of Lud. Blosius Inst. Spirit. that the Deiform fund of the soul is
the simple essence of the soul stamped with a divine impress* or, that from
whence arises a superessential life. Out of Sancta Sophia we are caught that
the way to perfection, is a Contemplative state, rather then an Active, and
that because it is more perfect, more easy, more simple and more secure from
all errors and illusions, which may be occasioned by an indiscreet use of
prayer. What is the active State. It is the use of reasoning and internal
discourse to fix our affections on God, and expressing it self in sensible
dev^tion and outward acts of obedience to God's will. What is the
Contemplative? Seeking God in the obscurity of faith, with a more pr^found
introversion of Spirit, and with less activity and motion in sensitive nature,
and without the use of grosser images. And further it is said, that such souls
are not of themselves much inclined to external works; but they seek rather to
purify themselves and inflame their hearts to the love of God by internal,
quiet and pure actuations in Spirit, by a total abstraction from creatures, by
solitude both external and especially internal, so disposing themselves to
receive the influxes and inspirations of God, whose guidance chiefly they
endeavor to follow, in all things. Is not this the very frame and mould of our
Quakers? But wherein lies the security of this state above the other? In this,
that a contemplative soul tending to God, and working almost only with the
heart and blind affections of the will, pouring themselves upon God,
apprehended only in the obscure no^ion of faith -- transcending all operations
of the imagination, and all subtilty and curiosity of reasoning, and lastly
seeking an union with God only by the most pure and most intime affections of
the Spirit: what possibility of illusion or error can there be to such a soul?
We see whence our Quakers had that, which is touched above. 20.

26. Yet more p. 332. and 333. He shows us, how they describe the soul's
passive union with God, to be In which God after a wonderful and inconceivable
manner, affords them interior illuminations and touches, yet far more
efficacious and divine; in all which the soul is a mere patient, and only
suffers God to work his divine pleasure in her, being neither able to further,
nor hinder it. The which unions though they last but even as it were a moment
of time, yet do more illuminate and Purify the soul, then many years spent in
active exercises of spiritual prayer or mortification could do. The progress to
this state of perfection they thus describe. He who would come to it must
practice the drawing of his external senses inwardly, there loseing and as it
were annihilating them; then he must draw his internal senses into the
superior powers of the soul, and there annihilate them likewise: and those
powers of the intellectual soul he must draw into that which is called their
unity: and lastly, that unity, which alone is capable of perfect union with
God, must be applied and firmly fixed on God; wherein the perfect divine
contemplation lies. In which union all is vacuity or emptiness, as if nothing
were existent but God and the soul, yea so far is the soul from reflecting on
her own existence, that it seems to her God, and she is not distinct, but one
only thing. Is not this the very life of the Quakers public and principal
worshipe?

27. Further we are told (see Page 336.) that they lay down as a fundamental
rule. That God only by his holy inspirations is the guide and director in an
internal contemplative life, and that all the light they have therein is from
immediate divine illumination -- and that this light does extend further, and to
more and other more particular objects, then the divine light or grace, by
which good Christians living common lives in the world are led, extends to.
Very Suitable is this to our Quakers doctrine above And we are informed further,
that Mr Cressy in his discourse of Passive unions, says That God reveals
himself to the soul by a supernatural species impressed in her, which
revelations are either sensible, as apparitions, words etc. or intellectual,
either immediately, or by Angels. The effects of which supernatural species, in
actions of God, are Rapts, or Ecstasies, internal visions etc. Our Quaker might
have given us some such thing as a more likely ground of their quaking and
trembling. More might be adduced out of that forecited Book, but this taste is
sufficient to let us see, that our Quakers way and worshipe has been long ago
in use among, and much applauded by the Fanatic Papists.

28. Afterward, I providentially saw the Sermons of one Taulerus a Dominican
(who preached at Colone about the Year 1346.) translated into Dutch by Ioannes
de Lixbona and printed at Antwerp. A. 1647. an Author much commended by Bzovius
in Annal. Trithemius, Bellar. de Script. Eccl. and Blosius, wherein I found,
without any narrow search, several expressions, showing whence our Quakers have
their rare things, of which I shall adduce some instances; not to mention the
manner of his conversion, set down in the relation of his life, how, while he
was sick, sad and dejected, a voice came and said to him, Be at peace and rely
upon God, and know that when he was in the world in Man's Nature, he cured all
their souls whose bodies he cured (which may be doubted as to the nine Lepers,
who did not return to give glory to God Luke 17:17, 18.) at which he was
transported out of himself, and had no use of his senses or of reason for a
time: Whereupon his friend, an old man, told him, that now he had felt the
grace of God in truth; and was taught by the holy Ghost, had the Scripture in
him, and could now understand it all, and reconcile all seeming contradictory
places; and that one of his Sermons should now do more good, than an hundred
formerly. Waving this, which yet looks very like our Quakers way, I shall
mention some few expressions (of many) in these his after Sermons. In his first
Sermon on the first Sunday of the Advent, he says, that people must Introvert
into themselves, and abide by themselves, in their inward fund (or ground) and
observe there the appointments of God, his drowings and callings, and take
these immediately from God. Whence we may see, where our Quakers have learned
their peculiar language: But moreover in his second Sermon on that day, he
speaks of an Essential Introversion into the fund of the soul, where God
dwells, and the true light shines without any error. And afterward tells us
of three men in every man, The outward man, that must be exercised with
fasting, watching, Prayer etc. The Inward man, or the Soul, which must be
exercised with inward devotion, earnest desires etc. And then The fund of the
soul, or the most inward Spirit, exercised in essential, or substantial
Introversions, and true unitings with God, beyond all works, thoughts, and
enjoyings or embraceings.

29. In his sermon on the first Sunday after Candlemess he told his hearers,
that in order to the new birth, they must Introvert and abide in their noblest
part, to wit, into the fund; for there is the place of this birth: and next,
That they must not have so much as one thought of God, as only Wise, Almighty
etc but must be empty of all Thoughts, Words and W^rks, and of all Forms and
Images of the understanding, and only suffer God to work in them; and become
thus holily empty. A little after, he says, That this fund of the soul is the
secretest part of the soul, in which the soul works nothing, knows nothing,
understands nothing; here the soul does nothing by her powers of memory,
understanding and will, but immediately by her own essence: and all the powers,
whereby the soul works, flow out of the fund of the essence, in which fund is
the inward silence: and in this alone is rest and waiting for this birth, and
there does God the father speak out his Eternal word: and in this fund of the
soul comes God wholly, as he is, and not divided: and no creature can come
there, but must abide without in the powers. Nay he told his hearers afterward.
That in the fund of the soul God begets his Son, the same way that He begote
him from eternity, that is, by knowing and seeing himself perfectly by himself,
and in his own essence. And this I^troversion from all thoughts and
imaginations, he afterward says, is like Paul's being out of the body 2 Cor.
12.

30. In his first Sermon on new Years Day, he says, That the Person that does
essentially give himself always unto God, as a prisoner, has God also given
up to him essentially as a prisoner; and that this person is turned into the
essence of God, in some sort; and that God is always sensibly present with
him, in all things, And in the same Sermon he says, Man must in all his work
Introvert, and wait on God there, and let him work, and look on himself but as
an Instrument, and do all by suffering and permitting, and not by working, and
so continue one that works inward and dwells inward, and so draw himself
in, and sinck into the fund of the soul (where God is present and dwells) --
he must give himself to God, beyond and above words, thoughts and
understanding, and in a suffering-permitting-way go off himself, and sinck,
after an inward and unknown manner, into the darkness o^ pure naked faith: So
in his second Sermon on that day, he has these words, When a man has given
himself wholly over as denuded of himself, of all propriety in things, and of
all things here, all that is borne in him, is not his but Gods -- and again,
when once a man, in an upright and well ordered inwardness, is drawn by God to
higher things, he shall put away all outward works and exercises, were it even
such, as he had bound himself unto by oaths and promises.

31. In his Sermon on the first Sunday after the three Kings Day, he tells us,
that in order to this new birth, our understanding must rest from all work, and
be void of all knowledge, and ^bide in darkness and ignorance, and not seek to
return to its former knowledge: and that this state of darkness, is called a
possible reception; for there remains (says he) no more in the soul, but a
possibility, or capacity to receive that, which will perfect it, and the man
must labor more and more after this possibility, till his mind be satisfied,
and become all things, that it can receive: And the more empty and unknowing
that the soul is, it is the nearer unto God. So in his Sermon on the first
Sunday after the Three Kings Day he says, I dar boldly say, that he that
introverts not, once at least every day, and turns not in according to his
power into his fund, does not live as a Christian: But such as are busy with
their fund, and empty themselves of all things, and lay aside all imagination^,
that the Sun of righteousness may send out his beams of Light, in their inward
fund, find the yoke of Christ easy. So again says he, Truly if any man
could find within himself, know and see, how the eternal God has founded
himself, in the inward fund of the soul; and how he is there hid, and, as it
were, soaked, he should be happy.

32. In his Sermon on Trinity Day, he tells us, That God begets in the fund
of the soul his only begotten Son, an hundred thousand times more quickly,
than in a moment, in a now of eternity, always new. And thereafter, That he
who would find this, must introvert beyond all the workings of his outward
powers and fantasies, and must sinck there into the fund; and then comes the
power of God the Father, and in him calls upon him, through his only begotten
Son -- and as the Son is begotten of the Father, and flows again into the
Father; so is this man begotten of the Father, and flows again with the same
Son in the Father, and becomes one with him. And afterward, In this fund a man
shall pray for his friends, both dead and alive; and such prayer is more
powerful then to sing, or say many Psalms by mouth: and then find we the
witness of the three, that bear witness in heaven, that is, in the inward
heaven, in the fund of the soul. Moreover in his first Sermon on the third
Sunday after Trinity, he has these words The penny must have its weight, and
its image; the weight, that the man may fall and sinck again in Gods fund, as
he is come out of it -- his image is -- that image, which is God himself, in
his own pure divine essence, in which God knows, loves and enjoys himself;
in which he lives, is and works, by which the soul is wholly God-dyed (or
like God) and becomes divine: and in this union with and sincking into G^d, he
becomes, through grace, all things, that God is by nature also. -- So that if
he could see himself, he would think himself to be God, and every one that
cou^^ see him in that clothing, dye, form and divine essence, would become
happy in that sight -- The man casts away again unto God, who gave all; all
things, and becomes so naked and empty, as one that is nothing and has
nothing: And thus the created Nothing sincketh into the uncreated nothing. And
thus one abyss calls unto another, the created abyss calls unto the
uncreated abyss; and these two abysses become as one, a pure divine essence,
where the Man's Spirit has lost its self, in the Spirit of God, being drowned
in that bottomless sea, (the like he has in his sermon on the eleventh Sunday
after the Trinity.) In his second sermon on that day, he tells us, that the
little shipe (mentioned Luke 5.) signifies the inward conscience, or mind,
the fund of the man, where our Lord truly dwells, and where his rest and joy
is, in case the man will always carefully observe this inward fund, and in the
love of God, for saking all things, will introvert into this fund etc. Again,
if one, while singing or reading, be moved to introvert into the inward fund,
and find that that exercise should hinder his introversion, he must leave
that, and all other good works, and introvert, and in this introversion give
himself wholly up unto God, and follow the divine pull, with all his heart. So
he expounds Christ's sitting in the shipe, and teaching, to be Christ's
sitting in the inward fund of the obedient man, and there teaching him his most
acceptable will; and (says he) such a person is able sufficiently to teach the
whole world.

33. In his sermon on the third Sunday after Trinity, he says, this weakness
(speaking of Paul's words 2 ^or. 12:9.) comes not from outward exercises, but
from an overflowing of the outpourings of the Godhead, that is so poured forth
on the man, that the poor earthly body cannot endure it: For God has now so
brought him in, that he is wholly like God, and all that is in him, is, in a
hyperphysical manner, transformed, so that God now works all works in the
man, so that justly he may be called one like God, for whosoever should see him
aright, would see him, as God (that is by grace) for God lives, does and
works all in him, yea enjoye^h himself in him. So on the fourth Sunday after
Trinity, speaking of prayer, he says, the man that would pray must recollect
himself and introvert into his inward fund, with his mind lifted up, and his
power streatched forth, and with an inward regarding of God's presence, and a
real desire, above all things, to do God's will, going out from himself and all
created things, and sincking himself there deeper and deeper, in the clarified
will of God -- and this is to pray in the Spirit. And again, he tells us, the
third degree of an inward life is a going over into a God-likness, by union of
the created Spirit with the essential Spirit of God: And this, (says he) may
be called an essential inturning. Thereafter speaking of this same matter, he
says. Then does God draw the man out of the humane form into the divine
form, and then is he so Godded, and so divine, that all he is, and does, God
is that, and does it; and he is so exalted above his humane form, that he
becomes that, through grace, which God is by essence: then he sees, that he
has lost himself; and he knows and finds himself no where, he knows
nothing else, but only one simple essence. And in the next sermon he tells us,
That God would rather live in a soul, then in heaven; and is more in a gracious
soul then in heaven, and that more properly: for God works all the man's works
not only in him, but for him, and then gives them to him, and he ^urther
begets his only begotten son in the soul, as truly, neither more, nor less,
then as he begets him in eternity. And he tells us, That this, which is
begotten in the soul, is not any thing that is of God, or divine, but is God
himself, the same Son, which the Father begets from eternity; nothing else
but that same lovely divine word, which is the Second Person in the Trinity:
And thereafter tells us, that all rational creatures, by nature love God, more
then themselves. And in his second sermon on the eleventh Sunday, he sais, this
inclination to God does not leave the soul even in hell: So also in his sermon
on the 17. Sunday.

34. In his sermon on the fifth Sunday after the Trinity, he tells us. That when
a soul receives the body of Christ in love (to wit, in the mass) it is
transformed or changed into the body and soul of Christ, yea into whole Christ,
and moreover also in his Godhead. -- This is the nature of divine love, that it
carries the soul above its nature, and transformeth it into the bottomless
Godhead; so that it knows nothing o^ it self, nor finds nothing in the
Spirit, but only it finds it self wholly transformed into Christ. And
thereafter he says, that when one receives in the S^crament the life and love
of Christ, they are changed into God, as the meat and drink is changed into
them. In his sermon on the seventh Sunday after Trinity, he has these words.
Therefore is it always necessary, that men turn the eye of their understanding
always unto that ground, where the man is by God eaten, digested,
incorporated, and united with God. In his second sermon on the eleventh Sunday
he says, the best and inward part and excellency of the soul is called by
some, the sponk of the soul; by others, the center of the essence; by others,
the image of the Trinity, and this flies so high that the understanding cannot
follow it, for it rests not until it come into the fund of the Godhead, out
of which it came, and where it was before it was created. The like he has in
his sermon on the sevententh Sunday.

35. In his sermon on the thirtenth Sunday, he has these words, when men by
all their exercises draw-in their outward sensible man to the inward reasonable
man, and those two together, go in into the inmost man, or most hidden man of
the Spirit (where the true image of God lies,) and then presse-in into the
divine abyss, in which man was from eternity, ^ere he was created; and when
the merciful God sees the man turned-in to him, in such purity and nakedness,
the divine fatherly abyss boweth down, and sincketh into this pure introverted
fund of the man, and changes, by a certain transformation, this created fund
into his divine essence, and makes the man's Spirit so one with himself, that
were it possible, that he could see himself in this state, he should see
himself so exceedingly excellent in God, that he should think that he were God
himself. So in his sermon on the seventeenth Sunday, speaking of the soul, he
says it is called men's, the mind, that is the fund, where the true image of
the Trinity lies hid, and this is so excellent, that we can als little give it
a proper name, as we can give God himself: And could any see how God dwells
in this fund, he should be happy: The nighness and affinity that God has there
is wonderful great, that we neither can nor dar speak thereof. Again, as our
soul does wholly sinck in and melt with its most inward into God's most inward,
and becomes there renewed, our Spirit is there so much more reformed by God's
Spirit, as we take the right and pure way; for God pours himself forth into
our Spirits, as the Sun does its light into the air, so that the whole air is
transformed therewith, that no difference can be seen: much more in this union,
which transcendeth all natural union, shall no man be able to difference the
created Spirit, from the uncreated Spirit of God -- for were the created Spirit
seen in this union, without doubt, it should be taken for God.

36. In his sermon on the ninteenth Sunday, he tells us of some, who having
turned away from themselves and all things, and turned in to the true light,
these (sais he) with an inward silence, sinck from all their strength, and
dissolve in God their original, and retire themselves into the darkness of the
divine wilderness -- and there thrust themselves so far in, that they lose all
difference in the unity of God, and lose also themselves, and all things, and
know nothing else but one bare pure and simple God, wherein they sinck to the
ground. In his sermon on the two and twentieth Sunday, he says, This image and
superscription is savingly made perfect in the most inward part of the soul, in
that place, which God has prepared and appropriat to himself -- to wit, the
glorious pure substance of the soul -- hereby is the most inward part of our
soul made perfect, and united with the most inward part of the high Godhead,
where God the Father is always begetting his everlasting word, his only
begotten Son. And thereafter he tells us, when the soul is emptied of all
things, it answers that only one, which is God; so there is nothing there,
but pure God alone.

37. So in the sermon on the feast of Mary, he tells us, that she Introverted
always into her fund, where the divine image lay hid; her fund, and all her
inwards were so like unto God, that if any man had seen her heart, there he
should have seen God, in all his beauty, and have seen the outcoming of the Son
and of the holy Ghost, in a substantial manner. And in his second sermon on the
birth of John Baptist, He says, in the fund of the soul, there is a certain
light, which testifies, that man was in God from all eternity, ere he was
created: And when he was so in God, he was God in God -- so that what he is now
since he was created, that same was he from eternity in God, being one
substance with God.

38. In his book of the Imitation of the poverty of Christ, part 1. Chapter 21. N.
134. he tells of two heavens, one bodily, which is above us; and another
spiritual, which is the essence or substance of souls, in which God is; and
where God is, there is the Kingdom of heaven; and of that speaks Paul, when
he says, the Kingdom of heaven is in us. And thereafter N. 138. he says, when
man has laid all his imperfections aside, and is carried into the essence and
nakedness, he stareth God in his bare essence, and with that stareing presses
in to God, and uniteth himself with him, and God carries the man with himself
in himself, and so he has he an eternal ingoing into God and he is wholly
embraced of God and loses himself, and so he drowneth into the bottomless sea
of the Godhead, and swimeth as a fish in the sea. And in the following Chap. he
speaks much of a silence, and an hearkening to the eternal word within. And
Chapter 23. he tells us, that this inward speaking is in the essence of the soul,
where God speaks, when the soul turns all to rest and silence, and is
gapeing after in the fund of her naked substance: And this hearing is nothing
else then an inward feeling, which flows out of God in that essence of the
soul, which is so full, that it runs over in the powers: And he that finds
this is happy.

39. More of this and the like trash, may be found, in that book: but here is,
I suppose, enough to discover, what affinity this Quakers doctrine has with
the fancies of Taulerus; and whence possibily, he and his fraternity have
learned their rare Notions and Expressions: to which end only, I have troubled
the Reader with these few passages; as also to show, that there may be greater
affinity and affection betwixt Papists, and our Quakers, then they will yet be
willing to acknowledge, or suffer us to say: But a little time will discover
much. I now pro^eed to

Chap. XXIII. Of Preaching,
1. After his discourse, concerning their manner of Worshipe, this Quaker
comes to speak more particularly of some parts of worshipe; such as Preaching
Praying and Singing, against all which he has something to say Page 248. etc..
18. And he begins with Preaching, telling us, that as Papists and
Protestants use it, it is after this manner: One takes a certain place or
verse of Scripture, and speaks upon it, for an hour or longer, these things,
which he had before studied or premeditated, and had set together either out of
his own proper invention, or from the writings or observations of others, and
committed them to this memory: in opposition to this, he tells us, what their
way is: thus, When the Saints assemble, and every one introverts to the gift
and grace of God, in himself, he, who ministereth, should speak acted by that
grace in himself, what the Spirit gives unto him, not affecting wisdom and
eloquence of words, but the demonstration and power of the Spirit, and that
either by interpreting some place of Scripture, if so be the Spirit lead him to
it, or otherwise exhorting, reproving, instructing, or by speaking out the
sense of some Spiritual experience; all which are to be consonant to the
S^riptures, though perhaps not relative to any particular chapter, verse, or
text.

2. Having thus laid down the two different ways, in such a manner, as he
thought most advantageous for himself, he says, Let us now examine and
consider, which of these are most consonant to the precepts and practice of
Christ, his Apostles and primitive Church, as recorded in the Scripture. Before
we come to this trial, I must tell him, That I am glade to hear him insinuating
so much, as that the Scriptures are our Rule in worshipe, and that, that very
mode of worshipe must be chosen as the best, which agrees most with the
primitive way, laid down in the New. Test. Only I would entreat him to
reconcile this with what he said on the Scriptures. One thing more I must tell
him: If he can prove the very first step of his way; that is, the Introversion
of all the members of the Assembly, unto the gift or grace of God, in
themselves, to be consonant to either Precept or Practice, recorded in the N.
T. I shall give up the whole cause, in this matter. We heard how straitened he
was to find an instance of this, toward the end of the foregoing Chapter,
when he did run as far back as to Job's days, to seek one: but, as to the
primitive Church, we must have patience, till he think of one; and for precept,
he could give none, that came within a look of Introversion.

3. It is necessare before we proceed, that we take a view of the proposal he
has made of our way, and compare it with his; that a just estimate may be
made. And (1.) The speaking from a word of Scripture makes not the difference;
for they do that themselves sometimes; as he says here, though he said it not
before. Nor is it unlawful, else I cannot think that the Spirit would prompt
them to it, if that Spirit be the Spirit of God: And I find that Christ spoke
from a text, and so did Peter Act. 2. from a passage of Joel. And to say, as he
does to this Page 249. that they did not this without an immediate motion of
Spirit, is but a confirmation of what I am now saying viz. that it is lawful.
So then as to this, there can be no debate, nor difference. (2.) That ministers
read and study, and make some use of their reading, in their sermons, can give
no just ground of offense; seeing we find the Apostle Paul, in his sermon to
the Athenians, making use of what he had read out of one of their poets Act.
17:28. And we find him pressing Timothy to study, and meditation, and that in
order to preaching to, and profiteing others. 1 Timothy 4:15. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them (this sure imports earnest and diligent
study, when the Apostle says, that he should be in these things, as it were
wholly exercised therein, and taken up therewith) that thy profiteing may
appear to all. And in that same Chapt. verse. 13. he says, till I come, give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. So that this reading was
not for his own private satisfaction, but in order to a fitting him better
unto exhortation and doctrine. And again he recommends to him a continueing in
the t^ings he had learned; whereby we see, that he had learned something; and
was to keep it, being assured that it was truth, knowing of whom he had learned
2 Timothy 3:14. And after that Paul had appointed him to continue in what he had
learned him, he recommends to him the diligent perusal of the Scriptures, with
which he had been acquanted from his youth: as being able to make him wise unto
salvation, and perfect, as a man of God v. 15, 17. Moreover among the
qualifications, which Paul requires in ordinary teachers, this is one 1 Timothy
3:2. that he be apt to teach, so also 2 Timothy 2:24. And this is such an Aptitude,
as must be tried and known before hand; as well as the other qualifications,
mentioned in both these places: And so it says, that such ministers should
have gifts and abilities, acquired by reading and other means, whereby they
might be fitted for this work of the ministry. This is plain and manifest; but
nothing of this kind is requisite in our Quakers speakers, in order to their
speaking. Yet more, Paul tells Titus Cap. 1:9. that the preacher must be one,
that holds fast the faithful word, as he has been taught (or as in the
margin, in teaching, or which makes for doctrine, that is, sits and
qualifieth him for teaching and edifying. See Beza in loc.) that he may be able
by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gaine-sayers: He must then
be a learned man, able to teach; and acquanted with the controversies of the
time, that he may be in case, by sound doctrine to put gaine-sayers to silence.
Add one word more. Act. 18:24, 25, 26. We find that Aquila and Priscilla took
Apollos, that was an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, and was
instructed in the way of the Lord, and had taught diligently the things of the
Lord, and expounded unto him the way of God m^re perfectly: And all this in
order to h^s peaching further the way of God; for it is said verse. 27, 28. And
when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the
Disciples to receive him, who, when he was come helped them much, which had
believed through grace; for he mightily convinced the Jews, and that
publicly, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ Here then we have
both practice and precept, for Ministers studying, that they may be able to
preach sound doctrine? But possibly the thing at which he most carpeth, is that
Ministers should study their preachings immedialy before they preach them: If
it be so, he must be a silly man; for what is the difference betwixt ones
studying ^ few days before, and ones studying some years before; when the one
has a more tenacious memory, then the other? But this was the error of the
Familists in N. England and of Saltmarsh opposed by worthy Mr Rutherfoord.

4. (3.) He sait^ that our Ministers study their Sermons, and digest them, and
commit them to their memory, having gathered them together out of their own
invention, or other folks writtings. To which I only says (1.) That, as it is
already manifested, he cannot make it appear to be dissonant to primitive
practice or precepts, that Ministers be learned, especially in the Scriptures;
and thereby fitted for preaching: And if their memory be so happy, as to
retain all they have learned and read; and their Judgment so solid, as to
improve it pertinently, according to the occasion, they will have the less need
to study, with much pains and labor, every Sermon; but if both their Judgment
and Memory be a little blunt, is the matter great, if they put to a little more
strength, and be a little more diligent? (2.) But how shall we be assured, that
the Quakers use no such leger-de-maine, as to make us believe, they speak all,
without one previous thought, and yet have all, to a word, well studied and
premeditated? Such cheatry has bin in the world; and I know not, why one might
not doubt of the truth of what they say; especially when I find credible
persons saying, that they can lie, as well as others. (3.) He speaks thus of
all the Ministers in common, making no difference; and if he be only acquanted
with some, (and sure I can not tell, how he should be so well acquanted with
all, as to know their way of studying, and prepareing themselves for preaching)
and intend them, he deals not ingenuously, nor candidely, to speak thus of
all. What knows he, but there may be some, that study the most of their
Sermons on their knees? What knows he, but there may be some, that read very
little (save the Bible) in order to preaching; and have such a ready gift, as
to be in case to preach, upon a very short times advertishment? What knows
he, but there may be some, who study most, to get their heart in a right frame
to preach, and brought under an impression of the weight of the truths, they
are to deliver? What knows he, but there may be some, that write none of
their Sermons, nor commit them to their memory but having the heads of
truths, they are to deliverer, digested, wait upon the Lord for his assistance
in uterance and delivery? What knows he, but there may be some, that never
digest their preachings so, as not to lie open to the influences of the Spirit,
and to welcome his seasonable and useful suggestions, and so speak many things,
which they had not once premeditated? What knows he, but there may be some,
that being called, have gone to preach, when they knew not well what to say in
particular, nor from what text? What knows he, but there may be some, who
after they have studied, and been at pains to prepare themselves; yet coming
to speak, have been so lead of the Lord, that they spoke little or nothing of
all they had thought to speak? What knows he, but there may be some, who upon
their way to the Assembly, have been constrained to alter text, and all, which
they had purposed to speak upon it? If he knew none of these things, he should
have learned better, before he spoke thus: and he cannot but be blamed for his
rashness.

5. But all this will not help the matter, for (4.) The Quakers, says he,
they affect not wisdom n^ reloquence of words, but the demonstration of the
Spirit and power. And hereby he insinuates, that our Ministers do the
contrary. But he must know, that I will not believe all that he says in this:
if he has his eye upon some particular persons, or sort of Ministers; I will
tell him, he deals not fairly, to impute to all what he observes in some;
and I think it sufficient to tell him, I know some that affects only that
Wisdom and Eloquence, that may contribute to the winning of souls and that,
thou^h they will not boast much (as our windy Quakers do) of their preaching,
as being in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power; yet dar say, in some
measure of singl^ness, that they corrupt not the Word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, they speak in Christ, and that
they have renunced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending themselves to every man's conscience, in the sight of God. (5.) They
are the men that exhort, rebuke and instruct, and speak out experiences. And
thinks he, there are none such with us; or that our Ministers preachings have
no tendency he^eunto? If he do, he is mistaken; f^r our Ministers Sermons have
all these uses, and some more, as to Comfort, Convince, Confute etc. And though
they bring not forth fancies and delu^ions, instead of experiences, yet they
can speak from experience; and appositely apply themselves to loose the doubts,
and remove the difficulties that trouble weak consciences; and in some measure,
in the strength of the great Master of Assemblies, speak a word to such as are
weary. But he will say, it is not so with all: and I will not contradict him in
this, yet what I have said is sufficient to discover his unfaire dealing, in
stateing the opposition or comparison here. And how shall we believe, that any
or all of the Quaker-Preachers do, as he says? His naked word is no very sure
ground of faith to me.

6. The maine difference now follows to be spoken to. He supposes, that our
Ministers do all without the Spirit; and their speakers do all in and by the
Spirit. As concerning Ours, he must know, that there are among them, who depend
upon the Lord in their preparation for preaching, seeking by prayer from him
what to say; and that he would lead them to and suggest unto them, that matter
and purpose, which may be most for edification: who, when after Meditation and
Prayer they have got something to say, give it up unto him, that he may give
it them to deliver, or not, as he thinks good: who depend upon Him, even for
Utterance and Expression: who look to him, and by faith depend upon Him, in the
delivery of what they had thought upon, less or more; that they may be helped
to preach with that Faith, Fear, Awe, Reverence, Weightedness of heart, Love;
Zeal and Faithfulness, that becomes, to his glory, and to the edification of
the Church: who depend upon Him for the blessing, knowing that all their words
of Persuasion, Conviction, Rebuke, Instruction, expostulation, and Consolation,
without the power and blessing of his Spirit concurring, and carrying the same
in upon the heart, will prove ineffectual: who receive with thankfulness, what
he offers and suggesteth, in the time of their preaching; and with singleness
declare it unto their hearers: who often times being called to speak, without
fore-thoughts, go in the strength of the Lord, not seeking to commend
themselves as able or learned ^en, but to commend themselves to every man's
conscience, in the sight of God: And who, when they have finished their
discourse, give up all by faith into the hands of God, that He may bless it, as
He thinks good, in Jesus Christ. He will possibly say, That it is not thus
with all; and I shall readily grant it: But will he be sa^isfied with this, and
account this spiritual preaching, or preaching in the Spirit? I suppose, he
will not be satisfied. And then it is not to him sufficient, though all should
study and preach after this manner.

7. Let us therefore a little examine his way. He first would have all Study,
all Meditation, all Prayer and wrestling with God in prayer (for this with us
is a maine part of study and preparation) laid aside; and Ministers going to
the Assembly, as naked and void of all knowledge of spiritual matters, as if
they had never heard of any such thing. Then being Tabulae rasae, they must
introvert unto that Grace or Gift, which is in them, and there receive their
Call, their Furniture, their Preparation both in matter and words, whether with
a text or place of Scripture, whereupon to ground their discourse, or to
explain and clear up, or without any such passage; as that inward teacher
will. Lastly, when they are thus called, and fitted by this thing within, then
they speak in the Spirit, and are acted by the Spirit. But now to canvass this
(not mentioning that which was spoken to before; to wit, that by their way, all
are alike preachers, and none must speak, but such as are thus acted by the
Spirit; and all thus called and prompted may and must:) I shall propose these
things to the Readers consideration. (1.) This Gift and Grace within, is, as we
saw above, no singular thing; it is common to all men and women breathing, to
Turks and Pagans, as well as to Christian Ministers: And therefore can have no
affinity with the Spiritual gifts, which Christ gives unto his Church, and
endueth his messengers with all, that they may be enabled for the work of the
ministry, and for building up of his house; nor has it any affinity with the
special and saving grace of God, which Christ has purchased for and bestows
upon his redeemed o^es: For neither of these are common to all the children of
men, as the whole Scripture declares: far less can it have any affinity with
the Spirit of God, which Lives, Abides, and Works in the Justified,
Adopted, and Sanctified children of God. It can therefore be nothing else, than
the relicques of nature, the natural light, and natural Conscience, which God
has left in every man. So that all the qualifications, which the Quaker
Preachers have and seek for, are but what a Pagan may have, that has a Natural
Conscience, and the Light of Common notions, concerning a Godhead, and equity
and right among men: This dim and darkened, and now malignant, light is the
Magazine and Storehouse of all their Enduements and Qualifications: this is the
sole fountain and spring of all their furniture; sufficient, I am sure, for
none, but for Pagan-Preachers. (2.) Their Introverting unto this, to consult
this Goddess, as the Pagans did turne-in to the Cells of Apollos, to receive the
Oracles, has a more diabolick aspect; for, what can it be that they would thus
consult, after they have unmanned themselves; or laid aside all motions of Soul
and Mind, (which is not natural, nor practicable without diabolick assistance,
if it be, as he says) but some Spirit? And what Spirit can we suppose to be in
Pagans, and every Son of Adam, before grace come and make a change, but the God
of this world 2 Cor. 4:4. the Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience Ephesians. 2:3. and that strong man,
that keeps the house? Is it not then manifest, that this introverting must be
a real consulting with, or giving themselves up unto the instructions and
directions of this Prince of darkness? If he say, that they are Regenerated,
and so under the power and direction of the Spirit of God, I Answer, I have
seen and considered what he says upon this, and have found, that it is nothing
but the operation of pure Nature, wrought by the strength of corrupt and wicked
Nature, that is an enemy to the Gospel, and to all the ways of God; and if
this has not been sufficiently evidenced above, the Reader is free to judge:
And if nature, and this Prince of darkness, who has now a soveraignity over
all the unrenewed Sons of Adam, can or will destroy the works of Satan and of
Nature, and embrace the Gospel, and the Spirit of Christ, according to the
Gospel, let all, who understand and believe the Gospel, judge, (3.) This Spirit
then, which acts and mo^eth them, or in them, can be nothing else, (if it be
anything distinct from Nature, seconded with and corroborated by fleshly
Imaginations, strong and proud Fancies, raised and ra^ified Brains, deluded
Minds, and perturbated Affections, together with the cooperations of the
Spirit of darkness) than the Devil acting, moving and carrying them, and
speaking in them or by them, as he sees good, for his own corrupt ends, All
which is further confirmed by their stated and fixed Opposition to, and
irreconcilable Hatred at the Gospel of the grace of God, and all the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, manifested in their Preachments and scriblings; for
though corrupt nature, and the carnal mind be enmity against God, and neither
is, nor can be subject to his Law, and cannot understand the things of God; yet
their bitter Opposition to all the ways of Christ, and their active,
indefatigable and industrious labor and pains, to destroy, so far as they
can, the whole Gospel, and bring their proselytes back to Paganism; and their
fury and rage, transporting them to the hieght of Blasphemy, against the pure
doctrine of the Gospel of the grace of God, says to every considering person,
that there is something, stronger then corrupt nature, acting and driveing
them; even that wicked Enemy, whose works Christ came to destroy. This is
plain and manifest: let them see to it. And let the Reader now judge, what for
Preachers these are: and whether their Talkers, or our Preachers, be most
acted, and led by the Spirit of God.

8. Though what is said may be sufficient, to obviat all that he can say,
either for himself, or against us; yet for further satisfaction, let us state
the question thus. Whether Ministers, in their preaching, should act as
Christians, and go about the work with an holy and Christian dependence by
faith, in the use of lawful and approved means, upon the Spirit of God, for
Furniture and Assistance: or should wait for and expect immediate Impulses, for
all they say and do, and never go about this work, in whole, or in part, but
when, and as, they are thus immediately Excited, Prompted, Acted, Moved and
Carried by the Spirit; and speak nothing but what is thus immediately and
extraordinarily, put into their mouth by the Spirit of God; or rather is spoken
by the Spirit, useing them as mere organs. If the question be thus stated;
though I know, the Quakers will arrogat this last way unto themselves, and
assert this to be the only way, now called for; yet how far they are from it,
is manifest from what is said: But as to the matter, I assert the first, and
deny this last to be the way, which Christ has appointed. My reasons are these
(1.) This would render all previous Pains, Labor, Study and Reading even of
the Scriptures, useless, as to the work of preaching, contrare to what is
already said. (2.) Paul could not then have said, as he does 2 Timothy 2: verse. 2.
And the things, that thou have heard of me, among many witnesses, the same
commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. For to
what purpose should there be such care had, that sound doctrine be transmitted
from one to another, and the same committed to faithful and trusty persons, who
will faithfully preach and deliver the same to people; if all must be done and
carried on by the immediate Inspirations and Motions of the Spirit? (3.) Nor was
there any ground, why the Apostle should say 1 Timothy 1:3, 4. As I besought thee
to abide still at Ephesus -- that thou might charge some, that they teach no
other doctrine, neither give heed to fables etc. Because such as must act by
the immediate impulses of the Spirit can receive no charge from man; nor
regulate themselves in their teaching accordingly. (4.) Nor could Paul say to
Timothy 1. Tim. 4:6 if thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things,
thou shall be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of
faith, and of good doctrine, whereunto thou have attained: For Timothy might
have replied, I cannot be stinted unto these doctrines, which you desire me to
put the brethren in remembrance of; for I must speak as the Spirit speaks in
me, and must receive all that I speak, immediately from the Spirit. And he might
have said also, I cannot put others in remembrance of any thing; for they must
do, as the Spirit acts them. (5.) Nor could he give that command verse. II.
These things command and teach; For the same reason: as is manifest. (6. Nor
could he give him in charge, as follows verse. 13, 14 15, 16. give attendance
to reading, to exhortation, to ^octrine; neglect not the gift that is in thee
-- meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiteing may appear to all. Take heed unto thy self and unto the doctrine;
continue in them: for this one reply, I must follow the motions of the Spirit,
would have made all null: for there is no place left for attendance to Reading,
to exhortation, to Doctrine, for not Nelecting the gift, for Meditation, for
Heeding the doctrine, or continueing in it; where all must be done by the
immediate Impulses of the Spirit. (7.) Nor can such preachers, as may and must
do nothing but as the immediate Impulses of the Spirit act them, be rightly
said to labor in word and doctrine, that is, (as the word imports) to
labor painfully, till they be wearied, with much travail and toil, with
strength and earnestness, as Rowers with oars, See Leigh's Critica sacra. on
the word (...), and yet this word is used of ministers, and of their work. 1
Cor. 15:10. and 16:16 Gal. 4:11. Phil. 2:16. 2 These. 5* 12. 1 Timothy 5:17. 2 Timothy
2:6 (8.) There could be no ground for that heavy charge, which is laid on
Timothy 1 Timothy 5:21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the elect Angels, that thou observe these things. And again 1 Timothy 6:13 14. I
give thee charge in the sight of Go^, who quickens all things, and Christ
Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou keep
this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ etc. if ministers were to do nothing in their ministry, but as
they were Acted, Inspired, Moved and Immediately Influenced of the Spirit; as
every one may see. (9.) Nor was there place for that. 1 Timothy 6:17 Charge them
that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded etc. For Timothy
might have said, I must only speak as moved by the Spirit; and am not master of
my self. (10.) Nor for that ibid. verse 20. O Timothy keep that, which is
committed to thy trust etc. For to what purpose, might he have said, seeing I
may not use it, as I will; but must do all as immediately Acted? (11.) If
matters were thus, why did Paul say, as he does 2 Timothy 1:6. Wherefore I put
thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee; seeing
gifts were of no use, and the stirring up of gifts were in vain, because all,
without gifts, or stirring up of gifts, was to be done by the immediate impulses
and motions of the Spirit? (12.) in vain also should he have said, as 2 Timothy
1:13, 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me --
That good thing, which was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost: For, he
was to regard no form of sound words, nor take any notice of that goo^ thing,
which was committed to him; but do and say, as he was acted and inspired. (13.)
what room is left by this opinion, to that word 2 Timothy 2:14. Of these things
put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive not
about words; For he could remember them of nothing, nor lay any charge upon
them, if they were to do all as the Spirit moved them (14.) The following
injunction verse. 15. is made also use^ess by this way; Study to show thyself
approved unto God, a workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly divideing the
word of truth: For it takes away all care and study, in this matter; and the
preacher can make no other division of the word of truth, than what is of and
by the Spirit; and that must always be right. (15) All that the Apostle says
2 Timothy 3:14, 15. should also be in vain, and to no purpose (16.) If this way
be the truth, why did the Apostle say 2 Timothy 4:1, 2. I charge thee therefore
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead,
at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word, be instant in season; out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine? might
not Timothy have replied; I have nothing to do with that charge, I cannot, I
may not, preach either in season, or out of season; nor can I Reprove, Rebuke,
nor Exhort, nor have I Doctrine, wherewith to do it, The Spirit does all, and
must move me, and inspire me to every Doctrine, Preaching, Rebuke and
Exhortation, and that at every time and season? (17.) H^reby that should be
also rendered useless, which is said. 2 Timothy 4, 5. But watch thou in all things,
endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy
ministry. (18.) If this be the way, why did Paul say to Titus Chap. 1:17* --
wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, seeing Titus
could have said again, I shall do, as the Spirit moves; and more I cannot, I
may not? (19.) So it takes away the force of Paul^s injunctions Tit. 2:1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15. For Titus was to have his eye upon no Doctrine,
but speak what the Spirit moved him to speak; nor was he to speak to either
one or other, age, or sex or quality, but as the Spirit acted him; and what
Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, was requisite in his doctrine, he was not to
be anxious there about; all would be so, because dictated and inspired
immediately by the Spirit: And what soun^ness of speech was requisite, the
Spirit would see to that: and therefore he was not to regard, what the Apostle
enjoined verse. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority
(20.) The command Tit. 3:1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities etc. must hereby be laid aside, as not obligeing Titus, who was
purely to follow the Motions of the Spirit. (21.) How opposite unto this
opinion, is that word Tit. 3:8. This is a faithful saying, and these things, I
will that thou affirm constantly? What, was not Titus to wait upon the
motions of the Spirit? (22.) If matters be thus, how could the Collossians say
to Archippus, take heed to the ministry, which thou ha^t received in the Lord,
that thou fulfill it, seeing Archippus was to follow the free and arbitrary
motions of the Spirit? (2^.) This opinion rendereth that injunction of Paul's
unto the ministers of Thessalonica 1 These. 5:14. useless, Now we beseech you
brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the
weak etc. as to preaching, (24.) It would hence follow, that all that such
ministers spoke, were infallibly true; for what the Spirit speaks, through
men, or by men, as his mere organs, must of necessity be truth, and nothing but
truth, and that certainly and infallibly; and so must be esteemed of, and
regarded as Scripture. (25.) If the matter be thus, it is all one thing whether
the preacher be Young or Old, a Child or a M^n of experience; for it is not
he, that speaks, but the Spirit in him: yet Paul requires, that he that is
put into the Ministry be not a novice 1 Timothy 3:6. (26.) Thus did the Prophets
and Apostles preach^, and declare their visions, as under moral commands,
(though they were under no such comman^s, to receive the visions, where they
had no election) Ier. 1: v. 17. and 26:15. Esa. 6:8, 9. Ier 15:19, 20. 1 Cor.
9:16.

9. More might be said, upon this head; but this may suffice, and I have said
the more of it, because they use to make it one of their common theames, while
they would, in their popular discourses, inveigh against the Ministry, and
seek to make it contemptible with people. Let us now come, and consider what he
says. And first he begins to speak against the method Page 249. And what
is this method? Ministers are free to follow what method they think most
edifying; and are not bound to one certain prescribe^ metho^e. But, says he,
when Christ sent his disciples to preach, he told them they should not
premeditate what to say, nor speak of themselves, but the Spirit should in the
same hour teach them. Mat. 10:20. Mark. 13:11. Luke ^2: verse. 12. Ans. Knows
he not, that at that time, Christ gave them their preaching with them, telling
them what they should say, saying. And as ^e go, preach, saying the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand, Mat. 10:7. Knows he not, that in these places by him
cited, our Lord is speaking of their appearing before Magistrates and Higher
powers, where they might, through fear and anxiety, be so discomposed, as not
to know well, how to speak in their own defense; and that our Lord adds
these words to free them of all anxiety about the matter: But, says he, if it
was so with them, when standing before men, much more in preaching, when they
stand before God. Ans. This consequence is weak, and contradicted by the Text
it self, where we see, they had their sermon taught them before hand; and
beside, when they were sent out to preach, they knew, what they were to say;
but when called before Magistrates, they could not know before hand, what
questions might be proposed unto them, and upon that account, might be anxious,
and troubled; which to prevent, this promise is made.

10. He proceeds; After the pouring forth of the Spirit, Act. 2:4. they are
said to speak, as the holy Ghost gave utterance; and not what they had studied.
Ans. It is very true, The Apostles then got their divinity and knowledge in
the mysteries of the Gospel, miraculously taught them, by immediate Infusion,
and withal got the gift of tongues, to speak to all people and languages: And
such as would expect such teaching now, may as well expect the extraordinary
gift of tongues, which the Apostles got: And who sees not, how absurd this
is? Beside, what was granted to the Apostles, was not granted to all the Church
Officers in those days, no not to Evangelists, who were extraordinary; let be
to ordinary Pastors and Doctors; Nay none of all the extraordinary officers
had all that the Apostles had: One thing I would learn of him. Can he tell me,
when and where the^e Apostles did Introvert to the gift within them, in order
to the obtaining of these rare qualifications, or to the preaching of the word?
If he cannot do this, he will find no ground for his method, in this that is
said of the Apostles: They were infallible, and acted by an infallible Spirit,
in their Teachings, and Writings; thinks he, that this is expected or required
of all Ministers now? Or thinks he that his Quaker-Pratters, are such? Whatever
he may dream, the Christian world may see the contrary. What he cites out of
Lambertus, I freely assent unto, for my part.

11. Next he tells us Page 250.. 19. That our way of preaching is hurtful and
destructive, because contrare to the nature of the Christian and Apostolic
Mini^trie. 1 Cor. 1:17. Wherein? It is not by the motion and acting of the
Spirit, but by men's Invention and eloquence, by natural strength and acquired
learning: the Apostles preaching was not so. 1 Cor. 2:3, 4, 5. Ans. The Spirit
helping by ordinary means is not contrary to himself, helping in an
extrao^dinary way: The Apostles way was peculiar to themselves. It is a
groundless imagination to think, that all that is spoken by dependence upon
God, in the use of ordinary means* and not by immediate Inspiration, is wisdom
of words making the Cross of Christ of none effect, or is entiseing words of
man's wisdom, opposite to the demonstration of the Spirit and of power. If any
man study painted words and rhetoric, to darken the wisdom of Go^ in this
mystery, I will not approve of it; but to study to find out acceptable words,
as the Preacher did, Eccles. 12:10. And words to render the Gospel plain, and
intelligible to the hearers, with a single dependence on God, for his
assistance herein, I shall never think, that Paul condemned this. But (says
he) the Preachers themselves confess that they are strangers to the Spirit of
God, and to his Operations. Ans. Not all, I hope; though I hope also, that none
of them will, with these bold and blasphemous Quakers, pretend to immediate
Inspirations. This Quaker, it seems, knows nothing of the workings of the
Spirit of God, in and by means; and will have all by immediate Revelations and
Inspirations; and before he want these, he will go to the Devil to get them; as
Saul did go to the witch at Endor, when the Lord would not answer him by the
means then usual.

12. Again, he says Page 251. It is contrare to the order and method of the
primitive Church, 1 Cor. 14:20. etc. Not considering that these were
extraordinary Prophets. Reads he, that these Prophets did Introvert into the
light within them, to get these Revelations? However we see, that Quakers are
all Prophets, in their own account, But sure I am, they are not Prophets of
the living God; nor are the Revelations, which they boast of, divine, but
diabolick. His last argum. is that by our way the Spirit of God is excluded.
What way? He tells us not, and we can not believe him. But he adds, And the
natural wisdom and learning of man is exalted. This is his mistake, which he
could see, if the beam were out of his eye. All their learning and wisdom is
the pure product of Nature, if not worse; as we have oftentimes manifested; for
it comes not from the Spirit of God, neither mediatly, nor immediately; but
rises out of the dung hill of nature, and is extracted thence by the natural
strength of man; and all its works and effects, are like the cause and
original, except where the Devil gets in his finger, in a more immediate way.
This is, says he, the chief and great cause, why preachings are so
unfruitful. Poor man, knows he no better? Did not Christ and his Apostles
preach to many, that were not converted thereby? Thinks he that the only cause,
why our preachings are so unfruitful, is because we preach not by Inspiration?
And are their preachments so fruitful? It may be too fruitful, but that is no
proof to me, that they preach by the true Revelations and Inspirations of God;
for I read, that when the Lord sends strong delusions, men will believe a lie.
I read that all the world wondered after the Bea^t: I have heard it said too,
that all the world became Arian. All the world is not yet become Quakers: see
also what is said, 2 Pet. 2:1, 2, 3. Yea says he, according to this doctrine
the Devil himself, may and ought to be heard, seeing he knows the notion of
truth, and excels any of them in learning and eloquence -- we see, when the
Devil confessed the truth, Christ rejected his testimony. Ans Why does the man
thus speak untruth? Do we say, that every one, though he were the Devil, if he
speak truth, should be heard? What countenance does our opinion, in this
matter, give to this dream? I should think his judgment speaks fairer for
it; for, I trow, the Devil needs no^ study, nor read books; but can give out
Revelations and Enthusiasmes, as many, as you will. And be it, in whomsoever he
speaks, by Revelations, or Inspirations, or Enthu^iasmes, Quaker, or other;
Christ and his Apostles will reject his testimony, though it should be true
upon the matter. And therefore, after the example of Christ and his Apostle
Paul, we receive no testimony from Quakers; themselves giving such palpable
evidences of the Devil speaking in them, and by them.

13. To an Objection taken from the experience of all ages, since the Apostles
days, to wit, that God by his Spirit has concurred with our way of preaching
to the conversion and edification of many, He answers. 20. thus, That though
he will not deny this; yet it will not follow, that that practice was good,
more then it was good for Paul to go to Damascus to persecute the Saints,
because he did meet with Christ in the way, Answ. His simile is a
dissimilitude, and has no correspondence with the thing in hand. Our Argument
is, That since the Apostles days, and the ceasing of extraordinary gifts,
there has been no other way of preaching, but by ordinary gifts, studied and
acquired* through the ordinary assistance of the Spirit, who has distributed
these, in their several measures, as he has thought good, to some more, and to
others less; and thus the Church has been preserved, and souls have been
converted: But never, that we hear of, by Enthusiastic persons, or persons
pret^nding Revelations, after Introversions: of many souls perverted with such
like pretensions, we have Instances in too great abundance. The whole
worshipers of Mahomet are one great instance: many there are also in Popery:
the Followers of John of Leyden, David George. Swenckfeldus, and the like in
Germany, may serve for a third Instance: And our Quakers come in for a fourth;
for boast they, as they will, of their converts, their converts and proselytes
are not made Christians, but perverted from Christianity to Paganism. It
comes to pass, says he next, oftentimes, that God, regairding the Integrity
of Preachers, or hearers, touched by his power the heart of the Preacher* and
lead him to speak, that which he had not premeditated, and these became more
profitable, than what was premeditated. Answ. If he will take these for
Revelations, and Inspirations, severals of our Ministers can pretend to them;
and what has he then to say? Is all his gall spit out against premeditation?
But has he never heard, that premeditated sermons have been blessed also? But
for all this he holds fast his conclusion, that these preachings are not
approven, but contrary to the primitive practice: And what remedy? But how has
he proven his practice? Not one instance has he brought for that, nor can he
bring, nor precept either. And I doubt, if ever such an Introversion, as he
formerly spoke of, was heard of, in all the Christian world, till the
Introverted Seck of the Quakers arose, except what was among some Papists, as
we heard above.

CHAP. XXIV Of Prayer.
1. WE have heard what for Preaching the Quakers own, and practice in their
public Worship, and what he had to say against our practice in that; we come
next to hear their judgment of Prayer, another necessary piece of solemn
service, performed unto God immediately; for He is therein and thereby solemnly
acknowledged to be the true God, and the only living God, the searcher of
hearts, 1 King. 8:39. Act. 1:24. Romans 8:27. and the only hearer of the requests
of his people Psalm. 65:2. Pardoner of the sins Micah 7:18. and the fulfiller
of all their desires Psalm 145:18, 19. As also that He is God, in whom alone we
ought to believe, and on whom we ought to rely and depend Romans 10:14. and is
to be worshipped with religious worshipe and service Mat. 4:10. Whereof prayer
is a special part. 1 Cor. 1:2. Yea the very light of nature shows, that there
is a God, who has Lordshipe and Soveraignity over all, is good, and does good
unto all; and is therefore to be Feared, Loved, Praised, Trusted in, Served,
and Called unto with all the soul, and with all the might Romans 1:20. Act.
17:24. Psalm. 119:78. Ier. 10.7. Psalm, 31:13. and 18:3. and 62:8. Romans 10:12.
Josh. 24:14. Mark. 12:33. And therefore Prayer with Thanksgiving, being one
special part of religious Worshipe. Phil 4:6. is to be performed by all men
Psalm. 65:2, The light then within teaching this piece of service, to be
performed unto God; it is but consequential to think, that Quakers, who own
nothing for their Bible and Teacher, but that, should not be wholly against
this duty: yet, though they do not directly deny and condemn the same, they do
assert that, which, in effect, is to deny it, and to lay it aside; for, as if
it were no duty, required by the law of Nature of all persons, they cut many
off from it, as we shall hear; And as for that, which is a principal and
necessary Ingredient in this duty, to wit, the name of Christ, in which it
ought to be gone about if acceptably done. Ioh. 14:13, 14. and 16:26. Dan.
9:14. they make little mention of this; though, such be our distance from God,
because of sin, that we can have no access to him, without a Mediator Ioh.
14:6. Esai. 59:2. Ephesians. 3:12, And Christ Jesus be that only Mediator Ioh.
6:27. Heb. 7:25, 26; 27. 1 Timothy 2:5. and therefore all our prayers can be
accepted only through him, and must be performed in his name. Col. 3:17. Heb.
13:15. for from him alone must we draw all our encouragement to pray, and our
boldness, strength and hope of acceptance in Prayer Heb. 4:14, 15, 16. 1 Ioh.
5:13, 14, 15. And moreover they assert that, as necessarily antecedaneous unto
the performance of this duty, which tends to the laying of it wholly aside,
to wit, a waiting for the Impulses of the Spirit: hence they inveigh against
Prayer, whether in private or in families, morning and evening, or other fit
and convenient seasons; and will not fixedly seek a blessing from God, at
receiving of meat, nor give God solemn thanks therefore; yea and in their
Public Worshipe, this has no fixed place, but may be and often is, quite laid
aside; and always, unless the Spirit come, with his Inspirations and Impulses,
calling and prompting them thereunto.

2. Let us hear this Quaker speak his mind, on this subject. His discourse is
ushered-in with an untruth; for he says, That our whole Religion is for the
most part external, and the acts thereof are merely produced by the strength of
the natural will. for we can pray, when we please. Ans. we acknowledge, that
true Religion is principally seated in the heart; but while we are speaking of
solemn worshipe, the Religion of the heart ought to appear in solemn
exercises, prescribed by God: we own no actions of Religion, as acceptable to
God, which are produced without grace in the heart, or by the mere strength of
nature. Prayer being a duty called for, at all occasions and seasons, and in
all exigences, we ought always to be in a frame fit for offering up this
service unto God, in the name of Jesus, and by the help and assistance of his
Spirit, and especially in our solemn worshipping of God: as for what he adds
of certain and prescribed prayers, or forms of prayer; he knows they are not
owned nor approven by all. But he says, that we all agree in this, that the
motions and inspirations of the Spirit of God, are not necessarily previous
thereunto. Wherein he is either ignorantly or maliciously mistaken; for he
might see, in our larger Catechism, the 182. Question. How does the Spirit
help us to pray? answered thus; We not knowing what to pray for, as we ought,
the Spirit helps our infirmities, by enabling us to understand both for whom,
and what, and how prayer, is to be made; and by working and quickening in our
hearts (although not in all persons, nor at all times, in the same measure)
those apprehensions, and affections, and graces, which are requisite, for the
right performance of that duty. Romans 8:26, 27. Psalm. 10:17. Zach. 12:10. And
therefore, in the very description of prayer Quest. 178. the help of the Spirit
is taken in. We own, as absolutely necessary unto the right performance of
this duty, the Influences of the Spirit of God, putting the heart in a frame
for the work, stirring up, blowing upon, and enlivening his graces in the soul,
and contributing his assistance in the carrying on and performance of it: But
the Motions and Inspirations, which he pleads for, as the only ground and
call to the action, and which we do not own, nor expect, are the extraordinary
and immediate Impulses of the Spirit, carrying the soul forth unto the duty;
such as the Prophets had, when inspired to write Scripture, and to declare the
mind of the Lord, in several cases. And as to this, I see no ground to assert,
that even the Apostles, who had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit of grace
and of supplication, and of the ordinary Influences and Assistances of the holy
Ghost, in this duty, were thus always called and carried forth unto this duty
of prayer, I mean, by these extraordinary Impulses, and physical Motions of
the Spirit, which they could not withstand, but yield unto; or by these
immediate Revelations calling them to the discharge of this duty hic and nunc:
What might be, and possibly was, at some certain times and occasions, I
determine not; but that which I affirm is, that I see no ground to assert,
that to all their acts of Preaching and Prayer, they had an immediate and
extraordinary Revelation, Inspiration, and Impulse calling them forth, and
setting them on to the duty hic and nunc; so as they never acted therein, upon
the ground of a moral command, or were pressed thereto out of conscience to a
command, or from the consideration of an ordinary call, whether because of the
work they were about, or the circumstances of time, place, and accasion,
inviteing thereunto, or the like.

3. But why supposes he, that we account all motions of the Spirit
unnecessary? It is because, we have certain and prescribed times, viz. before
and after sermon; morning and evening in private devotion; before and after
meat. Ans. This is the old plea of Familists; but though we own no Canonick
hours, nor the superstitious observation of fixed times and places, for this
or any other religious act of worshipe; knowing, that we are every where to
pray; lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2:8. and to
continue instant in prayer, Romans 12: verse. 12. and to pray without ceasing, 1
These. 5:17. and that we ought always to pray with all prayer and supplication,
in the Spirit, and to watch thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication
for all saints. Ephesians. 6:18. And therefore dar not restrick the exercise of
this duty, to determinat times and places, invented and prescribed by men,
without warrant from God: Yet we say, there are special times, wherein the Lord
calls for this duty; not only times of trouble, Psalm. 50:15. times of
affliction Iam. 5:13. times of mourning Esai. 22:12, 13. Joel 2:12 -- 17. Esth.
4:3. Ezra. 9. Neh. 9. Dan. 9. Ier. 31:9. and the like; but also solemn times,
as when the Lord is solemnly to be worshipped, in the assemblies of his people,
as 1 Cor. 11:4, 5, 13. Act. 2: ver. 42. and other occasions, when either the
work we are about, or the season calls for it; for Nature it self teaches,
and Christian prudence says, that when we are assembled to the solemn
worshipe of God, prayer ought to be offered up unto God, and that to do it
before and after sermon, is most suitable, and corresponding with Christian
order and decency, which ought carefully to be observed in the whole worshipe
of God, 1 Cor. 14:40. and the work of preaching and hearing, which ought to be
gone about with all Reverence, Attention, Faith, Understanding and Seriousness,
Iam. 1:21, 22. Act. 10* 33. Mat. 13:19. Heb. 4:2. Esa. 66:2. calls for prayer
to God, for his blessing and breathing, without which the work will be
fruitless, and that both before and after; when withal there ought to be an
Acknowledgement of our unworthiness, and of Gods rich mercy and grace,
following us with such gracious opportunities, and a serious begging of pardon
for sins committed both before, and in the work of Preaching and Hearing: so
that all things plead for the performance of this duty then. As also the very
law and light of nature would call for a solemn Acknowledgment of God by
Prayer and Supplication, Morning and Evening, and oftener too and that fixedly,
providing no dispensation of providence occurring did call off for that time;
and that both by families, and by private persons in secreet, Ier. 10:25. Deuteronomy.
6:6, 7, 8. Job 1:5. 2 Samuel 6:18, 20. 1 Pet. 3:7. Act. 10.2. Hence we read of
praying in the morning Psalm. 5:3. and 88:13. and 119:147. and evening Psalm.
141:2. and of morning and evening both Psalm. 55:17. and of day time and night
Psalm. 22:2. Yea we read of prayer performed three times a day Psalm. 55:17. Dan.
6:10. and 9:4. And the morning and evening sacrifices, which were offered under
the Law, do point this forth; to speak nothing of that solemn hour of prayer
Act. 3:1. And that word in the Pattern of prayer, taught by Christ, give us
this day our daily bread, Mat. 6:11. says that prayer is a duty, daily to be
performed. And as for our acknowledgment of God, in the use of his good
creatures, the very light of nature might instruct us, as to this; and that
petition in the pattern of prayer, but now mentioned, points forth this duty;
which is also clearly laid upon us by that word of Paul's, 1 Timothy 4:4, 5. For
every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, and the
example of Christ and of Paul is not, I suppose, to be slighted: see Mark.
6:41. Ioh. 6:11. Act. 27:35. By all which we see, that the Christian
observation of times and occasions, for this duty of prayer, is well consistent
with the ordinary Motions, and Inspirations of the Spirit, which we own, and
are to labor for, in the discharge of this duty; but are utterly repugnant to
and inconsistent with these extraordinary and immediate Calls and Impulses,
which he looks upon, as the only warrant of performance of the duty. And
hereby it is also manifest, what unfriends they are unto this great and
necessary duty of Prayer, and what an irreligious Religion that is, which they
own and profess, and what a tendency their doctrine has to banish Prayer
away, which is the native and kindly breathing of the Spirit of Adoption. Gal.
4:6. Romans 8:15. and is the distinguishing Mark of the people^ of God, from the
wicked, that do not call upon him. Ier. 10:25. Psalm. 10:4. and 14:4. and the
neglect thereof has been charged by the Lord, upon his own people. Esa. 43:22
Hos. 7:7. and acknowledged by them, as their sin. Esai. 64:7. Dan. 9.13.

4. Yet he grants, that prayer is Profitable and necessary, a duty commanded
of God, frequently to be gone about by Christians. What would he then be at?
But, says he, as without Christ, we can do nothing; so neither can we pray,
without the help of the Spirit. And this is very true. But will this say any
thing against what we hold? Or make any thing for his way? Knows he no
difference betwixt the ordinary and usual Assistance of the Spirit, without
which, we can do nothing aright; and that extraordinary Impulse of the Spirit,
which he would be at, and supposes to be the only lawful call unto this duty;
and really takes away all conscience of duty, or obligation to it? Nay, does
he think that that more ordinary assistance of the Spirit, Prepareing,
Disposeing and Frameing the heart for the work, by blowing away the ashes from
the coal of grace within, stirring up the graces of his Spirit, enlarging the
heart, giving a deep sense of unworthiness and necessities, setting faith,
love, zeal and fervency a work; and so putting the soul in case to sail fair
before the wind; does he think, I say, that this work of the Spirit is the
only ground and call to the performance of this duty? and that till this be
once, there is no warrant to set about it, or attempt it? When we hear his
proofs for this, we shall consider them: At present, I shall only say; That as
there is nothing in all the word, giving ground for this conjecture; so the
frequently reiterated command of God (which himself acknowledges, and which we
find not qualified and restricted, as some commands are) laying on an
obligation, takes all color for such a pretense quite away: the word of
command being our rule, the obligation to duty flowing therefrom is not
enfringed by the Lords free not-blowings, or restrainings of the Influences of
his Spirit, wherein he acts according to the good pleasure of his will,
sometimes out of mere soveraignity, because so it seems good in his eyes,
sometimes in way of holy Justice, punishing for misimproving his former
breathings, for not watching over the heart, nor guarding against such sins
as grieve the Spirit. These motions of the Spirit are no rule to us, being the
free and arbitrary actings of the Lord, who gives an account of his matters to
none. The Law is our fixed rule: and by this opinion, the Law and Command of
God is made of none effect; for to all injunctions, this shifting return might
be given; Let the command be never so peremptour, and pressing; Yet till the
Spirit breath first, and act upon me, I can do nothing; and therefore am under
no obligation; And thus all conscience of and mourning for sin, all godly
sorrow for our indisposition for, and neglect of the duty, and all serious and
earnest prayer and wrestling with God for his breathing and gracious
quickenings, are taken away; and a plain path made for Neligence, Security,
Indifferency, and Deadness. And if this hold as to prayer, it will hold also as
to all other Christian duties; Yea and to all duties enjoined by the law and
light of nature; for neither can we perform these acceptably, and in a
gracious manner, without the special Breathings and Communications of divine
Influence and Assistance; and so, until such quickening and upstirring
breathings and gales of the Spirit come, we are not to love God, nor our
neighbor, to eat, drink and sleep; nor may the laboring man plow or sow:
nay, nor must we abstain from murder, adultery, incest, and other
wickednesses, that the very light of a natural conscience condemns: as if all
those commands were not given to us as rational creatures, under subjection, or
as Christians under the law and command of the Gospel; but only as creatures
and Christians so and so spiritually qualified and disposed; and as if the
Lord's gracious communications, which are acts of sovereign grace, let out
freely according to his own will and pleasure, without the least of our
deservings, were to restrick and limite the obligation of his laws: and as if
his free restrainings and withdrawings of these qualifying and disposeing
influences, did put a check unto, and control his Authority, as King and
Lawgiver. Whatever this man may think of this, I can put no other construction
upon it, than that it is a turning of the grace of God unto lasciviousness.
This same was the opinion of Swenckfeldus, H. Nicholas, the Father of the
Family of love. John Waldesse, the Antinomians of N. England, and of Del and
Saltmarsh:

5. He tells us next, in order to the clearing of the question Page 253. That
there is an inward and an outward Prayer. Answ. We know, there is a speaking to
God in the heart, when the voice is not heard 1 Samuel, 1:13. Neh. 2:4. there are
ejaculatory Prayers, swift posts sent to heaven, in thoughts, sighs and
groans Romans 8:26. Psalm. 6:6. and 12:5. and 79:11. And there is a speaking to
God with words, a glorifying of him with our glory and tongue Psalm. 57:8. and
108:1. which we are here mainly to consider, being speaking of solemn
worshipe: but this, though outwardly, as to the expressions, differenced from
the other; yet not rightly separated; for in all Prayer, the heart must speak
to God, for Prayer is an offering up of our desires to God Psalm* 62:8. and in
public and solemn Prayer, the heart must so speak, as the tongue must speak
also, and the gift of Prayer be employed, for the solemn and professed
glorifying of God, and for the edifying of others, who must hear and concur 1
Cor. 14:14, 15, 16, 17. Let us hear, how he explaineth these, Inward Prayer,
says he, is that secret introversion of soul, which being secretly done, and
the Light of Christ being wakened in the conscience, and so being humbled in
the sense of sin and unworthiness, breaths to God, and sends up constantly
secret desires unto Him, and to this he applies Luke 18: v. 1. 1 These. 5: v.
17. Ephesians. 6:18. Luke 21: v. 36. Answ. That there are secret groanings and
breathings unto God, I have shown: That to these, sense of sin and
unworthiness, as also sense of want, and dependence on God is requisite, with
Faith, Love, Zeal, Submission, and other graces, I teadily grant; and hence
infer, that if the places by him cited command this (as I think they do; and
also a constant habitual frame, and disposition for Prayer, with a readiness to
go about it on all occasions offered, without disputing or delay, and that with
constancy and perseverance) we cannot shift this inward Prayer, upon pretense
of the want either of a gracious frame, through the breathing of the Spirit; or
yet of a secret, strong and extraordinary impulse. But as to that introversion,
(whether he make it inward Prayer, or only a preparation to it, his words give
us no distinct account) remembering what was said of it above, we can neither
look upon it as inward Prayer (except it be inward Prayer to corrupt nature, or
to the Devil, and so, utterly abominable; seeing all our prayer is to be unto
God only, and to none else Mat. 4:10. Romans 10:14. Deuteronomy. 6:13. and 10:20.) not
as any fit preparation to prayer; for, as he did describe it to us before, it
did unman and unchristian the man, taking away all Sense and Reason, all
actions of Mind and Understanding, yea and all sense of sin and wants. And
further, this Light of Christ, is but the Light of Nature and of a natural
Conscience, which is common to all Men, as such; and so not that Light of
Christ, which is purchased by him, for all his own, and is conveyed in and by
the New Covenant of grace; the method where of is, that a soul be first
interessed in Christ by true faith, and united unto him, and then enjoy the
benefits and blessings promised. So that all this wakened light of the
con^cience, being but what is natural, is no gracious preparation unto a
serious approaching unto God, by prayer, through Jesus Christ; of whom the man,
in whom he supposes this wakening to be, after this Introversion, is wholly
ignorant, having never so much as heard of him. Nay, what he adds a little
thereafter, gives us a more clear discovery of the nau^htiness h^reof, as
(says he) this inward prayer is necessary at all times; so man so long as the
day of his visitation lasts, wants not an influence more or less, unto its
practice; for the soul is sooner introverted, and considers it self in the
presence of God, than it prays thus, in part. For, not to enquire of him,
whether a soul can make this introversion while the man is sleeping, and so can
pray inwardly; or not; nor to speak any more of that day of visitation, of
which we said enough above Chap. IX. this is enough to discover of what nature
it is, that every man, Jew, Heathen, Barbarian, etc. has influences* fitting
for it, and so it may be gone about, without grace in the heart, and without
the least rumore of Christ coming to the ear; yea it is in part done, when the
soul but introverts; that is, when the man goes in to himself, he goes out to
God or rather he goes in to the God that is within him, the God of this world,
the Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience; for, in the presence of what God else, can the introverted Pagan
consider himself, who is without Christ, an alien from the common wealth of
Israel, a stranger from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without
God in the world Ephesians. 2:12. And who walk in the vanity of their mind, having
the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance, that is in them, because of the blindness, or hardness of their
heart, who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness to
work all uncleanness with greediness Ephesians. 4:17, 18, 19?

6. But what means he by Outward Prayer? He says, This is, when the soul
(sisting in this exercise of Introversion, and feeling the Inspiration of the
divine Spirit) receives the powerfully inflowing power and liberty, the motion
and influence of the Spirit being superadded, either of emitting ejaculations
to himself in the heart, though not in an audible distinct voice, or of
speaking by words or groans, and that either, in public assemblies, or
privately, or under degustation, or tasteing. Answ. Not to take notice, that
speaking by groans, not being by any distinct articular voice, which others
can understand, might rather be referred to inward prayer, seeing none can
thereby particularly understand what the desire of the soul is, but God, who
knows the thoughts of the heart: Nor to trouble myself to search after the
meaning of this Quaker degustation, which is made a state of prayer, distinct
both from public and private prayer; and yet can by no etymology import
solitary prayer: I take notice (1.) That he speaks of ejaculations, without
any audible distinct voice, as belonging to this outward prayer, and as
distinct from inward prayer; whereby we perceive, that the breathings or
spirations of the soul unto God, in the introversion, which formerly he
mentioned, while speaking of inward prayer, were not ejaculations of desires to
God, but something necessarily previous; and what that is, he would do well to
explain. (2.) What means he by ejaculations emitted to man's self? (...) in
cord -- ejaculationes emittend^? Are ejaculatory prayers to be darted up to a
man's self? This looks like a piece of Quaker idolatry: for prayer, as we heard,
even ejaculatory, is to be performed to God alone. And how differs this from
a man's communing with his own heart P^al. 4:4. Eccles. 1:16. Psalm. 77:6? But
(3.) We see, that to public prayer this Introversion is requisite, as he more
fully affirms afterward; and that this Introversion was either humanely
impracticable, or diabolick, we cleared above Chap. XXII. And beside this
simple Introversion, there must be a continueing in it, and how long I know
not; He tells us himself, that sometimes, all the time of their public worshipe
is spent about this Introversion, and it issues in neither Prayer nor
Preaching. (4) Beside this Introversion, he says, there must be the
Inspiration of the Spirit, and not only that, but a feeling of the same
Inspiration: But what is this Inspiration? Is this a blowing of the Spirit upon
his own saving graces in the soul? No, that it cannot be; for this Inspiration
may be, where ever this Introversion is, and this Introversion may be in those,
who are yet without the Covenant with promises; so that it can be nothing, but
some perception of the Light of Nature, and dictats of a natural Conscience; if
it be not the breathings of the Spirit of darkness working in the soul. (5.)
Beside all this, there is a superadded motion and influence of the Spirit; but
for what end, he tells us not; nor clears he to us, how it is distinguished
from the Inspiration; unless by the Inspiration he means the immediate
Impulse, extraordinarily setting the soul to work; and by this Influence, a
power or work of the Spirit, qualifying or fitting the soul for the duty. But
then (6.) What can be the import of that powerfully inflowing efficacy and
liberty, to speak in words, etc? And how differs this from what was said
before? But now, when we have heard this unintelligible description of outward
prayer, we would desire one passage of Scripture, or instance to clear and
confirm the same to us: for the braine-sick non-sensical dictates of Quakers,
are neither a Rule, nor Confirmation to us of any thing, in the matters of God.

7. If he had spoken here, as he speaks a little afterward, of the Lords
pouring forth a Spirit of Prayer and exciteing his people to it, he had been
better understood, for we acknowledge with thankfulness, the Lord has made
such a promise, and does perform it unto his own, and by his Spirit moves
and exciteth their drouzie and sleeping souls to a serious calling upon him
Cant. 5:4, 6. But that this is common to all, as well without, as within the
Church; as well such as never heard of Christ, as those, who are truly unite
unto him by faith; or to all, who can make this Introversion, is a quakeristick
antiscriptural dream. And beside, what will this contribute unto the maine
business; to wit, to prove that there ought to be no prayer, in public or in
private, till this sensible Impulsion, Excitation, and Influence with liberty,
come, an^ set the soul and all its wheels agoing? And what will this say,
against calling upon God at times and seasons by him appointed? His saying Page
254. that praying to God without the feeling of the Influences of the Spirit,
were a coming unto God, without due preparation and so a tempting of him: Is
but a groundless imagination; and is ill helped by his Introversion; for the
Lord no where requires such a preparation in us, before we pray; He no where
says, that we must not pra^, but when we feel his influences; yea the sense of
the want of them, is ground and warrant for his children to go and seek to him
for them; Hence we find David so often Psalm. 119. crying for quickening verse.
25, 40, 88, 107, 154, 159. See also the Church crying for this preparation,
Psalm. 80: verse. 18. quicken us, and we will call upon thy name, as also Psalm.
143: verse. 11. But this man's preparation is a mere Pelagian preparation,
wrought by the strength of nature, and which a Pagan may attain unto, by his
own industry and pains: Nay, if this were true, all the commands to pray,
which are innumerable in Scripture, were useless, and might be eluded by this;
we dar not pray, till we feel the influences of the Spirit; and when they come,
to excite us and drive us to the duty, then we shall go: but then where would
obe^ience appear? for to go when the Spirit drives, is not filial obedience;
for then nothing is done out of conscience to a command. This way is the loose
way of Libertines, making the law of God of none effect, taking away all
conscience of sin, in this matter, looseing the wicked from obedience to the
Law, putting the blame of all not-praying, on the Spirit, who breaths not,
and breaths not so, as we may feel it. This excuse of the Quaker; to wit,
fear of tempting God, is like Ahaz's coloring his disobedience to the command
of God, with this, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord Iesa. 7:12.
The ground of all this, is the Pelagian maxim, which this man has laid down
as a principal ground of all his Religion, to wit, That God requires no duty
of us, but what we have full and complete strength to do, if we will use it.
Yet he tells us afterward, that they sin, who neglect to pray. But wherein lies
their sin? In this, says he, that they turn not into that place, where they
may feel that, whereby they may be led to pray. Ans. Though I plead not for
rash and inconsidera^ rushing into the presence of God, knowing that this is
another extremity to be shunned; yet there is a midst betwixt this, and a
waiting till extraordinary Impulses come; or till we feel the Influences of the
Spirit: And as for that Introversion, or turning-in to that place, which he
speaks of, he must clear it, and prove it better to me, than he has done,
before I can say that it is any man's duty to do so; and that in order to
prayer, or any other commanded duty. And then, seeing he told us before, that
they may be long Introverted, and yet the Spirit not suffer them to pray; the
duty is not done, and they want not the preparation, and so are guiltles. How
then can all the nonperformance of this duty be charged on this? He says
afterward, God may ofttimes call and invite to prayer, an^ they through
negligence do not hear. Which is very true; whether we speak of the call and
invitation of his word, or by passages of his providence, clearing up the
present exigent: but will he say, that this was all, which he meaned by the
inspiration, superadded motion and influence, powerfully inflowing strength and
liberty to pray, given by the Spirit to the soul, sisted in this Introversion?
And is this the exciteing with the poureing out the Spirit of prayer, which he
talks of? Is this the drawing of the Spirit, which he spoke of, in this same
Page? What incons^stancies are the^e?

8. After this confused and inconsistent, yea self-destroying stating of the
question, he comes Page 225.. 22. to prove their method in praying. And first
he cites these passages, where watching is joined with prayer, such as Mat.
2:42. Mark 13:33. and 14:38. Luke 21:36 Ans. Put Mat 24:42. makes no mention
of prayer. We willingly grant, that Watching and Prayer should go together, and
that we should watch in prayer, Col. 4: verse. 2. and unto prayer. 1 Pet. 4:7.
But this waching is not Introversion, but quite opposite thereunto. This
watching is an exerciseing of all the sanctified powers and faculties of the
soul, to keep the heart in a right frame, to guard against all temptations
tending to slacken diligence in this duty, or to mar the right discharge of
it; and a watching unto all opportunities of setting about this duty, and so a
plain and careful circumspection, and eyeing of adversaries, both within and
without: And so has no affinity with their abstracting from all Exercises,
Thoughts, and Motions of soul and mind, and going- in to consult we know not
well what. No, says he, this watching can be nothing but the souls attending
on the Spirit, that it may feel him leading unto prayers; and so watch that
opportunity. Ans. This is the thing which he should prove, and not poorly beg.
Though we willingly grant, there are kindly motions of the Spirit, fixing the
heart, and oyling it for this duty, and stirring up the leazie sleeping soul,
through preventing grace; and such sweet opportunities should not be carelessly
looked to: but the thing, which he should prove is, that the soul should never
set about this duty of Prayer, till it feel all this, and be sure of it: and
that this may be attained and felt, the soul is to go in, by his Introversion,
to natures light, or to common ^ifts within, which Pagans have, as well as
Christians; or to some Demon. And when he shall bring some Scripture evidence
to prove this, we shall consider it.

9. He cites next Romans 8:26, 27. by which indeed we learn, that it is the
Spirit that must help, and teach us how and for what to pray, and must quicken
those graces in us, which are requisite unto the right performance of this
duty; but how it can prove his method by Introversion, and there waiting for
the drawings and impulses of the Spirit, which we must feel before we set about
the duty, I see not; Yea, I think the text clearly enough imports the
contrary; to wit, that when the honest believer, out of conscience to the
command, with the little strength and ability he has, is aimeing at the duty,
and setting about it, the Spirit comes with seasonable help, and helps his
infirmities, and makes intercession for him, with groans, that cannot be
uttered, and this the greek word imports, to wit, the Spirit's lifting at the
load, lest the believer should be crushed under it: see Calvin and Beza, on the
place. But he frames an argument thus Page 256. If man knows not how he
should pray, nor can he pray without the help of the Spirit, then he prays in
vain without him: But the former is true. Therefore. Ans. What will this
conclusion do for his purpose? It comes not near to what he should prove, by
many stages. Will he hence infer; Therefore man should not pray until he feel
the Impulses, Motions, Influences and Drawings of the Spirit? By the like
consequence one might prove from Psalm. 127:1, 2. That no man should put to his
hand to build, and no man should set a watch upon the wales of a besieged city;
and no man should labor in his ordinary calling, till he find the
influenceing motions, and concurrence of the Spirit pouseing him forward, and
driveing him to the work. But how ridiculous this is, every one knows: To
tell a dream is sufficient to refute it.

10. He cites next Ephesians. 6:18. and Iud verse 20. And infers, that that is
as much, as if he had said, ye must never pray without watching unto it. Ans.
Because we are commanded to love the Lord withal our heart, soul and mind,
etc. will he say, that that is as much as if it were said, ye must never love
the Lord except it be with all your heart, etc? So he may say, we should never
pray, except we pray with all prayer; and we should never watch unto prayer,
except we watch with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints; for
these things are in the text too. But again, though we should never pray
without the Spirit, will it hence follow, that we should never set about the
duty, till first we feel the Leadings, Driveings, Motions and Inspirations of
the Spirit? And then lastly. Though we should never pray without watching unto
it, how will it follow, that we should never pray without an Introversion?
These things hang together like ropes of sand. What says he to the place of
Jude? Jude, says he, demonstrateth, that prayers in the holy Ghost are those,
whereby the Saints are built up in their most holy faith. And what then? Are no
prayers means to build up saints in their most holy faith, but such as are
gone about, after we have Introverted, and felt the Influence, Inspirations,
Leadings and Drawings of the holy Ghost? This is like the rest of the Quakers
consequences, loose and sandy.

11. He cites, 1 Cor. 12:3. -- No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost. And thence infers, far less can he be called upon
acceptably, without him. And what is this to the point? Say we, that any can
pray acceptably without the Spirit? It is one thing to pray without the
gracious and ordinary influences of the Spirit, helping our infirmities; and
another thing to pray with the feelings of the Impulses, Motions, Leadings,
Pouseings and Driveings of the Spirit: When will he conclude this last; which
is the thing he should conclude? He adds Paul 1 Cor. 14 t 15. said, he would
pray in the Spirit. And so should we all do, and with understanding too. But
this is an evident Testimony, says he, that he did not use to Pray without the
Spirit. Answ. Though the consequence be not good; yet I think the consequent is
true. But where says the Apostle, that except he felt the Motions and Drawings
and Inspirations of the Spirit, and that after he had Introverted, he would not
pray? And when he writteth to the Churches, and press^th them to pray for him 1
These, 5: verse. 25. 2 These. 3:1. Heb. 13:18. 2 Cor. 1:11, Phil. 1:19. Romans
15:30. Philem. 22. Col, 4:3. Where adds he that clause, If ye feel, after an
Introversion, the Inspirations Motions, Influences, and powerfully inflowing
might and liberty: so that they might not attempt it otherwise? Let him clear
this, and win the cause.

12. He adds All prayers without the Spirit are abomination Prove. 28: verse.
9. Answ. Though that be true of the wicked, yet I durst not say, they were not
called to pray; seeing it is a command of Natures Law. See Esai. 55:6. Ps.
107:19, 28. Exodus 22:23 Job 8:5. and 36:13. Ier. 36:7. and 42:9. Not to mention
the word of Peter to Simon Magus, of which afterward. I know the plowing of the
wicked is sin Prove. 21:4. Must therefore say, the wicked man must never plow?
The sacrifice of the wicked was also an abomination Prove. 15: v. 8. and 21:27.
was it therefore a good consequence, under the Law, that such persons should
have brought no sacrifices? Knows he not, that the substance of an act may be
good, and yet for want of several things, not be accepted at the hands of the
wicked? We know, that in many things we offend all, but he dreameth of
perfection. He adds 1 Ioh. 5:14. and thence infers, but if they seek not
according to his will, they have no cause to be confident, that he will hear
them. Which is very true, when they seek any thing, that is not consonant to
his revealed will. But what then? His adversaries, says he, grant that prayers
without the Spirit, are not according to the will of God. We grant indeed, that
as to the manner, such prayers are not according to the command; but John is
not speaking of the manner of prayer, but of the thing prayed for. What will he
say next? To command any to pray without the Spirit, is to command them to see
without eye, work without hands, or walk without feet. Answ. I knew, we should
land at Pelagianisme; Nay he is worse than Pelagius, for Pelagius only said,
that whatever God commanded us to do, he gave us sufficient strength to do it
with all; but this man says, except we know and feel that we have not only
sufficient, but all working strength, we have nothing to do with the command;
nay, except the Spirit, which must do all, come and move, carry and drive us
forward; yea and we feel it and know it, we are not once to take notice of the
command. This is Quakerisme indeed.

13. What he adds Page 256.. 23. of some turning superstitious, some
idolatrous and others formal, upon this account; if he mean it of all that
oppose him, and contradict his opinion, I look upon it, as a groundless calumny
if he mean it only of some, I have no mind to defend them in it: Nor shall I
need to retaliat, and say, that their leaning to these false Inspirations, and
diabolick Excitations, having forsaken the good old way, are direct means,
through the judgment of God, to confirm them in their Paganism, and Paganish
Antichristianisme; for the matter is notoure enough, though I mention none of
their other miscarriages, even after their Enthusiasmes, wicked Inspirations,
and Introversions.

14, Before he come to answer Objections, he speaks Page 25^. 24. to the
defense of their irreligious* profane and contemptuous carriage, in our
Assemblies for worshipe, where they love to come, to do open affront both ^o
God and men: for even in time of prayer or praise, they will remain covered,
He says, they do this only to keep their conscience unhurt. But if there were
such hazard of sin in joining with us in our worshipe; why come they to the
place of Worshipe? Their end can be nothing else, but to do open contempt: if
they believe, as he says, that our worshipe is an abomination, they should
keep far aback from it; But the truth is, their Antichristian Spirit, which
acts them to an hight of rage, will not suffer them to see Christ worshipped
in his way, And how knows he that our ministers pray always without the
Spirit? Has he the gift of discerning Spirits? And can he go in to the heart,
and see how matters stand there? We profess that we pray without the Spirit, and
have therefore our limited times, says he. But he is a liar, we say no such
thing. The gift and the grace of Prayer both is of the Spirit, and though it
too often falls out, that there is not that faith in dependence on the
Spirit, that there ought to be, both for the gift and for the grace; yet it is
not our profession, that prayer should be without the Spirit; and this praying
with the Spirit, can well consist with praying at such and such times. But that
Spirit, without which, we say, we pray, is your Spirit of delusion, or your
fantastical Dreams, Impulses, Drawings and Inspirations; which for any thing
we can see, are diabolical. But it seems, they have a sagacious Spirit of
discerning, when one prays in the Spirit, and when not: for he says, though
one in our presence, should begin to pray, not expecting the Spirit; yet if
it appeared that the Spirit of the Lord concurred with him, we would also join.
And what is that, I pray, that will make this manifest unto them? Is it talking
in the Quakers dialect; Or the Mimical posture of the body? Or what is it? I am
apt to believe, it must only be something of that nature. As for Alexander
Skeins Propositions, I meddle not with them, because some other has answered
them; and the substance of them I have already confuted.

15. He comes, after this digression, to examine Objections Page 260.. 25. And
the first is this. If such inward motions and impulses be necessary to Outward
acts o^ worshipe, why not also to Inward? Nay much more they must be necessary;
for the special motions of the Spirit are more necessary unto the grace of
prayer, than unto the gift; and in the outward exercises of worshipe, there is
more of a gift required, than in inward. What answers he? Unto these general
duties, the motion and influence of the Spirit, dureing the day of visitation,
is always present, striveing with the man; so that, if he but stand, and be
abstracted from his evil thoughts, God is near to help him: But external
actions stand in need of greater and more particular influences Ans. Not to
insist here on the confutation of the marrow of Pelagianisme, which is laid
down for his ground, tha^ being done sufficiently above; I only take notice
here, that with our Pelagian Quakers, an Heathen, or a Pagan, can love God with
all his heart, adore, fear, believe in him, and perform all inward worshipe of
this kind, easily, when he will; he has divine influences at his command;
nay, the Spirit is within already for that end; so that if he will but sist his
course, and abstract from his evil thoughts, which he may very easily do, God
is at his hand, and the work will go on; but as to uttering of words, much more
is requisite; that is, if I be not far mistaken, Nature can help him to perform
^ll Inward worshipe, but he must have the supervenient Influence of an evil
Spirit to act him, before he perform any public act of worshipe: Such an
enemy is this Spirit, that acts the Quakers, unto all Public profession of
the name of Jesus, and worshipping of him openly, that he will never suffer any
thing, that looks there away, to be done, until he have his hand so in it,
that he shall be sure, it shall be more worshipe and service to himself, than
to Christ:

16. It is Objected again. That by this principle, no man should do a moral
duty, as honor his parents, do justice to his neighbors, plow the land, until
the Spirit move him: for no service else can be accepted: He answers, There
is a difference betwixt those general duties, and particular acts of worshipe.
These are spiritual, and are commanded to be done by the Spirit. Those some way
answer their end, as to them whom they immediately concern, though they
proceed from a mere natural principle of self love Ans. Who denies that there
is a difference betwixt them: yet each of them must be performed in the right
manner, else they are not acceptable; and the right manner cannot be without
the Spirit. This he confesses: And therefore must yield the argument: And we
deny that worshipe is to be done in the Spirit, according to his sense, and no
other way: that is, only by the immediate Inspirations and Im^ulses and Drawings
of the Spirit; we affirm worshipe ought to be performed in the Spirit, that
is, by his gracious Assistance, graceing the soul, and breathing on his graces,
that they may act seasonably. But says he further, As a natural Spirit is
required to perform natural acts; so the Spirit of God is requisite to the
performance of Spiritual acts. All is granted: yet he knows, that to perform
natural acts in a spiritual manner, the Spirit of God is requisite; and if
natural acts be not performed in a spiritual manner, they are not accepted of
God: and therefore according to his principles, we must not eat, drink, sleep,
walk, work, plow etc. till the Spirit stir us up immediately, and carry us to
the duty; because without this previous motion of the Spirit, we will but
commit abomination, in all these actions; as well as in worshipping without the
Spirit. So that, if this man will speak consequentially, he must come to this
at length; for he will never be able to loose the connection.

17. Another Objection is. That thus a man may neglect prayer all his days,
alleiging the Spirit has not moved him to it: And indeed the Quakers doctrine
has a direct tendency, to the utter neglect, and laying aside of all the
worshipe of God, what answers he? He should come to that place or state,
where he may feel the Spirit leading him? That is, he should Introverte; but
when he has Introverted, he can pretend the Spirit does not yet breath; as
themselves do sometimes. They sin, says he, in not praying, but the cause
hereof is, they watch not. Nay, for themselves Watch and Introverte, and yet
pray not. Our adversaries say, says he, that no unworthy person should come to
the sacrament of the Supper, and such as know themselves unprepared should
absteane; and so, though it be a duty to come to this sacrament, yet it is
necessary, that they first examine themselves. Ans. (1.) The use of this
Sacrament is a part of instituted worshipe, and so may have its own
limitations, conditions and restrictions according to the will of the
Instituter; it is not so with prayer, which is a piece of moral natural
worshipe; incumbent to all, by the very law of Nature. The Scripture says
indeed, let a man examine himself, and so let him eat; but the Scripture says
not, let a man Introverte, and so let him pray. Under the law, no stranger was
to eat of the Paschal lamb, till he and his males were first circumcised; can
he show us any such condition put upon strangers, in reference to praying unto
God? (2.) In the matter of the sacrament, there is a previous condition
required of comers, and when that condition is performed, they must come, or
else sin: but the cond^tion, which he requires in the matter of prayer, may
he performed, and yet the person may not, must not pray; For though a man
introvert, and do all that is required of him in order to prayer; yet he must
not pray until the Spirit draw and inspire him. So that his simile halteth
miserably.

18. To the Objection, taken from Peter's enjoining prayer to Simon magus Act.
8:22. He says. That Peter bids him first repent; and the least measure of this
cannot be without some introversion. Ans. Peter bids him not repent in order to
prayer; but repent and pray in order to pardon: and so though he was in the
gall of bitterness, yet it was as well his duty to pray, as to repent: But, I
see, with our Quaker, a graceless person can repent, but he cannot pray; nature
can help him sufficiently to repent, but he must have some more before he be in
case to pray, or under an obligation to pray, with him. (2.) Though the least
measure of repentance could not be, without this Introversion; Yet what would
that avail? Simon Magus, though he had Repented and Introverted too, might not
pray until the Spirit Inspired him, and Acted and Drew him; if our Quaker speak
truth: And so Peter was mistaken, to enjoyne him to pray; and should have said,
Repent, and when thou art introverted, wait for the Spirit to draw, and
inspire thee to prayer; and then pray, and not till then.

19. The last Objection is, Many prayers begun without the Spirit, become
afterward affectual; yea the prayers of some wicked persons, as of Ahab, have
been heard and accepted. Ans. Of Ahabs humbling himself and fasting, etc. I
read, but I hear not of his prayers: but as to the first part of the Objection,
I think it strong and considerable* For who of the saints have not found it
true, that though they have gone about this duty, without these previous
impulses, yet have got a sat^sfying answer? Yet he answers. Acts of divine
indulgence, are no rule of our actions. The wicked are often sensible of the
motions and influences of the Spirit, before their day of visitation expire,
and by those motions they may some time pray acceptably, not remaining wholly
impious, but thus entering into the beginnings of piety, from which afterward
they fall away. Ans. (1.) Acts of divine indulgence, so frequently manifested,
are stron^ inducements and encouragments; and when they are conform to a
gracious promise they confirm the rule, which we walk by, and sufficiently
evince that there is no rule to the contrary. (2.) The motions and influences,
that wicked persons living without the Church are sensible of, are nothing but
the stirrings of a natural conscience: and such as some within the Church meet
with, who remain ungodly, are but common, and not special and saving. (3.) If
they be such, as will warrant acceptable prayer, they must be indeed special
and saving, strong and mighty Influences and Inspirations, giving great power
and liberty, and that after a serious Introversion; according to his doctrine.
(4.) Now at length we see, that all the great business of preparation for
prayer, by Introversion, by the Inspirations, Impulses, Motions, Influences,
and Drawings of the Spirit, is just nothing, but what a wicked wretch or a
Pagan is capable of. (5.) As for his day of visitation, and falling away from
grace, (which here he minceth, by calling it only beginnings of piety) we have
said enough above of both.

CHAP. XXV. Of singing Psalms.
1. AS to singing of Psalms he speaks but little Page 262.. 26. granting it a
part of divine worshipe, and sweet and pleasant, when coming from the sense of
God's love in the heart, and when it arises from the divine influence of the
Spirit, whether it be in words of David's Psalms, or of the songs of others,
such as Zachary, Simeon and Mary. And I need to say the less, seeing I have said
enough of this elsewhere, This man if he plaseth, may take some notice thereof,
in my last book on the Sabbath, where I am speaking of the right sanctification
of that day, in public. I grant, we are to sing with grace in our hearts to
the Lord, Col. 3:16. and we are to make melody in our heart to the Lord, Ephesians.
5:19. But I dar not say, that no man must sing, but he who has the sense of
Gods love in the heart, seeing I find so many Psalms sung, that were of a far
other strain, as for example David's Penitential Psalms, as they are called,
such as Psalm. 6. and 32. and 38. and 51. etc. as also that of Heman Psalm. 88
and others. As for the influence of the Spirit, I acknowledge, that without
that neither this, nor any other piece of worshipe can be rightly performed:
but that neither this, nor any other part of religious worshipe should be gone
about, till there come an Impulse of the Spirit; or till the soul find it self
in a fit frame, is that which I deny, for reasons given in the foregoing
Chapter.

2. What are then his exceptions, against our singing of Psalms? There is no
footstep, says he, in the Scriptures, of our formal and common way of singing.
Answ. The Scripture mentions singing, and commands us to sing; but, it is
true, prescribes not this, or that particular mode of singing; but leaves
that to our liberty, that it may be done according to the general rules of the
word, that is, that it be done with gravity, in a way suitable to the worshipe
of God, without vanity, lightness and affectation; and such, I suppose, is our
manner. Will he sing none, till he find what mode of singing is particularly
prescribed in the word? I fear he shall then lay it aside altogether: or will
he wait till the Spirit inspire the notes and manner, as the matter? where is
his warrant for this? is there a promise of such a communication?

3. He says next, our way has this peculiar abuse attending it, that thereby
frequently horride and abominable lies are uttered unto God, while every
profane wreatch must personate David's condition; and others also must sing
Psalm. 22:15. and 6:7. Answ. But he little considers, that the same abuse, if
it be an abuse, did attend their singing of old, as well as now; for these same
Psalms, and particularly Psalm. 6. and ^2. were put into the hands of the
chief musician, and so were to be sung publicly by others; And we conceive
the same of the rest, that want this express title, because of what we read 1 Chronicles. 16, 17. for there the 1^5 Psalm, which in the book of the Psalms has
not these words, To the chief musician etc. prefixed, is expressly said, to be
delivered by David, into the han^s of Asaph* and his brethren. And why may not
we sing with the words of David and of Asaph the Seer, as well as they did in
Hezekiah's days. 2 Chronicles. 29, 30? Could the Levites, and others that joined,
say all that of themselves, that David did say of himself? Hence then he may
see the ground of his mistake: for he supposes, we should sing nothing but
what is our own particular case, as if the dispensations of God^ toward
others of his Children, did not concern us; but what then means the Psalmist
Psalm. 66:6. to say He turned the sea into dry land, they went through the flood
on foot; there did we rejoice in him? How could he and others say, that they
rejoiced at the red sea, when the Lord brought his people through it, when they
were not then in being? And how is it, that such as had gotten victory over the
Beast, did sing the song of Moses, the servant of God Revel. 15:2, 3? As the
joyful, so the sad condition of others, being turned into a song, may be matter
of a song to us, as we are members of the same body; the favors and
deliveries, bestowed upon others, should be looked upon by us, as favors
conferred upon ourselves.

3. What next? And sometimes, immediately after singing, they will, says he, in
their prayers confess themselves guilty of these vices, for redemption from
which they had been praising God with David. The inconsistency here is in own
imagination, for he supposes, that the case of others, which we sing, we sing
it as immediately our own: But may we not bless and extol that God in praises,
who has redeemed others from these sins, under which we yet groan? And may
not the singing of this contribute to the strengthening of our faith and hope
of the like redemption? And may not we, in the singing of such experiences of
others, be raised up to see what an high and rich favor it is to be blessed
with such a redemption? And cannot all this be done without hypocrisy?

4. But now I would know, what sort of praises, and songs, they would offer
unto God? These, says he, that proceed from a pure heart, that is, from the
word of life in the heart. And cannot we sing from ^ pure heart in the words of
David, as well as they did, in the days of Hezekiah? But what is this word of
life in the heart, which is made the original and leader of their songs? It is
that sure, that is common to all men, Turks and Pagans, Scythians and
Barbarians: And we look not upon that, as grace, from whence spiritual songs
can arise. I would enquire, if the Spirit ever moves them in their Assemblies
to sing, and what for Psalms they sing? Are they immediately Inspired by the
Spirit, or not? If not, how can they, according to their own principles, sing
them? If they be immediately Inspired; how can others concur, who never heard
of them before? What if they do not agree with the present condition of every
member of the Assembly? And how can others sing with them, without the same
previous motion of the Spirit? Or is it enough, if one sing alone? And if so,
how can that be an act of public worshipe performed by the whole Assembly?
These things, if he be for singing at all, in the public worshipe of God, he
would do well to clear to us: And withal tell us, if the Spirit inspireth also
the meeter in the song, and the tone of the singing?

5. He tells us next, that there is no warrant in tht New Covenant for Organs
(which I plead not for, nor for any such instrument) nor for artificial music
with the voice. But if there be warrant for singing, (as there is, himself not
denying) there must be warrant for some sort of artificial music; for singing
is something else than reading or speaking: and how is it distinguished, but by
notes of modulation, and that must be either natural or artificial, and the
first mus^ be helped by the last, else in an Assembly, where one and the same
thing is sung by all, there will be a discord, instead of a concord: And for
the artifice, I shall not plead, that it be very fine: if it be modest and
grave, I am satisfied. And he knows, there is no great ground of exception
against our manner of singing, upon this account, in Scotland. This is all, he
has to say against our singing of Psalms, and why he does not declare unto
us, what their peculia^ way is, I know not.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Baptism.
1. TO manifest the perfect and compleet hatred, which this Paganish
Antichristian Spirit, which reigns and rages in the Quakers, has at all the
Insti^utions and Appointments of our Lord Jesus Christ, we have here a clear
demonstration of the hieght thereof; and of their design; as acted by the
same. It will not satisfy them to plead, with other Anabaptist^, against the
baptism of Children, and so be Antipaedobaptists; but they must be
Antibaptists and join with the late Ranters, H. Nicholas and Antinomians, as
enemies to the whole of the Institution; and so not only be against all the
Churches of Christ, from the very beginning of christianity to this day; but
also against all the Several Sects of Anabaptists, or Catabaptists, that we
have heard of; and join with Socinus, who at first, would have had this
Ordinance wholly laid aside: And dispising Socinus and his followers policy or
prudence, who afterward perceiving what an odium this would be to all
Christendom, and how detestable it would render them, condescended at length,
that the outward form should be observed; but peremptorily adhered to this,
that it was no Ordinance of Jesus Christ, constantly to be observed by the
Churches, by virtue of a command, but only a mere indifferent thing: These men,
with gigantine audacity, dar appear, and down right plead against any use of
it at all, upon any account: whence it is evident, that they would have this
Ordinance quite taken away, that so there might not be so much as an outward
sign of Christianity left, or any thing remaining, that might give the least
import or signification of a relation, that people have unto Jesus Christ, as
being once baptized in his name, and solemnly by profession given away to Him,
and publicly received in his Kingdom and visible Church, and so distinguished
from such as are without. What a paganish design this is, to take away all
outward and visible discriminating difference betwixt Christians and Turks or
Pagans, every one may see; Thus would they bring-in Pagans, as equally sharers
of all external privileges of the Church, with Christians; that so Christ might
have no distinct house, or Kingdom. This was several times hinted to us before,
but now the veil is taken off their faces, and their design is open and
manifest. Hereby also we see how near a kin this Spirit, that acts them, is
unto the Spirit, that covenanteth with and acts in the witches; for as these
miserable creatures must, in the entry of their covenanting with the Devil,
renunce their bap^isme; so the Quakers, as being more active and masculine
servants, will not only renunce it for themselves, but will have all others,
whom they can seduce to their party, do the like; and so far as they can by
their pen, make it null every where; that so the very profession of
Christianity might be banished out of the world. O! what desperate Runagadoes
must these men be?

2. We need not here spend time, in the confirmation of this Institution, which
was never, in all the ages of the Christian world, called in question, till
Antichristian Socinus, and Swenkfeldus arose, except what the Manichees of old
said, and a Seck called Whippers. It cannot be denied, that John baptist had a
commission from heaven to baptize. Ioh. 1:25, 26, 28, 33. Luke 3:2, 3. Mat.
11:25. Luk: 7:29, 30. It is also certain, that Christ, who came to fulfill all
righteousness, did submit unto it. Mat. 3:13 etc. Mark. 1:9. It is likewise
unquestionable, that the disciples of Christ baptized, which would not have
been without his warrant; for it is said of him, that he baptized, though not
in his own person Ioh. 3:22. and 4:1, 2. And a commission is amply, and in
full form, given to the disciples, by him, after the resurrection, to baptize
in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28:19. Mark.
16:15:16. And it is no less evident, that in obedience to this command, his
Apostles did baptize, wherever they came, and made converts. Act. 2:41. and
8:12, 13, 38. and 9:18. and 10:48. and 16:15, 33. and 18:8. and 22:16. 1 Cor.
1:13. What unparalleled boldness must it then be, to call this ordinance into
question, which has such a divine original, such a manifest divine warrant,
and was so religiously observed by the Apostles, and by all the Churches of
Christ, since their days, unto this very day* And who can sufficiently admire
the madness of these men, who would have us lay aside and cast away such an
ordinance, so appointed, and so observed; and which withal is so useful and
necessary, being not only ordained to be for a solemn admission of the party
baptized into the visible Church. 1 Cor. 12, 13. but also to be a sign and a
seal of the covenant of grace, (whereof these Quakers know nothing) Romans 4:11.
Col. 2:11, 12. And to be unto the believer a sign and seal of his ingrafting
into Christ. Gal. 3:27. Romans 6:5. of his Regeneration Tit. 3:5. of Remission of
sins. Mark 1:4. of his Adoption. Gal. 3:26, 27. and Resurrection unto life. 1
Cor. 15:13. And of his giving up unto God, through Jesus Christ, to walk in
newness of life Romans 6:4, And by which, when rightly used, the grace promised
is not only offered, but really exhibited and conferred, by the holy Ghost to
such (whether of age, or Infants) as that grace belongs unto, according to
the counsel of God's own will, in his appointed time Gal. 3:27. Tit. 3:5.
Ephesians. 4:25, 26. Act. 2:38, 41. Would we but seriously ponder, What is briefly
set down in answer to the 167. Question, in our Larger Catechism, we might
see what desperate enemies unto true Christianity these Quakers are, who would
despoile us of this profitable and advantageous Ordinance, which might and
should be improved to rich advantage. How is our baptism to be improved by us?
Answ. The needful but much neglected duty of our improving our Baptism, is to
be performed by us, all our life long, especially in the time of temptation,
and when we are present at the administration of it to others (Col. 2:11, 12.
Romans 6:4, 6, 11.) by serious and thankful consideration of the nature of it,
and of the ends, for which Christ instituted it, the privileges and benefits
conferred and sealed thereby, and our solemn Vow made therein. (Romans 6:3, 4,
5.) by being humbled by our sinful defilements, our falling short of and
walking contrary to the grace of baptism and our engagments. 1 Cor. 1:11, 12,
13. Romans 6:2, 3) by growing up to assurance of pardon of sin, and of all other
blessings sealed to us in that sacrament (Romans 4:11, 12. 1 Pet. 3:21.) by
drawing strength from the death and resurrection of Christ, into whom we are
baptized, for the mortifying of sin and quickening of grace (Romans 6:3, 4, 5.)
and by endeavoring to live by faith (Gal. 3:26, 27) to have our conversation
in holiness and righteousness. (Romans 6:22.) As those that have therein given up
their names to Christ (Act 2:28.) and to walk in brotherly love, as being
baptized by the same Spirit, into one body (1 Cor. 12:13, 25, 26, 27.

3. These things considered, and thereby it being manifestly discovered, what a
relation this Ordinance has unto the cardinal duties and privileges of
Christians, to wit, Faith, Repentance, Remission of sins; Regeneration,
Adoption, Justification, Sanctification and Salvation. Luke 3:3. Mark 16:16.
Act. 2* 38, 41. and 8:36, 37. and 16:14. and 18:8. and 12:6. Romans 3:4, 5, 6. 1
Cor. 12:13. Gal. 3:27. Ephesians. 4:5. Col. 2:2. 1 Pet. 3:21. And withal
considering how dangerous it is to neglect it, and contemn it. Luk 7:39. And
how by Christ's own appointment, it is to be continued in his Church, until
the end of the world Mat. 28:19, 20. We see a necessity of maintaining it; and
withal have ground of hope, and confidence, that Christ, who, when he had
given this in commission to his disciples, to teach all nations, baptizeing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, promised
to be with them always, even unto the end of the world, will own this Ordinance
by his power and presence, and rub shame on these professed enemies to the very
name of Christianity; and defate all their desperate Counsels and Machinations.
Amen.

4. It is time now we see, what this man would say. Toward the end of his
harrangue, (which we have nothing to do with) with which he ushereth-in his
discourse upon this subject, he tells us Page 165. That there have been more
contests and disputs about the Sacraments, than about any other Christian
doctrine. And good man, so tender is he of the peace of Christianity, that to
prevent any further disput, and to end all these many controversies, he has
found out a medium; that is, to take them away altogether; as if a man would
deny all Christianity, to the end, all controversies in Christianity might
cease, and we might live all together in peace, and believe no more of
Christianity, than Pagans; such a short cut has this man found out, to bring
us all to an agreement among ourselves, by becoming all Pagans: And yet this
peacable man, is a wild man for Ismael-like, his hand is against every man,
and every man's hand is against him; for all those who upon each side, maintain
these controversies; do own their being, and would defend the same against
him, and many of their controversies thereabout speak out their care to
maintain this Ordinance.

5. He takes, in the first place, exceptions, at the name Sacrament, as not
being a term found in Scripture; So tender would he seem to be of all things:
But I pray him tell me, where, in all the Scripture, reads he of his
Introversion; a very great matter with him? Where reads he of fermentation,
of the vehicle of God, and I know not how many more? He is beholden to the
Socinians for this exception: and they will tell him also, he must except
against the Trinity, upon the same ground: It is a poor thing to move debates
about a word, especially for him, who denies the thing. Knows he not, what
we mean by that word? Knows he not, that we are not masters of words, but
that use rules that? But says he, if this name be laid aside, the
controversy about the number of Sacraments is at an end, for there will be no
Scripture term found, that will give occasion to that debate. No? He is
mistaken: the same debate will remain, if instead of Sacrament, we use signs
and seals of the Covenant, and these are Scripture terms, Genesis 17:7, 10. Romans
4:12. Knows he not, that in that debate, the question is not about the name,
but about the thing imported by the name? This he is not sensible of; for says
he, if we define a Sacrament, to be an outward sign, whereby an inward grace
is either conferred, or only signified, that will agree to many other things.
No sure, if we define a Sacrament to be an outward visible sign, whereby
inward grace is not only signified, but really exhibited and conferred to the
worthy partakers: far less, if we define a Sacrament thus. An holy sign and
seal of the Covenant of grace, representing Christ and his benefits, and
confirming to the right receivers, their interest in him. Can this definition,
thinks he, agree to any other thing, to Prayer, Preaching, or any good work?
But, says he, the Spirit only is called the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians.
1:14. and 4:30. 2 Cor. 1:22. And profane men may partake of the Sacraments.
Ans. That the holy Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, and does seal
believers unto the day of redemption, inwardly by his grace in the soul, and by
his abideing there, as a sure and real pawn of the future inheritance, is most
true; but yet the Sacraments may be and are outward seals and pledges, unto the
true believer: hence 1 Cor. 10:16. the cup of blessing is called the communion
of the blood of Christ; and the bread, the communion of the body of Christ, as
not only representing it, but as sealing to the believer, his real interest in
the body and blood of Christ. So also it is called the New Testament in Christ's
blood, 1 Cor. 11:25. As Circumcision was a sign and a seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4:11. So believers are buried with Christ in
Baptism, and risen with him, through the faith of the operation of Go^, Col.
2:12. Romans 6:4* 5. Thou^h wicked persons may partake of the outward elements,
yet they become no seal unto them; because the Sacraments seal only unto them,
who have the righteousness of faith; and exhibit the benefits only to the
worthy receivers: that is, to such as believe in Christ, and are united to him
by faith.

5. To the end he may quite destroy and abolish this Ordinance of Baptism, he
lays down three Propositions. 3. the proving of which, he supposes, will
evince, that there is no such ordinance as Baptism. The first is. That there
is only one Baptism, Ephesians. 4 5. Ans. But the Scripture no where says that
there is but one Baptism. Yet what would he make of this? Not to mention the
Baptism of affliction, Mat. 20:22. nor that extraordinary Baptism, whereby
the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost were conferred Act. 1:5 as not being
here understood; because the consideration of either, or both of these, has no
interest in the argument, which the Apostle is here adduceing, to press an
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace verse. 3. The
Baptism here meaned, is the Baptism, which we contend for, the outward sign
and seal of the new Covenant, whereby all visible professors are solemnly
admitted into the Church and Kingdom of Christ; And this Baptism is one, not
only because it is not to be reiterated; but because it is the same way
administered, and has the sam^ ends and uses to all visible Profess^urs, unto
whom Paul is here speaking: Yet we must not consider hereby the bare outward
element, abstracted from what is thereby signified, or from its ends and uses,
according to the Institution; but the whole Institution including both the
outward element, and the thing represented and sealed thereby; or the Ordinance
with its ends and uses. But our Quaker thinks, that this will make two
Baptismes, while as there is but one, as there is one faith, etc. And here
lies the whole ground of his mistake. And upon this same ground, he might say,
there were two circumcisions under the Law, because sometimes the inward grace,
signified and represented by the outward act, and really bestowed upon
believers, is called circumcision; as where mention is made of circumcision of
the heart Deuteronomy. 30:6. And because the Apostle says, Romans 2:28, 29. -- neither
is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, but circumcision is that
of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men,
but of God. And Col. 2:11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumsicion made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh. But who would not smile at this? The Apostle says here also, there is
one faith. And upon the same ground, our Quaker might argue, that the doctrine
of the Gospel, which is the object of faith, is not faith, though the same
Apostle calls it so, Gal. 1:23. and elsewhere; and that the outward
Profession of the truth is not faith, though it be so called, Act, 8:13. 1 Timothy
1: ver. 19. and 3:9. and 4:1. hence the historical and temporary faith, and the
faith of miracles, should be no faith; because not the faith here meaned. As
also because the Apostle says here, there is one body, he might thus reason*
Either the mystical body of believers is not the body; or the universal company
of Professors is not the body, But as the body here comprehends both, and
the Faith takes in both the outward profession, and the inward grace; so the
Baptism comprehends both that which is inward and outward, not the one with
the exclusion of the other, as making up that one, Ordinance of Baptism, the
consideration of which, is a strong motive to union among Church Members, made
partakers thereof. But he thinks, that he is confirmed in his opinion, if we
say, that the water is one part of Baptism, as being the sign, and the Spirit
is the other, as being the thing signified. But we take the thing signified to
be Christ and his benefits; for it seals to the believer an interest in him,
and all the promises of the new Covenant, whereof the promise of the Spirit is
a grand and comprehensive one. Let us hear his reason. For says he, if water
be the sign, it is not the matter of the one Baptism; and the one Baptism is
to be taken for the matter, and not for the figure, type or sign. Answ. Whether
he call it matter or sign (as a figure or type we own it not) this is certain,
that the outward element administered according to appointment, is the outward
visible part of that Baptism, which comprehends both the outward and inward
part. But he supposes, we say it is a part of the inward grace; which is his
dream: and he speaks of the inward grace, as separated, and considered wholly
as distinct from the outward part; and will have it only called Christ's
Baptism: which may be true in some sense, because it is it which he does and
works by his Spirit: but it is not that baptism, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 4. that, so abstractly and separatly considered, having no
force of an argument or motive in it, to press Visible Professors to an
endeavoring of unity; but as conjoined with this outward administration,
wherein all were solemnly dedicate to God, and whereby they were solemnly
admitted as members of one visible body, and visibly separated and differenced
from all the rest of the world, and so, engadged to be wholly and only the
Lords, and to lay out themselves for the good one of another, and to seek by
all lawful means possible, the welfare and felicity of the whole body, and to
demean themselves as members one of another, for the glory of their one Head
Christ. This is plain and obvious to every one, that will but open his eyes.
See 1 Cor. 12:12, 13, 14, 25, 26, 27.

6. Having laid this sandy foundation, in his mistake of that one baptism
mentioned by Paul, Ephesians. 4: verse. 5. he procee^eth to his second Proposition
Page 267. which is this, That this one baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is
not the washing of water, Mat. 3: verse. 11. Hence he argues Page 268. If they,
who were baptized by the baptism of water, were not therefore baptized by the
baptism of Christ, then the baptism of water is not the baptism of Christ.
But the first is true. Therefore etc. Again, If they who did truly and really
administrate the baptism of water, did nevertheless declare, that they neither
did nor could baptize with the baptism of Christ; then the baptism of water
is not the baptism of Christ But etc. Ans. This man's trumph, though he stand
upon the shoulders of his friend Socinus, who spoke thus before him, is a mere
glorying in a thing of naught, and both his arguments may be blown away with
one distinction; thus, if those who were baptized with the baptism of water,
were not therefore baptized with that baptism, which Christ himself by his
Spirit, and not by the ministry of men, was to administrate, than the baptism
of water is not this baptism, which Christ was to perform by his Spirit,
without the ministry of men, true: then the baptism of water is not the
baptism which Christ has instituted, this is false. The Assumption is only
true in the first sense, and not in the last. And so his Conclusion proves
nothing. The baptism of water and this baptism, of the Spirit are different,
we confess; and the baptism by water is not the external part of this
baptism of the Holy Ghost, nor a sign, far less a type or figure: nor is
this baptism of the holy Ghost the baptism, whereof the Apostle speaks
Ephesians. 4* 5. Nor is this baptism that, which Christ did institute, and whereof
we speak. He cites further. Act. 1* 4, 5. but to no purpose, for we confess
this baptism, where with Christ was to baptize the Apostles, was far different
from that, which John did administrate; and from what Christ's own disciples
did, and were, after his resurrection, according to his injunction, to
administer, and which is it, we speak of. To the same purpose he cites Page
269. Act. 11:16 whereby every one may see what that baptism was, which is
mentioned, as differing from John's. But what is there here to prove, that only
this baptism with the holy Ghost is to be called Christ's baptism, and none
else? or that there is no other baptism now to be administered? And who, I
pray, shall be the administrators thereof? But, says he, if there be now but
one Baptism, as is proved, this baptism, must be the baptism of the Spirit.
But where reads he of but one baptism? And as to the consequent, how does it
follow? Rather the contrary, seeing that baptism of the holy Ghost and with
fire is ceased: on whom, I pray, does the holy Ghost now fall, as it did on the
Apostles Act. 2: verse 4. and on those Act. 11? who are thereby enabled to speak
now with strange tongues? Are the Quakers thus baptized? why do they not
evidence it by their extraordinary gifts? if not, why do they not hold one
baptism, till they get another? But then, says he, I^ should not be Christ's
baptism that remains. Answ. It should not be that baptism by the ^oly
Ghost, which he promised to his disciples, it is true; but it is false to say
it should not be that baptism, which Christ did institute, and appoint his
Apostles to administer. Read we not of some baptized in the name of Christ, who
yet had received none of these gifts Act. 8:16. and yet sure, that baptism was
Christ's. His following words, I have nothing to do with; for I say not, that
John's Baptism was a figure of this extraordinary baptism by the holy Ghost,
and by fi^e. I observe moreover another piece of this man's ignorance or
deceit, whereupon he would found his discourse here: he imagines, that these
extraordiry gifts of the holy Ghost, are the same with the Spiritual things
signified, conferred, and sealed in baptism. And when the man does shut his
eyes, and then run on furiously in his blindness, what can we do, but stand by
and be sorry at his folly and madness? Hence he will have none said to be
baptized in the Spirit, but such as are baptized and endued with these
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; and because we admit not now such a baptism
of the Spirit, he infers, that we are only for the bare form and shadow of
baptism, and he is for the substance. Who would not pity such a man, that
takes upon him to condemn, (as the Manichees did of old, and a Seck called
the Whippers, that arose in the 13. Century) our baptism; and therein to
condemn all the Churches of Christ, when he has need to go in among the
Catechumens and be catechized. I say aga^ne, if he and his fraternity be thus
baptized with the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles were, and these mentioned Act.
11. Why do they not show it? The fire in the Apostles could not be hid, they
spoke with tongues; but our Quakers do no such thing (except by a new kind of
nonsense he would have us understand their speaking with tongues: And indeed
they are all baptized with this baptism) These were extraordinarily endued
with learning and all abilities, to set forward the Kingdom of Christ: but our
Quakers are ignorant, and yet they imagine they are learned; and with what they
have, they destroy, so far as they can, this kingdom; and therefore if they be
extraordinarily baptized with a S^irit, it must be with a blake Spirit,
Christ's enemy. And further, the baptism of the holy Ghost, with which the
Apostles were baptized, made them not enraged against the baptism of water,
but more careful to observe it, and administrate it, according to Christ's
appointment; and that even to such, as had also received that extraordinary
baptism: As Act. 11. these same persons, on whom the holy Ghost fell, were
baptized with water. But it is otherwise with our Quakers, the Ghost, which
they suppose themselves baptized with, is a Ghost opposite to all Christ's
Appointments. Let them then consider, whence he came, and whether he leads
them.

7. He cites further Page 270. 1 Pet. 3:21. plowing with Socinus's hifer, and
supposes, that there is here given a definition of Baptism, and it is true
the Apostle shows what that baptism was, which he was speaking of, to wit,
not the bare outward element, and the application thereof, which alone cannot
be effectual to salvation; but the principal thing here requisite is, the
answer of a good conscience, which all must have, who shall expect any good of
Baptism; And thus the Apostle does plainly establish this Ordinance, as a like
figure unto that* whereunto Noah's Ark was a figure, which proved a mean of
saving none, but faithful Noah and his family: And this truth we own, to wit,
that the outward washing of water can save none, where there is not the
stipulation of a good conscience toward God. Shall we hence with Swenkfeldus
(whom Calvin on the place confuteth) say, that the outward Ordinance is null?
Or shall we with Papists stick in the outward element? No; Christ's way is the
best; we own both what is inward, and what is outward, and give each its due
place. What would our Quaker now say? He sideth with Schwenckfeldus, and
Saltmarsh, and would have the outward part wholly laid aside, and why? Because
Peter says, Baptism is not the putting away the filth of the Flesh. Ans.
Peter says not, that there is no putting away of the filth of the Flesh, in
Baptism; but that the baptism, which will save, must have some other thing,
then outward washing; to wit, the answer of a good conscience toward God.
Again he joyneth with Papists, and will have baptism to be that, which was
really typified by the Ark, while as it is but a corresponding exemplar,
carrying some analogy or proportion therewith: let him Read Calvin and Beza on
the place. But says he, As all in the Arkwere saved by water, so all should be
saved by outward washing, if that were baptism. Answ. If we made the outward
washing, as separated from the inward grace, the whole of Baptism; the Quaker
had some color to speak thus: but when we speak of Baptism, as saving, we
comprehend both the outward washing and the inward grace, the answer of a good
conscience; for where this is not, the outward washing in baptism is
ineffectual: One thing more, How will this Quaker prove, that this answer of a
good conscience, is the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which were poured
forth upon the Apostles? Or is that baptism by the holy Ghost and by fire,
whereof Christ speaks, Act. 1:4? His saying Page 270. that none can give this
answer, but they whose soul the Spirit of God has purified, and whose corrupt
nature, the fire of his judgments has consumed, is but to show his profane
dexterity in allegorizein^, and playing with the word of truth; let him plainly
tell us, if he thinks, the Apostles had no grace, no corruption purified,
until the day of Pentecost came; and so that the thing, which Christ had
promised, and which then was fulfilled, was this Spirit of Sanctification, and
nothing else? And if he dar not say this, let him consider, to how little
purpose all this is said.

8. He cites also, but to the same purpose (stealing from Socinus) Romans 6:3,
4. Gal. 3:27. Col. 2:12. for the Apostle is not speaking of the outward
washing, abstracted from the inward grace; but is speaking of whole baptism,
and that as a^ministred to such, as he supposed believers, and speaks unto as
such, pressing duties and mentioning privileges, that agree to them only: And
thus all which our Quaker says, is obviated; for we say not, that the things,
there mentioned, are to be understood of bare outward washing, but of the
Ordinance, which includes the inward grace, in order to these privileges and
benefits. We do not say, that all who are only outwardly washen in baptism,
are therefore crucified with Christ, or have put him on; but that baptism
seals this to such as do really believe. But let us hear his arguments. If
the baptism of water, was that one baptism, that is, the baptism of Christ:
then as many as were baptized with water, did put on Christ. But this is false.
Therefore. etc. Again, If so many as are baptized into Christ, that is, with
that one Baptism, which is Christ's baptism, have put on Christ, then the
baptism of water is not the one baptism, the baptism of Christ. But the
former is true: Therefore etc. Ans. Not to trouble him with that distinction,
which yet enervateth both his arguments, viz. That such as are baptized with
water, and have no more, though they have not put on Christ in truth and
reality; Yet they have put on Christ in profession, and thereby have publicly
declared their engadgment to the duties pressed: Conform to what was said, I
Answer to his first argument thus. If the baptism of water, abstracted and
separated from the answer of a good conscience, was the baptism of Christ,
then his Minor is true: But if baptism of water, and the answer of a good
conscience, therein required, be Christ's baptism, then it is true, that as
many as are thus baptized, have put on Christ; and so his Minor is false, and
his Conclusion is vain. So as to his second arg. I Answer thus, if so many,
as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, then the baptism of water
without the answer of a good conscience, is not that one baptism; true: then
the baptism of water including the answer of a good conscience is not that one
baptism; It is false. The Minor is true of this last, but not of the former;
and so again his conclusion is a non-sequitur. Thus he may see his folly, in
disioyning and separating, what should be conjunctly considered. In all this,
what has he said, to Prove, that the baptism, whereof the Apostle speaks in
the places cited, is nothing else, then the very baptism of the holy Ghost and
of fire, wherewith the Apostles were baptized in the day of Pentecost? One
might admire at this man's folly, in all this discourse; but we cannot expect
better from the Quakers.

9. After this he gives us Page 272.. 5. his Third Proposition, which he has
learned, belike, of Saltmarsh the Antinomian or Familist; and it is th^s, That
John's Baptism was a figure of Christ's, and when Christ's, baptism is come,
the figure must cease. That is, John's baptism was a figure of that baptism
with the holy Ghost and with fire, with which the Apostles were baptized on the
day of Pentecost: And thus we see, that no part of this proposition is true; It
is not true, (how confident so ever he be of the truth of it) that John's
baptism was a type of this; nor is it true, that when this came, the baptism
of water (which he means, by John's baptism) ceased, but rather increased,
for that very same day, there were three thousand persons baptized Act. 2:41.
He proves that John's baptism was a type of this, because the baptism of
water is a figure of the baptism of the Spirit. Which is also denied, and is
but a fiction of his own brain. But he proves his Proposition thus. No
baptism is now to be continued, but the one Baptism of Christ: Therefore the
Baptism of water is not to be continued; for that is not Christ's baptism.
Ans. If by the one baptism of Christ he mean, the baptism with the holy
Ghost and with fire, the Anteced. is false: if he mean the baptism which
Christ has instituted, it is true, and his consequence is null: For baptism
with water is institute by Christ; and therefore is his, and is only that one
baptism, mentioned by Paul Ephesians. 4:5. which the Quaker might see, if he
would; for he dar not say, that all the members of the primitive Church and of
Ephesus were baptized with the Baptism, wherewith the Apostles were baptized
on pentecost day, and some few others afterward. But he will prove that John's
baptism is wholly ceased, from John. 3:30. where John speaking of Christ
says, he must increase, and I must decrease: As if John and baptism with
water were all one, and Christ one and the same with the baptism of the holy
Ghost.

10. When this will not do, he tries another way, and goes about to prove,
that baptism by water is ceased, by this argument. If baptism by water be an
ordinance, that was to continue; then Christ would either have used it himself,
baptizing some, contrare to Ioh. 4:2. or would have commanded his Apostles to
have used it. But this I could never find written, says he, Answ. Though
Christ did it not himself: Yet his disciples did it, with his warrant and
approbation, at least; if not an express command: For though we read not of an
express command given before his resurrection; Yet the usual and constant
practice of the disciples, in his presence, says, they wanted not his warrant.
Neither were they ^o rash, as to take up a practice in the worshipe of God, at
their own hand, and continue it, without all divine warrant: And though they
had been so rash, yet we may not think, that Christ was so untender, in the
matters of worshipe, and so little careful of the Christian deportment of his
disciples; as not to rebuke them for will worshipe; or to suffer them to
continue so long in that sin, without once challenging them, and rebuking them
for it. We infer from their continued practice, a divine warrant, till he let
us see an express, or a virtual prohibition: He may thank the Socinians for
this. We find also an express command given to his Apostles, Mat. 28:18. And
we find a constant practice of this through the Acts of the Apostles; and
their practice, after they were endued with an infallible Spirit, and
authorized with power to establish Gospel ordinances, is warrant enough for us,
though there were no more. So that this argument of his is every way weak.

11. He adds another Socinian argument. 6. Page 273. saying, that it is
contrary to the nature of Christian Religion, which is pure and spiritual, And
why so? This washing with water, says he, was a legal rite Heb. 9:10. Answ.
That under the Law there were several ritual and typical washings, is true; but
that the baptism of water unto repentance, and in the name of the Father, Son
and holy Ghost, was of the same nature, is not only false; but the asserting of
it, is a manifest condemnation of John Baptist, of Christ himself, and of his
Apostles: John Baptist had an express command for it; which needed not, if it
had been of the same nature with the legal ritual washings: It is called the
baptism of repentance, Mark. 1* 4. Luke 3:3. Act. 19:4. which we read not said
of the ritual washings under the Law. It had a strick connection with his
doctrine, which was not legal: hence Peter says Act. 10* verse. 37. -- after
the baptism, which John preached. Christ himself appointed it to be observed
unto the end of the world, Mat. 28:19, 20. The Apostles, who were crying down
the Law of ceremonies, did nevertheless constantly in all Churches practice
this. And in their Epistles teach us, what excellent use and improvement, we
are to make of it, as was seen above. All which says, that it is a notorious
untruth, to say that it is repugnant to a Gospel state. Nay the Apostle, even
in that Epistle to the Hebrews, where he is showing the nullity of all the
ceremonial rites used under the Law, now under the Gospel, asserteth the
doctrine of baptismes, to be one of the foundations. Heb. 6:1, 2, And in these
Epistles, where he speaks most against the Ceremonial Law, as ^o the Romans,
Colossians and Galatians, he makes honorable mention of baptism, and
points forth the noble advantages had thereby, and uses that should be made
thereof. And shall we think, that when Peter said to the Jews, Act. 2:38. --
Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, he looked upon bap^isme as nothing else then as some of
their legal washings? And would Christ have spoken so of it, as he does Mark.
16:16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved? But to show, that it
is of the same nature with these, He says, the matter is the same, the Author
is the same: And the ends are the same, he thinks, because the end is but to
signify inward purification by outward washing. Wherein his mistake is
ma^ifest, for we have shown, that our baptism is instituted to be a sign and
seal of ingrafting into Christ. Gal. 3:2. of Remission ^f sins Mark 1: verse. 4.
of Regeneration Tit. 3:5. of Adoption Gal. 3:26, 27. of Resurrection unto
eternal life 1 Cor. 15:29. Romans 6:5 And to point forth other duties toward
members of the same body, Ephesians. 4:5. 1 Cor. 12:12, 13, 14, 15. Can he
demonstrate these of legal purifications? We value not his crying out, that we
herein judaize, seeing it is a falsely grounded blaspemous reflection, injurious
to Christ and his Apostles; and therefore we may bear it the more patiently.

12. He cites next (stealing it from Socinus) 1 Cor. 1:17. And thus argues,
If baptism with water were a Gospel institution, Paul would have been sent to
administer it But he says the contrare. Therefore. Ans. (1.) If Paul had not
been sent to baptize, why would he have done it? He tells us, that he baptized
even some at Corinth. But says our Quaker Page 276. this was to comply with
them in their weakness, as elsewhere he circumcised Timothy And if so why did
he not also circumcise some of them, as he did Timothy? Did ever the Apostle
Paul practice Jewish ceremonies among the Gentiles, such as these Corinthians
were, to comply with them? Why was he then so offende^ at Peter Gal. 2?
Timothies mother was a Jewesse, and he circumcised him because of the Jews,
which were in these quarters, Act. 16:1, 3. But hear what he says of Titus
Gal. 2:3, 4, 5. But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was
compelled to be circumcised, and that because of false brethren unawares
brought in who came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus* that they might bring us into bondage. To whom we gave place, by
subjection, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might ^ontinue
with you. (2.) Not only at Corinth did Paul baptize, but elsewhere also. Act.
16: verse. 15.33. And shall we think, that Paul would have done this, without a
commission? (3.) These words therefore must not be simply, but comparatively
understood; as if he had said, my principal business was not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel. See the like expressions Ier. 7* 22, 23. Ioh. 15:22* 24. and
Hos. 6:6. I desired mercy and not sacrifice, etc. To this our Quaker says, It
is added, and the knowledge of God, more then brunt offerings, and so brunt
offerings are not excluded: But there is no such thing there. But that
posteriour expression learneth us, how to interpret the prior. And what says
he to Christ's saying simply, goeye and learn what that means, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, and that twice over Mat. 9, 13. and 12:7. and in
neither of the places, adds he the latter clause, must we therefore take his
meaning to be simply this, that God would not have sacrifices, because he
adds not the explication? (4.) Why should Paul have said simply, that he was
not sent to baptize? Was there any difference betwixt his commission, and the
commission given to other Apostles, to whom the Preaching of the Gospel was
principally committed, and baptizing as an accessory? Our Quaker answers by
saying. That though as to the preaching of the Gospel he was no less tied than
others; Yet Christ did not require of him, that he should lead his Proselyts
into Jewish ceremonies and baptismes howbeit such things were permitted unto
and practiced by the rest among the Jewish Proselytes. But then it seems the
other Apostles had another commission, than Paul had: and in their commission,
they had power, to admit their Proselytes into the Jewish ceremonies: thus must
his discourse run, if he speak sense; but he saw how odious this was and false;
and therefore speaks of permission only granted to the rest, and that only
among Jewish Proselytes; and yet neither hereby can he gain any thing, for
among the Jews, Paul was as condescending as any; for he circumcised Timothy,
because of the Jews; and unto the Jews he became a Jew, that he might gain
the Jews, 1 Cor. 9: verse. 20. See also what he did Act. 22. which occasioned
all his after trouble: The answers, which he starteth and answers Page 277. I
meddle not with, satisfying my self with what is said.

13. Let us now see what he says to our Arguments. To that taken from Christ's
submiting himself unto Baptism Mat. 3:13. He says, that Christ was also
circumcised and yet it will not follow, that is therefore to be continued.
Answer, That Christ was under the cerem^nial Law, we know: But this baptism
was no part of the ceremonial Law, being but newly institute, and John
receiving a special command from heaven to go about it; and if it had been a
ceremonial rite, free for any to have used, why would the Jews have asked him,
how it came to pass that he baptized, seeing he was neither Christ, nor Elias,
nor that Prophet; Ioh: 1:25? and why would the jews have stood so mute at
Christ's question, when he asked them, whether John's bap^isme was of God, or of
men? Mat. 21:35. Mark. 11:30. Luke 20:4. And why would John have scrupled it,
as he did, saying Mat. 3:14. I have need to be baptized of thee, and come
thou to me? And Christ's answer verse. 15. Suffer it to be so now; for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, says, that it was a divine
institution; and that righteousness required his submission to it: but there
was no divine institution, for it under the Law: therefore it must have been a
Gospel institution and consequently a continueing institution, having such
necessary ends and uses, as it has: and Christ did this to consecrate our
Baptism in his own person.

14. Unto that express command of Christ to his Apostles Mat. 28.19, He
grants all, supposing that it is not meaned of baptism with water, as not
being expressly so called in the text; and remitteth the proof to us. Wherein he
is beholden unto the Socinians, never man having the forehead to call this into
question before them: But these things make it evident (1.) This is but an
enlargment of a former commission, as to the Object, while as before they were
limited to the house of Israel* now they are to go to all Nations; And before
this we heard of their baptizeing with water, with Christ's warrant and
authority, so as that it was accounted Christ's deed Ioh. 4:1. and 3:26. (2.) It
is joined here with discipling, disciple all nations baptizing them: and so was
it formerly their way of making disciples among the Jews, they made and
baptized disciples Ioh. 4:1. (3.) Their constant after-practice declares this
to have been the meaning of the command. (4.) This is the proper acceptance
and import of the word, and himself says, that the propriety of Scripture
words must not be forsaken, nor must we run to a figurative sense, unless
necessity urge: Now there is no necessity apparent enforceing a figurative
sense here: And all greek lexicons can tell us, that (...) and (...) signify
washing with water. (5.) This is the constant acceptance of the word in
Scripture, except in three or four places, where the circumstances enforce a
metaphorical acceptance, which is not in the least apparent here, (6.) The
word is taken in a threefold sense only, so far as I remember, in the N. Test.
as, for baptism with water, for baptism with the holy Ghost, and for baptism
with the cross Luke 12:50. Now neit^er of these two last senses can be here
admitted; for it cannot be meaned of baptism with the cross, as himself will
grant: nor can it be meaned of Baptism with the holy Ghost, for these
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost were not common to all the disciples: See
Act. 8:16. nor had the Apostles power of bestowing these gifts upon the
disciples; nor read we that ever they baptized any that way: We read of their
laying on of hands, and of the holy Ghost's coming upon some then Actor. 8: and
19. but we read not of their baptizing with the holy Ghost,

15. But he has reasons to the contrary 1. We must not depairt from the
propriety of words, till necessity force us. Answ. This is for us, for we own
the word in its proper sense: let him give us a more proper or usual sense, out
of any or all Greek Authors; if he can. 2. The Baptism, which Christ commanded
his disciples, was one baptism, Christ's own baptism: but that was not
baptism by water, as is proved. Answ. (1.) If he thinks, that one Baptism
only is to be called Christ's baptism, What will he say to that Luk 12:50. But
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? I think this must be it; for this was every way peculiar unto
Christ, and to none else: and what will then become of all his former
discourse? (2.) We have shown, that that one baptism Ephesians. 4:5. is only to
be understood of the baptism, we speak of; for no other was common to all
professors, no other was a fit argument for unity and concord; and so no other
could suite the Apostles scope there. (3.) All the three sorts of baptismes are
Christ's, in several senses: That baptism of the cross, was his; because he
alone, in a p^culiar manner, was to be baptized therewith: the share that
others were to get thereof Mark. 10: v. 39. was but little, in comparision with
what he was to suffer. Baptizing with the holy Ghost was his, because he was to
bestow and pour out these gifts, as the anointed and crowned King Ephesians. 4:8,
11. etc. Baptism with water was his also, as being instituted by him. So that
this man's argueing is a manifest fallacy. 3. The Baptism enjoined to his
disciples, was such, as who ever were thereby baptized, did put on Christ, But
this cannot be said of Baptism with water. Answ. All who are baptized with the
bap^isme of water, without the inward grace, have put on Christ by profession:
All who are baptized with water, having the inward grace required, have put on
Christ in truth and in deed. 4. The baptism that Christ enjoined his
disciples, was not John's baptism; but the baptism of water was John's. Answ.
It was the same with John's, as to the substance, as our Divines show against
the Papists; and our Quaker, inadvertently, to destroy his own argument,
proves this Page 27^. yet he tells us there, that (...) is in nomen, not in
nomine, and the name of the Lord, in Scripture, signifies his power and virtue
Psalm. 54:3. Cant. 1:3. Prove 18 10. And so the Apostles did baptize unto this
name and power, as appears from that word, as many of you, as are baptized,
have put on Christ. Answ. By this he tacitly condemns our manner of
baptizing in the name of the Father etc. but in vain; for the name of the Lord
does in Scripture signify not only his power, but all that whereby he makes
himself known; but here, to be baptized in the name, or into the name, can
import nothing else, then to dedicate unto God, Father, Son and holy Ghost, as
is clear from that expression of Paul's 1: Cor. 1:13. were ye baptized in the
name, or into the nam^ of Paul? That is, were ye in baptism consecrated unto
him, as your Lord and master? The meaning cannot be, were ye baptized into his
power and virtue? Nor does that word, which he cites, evince any such thing,
for though the putting on of Christ does not necessarily follow the outward
wash^ng with water, unless we mean only an outward profession; yet it
necessarily follows the right receiving of this ordinance, according to
Christ's Institution; for all such as have true faith (and to none else does
baptism seal the great things promised) do in baptism solemnl^ and formally
put on Christ. And knows he not, that (...) is often put for (...)? see Mark.
^:1. and 13:16. and 5:34. Act. 2:31. Mark. 1:9. in Jordan, will he have this to
be into the power of Jordan? But further to show, that these words in the name
of the Father etc. import no form of words to be used, at the celebration of
baptism, he says Page 280. that this is not mentioned, in the Acts, where the
Apostles baptizeing is mentioned. Answ. And what then? will it follow, that
they never used that manner, because it is not, in so many words, expressed?
How will he prove this Consequence? He adds, It is said of some Act. 8:16.
and 19:5* that they were baptized in the name of Jesus. Answ. He has this also
from Socinus, but without any advantage; for these that were baptized, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, were virtually baptized in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Luk is not speaking of the manner and form of
their baptism, but only showing, that though they had been baptized and
received as Christ's disciples* yet they were not as yet made partakers of the
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost; which, by the way, destroys the ground
formerly laid down by our Quaker; for we see some baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and consequently with his baptism; who yet were not baptized with
the holy Ghost, and with fire, as the Apostles were, on the day of Pentecost.
And further, our Divines against the Papists, Anabaptists and Socinians, evince
that that baptism mentioned Act. 19:5. was not administered by Paul. He, says
next, that baptism in the Spirit is here meaned: But what does that import? It
imports to reach the hearts and soften them, says he, Ans. That was not the
work of the Apostles, nor of men: the Spirit of God alone could do that. He
says further. That men can do it instrumentally. Answ. This is true, but
nothing to the purpose, unless to make Christ tautologize; for that was
sufficiently expressed in that word, Teach, or disciple all nations. And to
what end should Christ have said the same thing over again? Where ever reads
he, that the Apostles are said to baptize with the Holy Ghost?

16. To the argument taken from the constant practice of the Apostles, he
answers Page 281.. 9. That the contrary is made out by Paul's example: And
yet Paul baptized both at Corinth and else where: and that he baptized not more
at Corinth, is nothing; for what he did not, another did; and seeing there were
others that went about that work, he minded that, which was more painful. And
by this constant practice of all the Apostles, we are confirmed, as we said, of
the meaning of their commission Mat. 28:19. for they did it by virtue of that
commission; or by virtue of no commission: If they had no commission, how could
they be approven in it? They might have done it, says he, by permission for a
time, seeing they were in use of it before Christ's death; and because the
people, being educated in, were used with these, outward ceremonies; as they
used circumcision, and other legal purifications, for a time Ans. (1.) He
thinks that his may be will strongly evince a must be. (2.) we showed above,
that what they did in this, before Christ's death, was not by mere permission,
though he and his Fathers the Socinians think so. (3.) If this practice had
been only among the converted Jews, his supposition would have some color;
but it being, also among the Gentiles, amongst whom the Apostles would bring in
no such ceremonies; but only desired, that they might for a time abstain from
things offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled Act. 15. which
restraint Paul t^ok off in his Epistle to the Corinthians, his supposal is
utterly destitute of reason; for we hear not of their circumciseing the
Gentiles, but much to the contrary. He adds; That it is no absurdity to say,
they did not then understand the meaning of their commission; as they did not,
in respect of teaching the Gentiles. Ans But though at the the first, they did
not fully comply with that meaning of the enlairging of their commission; Yet
afterward they came to understand it fully: But when came they to understand
baptism otherwise? It seems, neither they, nor any of the Churches
understood this matter till of late, that the Quakers arose; for we hear not
this sense put upon the words, even by Socinus himself, which this Quaker
mentions; And as for that word of Peter, it gives no countenance hereunto,
as we showed: Yet he adds some probable ground of their mistake. The Chief
of them had been John's disciples, and kept a venerable esteem of John's
Baptism, and so took Christ's spiritual baptism, for John's baptizing with
water. Answ. Strange confidence; Will he tell us, who these chief were? Where
is there any color or probability for this consequence? What Quakers cannot
do with reason, they must do, with confident and bold lies.

17. To that of Peter's baptizing of Cornelius and his company, even after they
had received the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost Act. 10:47, 48. he
replyeth That this will only prove that Peter did for that time baptize them.
Ans. Yes it will also prove, that there was a baptism with water in use,
beside the baptism with the holy Ghost: and it will also prove, that Peter had
an eye to the commission, when he says, can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? For
thereby he evinced their right to the Ordinance of baptism, because it was
manifest they were disciples, by receiving of the holy Ghost. Next he says,
These words, and he commanded them to be baptized, p^ove only a fact, but no
right; and prove not, this to be a permanent institution. Ans. How intolerable
is this, that these Quakers must condemn Peter's fact, as being without
warrant, when all the rest of the Apostles approved of it, in the next Chapter?
And Peter there gives the reason for what he did, saying verse. 1^. -- what was
I, that I could withstand God? Importing that he durst do no other ways, then
he did, for as much as he saw, God had given them the like gift, as he did unto
the Apostles? And when the rest heard these things, they held their peace and
glorified God, saying then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life verse. 18. But our Quaker will not for all this hold his peace; bu^
will condemn Peter, and all the Apostles, for company; because they rested
satisfied with what Peter had done. We do not from this one single passage,
prove the permanency of this Institution. But when we have the practice of all
the Apostles, together with the command of Jesus Christ, and that with a
promise, that he will be with his servants, in this and the rest of their
ministerial work, unto the end of world; we think they must have an hard
forehead, who dar call this lasting Institution into question. He adds, why
should this fact of Peter more prove the permanency of baptism, than his
compelling (which yet is more than a command) the Gentiles to be circumcised:
when he did this to Cornelius, the common opinion was, that the Gentiles should
be circumcised. Ans. Where reads he, that Peter compelled the Gentiles to be
circumcised? That failing of his Gal. 2:12. will not prove this much; and this
was also after the unanimous resolution of the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. ^not to put the burden of circumcision, and other Jewish
ceremonies, (beside the few excepted, for avoiding of Scandal) upon the neck of
the Gentiles. And though this calumny of the Quakers had some ground, Yet the
difference betwixt the one practice and the other is great: Christ by his death
did break down the middle wall of partition, and so put an end to the Jewish
ceremonies; but he did not so with his own Gospel Institutions; but rather
confirmed them. Where reads he, that at that time, when Cornelius was
baptized, it was the common opinion, that the Gentiles should be circumcised?
And how came it, that Peter did not circumcise Cornelius, if that was the
common opinion? But we must take dreams for reasons from Quakers: For it is
much, that they will give any thing like a reason, though it be but a reason
with a rag, and sometimes worse.

18. Against the native signification of the word (...), I wash with water, he
gives in his exceptions Page 283. 10. and says. That baptism with water was
in use among the Jews, before John's days, as Paulus Riccius witnesses, and
so that ceremony got the name from the nature of the thing. Ans. Though all
this were true, it will be but a confirmation of this native signification of
the word: And he and his Paulus Riccius both, will have enough to do, to make
it but probable, that baptism was in use among the Jews, before John
Baptist's days; for as for the Jewish writings, the eldest whereof come not
near to John's days, we owe them no faith, their design being the same with
the Quakers design, to wit, to destroy Christianity, the foundation of which
was laid by Rabbi Iehuda Hakkadosh, about the year 190. or 200. when he wrote
the Misnaioth or Jewish Alcoran, He adds, Christ and his Apostles give these
terms a more spiritual signification. Ans. That the word is sometimes taken
figuratively, as when we read of baptizeing with the holy Ghost, and with fire,
we know; as we read also of circumcision of the heart, will he therefore
interpret the Law, concerning Circumcision of the heart, excluding the outward
circumcision of the foreskin of the flesh? Why has he forgoten his own
axiom, granted by all, mentioned Page 278. that the propriety of the word
should not be forsaken, nor a figurative sense admitted, unless necessity
compel? May not this serve to convince him, that we must hold by the proper
signification of the word, and reject his figurative, till he demonstrate the
necessity. He adds, if we hold to the etymology of the word, we must dip in
baptism. Ans. Whether we baptize by dipping or sprinkling, it is all alike to
him; for neither will please him, and either will prove that baptism is with
water: Neither does the word always signify washing by dipping, in the N. T.
see Mark. 7:4. Heb. 9:10. 1 Cor. 10:2. Act. 9:11, 18. As for John 3:5. I shall
not urge it, and so pass what he says to it. And what follows, is either
little or nothing to the purpose, or is answered already: And as to the
baptizing of Infants, we need not be at pains to prove this to him, who
denies all baptism, whether of Infants, or of old Persons. And so we come to
hear what he says of the Lords Supper, against which he also fights.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Lords Supper.
1. WE have seen this Man's weak reasons, and strong rage, against the
Institution of Baptism, And must have a little more patience, and hear the
like against the Lord's Supper. Such is their malice against all the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ, that nothing will satisfy them, but a total extirpation of
them all, without exception of any; and such is their enmity against Christ,
that they will have every memorial of him quite taken away, that there might
nothing remain, to discriminate us from Pagans; And indeed if their Principles
prevail, all Christianity is overturned, and manifest Paganism is introduced.
Christ did institute a Supper to be religiously observed, in remembrance of
himself; and these men will not be satisfied to take away Baptism, the
engadging and honorable badge of Christians; but they must have the ordinance
of the Supper of our Lord also quite Cashiered; that by time, when this lasting
memorial is removed, people may be more easily enduced to renunce all
Christianity, and persuaded to embrace Paganism. And thus they have sucked-in
the venom of some of old, who were against all Sacraments, such as the
Ascothyptoe, Messalians, Acephali, Henry Nicolas, the Father of the family of
love, Swenckfeldus, and Almaricus, the first broacher of the Seculum Spiritus
S. wherein there was to be no use of Sacraments. And they are, in this, worse
then the Antichristian Socinians, who, though they destroy the principal end of
these Sacraments, viz. to be sealing and confirming ordinances, owneing them
only for outward professions of faith and thanksgiving; yet keep up something
of the practice: but these our Quakers would take away both name and thing; and
the thing it self with all its uses and ends; that so nothing might stand in
their way, while posting toward Paganism.

2. But whatever these Desperadoes say; we must hold for a sure truth. That our
Lord Jesus, in the night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament of
his body and blood, called the Lords Supper, to be observed in his Church, unto
the end of the world, for the perpetual remembrance of the Sacrifice of
himself, in his death; the sealing all benefits thereof unto true believers;
their spiritual nourishment and grouth in him: their engadgment in and to all
duties, which they owe unto him: and to be a bond and pledge of their communion
with him, and with each other, as members of his mystical body 1 Cor. 11:23, to
26. and 10:16, 17, 21. and 12:13. For therein, by giving and receiving bread
and wine, according to the appointment of Jesus Christ, his death is showed
forth, and they that worthily communicate, feed upon his body and blood, to
their spiritual nourishment and grouth in grace Mat. 26:26, 27, 28. 1 Cor.
11:23, 24, 25, 26. have their Union and Communion with him Confirmed 1 Cor.
10:15. Testify and Renew their Thankfulness 1 Cor. 11:24, 25, 26. and
Engagement to God 1 Cor. 10: v. 14, 15, 16, 21. and their Mutual Love and
Fellowshipe each with other, as members of the same mystical body 1 Cor. 10:17.
And though the body and blood of Christ be not Corporally or Carnally present
in, with, or under the outward Elements of bread and wine Act. 3:21. yet they
are spiritually present to the Faith of the Receiver, no less truly and
really, then the elements themselves are to their outward senses Mat. 26:26,
28. And they that worthily Communicate in this Ordinance, do therein feed upon
the body and blood of Christ, not after a Corporal and Carnal, but in a
Spiritual manner, yet truly and really 1 Cor. 11:24, -- 29. while by faith
they receive and apply unto themselves Christ crucified, and all the benefits
of his death 1 Cor. 10:16, Therefore, as upon the one hand, we must reject all
Corruptions of, and corrupt opinions concerning this Ordinance; such as the
Popish sacrifice of the Mass, a most abominable device, injurious to Christ's
one, only sacrifice, the alone propitiation for all the sins of the elect
Heb. 7: v. 23, 24, 27. and 10:11, 12, 14, 18. for in this Sacrament Christ is
not offered up to his Father; nor any real sacrifice made at all, for the
remission of the sins of quick or dead Heb. 9:22.25, 26, 28. but only a
Commemoration of that one offering up of himself* by himself, upon the cross,
once for all; and a Spiritual Oblation of all spiritual praise unto God for the
same, 1 Cor. 11:24, 25, 26. Mat. 26:26, 27. As also private masses, or
receiving this sacrament by a Priest, or any other alone 1 Cor. 10* 6, And the
denial of the Cup to the people Mark 14:23. 1 Cor. 11:25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
Worshipping the Elements, the Lifting them up, or Carrying them about for
Adoration, and the Reserving them for any pretended religious use, they being
all contrary to the nature of this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ
Mat. 15:9. As also the doctrine, which maintains a change of the Substance of
bread and wine, into the substance of Christ's body and blood (commonly called
Transubstantiation) by consecration of a Priest, or by any other way; as being
repugnant not to Scripture alone, but even to Common sense and Reason, and
overthrowing the Nature of the Sacrament, and has been and is the cause of
manifold Superstitions; yea, of gross Idolatries Act. 3:21, with 1 Cor.
11:24.25, 26. Luke 24:6, 39. for though the outward Elements here duly set
apart to the uses ordained by Christ* have such Relation to him crucified, as
that truly, yet Sacramentally only, they are sometimes called by the names of
the things they represent, to wit, the body and blood of Christ Mat. 26:26, 27,
28. Yet in Substance and Nature, they still remain truly and only bread and
wine: as they were before 1 Cor. 11:26, 27, 28. Mat. 26, 29. As, I say, we must
reject these errors about this Ordinance, So upon the other hand, we must own
the right manner of its Administration, according to Christ's appointment, which
is, that his Ministers Declare his word of Institution to the people, Pray and
Bless the element of bread and wine, and thereby set them apart from a common
to a holy Use; and Take and Break the bread; take the Cup, and (they
communicating also themselves) give both to the communicants Mat. 26:26, 27,
28, Mark 14:22, 23, 24. Luk* 22:19, 20. with 1 Cor. 11:23, 24, 25 26* but to
none, who are not then present in the Congregation Act. 20:7. 1 Cor. 11:20. and
the Communicants are, by the same appointment, to take and eat the Bread, and
to drink the Wine, in thankful Remembrance, that the body of Christ was broken
and given, and his blood shed for them 1 Cor. 11: v. 23, 24. Mat 26: v. 26, 27,
28. Mark 14:22, 23, 24. Luke 22:19, 20, And mind the right way of approaching,
both as to Preparation before, and in the time of Administration, and after:
all which is plainly set down, in the Larger Catechism Quaest 171, 174, 175.
And withal remember, that although ignorant and wicked men receive the outward
Elements, in this Sacrament; yet they receive not the thing signified thereby;
but by their unworthy coming thereunto are guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, to their own damnation. Wherefore all ignorant and ungodly persons, as
they are unfit to enjoy communion with him, so are they unworthy of the Lords
table, and cannot without great sin against Christ, while they remain such,
partake of these holy mysteries 1 Cor. 11:27, 28, 29. 2 Cor. 6:14, 15, 16. may
and ought, notwithstanding of their profession of the faith, and desire to come
to the Lords Supper, be kept from this sacrament by the power, which Christ
has left in his Church 1 Cor. 11:27. to the end Mat. 7:9. 1 Cor. 5. Iud. v.
23. 1 Timothy 5:22. until they receive instruction, and manifest their reformation
2 Cor. 1:7 Withal it would be remembered, that this Sacrament and baptism,
though they agree in these things, that the Author of both is God Mat. 28: v.
19. 1 Cor. 11:23. the spiritual part of both is Christ and his benefits Romans
6:3, 4. 1 Cor. 10: v. 16. both are seals of the same Covenant Romans 4: v. 11.
with Col. 2: verse. 11, 12. Mat. 26:27, 28. both are to be dispensed by
Ministers of the Gospel, and by none other John 1:33. Mat. 28:19. 1 Cor. 11:23.
and 4:1, 2. Heb. 5:4. and to be continued in the Church of Christ, until his
second coming Mat. 28:19, 20. 1 Cor. 11:26. Yet they differ, in that Baptism
is to be administered but once with water, to be a seal and sign of our
regeneration and ingrafting into Christ Mat. 3:11. Tit. 3:. v. 5: Gal. 3* 27.
and that even to infants Genesis 17:7, 9* Act. 2:38, 39. 2 Cor. 7:14. Whereas the
Lords supper is to be administrated often, in the Elements of bread and wine,
to represent and exhibit Christ, as spiritual nourishment to the soul 1 Cor.
11:23, to 26 and to confirm our continuance and grouth in him 1 Cor. ^0:16.
and that only to such, as are of years and ability to examine themselves 1 Cor.
11: verse 28, 29.

3. This short account, out of our Confession of Faith, and larger Catechism
of this matter, I thought fit to premise, that all may see, what that doctrine
is, which we own, and these men oppose; And all may see the desperate
wickedness of these Sacrilegious Anti Christians, who labor thus desperately
to deprive the Church and people of God of all the soul quickening and soul
strengthening and comforting Ordinences, which Christ, out of great love to his
redeemed people, has graciously instituted, for establishing and building them
up in their most holy faith. What gracious soul, that has ever tasted of the
sweet Refreshing, and soul-rejoyceing Communications of grace and love, from
the God of all grace and love, in this special Ordinance, can endure to hear
these Soul-murtherers thus bereaving the people of the Lord of the means of
their sweetest feasts? These deluded deceivers talk much of their Experiences,
which yet are but the delusory gratifications of their blinded imaginations,
and the workings of the Prince of darkness, tickling their fanci^s, and
complying with their blinded minds and corrupt humores; and hereby draw
strength and confirmation to their abominable errors and practices, and are
more deeply rooted and fixed in the same, howbeit contrary to the divine light
of the Word of God* to the very light of Nature and pure Reason, and to all the
true experiences of the holy and upright walkers with God; and are more
fortified and animated in their rage and opposition to all the ways of God.
And sure I am, the Saints of God, though they will not with such a pharisaical
and froathy ostentation, talk of their enjoyments, as these wicked deceivers
do, on all occasions, to set forward the desperate designs of the Devil in them
and by them; yet know what rich incomes of Joy unspeakable and full of glory,
of Strength and Encouragment in the ways of the Lord, of Peace and Serenity of
soul, of Light and Consolation, satisfying all their desires, and making their
souls to run over; and all this in compliance and harmony with the word, and
for a verification and accomplisment of the rich promises of the New Covenant,
ordered in all things and sure, and confirmation of the truth and reality of
the workings of the grace of God in their soul, where^y they were to their own
feeling sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of their
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory, they have had in this Ordinance, Melting their hearts with true
tenderness and godly sorrow, and Kniting their souls more firmly in love to God
in Christ, and Engaging them to run the ways of the Lord with all
cheerfulness, enlargedness of heart, and delecta^ion; and to Strive against the
enemies of the glory of God, and of their salvation, whether within or without,
with more courage, alacrity and resolution of soul; So that, I am persuaded,
they will upon this very account, detest and abominate t^ese coworkers with
Satan? and find themselves called of God, for his glory and their own
security, to remove far from their tents, who drive such a desperate and
hellish design against heaven, and against all the Interests of Jesus Christ,
their Lord and Savior.

4. These desperate Despisers of the goodness and condescensions of love, and
malacious Opposers of all the ways of God* in manifest mockage, substitute our
ordinary repasts, in the room of this soul-feeding Ordinance, for thus speaks
that blasphemous wretch Ia. Nayler in his love to the lost Page 45. (as Mr
Stalham cites him in his book) for the sake of such, who are lost in this
thing, and troubled in mind concerning it, what I have received of the Lord,
that I shall declare unto you, which all shall witness to which come to partake
thereof, as the truth is in Jesus Christ. If you intend to sup with the Lord,
or show the Lord's death till he come, let your eating and drinking, so often as
you do it be in remembrance of him, and in his fear, that at death you may
witness to the lust and excess etc. And Page 43. he said, this was to be done,
at all seasons when they eat and drank and Page ^4. that the Lord commanded his
disciples in eating and drinking to show forth his death till he come, to
avoid excess, and becomeing reprobats in the faith. Is not t^is a sufficient
discovery of the Spirit, that acts them?

5, Let us now come to examine what this our Quaker says, in this matter: and
passing his intrade, wherein, after his manner, he upbraideth all with their
ignorance of this mystery, as if they only were admitted to the secrets of God,
and acquanted with the mysteries, hid from all the generations of the Christian
Church: we come to the answer he gives to that question, what is that body
which we eat, and that blood which we drink? which is this Page 288. It is
says he, That celestial seed, that divine and spiritual substance, of which we
spoke. These. 5. and 6. that vehicle or spiritual body of Christ, whereby he
communicates life and salvation, to all that believe in and receive him, by
which also man obtains communion with God. To which we need say noth^ng here,
having fully discovered above Chap. X. what this Seed, Substance, and Vehicle
is, in their judgment, to wit, nothing but what is in every Son of Adam, as he
com^th into the world; the dim light of a natural conscience, and of a
reasonable soul, having some dark notions of a God, and of some principles of
morality, without the least imagination or apprehension of any of the ways of
the grace of God, revealed in the Gospel; yea which has a native and inbred
enmity at, and antipathy against the mysteries of love and grace, manifested in
the Gospel. This, this is the Quakers Christ, the Food of their souls, the
Substance, whereupon they feed: this is all that true bread, which they have to
eat. And while he calls it a substance, he joyneth with the old
Heracleonites, who said, that man was composed of a Body, of a Soul, and of a
third Substance. And the harkening unto and believing this Natural thing, which
is in all ^eathens and Pagans, and receiving its light, is all their Feast, and
all the means of Communion, which they have, or expect to have, with God: so
that it is sufficiently manifest, that the hieght of their Religion is
moralized Paganism. And yet he dar say, that ^his is confirmed John 6. from v.
32. to the end. And thereby give us to understand, that they acknowledge no
other true bread, which the Father gives from heaven, but this which all Turks
and Pagans have. This is their Jesus, and their Bread of God, that came down
from heaven; and this is the only thing, that gives them life, so that they
shall never hunger, nor thirst; They are given of the Father to this thing, and
by this will they be raised up at the last day: when they hearken to this, then
they are taught of God, and have learned of the Father, according to the
writings of the Prophets: yea if they but believe this, they have everlasting
life; for this is their Bread of life; whereof if they eat, they shall not die,
but live forever: this is, with them, the flesh, that was given for the life of
the world; this is all the flesh they eat, and all the blood they drink; and
thus they dwell in Christ; and Christ in them. O what a desperate delusion is
this? What a wonder is it, that men, who believe they have immortal souls, and
have ever heard of the Gospel, dar thus speak, and metamorphose the whole
Gospel into pure Paganism? This, sure, must be a more than ordinary judicial
stroke of blindness, delusion, of a reprobat mind, and of a perverse Spirit,
with which these men are manifestly plagued; and the Devil must have an
extraordinary power in them and over them, acting and driveing them at this
rate of heathenish opposition, and profane paganish contradiction to the ways
of grace.

6. He goes on notwithstanding Page 289. and will needs have this to be all
that, which Christ there speaks of, because all these things cannot agree to
that body which was borne of the virgin Mary, which came not down from
heaven. As if their corrupt light of Nature could be said to come down from
heaven: and as if Christ were not there speaking of himself, as God-man,
Jehovah's servant, and the Mediator betwixt God and man: And as if we were
with these carnal Capernaites dreaming of eating the flesh of Christ, with our
bodily teeth: Or as if there were no other way of feeding upon Christ, but this
Paganish way of living by the light of nature. But if this be all, to what end
is faith in Christ called for verse. 35? And what necessity is there of God's
divine teaching and drawing unto this, verse. 44:45, 65? Yet the man tells us,
that all these great things do agree to this light and seed, of which John
testifies Chap. 1. that it is the light of men, and life of the world.
Imagining, that this is nothing else, but what is in every Pagan, as he comes
into the world, a Paganish fancy and dream, yea a devilish delusion; as we have
shown above Chap. X. And according to his former doctrine, he tells us, how all
this salvation is brought about, This spiritual light and seed (says he) as it
gets room to rise up in man's heart, it is bread to the hungry soul, which
was dead and buried in the lusts of the world, and is now revived, as it
tastes this heavenly bread; and such as are partakers of this, are said to
come to Christ; nor can any enjoy this bread, but by coming to Christ, and
believing in the manifestation of his ligh^ in the heart, by receiving and
believing in which, communion of the body and bread is known. That is, The
Pagan has the light of nature within him, and if he will not with his
wickedness smother it, but give way to it, it is heavenly bread, that came down
from heaven, and gives life to him: And if he but taste of this, by hearkening
to it, he is a believer in Christ; and by believing the dark dictats, and
manifestations of this glimmering light of nature, he has communion with God,
with Christ, with Christ's body and bread: And what should more? He is a saved
m^n, and a brave Christian; though he knows not so much of Christ, as the
Devil does: He is feasted at this banquet of love, Christ is in him, and he is
in Christ, though he never heard of the Name of Christ, let be of his Death and
Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, and Sitting at the Fathers right hand, and
living for ever; Nay, nor never knew, or heard of a Covenant of works, let be
of a Covenant of grace, or any thing belonging to the grace of God. Are not our
Quakers now brave Pagan-preachers? And is their Religion any thing but pure
Paganism? K^ow they any other Gospel? O how Paganish and Hellish is this
light, that is within them! I^ is not sure the light of nature; but it is
hellish darkness, that has exstinguished even that.

7. He rages a^ the same rate of madness Page 290. telling us, that as Christ
had an outward and visible body, or temple, which had its original from the
virgin Mary, so he had a spiritual body by which he revealed himself to the
sons of Men in all ages; and by which they were made partakers of eternal
life, and had communion with God and with Christ. Then by this spiritual body,
he revealed himself to the worshipers of Baal Zebub, Baal Peor, Bell, Dagon,
Astaroth, Adrammelech, Chemosh, Nisroch, to the Phenicians, that sacrificed
yearly young infants to Saturn, or to the Devil rather, and practiced Sodomy
in the temple of Venus, and to all Paganish Idolaters* who worshipped Sun, Moon,
Serpents, Trees, Fire, Earth, Water. Winds Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, Mars,
Hercules, etc. even to such as did prostitute their Daughters in honor of
Venus, and their Wives and Sisters; and did many other unnatural brutalities;
and by this body spiritual of Christ, which was within them, they were made
partakers of Eternal life, and had communion with God and with Christ: is not
this excellent Christianity? And he thinks that by this Adam, Seth, Enoch and
all the Patriarchs and Prophets, were nourished; and that this was all that,
which was shadowed forth by the types under the law: And thus all Religion,
through all the ages of the Church, was but Nature; And consequently was more
pure among the heathen Idolaters, than among the people of Israel, where it was
so hid and obscured with so may types, and covered with so many dark vails,
that, as he says, the Jews, even some of Christ's own disciples, did not
understand Christ speaking of it. What a perversion is here of all the doctrine
of grace, from the beginning; and an overturning of the Faith and Religion of
all the ancient and renouned Patriarchs, Prophets and People of God? But as
concerning this Spiritual body and blood of Christ, what means he thereby?
Had Christ two bodies? One Carnal and another Spiritual? and if we have two
such bodies too, what difference betwixt Him and us? where is that body of his
today, which they call Carnal? Has he both these bodies, now in heaven? or
only the Spiritual body? if only this; what shall then become of his
Resurrection and Ascension? was this Spiritual body of the seed of Abraham and
of David? Thus at one blow, they deny the Christ of God, and overturne all
Christianity.

8. And as if he had not yet given us a clear enough discovery of his paganish
Religion, he Page 292.. 3. in answer to this question, How is man made a
partaker of this, and nourished by it? He says, Know this light, manifesting
thine iniquities, opening up thy barrenness, nakedness and emptiness, is that
body, whereof thou must partake, and by which thou must be nourished -- and as
this small seed of righteousness arises in thee, and is suffered to come to
the birth, that new substantial birth is naturally fed and nourished with this
Spiritual body. That is, this dim light of Nature, which is in all Pagans, is
the body of Christ, the Spiritual body, by which we must all be nourished unto
eternal life; for it is a seed of righteousness; and if we will but give way to
it, it will become a new substantial birth, and be naturally nourished of it
self: and so Nature is the seed of the new birth, and is the new birth it self,
and is all the Spiritual nourishment, whereupon it lives. Is it any wonder,
that these say much of this light, which is all their grace, and all their
Christianity? We pity such as sacrificed their children to the Devil: And what
shall we think of them, who thus sacrifice their souls unto this Goddess,
blind Nature? This is Religion for the Devils indeed. And this man may go to
hell and preach this Gospel: And say to ^eelzebub, the Prince, and to all his
associats. O poor Devils, know ye not, that light within you manifesting your
iniquites, and opening up to you your nakedness, barrenness and emptiness, is
the Spiritual body of Christ, and is a seed of righteousness, a measure of that
divine light and seed, with which Christ is clothed, and whereby he is
testifying unto you, that you may be quiet, and suffer it to come to the birth,
the new substantial birth, that you may eat his body and drink his blood, and
so have communion with the Father and with his Son. Can the Quakers Religion
bring us no greater length, then to the state of Devils? And yet he goes on
Page 292. blasphemou^y applying what is said Ioh. 6. of Christ, to this Light,
whereof even Devils are sha^ers; and tells us, that by our common participation
of this, we have communion one with another, according to that 1 Cor. 10:17.
And shall our fellowshipe be with the Devils, and with all that partake of this
Light? O miserable fellowshipe? What more? He has the confidence to tell us,
that this is the true and spiritual supper of the Lord, whereof we are made
partakers, by hearing Christ's voice and opening to him Revel. 3:20. But this
Christ, that speaks Revel. 3:20. stands without, and is not yet within. But
the Christ, he talks of, is within already, and was within since our very
birth: know these men no shame? Have they no faith of a God? How comes it
then, that they dar thus mock? But as if we had not yet enough, we must hear
more, The Supper of the Lord is really and truly possessed, says he,
whenever the s^ul introverts to this Light, and partaketh of this celestial
life, whereby the inner man is nourished: and this believers enjoy at all
times, but especially when they meet together, to wait upon God. Thus is all
Christianity, and the most profitable and solemn exercises of our Religion
turned over to Paganism. If a man but reflect and take notice of the dictats
of something, which is within every man, he is introverted, and he is supping
with the Lord, and feasting on celestial cheer. But can no man tell me,
Whether the Devil can introvert, or not? He has a Light and an Understanding,
and I suppose knows more, even as to what is right and what is wrong, than
Pagans do: can he not reflect upon this light? If he can, he is a guest at the
Quakers supper, and tastes and eats of their dainties. But it is like, the
Devil cannot introvert, because he cannot abstract from all cogitations and
imaginations, and therefore, it is peculiar to man: And can men, when they
please, cast themselves into such trances and ecstasies, if they may be so
called, where not only the outward senses are still, but even the understanding
cease from work, without the help of Satan, and a strong imagination?

9. After he has explained, as well as he could, his meaning, he would feign
make us believe. 4. Page 292. that all the controversies, that have been and
are this day about this Sacrament, (in relateing of which he is pleased to
spend many words, little worth the noticeing) have arisen from the mant of this
spiritual knowledge. And indeed, I must confess, if the Quakers opinion be
embraced, all our controversies about this matter shall cease; nay I think, we
shall then have no more controversy with Pagans, not only about this, but
about no point of Christianity, but shall give all up ^o Pagans; and at once
condemn all that the worthies of old wrote in defense of Christianity against
the Pagans; yea and admit of no glosses or senses of the Scripture, but what
Pagans can give. If this be the way of ending controversies among Christians,
it shall not be very displeasing unto the Devil, for thereby he shall come into
full possession of all. But our Lord Jesus shall reign, whether Quakers and
Devils will, or not: If our Quakers shall think it of their advantage, to write
Comments on any of Paul's Epistles, or on the New Testament, it will sure bear
the title, of Paul^^ Paganizans, Mattheus, Marcus, Lucas, Ioannes, Iacobus,
Judas or Petrus Paganizans And so also as to the Old Testament: but their
und^rvalueing of them will prevent this: And yet out of their writings, some
such thing might be made.

10. He must now come to destroy this Ordinance, if he can; and therefore he
first speaks something of a Relation Page 295,. 5. etc. because he knows,
we maintain a spiritual Relation and sacramental Union, between the sign and
the thing signified, so as the names and effects of the one; are attributed to
the other; as we find Circumcision called, the Covenant Genesis 1^: v. 10.
Christ, the Passover 1 Cor. 5:7. so the bread in this Sacrament, is said to be
Christ's body; and the cup, his blood of the new Covenant Mat. 26:27, 28. or the
New Testament in his blood 1 Cor. 11:25. And for this end he tells us, that a
special and necessary relation is, where two things are so connected, and
united either of their own nature, or by a divine command, that the one cannot
be possessed at least, (I think he would have said ordinarily, because of what
follows,) though it may be extraordinarily without the other. And among other
instances to clear this, he gives this, as sensation of the presence of God
has a necessary respect unto meeting together by virtue of a divine command,
because of his promise. As if a promise and a divine command were all one; and
as if Gods presence, and the sensation of his presence were one and the same:
But to the thing in hand. We grant there is such a Relation betwixt the eating
and drinking in this Sacrament, after the manner appointed by Christ, and the
participation of Christ and his benefits, that who ever does the one, shall
enjoy the other; but I dar not say, that none shall enjoy the thing signified,
but such as partake of the elements; (which is the thing, he would hinte) and
that because of the very instance he has brought; for I dar not say (and it
may be, he will be of my mind here) that none shall enjoy the sensation (let
me use his words) of the presence of God, but such as meet together: And that
other instance, which he adduceth, of God's giving according to his promise, to
such as ask, confirms me in this; for God many times preventeth our seeking:
other instances might be adduced, but these two, which himself has adduced,
are enough to clear the matter.

11. How proves he, that the participation of the body and blood of Christ
has no such Relation, to the breaking and eating of bread, and drinking of
wine, in this Ordinance? This relation (says he Page 296) either would come
from the nature of the thing, or from some divine precept. Answ. There are
other ways; such as a Promise, (which is different from a precept) and divine
Institution, virtually including a promise: And because he takes no notice of
these ways, his whole discourse is to no purpose; for we grant, there is no
Relation here flowing from the nature of the thing: And we see not what way a
precept has any efficacy to the making of such a Relation. It is not because
God has commanded us to be holy, that therefore, such as are holy shall see
God's face; but because of a promise. What will he now do? his light has
confounded him, so as he knows not what he says. But, howbeit a precept has
no interest here, while speaking of his Relation; Yet least he boast, as
supposing, we could not maintain, that there was a command for the use of this
ordinance, we must see What he says here. If there were any such precept,
says he, it should be found there, where the institution is. Which is very
true, for the very Institution has the force of a command, though there were
no more. Matthew and Mark, says he, mentione no command, and Luk only says,
this do in remembrance of me, Answ. Here is an express command mentioned by
Luk, and what needs more? The Institution, say I, has the force of a
command; and that the Apostles after practice declared; and the practice of the
primitive Church: and beside all this, we have Paul's large commentary upon
this 1 Cor. 10. and 11. for if there had been no command for this, why was the
Apostle at all that pains, to rectify abuses among the Corinthians, about
this matter? why spoke he of a cup, which he blessed; and of bread, which he
brake 1 Cor. 10:16: Why did he deliver this unto them, and tell them, that he
had received it of the Lord 1 Cor. 11:23? Why does he not discharge this
altogether, as he does the Love feasts? why says he not, There is no such
ordinance of Christ, There is no command for it? Is there no precept
presupposed, nor included in all this? wonderful! The end, which paul
expresses, says he, 1 Cor. 11:26. is to declare the Lord's death, but this
has no necessary ^elation to, or connection with partaking of Christ's body and
blood; for though such as partake of this, cannot but commemorat his death; yet
his death can be commemorated, without this participation. Ans. (1.) That
declaration of Christ's death is a comprehensive end; and includes a Christian
improvement, and application of Christ's death, to all the ends, for which he
is held forth in this Sacrament, which appears by the whole context; for
where this is not, there is an eating of the bread, and drinking of the cup
unworthily, and an incurring the guilt of the body and blood of the Lord verse.
27. and to which is required self examination, as a necessary preparation; and
an eating of the bread and drinking of the cup so: And such as includes a
discerning of the Lord's body, the want of which makes persons eat and drink
judgment to themselves; and was the cause, why many were weak and sickly among
them, and many were asleep verse. 29, 30. And such as requires self judging, to
this end, that we may prevent God's judging verse. 31. Thus we see, that such a
Commemoration of the death of Christ, as is here understood, cannot be without
this partaking. (2,) This same end includes a command to use this Sacrament,
until Christ's second coming. (3.) What thinks he of the ends mentioned 1 Cor.
10:16, 17? (4.) How such as partake of Christ's body and blood, in his sense,
cannot but declare his death, is a mystery to me: Let him clear to me, how a
Pagan, that never heard of Christ, or of his death, can by introverting unto
the light within him, declare Christ's death? (5.) Though Christ's death could
be commemorated without partaking of his body and blood in this Ordinance; Yet
it will not hence follow, that it must not be commemorated by this Ordinance:
He might as well argue, that because Christ's death can be declared in this
Ordinance, therefore it must not be declared in the Word: but the truth is,
this man would have all declaration of it laid aside, that it might be quite
forgotten, or no otherwise declared, than as may be by a Pagan, introverting to
his Light.

12. What says he to these words. This is my body, and this cup is the New
Testament in my blood? As Christ (says he) used by the use of natural things,
to lead the mind of his disciples up unto spiritual things; so here; Christ
took occasion from the bread and the wine, which was before them, while
supping, to tell them, that as bread and wine served to nourish their bodies,
so his body and blood should be for their souls. Answ. Are not these excellent
Commentators? Is it any wonder, that they will not take this word for their
Rule? Who ever heard even men's words so abused and perverted? O the patience of
God! Though I think the very reciting of his words, were enough to shame him
(if he could be ashamed) and them both; yet let me soberly ask him a few
things. (1.) Why does he not give us a like instance? That which he mentions,
of Christ's speaking to the woman of Samaria Ioh. 4. is nothing to the purpose;
for Christ says not there, This well is my body, Or this well is the New
Testament in my blood. (2.) What signified Christ's blessing of the bread, and
blessing of the cup, if this was all? (3.) To what end did he break the bread,
and give it to his disciples, and said, take eat, etc. when they had been
eating and drinking already? (4.) Why said he of the cup, drink ye all of it,
if there was no more imported? (5.) Why said he, this do in remembrance of me?
(6.) Was this all, that Paul delivered to the Corinthians? (7.) Was this all,
that he received of the Lord? (8.) How comes it, that the Spirit of the Lord
in Paul gives us not that commentary of the words? But enough of this piece of
profane blasphemous boldness.

13 What says he to 1 Cor. 10:16. The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? He answers. Page 298. That in all this
Chapter, Paul is not speaking a word of this ceremony, (he should say,
Ordinance) Answ. For as bold as he is, we will not believe him: Let us yet hear
his reason. He says verse. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup
of Devils, etc. but they could drink of the cup of Devils, and of the outward
cup. Answ. Not morally and lawfully, because the Apostle here disswades them
from having communion with idols, upon this very account; though they might
physically: as Robert Parclay may steal and murder. But, says he, Paul speaks
of one bread verse. 17. and this cannot be outward bread, otherwise the inward
should be excluded. Answ. Both may consist; for by the inward they become all
one body really and spiritually; and by the outward, they became one body in
profession, and open declaration: And what inconsistency is here? He next tells
us, that he can see no ground or occasion in the Scripture, for this figment of
Sacramental union. And what remedy, seeing Institutions of Christ must be
figments with him; it is no wonder he cannot see what others see; But some are
so far master of their sight, that what they desire not to see, their eyes can
not see: But, it may be, it is worse with him; He cannot but see, and yet the
light within will not let him see. We have mentioned lately some passages to
this purpose, both in the Old and New Testament; and that may satisfy such, as
will see.

14. He finds the Apostles discourse 1 Cor. 11. A great mountain in his way,
therefore Page 299 he labors all he can to blow it away. He must grant, that
the Corinthians were in use of celebrating this Sacrament, and that Paul
rectifieth the abuses, that were committed, in their manner of going about it.
Yet he says, that the express and special use hereof, in the Apostles
judgment, was to declare Christ's death; but this is far different from
partaking of Christ's flesh and blood. Ans. One use does not destroy another;
the Apostle had, in the preceding Chapter, mentioned the other use, and needed
not here again repeat it expressly: and we have shown already, that this was a
comprehensive use, and could not but take in their eating of Christ's body and
drinking of his blood: and this is clear, in that the Apostle says, that
whosoever did eat and drink unworthily, were guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and did not discern the Lord's body. Nay himself grants, in the
following words, that to such, as use this, it has an immediate relation to the
outward body and death of Christ. And so there is a Sacramental union. But he
adds, It has not a necessary relation to the participation of the Spiritual
body and blood of Christ. Answ. We grant it, as to that which he takes the
spiritual body and blood of Christ to be: For there is no relation of the world
there. But that true believers, partaking of these elements by faith, are
really and spiritually made partakers also of Christ and his benefits, we
assert; and he dar not disprove it. He adds. That these words of Paul verse.
27. say only, That seeing the Corinthians would needs perform this ceremony, as
an act of religion, they should do it worthily, otherwise bring condemnation on
themselves. Answ. (1.) If the Corinthians performed this ceremony, as an act of
Religion, without a divine warrant, they were guilty of will worshipe; And
shall he make us believe that Paul, or the Spirit of the Lord rather in Paul,
would not discharge this superstition? Nay, not only not so; but denunce such
judgments on them, for doing of it but amiss? (2.) Shall he make us believe,
that Paul would have taught and delivered to them modes of will-worshipe, and
prescribed the exercise of Superstion? Yet Paul says verse. 23. that he
delivered this unto them. (3.) Shall he make us believe, that the Lord would
give Paul commission to establish among the Corinthians will worshipe and
Superstition? Yet he says verse. 23. For I have received of the Lord, that
which also I delivered unto you. (4.) What way can people go worthily about an
act of will-worshipe? (5.) Would God have punished them with sickness, weakness
and death, for an escape in the manner of will-worshipe, and not for the
will-worshipe it self? What wild and bold conceits are these? He needs not
tell us, that from their practice, it will not follow, that this was a
religious act incumbent to others also; for we lay not down their practice, as
our ground; but what was their ground is ours, the Institution of Christ, which
he delivered unto Paul, and Paul received to deliver unto the Corinthians: And
therefore it is not a thing indifferent, and so not to be compared with that,
Romans 14:5. as he dreameth: and the practice of things indifferent, as such, is
no act of Religion or of worshipe, such as this is: And therefore what he
adds Pa^. 300. is but a laying of a further imputation of unfaithfulness on
the Apostle, for fomenting the Corinthians in their error and mistake; and
never once rectifying or informing their erroneous consciences. What wonder is
it, that these proud Quakers account our Ministers unfaithful, and what not;
when this Man dar lay such a foul imputation in Print upon the Apostle Paul?
Nay, blasphemously impute this to the Spirit of God, that acted Paul?

15. In the next place, he thinks he will prove that this Ordinance is not a
lasting ordinance. 6, Page 300. etc. Passing what is but a repetition, let us
hear his arguments. Matthew and Mark, says he, expresses this, as done while
they were eating: And this was usual among the Jews, as Paulus Riccius
observes, for at their eating of the passover, the master of the family took
bread, and brake it, and did distribute it, and so did he with wine: So Christ,
who would fulfill all righteousness, and would observe the Jewish feasts, used
this ceremony, for his disciples only, and took occasion thereby to raise up
their minds to higher things. Answ. (1.) To this last we have spoken before;
and why did not Christ take occasion to give this Christian document before
this time, while they were eating? (2.) It is true, Christ instituted this
Supper before they rose from table, and what then? (3.) As for what is reported
of the Jewish practice, not only by this Paulus Riccius, but by several others*
I doubt, if all that is said shall demonstrate, that the Jews had this custom
before Christ's days; seeing the eldest of the Jewish writters, out of whom
they have it, wrote not till a considerable time after the Temple was brunt:
And what credit is to be given to what they wrote, when their purpose and
design was to deface and annull Christianity, let sober men judge. (4.) Sure I
am, there was no divine command for this practice, at the eating of the Paschal
Lamb; and how our Quaker can say, that Christ would do this, because he would
fulfill all righteousness. I know not; seeing righteousness stands in obeying the
command of God. (5.) Though Christ did observe the feasts, prescribed to the
Jews by the Lord; Yet he would not observe their sinful additions and
traditions: No; he condemned these Mat. 15. (6.) That which we are to look to,
is Christ's practice, and we are sure, that that should oblige us more, then
the Jewish practice could oblige Christ. (7.) We not only have Christ's
practice, but a command, mentioned by Luk, do this in remembrance of me. This
evinceth no more, says he but that seeing that was to be the last occasion of
his ea^ing with them, he would have them, while they were eating, look to him,
that by commemoration of that occasion, by his passions and death, they should
be stirred up to follow him more diligently. Ans. Need we cite Scriptures
against these men, who have such a dexterity, to elude all with non sense?
Whether should we believe this man's fiction, or the commentary of the Spirit of
God by Paul 1 Cor. 11:24, 25. where we have these words twice repeated, and an
application unto them beside verse. 26. showing that word of comman^ did not
concern the Apostles only, but the Church in all ages? If they had never been
to do that again, how could they obey that command? Does not common sense and
common language confute this vanity? And why would Christ have mentioned this
Command, both when he gave the bread, and when he gave the cup, as Paul shows
us, if this had been all? What is that to say, by commemoration of that
occasion, by his passions and death, etc.? Nothing but nonsense.

16. He mentions next that passage of Christ's washing his disciples feet
Ioh. 13* 3, 4, 8, 13, 14, 15. And because that is not looked upon as binding,
which yet was done (says he) with greater solemnity, and more precisely
prescribed, then this of the Supper, he infers, that neither should, this be
accounted obligeing: and upon this one instance, he expatiateth Page 302. and
30^. But we Answer. (1.) Though it were true (as it is not) that Christ had
instituted this ceremony to be observed, as he did the Supper; the Churches
neglect of the one, will not warrant him and his followers to despise both:
But. (2.) The difference betwixt the two is clear and manifest. This of washing
was an usual practice in those ^ote Countries, where men walked bare footed,
using only sandals; and a common piece of humanity and service, whereby love to
strangers was declared Luke 7:44. 1 Timothy 5:10. And Christ, being Master and
Lord, would condescend unto the performing of this inferior piece of service,
usually practiced by servants and the inferior sort of persons, that he might
both testify his great love to his disciples, and also impress deeply on their
soul, the moral duty of Humility, Condescension, Mutual service; and, by his
own example, root out more effectually that Pride, and Emulation, that was
working in their hearts: and so this practice, in the very nature of the thing,
did preach-out this moral duty: But the matter of the Supper was a new
Institution, having a mystical signification, depending merely upon the
Institution, and was chiefly to be a Sign and Seal of, and a Mean to exhibit
to the followers of the Institution, and conscientious observers of Christ's
Appointments, Spiritual benefits, even Christ, and all his blessings. Hence
Christ said of the Bread, in the sacramental Institution, this is my body,
which is broken for you; and of the Cup, this is my blood of the new Testament,
which is shed for many: But in this action of washing; there is no such thing
apparent. And further, Christ presses here no formal repetition, or
reiteration of this practice, as a mystical Institution; for then he would have
urged a full conformity in all points, and so have told, that one among them,
and the highest, represent^ng their Lord and Master, should do as he had done,
wash the feet of the rest; but instead of this, and to show, that this was but
a natural expressive signification of a moral duty, incumbent on all, to each
other, he says verse. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet,
ye also ought to wash one another feet. And for this end to enforce this moral
command on all, he set before them his own example verse. 15. and his own
example, with this mightily influenceing ingredient and circumstance, that he
who was their Lord and Master, had done so; and therefore they should much more
do so verse 16.- the servant is not greater than his Lord, etc. I might add,
that there is nothing apparent, in the practice of the Apostles, and of the
primitive Church, giving any ground to think, that this was looked upon, as a
significant rite or symbol, having a mystical representation, and
signification: but the moral duty, pressed hereby, was both frequently urged by
the Apostles, and practiced by the primitive Christians: but as to the Supper,
we find matters far otherwise* an Institution punctually followed and
frequently reiterated. Act. 2:42. and 20:7, And the abuses, that had
creeped-in, in the observation, rectified; and the right manner of celebrating
it largely pressed, and enforced with strong arguments, and all this founded on
an Institution 1 Cor. 11:23. etc. And hence our Quaker, if he will, may see
what difference there is betwixt the two; and clear grounds, why the
perpetuity of the one is asserted, and not of the other.

17. He urges. 7. Page 304. our not observing of all the circumstances, as not
celebrating it at night, while supping. Which can make nothing for his
rejecting of the whole Institution: Suppose this were an error in us, will
that justify his profane pleading against the whole Ordinance? But he must
know, that every occasional circumstance of an Institution ha^h not a fixed
place and use in the Institution; though other circumstances* which are parts
of the Institution have a fixed place and use therein; and of these, not of
those must that command, do this in remembrance of me, take place: Hence we
find the alteration and change, both as to the place, and as to the number,
and as to the supping at that time, (which were all but occasional
circumstances) practiced and urged, Christ did celebrate this first supper in
an upper room, with his few disciples; but the Apostle speaks of the meeting
of the whole Church, Act. 20: verse. 7. 1 Cor. 11: verse. 18, 33. and that in a
public place of meeting 1 Cor. 11: verse. 11, 20. So Christ used his ordinary
supper at this time: And it is l^ke the Corinthians would do this also in
imitation: but we see the Apostle discharge this 1 Cor. 11: verse. 21, 22. and
shame them from it: but as to such circumstances (if they may be so called)
which have a fixed place in this Ordinance, and are parts thereof, the Apostle
is very tender and careful of these, repeating and urging the whole of the
Institution, 1 Cor. 11:23, 24, 25. But he thinks, that the whole may be as
well called occasional and accidental, being the practiseing of a Jewish
ceremony. In which he is mistaken, as we have shown. And he thinks the wine,
being the native product of that country, (...) as but accidental. But knows
he not, that water was also the pro^uct of that Country; and yet Christ made
choice of wine: And what though other ordinary drink and bread were made use
of, where wine and wheat bread could not be had? He enquireth again, how these
word do this, can import, that officers should break, bless the brea^ and
distribute it, and that other people should only take and eat? But his
question is like many of the Quakers questions, very impertinent and foolish;
for as Christ was there acting the part of a Master and Officer; and the
disciples, were as Church members; so do this points out the several
respective duties of both: knows he not that the Ministers of Christ are
Stewards of the mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4:1? And thinks he, that it is every
private Members part to bless the cup, and the bread, and to break it? Paul
hinteth some other thing 1 Cor. 10:17. compared with verse. 21. The dust which
he raises about the manner, whether sitting, standing or kneeling, As being
matter of debate, has been sufficiently spoken to by others; and he knows
the maine exception, against kneeling, was not taken from it is being different
from Christ's manner, which yet was sufficient: All this gives no ground for
his profane rejecting of the whole Ordinance; but rather is a witness against
him.

18. He tells us Page 306. that the breaking of bread mentioned. Act 2:42. was
not meaned of this Sacrament, but of their private repasts, because this is
understood verse. 46. But he adverteth not; for verse. 42. their public actions
as a Church are recorded, they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine,
and followshipe, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers, which are all Church
and Public actions: but verse. 46. the breaking of bread, was in their private
converse, for they did it at home, and with gladness and singleness of heart;
which point out their mutual heartsome converse, with love and frugality: And
if the breaking of bread ver. 42. were nothing but this ver. 46. what necessity
was there for the repetition? and why does not Luk add the same explication of
breaking of bread verse 42. which he adds verse 46. saying, did eat their
meat with gladness etc? And to say, that the breaking of bread. Act 2:42. is
the same with the tables mentioned Act. 6:2. is a mere groundless fancy; like
many of the Quakers bold notions.

19. He speaks next Page 307. to Act. 20* 7. And will have that but a private
meal too, because of what is said verse. 11. Little considering the words, or
the series of the discourse. The first day of the week, our Christian sabbath,
the disciples, in their whole number and company, came together to break bread,
not to feast sure in a private house, (where convenience for such a multitude,
was not to be expected, and to which no small preparation and labor was
requisite,) but to celebrate this Sacrament, which looked more like a work
suteing the day, than such a private feast, as he imagines: And it was such a
feast, as required Paul's preaching: shall we think, that Paul did eat none at
their private meals, all the seven days he was there? Yet we hear no word of
his preaching at any other feast. And as for that verse. 11. it was not a
supper; for it was long past supper time, it was after midnight, that he did
eat then; but it was a little refreshment for himself, after his long
preaching: And it is not, said verse. 11. that the disciples did all eat, as
they came all together to break bread verse. 7. but only that Paul did it, when
he therefore was come up again and had broken bread and eaten, and talked a
long time, even till break of day etc. So that this eating was for himself,
both to refresh him after his long speaking, from the time that the disciples
came together, until midnight; and also to strengthen him for speaking till
break of day, and for his journey then.

20. He comes next to examine 1 Cor. 11. Page 308. And tells us that Paul verse.
20 says. When ye come together-this is not to eat the Lords supper, simply;
and not, that was not to eat aright, and that because they were ready
superstitiously to extend it beyond its true use. Ans. Of their superstition,
we hear not; but rather of their defect in duties of Religion, as to this: And
here the thing for which they are reprehended, is their coming in distinct
separated troops, making schisms; and this he says was not a coming together
to celebrate this feast, as one body; And more particularly verse. 31. he
reprehendeth their abuse, in eating thus disorderly, and not waiting upon
other, which in end he enjoyneth verse. 33. what makes all this to prove this
to have been a private repast only? was it ever the fashion of the Christians
to hold their private feasts, and no feast else, in their public Churches? We
know these Corinthians had adjoined to the solemn feast, their private feasts,
or love feasts, but the Apostle does plainly discharge that practice, saying
verse. 22. what, have ye not houses to eat and drink in? Or despise ye the
Church of God, etc. He would have no feast there held, but what belonged to the
worshipe of God, and was a Gospel Institution; and therefore, in rectifying of
all their abuses, he reduces them to the first Institution, not barely
narrating a matter of fact, as our Quaker fancieth; but relating an Institution,
which he had delivered unto them, and had received of the Lord for that end.
And if our Quaker were not willingly blind, he might see a command here; and
all the rest of the following verses confirming it: But Institutions are no
commands with him; nor have divine commands any power over him; for he is not
under God's Law, but under the light. Was Paul's delivering to them what he had
received, nothing, but a simple narration of a matter of fact? What profane
babbling is this? But, says he, when he repeateth Christ's command, he wordeth
it so, as that it is no command verse. 25, 26. but a conditional thing, as often
as ye drink it, etc. Ans. Then Paul relates not faithfully, but makes a false
narration: But our Quakers scruple not at loading the Apostle with reproaches,
yea and the Spirit of God speaking in him! What force, I wonder, has these
words as ye eat and drink, to enfringe the command, and make the proposition
only conditional? by these words the Apostle lets us see, that Christ did not
enjoyne, how often this Supper should be gone about, but the command to do it in
remembrance of Christ stands, and is thrice repeated by Paul, for the verse.
22. may be read imperatively; where also we see, that there is a command of
keeping up this ordinance, until Christ's second coming. His talking, that this
is to be understood of Christ's inward spiritual coming, is but a quakeristick
notion; as if any spiritual coming of Christ to his people here, would
obliterat and delete the remembrance and commemoration of Christ's death; and
beside, it would suppose, that there was not a good Christian in all this
Church, nor one to whom Christ was come spiritually; or he must show us, where
these are excepted here, and exempted from this command. But says he, they
were weak, and Paul bore with them. Ans. Yet being weak, they might be babes in
Christ I Cor. 3:1. and so have Christ arisen in them: but if all were void of
grace, how could Paul call them sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1:2. and
thank God, for the grace of God, which was given them by Jesus Christ verse. 4.
and say, that the testimony of Christ was confirmed in them verse. 6. why said
he, that the Spirit of God dwelt in them, 1 Cor. 3:6. and that in Christ Jesus,
he had begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4:15? These and many such
passages, which we find in this Epistle, say that there were at least some,
and not a few, real believers among them, and so such to whom Christ was come
inwardly and spiritually, who, for all this, were to wait for Christ's second
comeing, 1 Cor. 1.7, 8. and, in hopes of that, to use this Sacrament. Yet to
confirm this, he says, that bread and wine, are among the things, that are on
the earth, which such as are risen with Christ should not set their affections
upon, Col. 3:1, 2. Which I do not wonder at; but think strange rather, that he
did not reckon it among those members, which are upon the earth, and which we
are to mortify, Col. 3:5. to wit, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness: Yet it may be, he will do so
the next time. As for his Syriak version (which we regard not as authentic) if
he will look upon it as authentic he may consider what it says, Act. 2:42.
And, if he has rightly translated the words here, on verse 17. thus, what I am
about to command you, I say not as praising you, for ye are not advanced, but
descended unto that, which is less. I see not what they can make for him; will
this prove, that the Apostle saw a necessity to teach them, not external things
and elements, but unnecessary and uncommanded things; as our Quaker must say?
Nor is there the least show of any countenance, from that version on verse. 20.
given to this man's inference. When therefore you meet together (says the
version, as he translateth it) you do not, as is just, in the day of our Lord,
eat and drink. And his inference is, that to meet for eating bread and drinking
wine was not the work of that day of the Lord. While as the Version speaks of
their corrupt manner. But he would needs let us know, that he has seen these
Versions, with their interpretations, in the Biblia Polyglotta; though he could
make on other use of them, than to show how dexterously he could pervert them,
as well as the authentic Original.

21. When he can gain nothing here, he must try another foord; and therefore
Page 313. he tells us, that other precepts, far more positive, are laid aside:
as that Act. 15:29. And knows he not, that that was a part of the ceremonial
Law, the observation of which was thought necessary at that time, for avoiding
the scandal of the Jews: And the force of this canon was soon taken away by
Paul, in his Epistles to the Corinthians and Colossians: was the Lord's Supper,
a ceremonial command? Where read we of it, in all the Law of Moses? And was it
ever a brogated by the Apostles, or Antiquated, either directly, or by
consequence? When, I pray, or where? And then he cites that James 5:14. of
anointing the sick with oil. And when he replyeth to himself, that it was a
consequent of the gift of miracles, which is now ceased, he sweetly
acquiesceth: Only he advises us to lay aside the ceremony of Imposition of
hands, seeing the giving of the holy Ghost is ceased; Not considering, that we
use it not, as it was used for the conveyance of the extraordinary gifts of the
holy Ghost; but as it was used for conveyance of the ministerial Power and
Authority; and this use continues, and so may the outward Ceremony of laying
on of hands.

22. To make all sure, he will adduce some Scriptures, proving that such
outward, and external rites, are no necessary parts of the new Covenant
dispensation. And to this end cites first Romans 14:17. But the meat and drink,
which the Apostle there speaks of, is the same he was speaking of from the
beginning of the Chapter, and that (as most suppose) was meats, which had been
prohibited by the Law of Moses, which some weak Christians thought yet to have
been in force, as to these things; and therefore thought some meat was
unclean: see verse. 14. Will this make any thing against the observation of the
Institution of Christ? Will he bring in Christ's Supper, as meat prohibited
under the Law? Then he will make Christ a transgressour, He cites next Col.
2:1^, 20. Which is so plainly against him, that I think he has done violence
to the light within him, while he cited it; for he must bring Christ's Supper
either under the traditions of men, or the rudiments of the world; for of these
the Apostle speaks, as we see verse. 8, 22. will he say, that the Lord's
Supper comes in among the shadows of himself, as yet to come, while as he was
already come? But he adds a reason, that must enforce all Page 311. to wit,
that then the Gospel shall not be distinguished from the Law, nor preferred.
Which is but a Socinian argument, formerly spoken to. There is no yoke, nor
typicalness, nor typical representation of things to come, under the Kingdom
of the Me^sias, in the Supper of the Lord; but a commemoration of what is past,
and a sealing and confirming to believers, their right and interest in Christ,
and all his benefits. What follows to. 10. has been spoke to, and obviated
already: He is wearisome in his repetitions; and we must not weary the Reader
with repetitions too.

23. If nothing will do, then he must ask, what authority Ministers have to
administrate this Sacrament Page 312.. 10. and so recalleth the debate
concerning our call to the Ministry, to which enough was said above Chap.
XVII. And, because he would end as he began, he must touch again upon the
various opinions about, and practices in this Sacrament, of old, and of late
Page 313. which only argues the restlesness of his malice against this
Ordinance, and how feign he would have it cashiered; but all in vain, it will
abide in force, and be preserved in use, till Christ come again, nill he, will
he, and all his party.

24. In end, after our Quaker has fought until he can stand no longer, and
finds himself weak, and unable to fight any more, he comes to something like
a parlie, and would accord unto some accommodation; for he says. 11. finally,
if any today, out of true tenderness of conscience toward God, would perform
these ceremonies, after that way and method, in which the primitive Christians
did it, I would not doubt to affirm, that to such it might be indulged for a
time: But, if what he says be true, to wit, that there is no command for this
Ordinance; that i^ is a legal Rite, a shadow of good things to come, whereof
the body is Christ, that it is repugnant to the nature of the new covenant
dispensation etc. I shall be bold to say, that no man can, out of tenderness of
conscience to God, after any method or manner, go about it; and that no man
should be more indulged therein, than in practiseing of circumcision. What he
adds, is but a little bundle of his groundless whimsies, without truth,
sense, or consistency. We haste to what follows.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Liberty of Conscience.
1. AS Thieves and Robbers, who love to live on spoil and rapine, desire
earnestly, there were no Law, nor Judge to reach them in their wicked works; So
our Quakers, conscious, as it would seem, to themselves, of the evil of their
ways and practices; and knowing full well, how they are looked upon by all, as
pests, and most noxious persons, both to Church and Commonwealth, to Religion
and Civility; and that therefore, they cannot be tolerated, or suffered to
enjoy a license to follow forth their wicked designs, to ruin all
Christianity, destroy all Churches, in their very Being, as well as in their
Order and Government; introduce Paganism, to the reproach of Christianity, and
to overturne the very foundations of Religion and Piety: Our Quakers, I say,
who are wise enough for evil, and sagacious enough to contrive their own
security, thought it best for their own saiftie, to add this to the rest of
their errors, That Magistrates have no lawful power over them; and so join
with Libertines, Arminians and Anabaptists, and with the Donatists of old* and
Raimundus Lullius, and with the old Fraticelli, (who from their perfection
inferred, that they were not subject to any humane ordinances, either of Church
or State) in pleading for a liberty of Conscience, as it is called, but in
truth, a lawless license to destroy all Religion, all Piety, and all the
precious Concerns of Jesus Christ, and of the souls of men. Blackwood, in his
Storming of Antichrist Page 23. would add some limitations or restrictions,
saying Evil works committed against the light of Nature and Reason, as the
setting up of Mahomet, or any other God, beside the Creator of heaven and
earth; Atheism, when any man shall boldly affirm, there is no God;
Polytheisme, when men affirm many G^ds; Blas^hemy; murder: these and such like
the Magistrate, whether Heathen or Christian, is to be a terror unto. 2. These
evils, which are against the light of Nations; there is no Nation in the world
but in it the Magistrate will punish those, that speak against the God, that
they profess, and against that which they think is Scripture; So if any rail
against Christ, or deny the Scriptures to be his word, or no rule for us, and
so unsetle our faith; this, as I take it, may be punished by the Magistrate*
But our Quaker, I know, will not stand to this: He will rather say with
Williams Bloody Tenet, in the Preface Page 2. it is the will and command of
God, that since the coming of his Son, the Lord Jesus, a permissi^n of the most
Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian consciences, and worships, be
granted to all men, in all Nations and Countries: For his Thesis is general,
taking in all opinions about Worshipe and Religion. And he grants to the
Magistrate only liberty to judge in matters touching the life and goods of
others; or what is hurtful to humane society, and commerce: But probably not of
Quakers; for they are perfect and so cannot do wrong. And though this be a very
narrow restriction, yet I cannot see, how he can yield to this, without
destroying the maine ground he stands upon; for Conscience may be pretended
for the one, as well as for the other; and an erroneous conscience way teach
^ome to Sacrifice their children to Molo^h, and to cut off their nieghbou^s
head, as a revelation taught the Anabaptist in Helvetia, to cut off his
brothers head; and others at Munster, to do many villainies.

2. Seeing our Quaker declineth a full disput, upon this head, telling us, that
many have writ^en largely and earnedly upon it; upon this same account, I think
my self releaved from any large prosecution of this Theme; and that I need do
no more, but examine, what he says for his license, and against our Arguments,
such of them, as he is pleased to take any notice of. Any who desire to have a
full discussion of this question, may peruse Mr Rutherfoords free disput
against pretended liberty of Conscience, Mr Edwards, Prin, and Others, who have
fully handled that debate. The truth which we own is summarily set down in our
Confession of Faith Chap. 20.. 2, and 4. God alone is Lord of the Conscience,
(Iam. 4:12. Romans 14:4.) and has left it free from the doctrines and
commandments of men, which are, in any thing, contrary to his word, or beside
it, in matters of faith or worship (Act 4: v. 19. and 5.29 1 Cor. 7. v. 25. Mat.
23:8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 1:24. Mat. 15:9.) So that to believe such doctrines, or to
obey such commands, out of conscience, is to betray true liberty of C^nscience
(Col. 2:20, 22, 23. Gal. 1:10. and 2:4, 5. Psalm. 5:1.) and the requireing of an
implicit faith, and an abs^lute and blind obedience, is, to destroy liberty
of Conscience, and reason also (Romans 10:17. and 14:23. Esa. 8:20. Act. 1^:11.
Ioh. 4:28. Hos. 5:11. Revel. 13:12, 16; 17. Ier. 8 9.) And because the Powers,
which God has ordained, and the liberty, which Christ has purchased, are not
intended by God to destroy, but mutually to uphold and preserve one another;
They, who upon pretense of Christian liberty, shall oppose any lawful Power, or
the lawful exercises of it, whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the
Ordinance of God (Mat. 10: verse. 25. 1 Pet. 2: verse. 13, 14, 16. Rom 13:1, --
8. and 13.17.) And, for their publishing of such opinions, or maintaining of
such practices, as are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known
principles of Christianity, whether concerning faith Worshipe or Conversation,
or to the power of godliness; or such erroneous Opinions or Practices, as
either in their own nature, or in the manner of publishing or maintaining them,
are destructive to the ext^rnal peace and order, which Christ has established
in the Church, they may lawfully be called to account, and proceeded against by
the Censures of the Church, (Romans 1:32. with 1 Cor. 5:2, 3, 11, 13. 2 Ioh.
10:11. 2 These. 3: v. 14. and Tim 6:3, 4 and Tit. 1:10, 11, 13. and 3:10. with
Mat. 18:15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 1: verse. 19, 20, 21. Revel. 5:9 and 2:2, 14, 15.)
And by the power of the civil Magistrate (Deuteronomy. 13:6, to 12* Romans 13.3, 4. with
2 Ioh. v. 10, ^1. Ezra 7:23, 25.26, 27, 28. Revel. 17:12, 16, 17, Neh. 13:15,
17, 21, 22, 25, 30 2 King. 23:5, 6, 9, 20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 34:31. and 15:12, 13,
16. Dan. 3:29. 1 Timothy: 2:2. Esai. 49: v. 2. Zech. 13:23.

3. Our Quaker premitteth some things for clearing of the question; and first
he tells us, that by Conscience, as he said before, he understands that
persuasion of soul, which arises from the Intellect, with the truth or
falsehood of a thing. An^w. (1.) How this description can agree to a scrupulous,
or to a doubting Conscience, I see not; for neither of these have attained to
any persuasion; though I know, a blinded conscience, or an erroneous
conscience, can have a sort of persuasion. (2.) Before, to wit Page 89. he told
us, that some of the Quakers did fitly compare the Conscience unto a lantern,
and the light of Christ to a candle burning in it: And compareing this with
what is here said; we may see, that in the Quakers judgment, the light of
Christ, whereof they talk so much, is nothing but the light of the
understanding, for it is this light of the understanding, that causes the
persuasion, which he calls Conscience here; and it is that which shines in
the dark lantern of conscience, as they speak there. But (3.) How can
Conscience be compared to a lantern, seeing a lantern is a dark thing, having
no light in it self, only it has an aptitude to transmit the light, that
shines in it; but Conscience is a lump of light* and is either an act of the
practical understanding, as some; or rather, as others, a power of the
practical understanding, and is not a distinct faculty from the understanding,
but the very understanding judging of and giving sentence upon the man's State,
Ways and Actions? And the very name Conscience imports a knowing power and
faculty, con -scientia or co-knowledge: to it belongs the Synteresis, the
intellectual storehouse and magazine of truths, the Register of common
notions left in us by nature, whether as to things concerning God, or as to
things, concerning Ourselves and our Nieghbour, in respect of which, the
conscience is said to be a Law, or Light: and this belike, is all the Light of
Christ, which our Quakers understand: And the judgment of Conscience being
discursive, to it belongs also, the knowledge of all the man's actions; in
which respect it is called a Book or Witness, or an Indi^ement, as it brings
forth these actions to light, and compares them with the Law. To it also
belongs the judgment or sentence, passed upon the actions, as conform or
disconforme to the Law of God. (4.) Conscience then cannot properly be called a
persuasion; for this resulteth from the clear apprehensions, dictats,
witnessing and judgment of the Conscience; and so is but a consequent of
Conscience acting, and that not of every conscience either; as not of a
doub^ing, nor of a scrupling conscience; but of a clear and sound conscience;
or of a deluded one.

4. What says he further? which (to wit, the thing presented by the intellect)
th^ugh it be false and evil in it self, yet as long as the man is persuaded,
(to wit, that it is true and ^ood) he should sin, if he did contrary to that
persuasion; for says the Apostle, whatever is not of faith is sin, and he that
doubts is damned if he eat: And Ames says a conscience erring tyeth etc
Answ. It is true, whatever the Conscience dictateth or enjoyneth, it does it,
in the name and authority of God, whose Deputy and vicegerent it is; yet it is
but an underjudge, and is not the supreme Law, but regula regulata; so that
though its dictats, even when erroneous and contrary to the Law of God, do so
bind, as that the man who does contrary, cannot but sin; for though upon the
ma^er he does nothing contrary to the Law of God; yet formally and
interpretatively he transgresses that, which is represented to him by
Conscience, as the Law of God, and he knows no better, but it is in very deed
the Law of God, which he transgresses; Yet for all this, the erroneous
conscience lays on no formal obligation; as the same D. Ames tells us; for
it cannot oblige us to do that, which is a transgression of the Law of God, our
supreme Lawgiver. It is true, which the Apostle says Romans 14. last, that
whatever is not of faith is sin etc. because when we do any thing, not knowing
certainly but in so doing we sin against God, we shake off the awe and f^ar of
God, and have not a sufficient abhorrence at sin.

5. He proposes the question thus; Whether the Civil Magistrate has power to
compel men against their conscience, in matters of Religion: And if they will
not obey, to punish them, in their goods, liberty and lives. And he holds the
negative. I Answer. This is a most perverse stateing of the question: For (1.)
He distinguishes not the Elicite and Imperat acts of the Conscience, but
confounds them: As if the Magistrates power were said equally to reach both;
whereas we do not say, that the Magistrate can compel men, as to the inward
liberty of the soul and conscience: that is, to Think, Judge, Understand and
Conclude in their minds, as he will; as if he could force and compel any to
Believe and Assent unto this, or that opinion, in the matters of God: We say no
such thing: the Conscience, as to these inward acts, is far beyond the reach of
his Sword: But the question is concerning Outward and Imperated acts, such as,
Speaking, Preaching, Writing, Printing, Open Profession, and Persuading of
others, which are visible and audible, dishonorable to God, and noxious to
men; to wit, Whether the Magistrate may punish such by the Sword, who, in
matters of Religion, Teach, Speak and Printe blasphemies against God, doctrines
overturning Religion, perverting souls, etc. And other things of that nature,
that men can pretend conscience for; or not? If he hold the Negative here, as
he must, if he speak to the point, we shall consider his arguments. (2.) Upon
the other hand; Though the Magistrate cannot enforce a Religion upon men: Yet
he may force them to the use of public means, whereby they may be brought to
the knowledge and conviction of the truth; As to hear sound Instruction, and
Information, and to attend the means, whereby light is usually conveyed into
the soul: and this is no force upon conscience, but a putting of people to
duty. (3.) So then, the question is not, whether the sword be a means of
conversion of men to the true faith? nor whether, heathens are to be compelled
by the magistrates sword, to embrace the truth? Nor yet, whether the Inward
Opinions of the mind can be punished by the Magistrate. But the only question
lies here? Whether the Magistrate can by his power punish and restrain Open
Idolaters, and false Worshipers, false Teachers, Perverters of the right ways
of the Lord, Seducers of souls, Corrupters or Deniers of the true worship of
God, open Blasphemers of God and his ways, declared and open Atheists, who
deny there is a God, and the like; whose doctrine eats like a canker 2 Timothy
2:17. and who Apostatize from the truth received and professed, and teach
rebellion against God; though they pretend conscience in all this, and say
their conscience dictateth such things unto them, and commands them, in the
name of the Lord, to do such things, and teach such doctrine; or not?

6. He will not extend this liberty of conscience, unto practices, that are
hurtful unto our Neighbor, or unto humane society, as Libertines do; but only
to those things, which are immediately betwixt Men and God; or men and men of
the same persuasion. Ans. But (1.) ^roaching of errors is noxious to our
neighbor, eating as does a canker 2 Timothy 2:17. subverting the hearers 2 Timothy
2:14. subverting whole houses Tit. 1:11. subverting souls Act. 15:24. it is a
work of the flesh Gal. 5: verse. 20. (2.) Broaching and propagating of
superstition and idolatry, cannot but be noxious both to our neighbor and to
humane society, in that it ushereth-in, and tends to the bringing-on of the
wrath and judgments of God, by which he punishes such courses: And therefore
evil must be put away from the Society, Deuteronomy. 13:5. and 17:7. Levit. 20: verse.
2, 3, 4, 5. (3.) Let us take these hurtful things, to be m^aned of
transgressions against the second table of the Law, I would know, why the
Magistrate can more punish for these, than for violations of the first table?
He is a keeper, in his place, and according to his power, of both tables of the
Law: and so can punish open transgressions of both: But the mai^e ground of my
question is; How the Quaker can yield this, and not the other; seeing Conscience
may be pretended in the one, as well as in the other; And the Conscience can be
misinformed, and when misinformed can bind, as well in the one, as in the
other? Either then his ground, which he lays down; to wit, that an erroneous
conscience binds so, as the man ^ar ^ot act contrary to its dictates, is not
good and sufficient, in this matter; or by ^his his concession, he yields the
cause, and undermineth his own Assertion. (4.) What means he by that, betwixt
men and men of the same persuasion? Do all matters of question, and debate
betwixt men of the same persuasion, belong otherwise to conscience, than matters
of debate betwixt men of contrary perswa^^ons? May the Magistrate medole with
no matter of debate or question, even about civil matters, that is betwixt men
not of the same persuasion? Then they must not meddle with the Quakers, if they
wrong the persons and goo^s of any of another persuasion: This is enough to
expose all true Christians to the fury and malice of the Quakers: whence we see
his Concession is not for nothing.

7. But he explaineth himself better, in the following words, saying, to wit,
to meet together, and worship God that way, which they judge will be most
acceptable to him; but not to urge their neighbors, save by persuasion, and
reason, and other means, which Christ and his Ap^^tles used, as of preaching
and instructing: and not at all, under pretext of conscience, to do any thing
against the moral and perpetual statutes, which all Christians commonly
acknowledge. Ans. But (1.) Then the Magistrate may not hinder persons to meet
together to worship a stock or a stone; Yea or to offer up their children to
Moloch; to sacrif^ce beasts, crocodiles, birds, etc. to Jupiter, Mars, Vulcan,
or to prostitute their wives and daughters, or commit sodomie, in honor of
Venus, as Heathens have done, because their Consciences judge, that this way of
worship is most acceptable to God. (2.) To urge Neighbors by persuasion to
embrace Error, and to follow Idolatry, Superstition, and false ways of
Worshipe, is a most noxious and hurtful thing, destroying their souls,
subverting their faith, and exposeing them to the wrath and indignation of God;
and so of far worse consequence, than the wronging them in their Names, Goods
and Bodies: and therefore requires much more the Magistrates sword of justice,
to punish such noxious and soul ruining Teachers. (3.) Still the doubt
remains, why the pretext of conscience cannot ward off the Magistrates
sword, in matters of the second table of the Law, as well as in matters of the
first; seeing conscience is God's deputy, and only subject to him, in the one,
as well as in the other? (4.) Moral and perpetual statu^es comprehend, I
suppose, the commands of the first table, as well as the commands of the second
table; and it is no matter, whether all Christians commonly acknowledge them,
or not; for God's moral Laws borrow no force or strength from our
acknowledging and receiving of them: And thus we see, this poor man destroys
what he would be at. And when he condemns, in the following words, the
Anabaptists at Munster, he confirms what we say; for they pretended
conscience: and though, as he says, their deeds rather flowed from pride and
avarice, than purity and conscience; Yet that helps not the matter, for it is
as apparent, that the actions of our Quakers cannot flow from Purity and
Conscience, unless we understand a develish deluded conscience, which has no
affinity with Purity, whatever they pretend.

8. He tells us next Page 316. that all the liberty, which he pleads for, is
but that, which the Primitive Christians required of the Heathen Emperors.
Ans. But he should first prove, that the truth they prof^ss is consonant to the
truth, which the Primitive C^ristians owned: We say not, that Magistrates,
whether Heathen or Christian, should persecute the truth, or hinder by Laws or
violence the Professors of truth, to meet and worshipe God, in the way by him
appointed. If his way be the way of truth, he should not plead for toleration*
for toleratio semper est mali: And if he can manifest it to be the way of
truth, I shall willingly grant, that Magistrates should not only not trouble,
or tolerat him, but should countenance and encourage him: But we have heard
enough already, to demonstrate how dissonant, that, which they maintain, is to
Scripture truth, and to primitive truth; and so, we see no ground, whereupon
they can plead, for the same liberty, which the Primitive Christians did
desire, and plead for? especially considering, how they have Apostatized from
the truth once by themselves professed; and having renunced their bapt^sme, and
the faith once delivered to the Saints, would seduce all others to the same
abomination.

9. He says next, he would not have men, as men, and members of the Common
wealth molested, in their temporals or privileges, for their inward persuasion.
Answer, And I say the same: but public meetings to the dishonor of God, and
scorn of Christianity; And acts of preaching, and seduceing, by creeping into
houses, and loading captive silly women, laden with sins, and led away with
diverse lusts, is not a mere inward persuasion: Yet he grants, that in the
Church of God, there should be censures exercised upon such as fall into
error, (...) well as upon such, as fall into sin, and after admonition, if
they remain pertinacious, they should be cut off by the Sword of the Spirit,
but not by the Sword of the Magistrate. Answer, (1.) Yet, I hope, he will
grant, that this falling into error must be something more, then an inward
persuasion; even that, which can be witnessed, and whereof the person can be
convicted, and for which he can be admonished. (2.) We say not, that
Church Officers can punish by a temporal sword; and so we assent to that of
Chrysostom. which he cites, dogmataimpia, quae ab haereticis profecta sunt,
arguere and anathematizare oportet, hominibus autem parcendum est, and pro
salute eorum orandum. Nor do we say, that every error should be punished by
cutting off with the temporal sword; nor that all erroneous persons should be
forthwith spoiled of their civil privileges. There are degrees of Errors, and
degrees of Punishments; so are there various kinds of erroneous persons; some
Simple and deluded, through ignorance; others, Crafty and active in spreading
their corrupt seed; Some may be easily, after Information, convinced of their
mistake: Others are Pertinacious, and Imperswadible. (3.) What means he by
cutting off with the sword of the Spirit? Understands he Church
excommunication? Or cutting off by an Inspiration, or by the light within? But
he owneth no Church beside their own; And in their own, they have no set and
fixed officers, by whom such a sentence should be given out. And I wonder, what
that error would be, for which they would draw forth this sword of the Spirit;
it would be, I judge, pure orthodoxy. (4.) But I desire, in his next, that he
would clear to me, how this shall not be a forceing of conscience, in things
immediately betwixt God and man, and between men of the same persuasion? (as he
spoke above,) we accept howeve^ of this concession, and shall make our own use
of it afterward, as he shall hear.

10. This being all, which he had to say, for clearing of the question, he
comes. 2. to tell us, that he will prove, That man has not authority over the
conscience, by virtue of any power or dominion, which he has in the government
of the world. And unless by Conscience here, he mean the outward and imperated
acts, which are properly the actions of the man, that come in the open view of
the world, he does nothing but mock his Reader, and publish his own
ignorance: And the same we say to his argument, which is this, That man's
conscience is the seat and throne of God. And moreover this Argument will plead
as effectually for freedom from Church censures, as from Civil punishments; for
the Church or his Light within, can no more invade Gods Throne and
Jurisdiction, than the Magistrate. But his after-expressions intimate that his
meaning is of outward actions; for he proceeds very confusedly, in his
probation, and says that the magistrate is not capable to judge in these
matters: Little adverting, that this will take away their power even in civil
things; for, as to many such, they have not always all the fitness requisite
to judge, but must take help: And the same may be said of his Church; and how
shall they then draw forth the Sword of the Spirit? But all this is nothing to
our present question; for he will not yield this power even to such
magistrates, as are able to judge in these matters; or if he will, he must not
plead for Liberty of Conscience.

11. His second argument is Page 317. This power is contrary to the nature of
the Gospel. But why so? Because Christ said, his Kingdom was not of this world.
Answer, Yet Christ nor his Apostles never used this argument, in their
defenses, which, I think they would have done, if this were so. Again, What
thinks he of that which Christ did Ioh. 2:15, 16, 17. This consequence is water
weak, for we are not pleading, as his following words suppose, for the
Magistrates power, in propagating the Gospel by fire and sword; but for
suppressing of what is destructive to the Kingdom of Christ, and is
dishonorable to God: And knows he not, that in Christ's Kingdom,
Righteousness betwixt man and man, in things civil, is required? Knows he
not, that the Gospel teaches us to live soberly and righteously, as well as
holy Tit. 2:12. Will he therefore say, that Magistrates have not power to
punish Injustice and wicked Unrighteousness, or what is contrare to sobriety?
No: for he has granted this already: What can his argument then conclude? His
saying, That when Christ sent forth his disciples, he said not to them go
kill, scourge, imprison etc. Is but a demonstration of his ignorance of the
question. Do we say, that M^nisters should do any such thing? He cites Luke
9:55. but most impertinently; for it touches not the question, as he himself
has stated it: that act of the Samaritans, was not a matter of conscience
betwixt God and man immediately; but an act of incivility and inhumanity: He may
better hence infer, that Magistrates may not punish uncivil, inhumane and
indiscreet persons: The quarrel here was not false doctrine, nor perverting, of
souls: Nor do we plead, that ministers should use fire and sword; Yea if this
prove any thing, it will prove, that Ministers may not Anathematize (which yet
himself granted out of Chrysostom, as we heard) false teachers; for that looks
liker to a praying for fire, or some extraordinary plague out of heaven; than
what we plead for. He runs wild, when he hence infers, that far less may
men now raise fire upon the earth, to destroy them, who believe in Christ: for
though this be true, it says nothing for them, who are men of the same metal
with the Samaritans, as to hatred of and enmity against Jesus of Nazareth: For
in him they do not believe, but in a Christ within them. He is as wild, when
he adds, That if it was not lawful for the Apostles, to compel others to be
of their judgment, far less is it lawful for men, who confess themselves
fallible to kill all, who will not be of their judgment in Religion, in all
points: For difference of judgment, in the matters of Religion, was not the
ground of the Apostles quarrel against Samaria: Nor do we speak of killing all,
that are not of our judgment, in all points, in matters of Religion: this was
the judgment and practice of their Forefathers, the Phanatick Enthusiasts of
Munster; not ours; as his own conscience, or light within him, if it be not
blind and dead both, may tell him. At the same rate of impertinency, he goes
on, and says, Christ did not by outward force, compel others to believe in
him: And cites Zech. 4:6. and 2 Cor. 10:4. and Psalm. 110 3. For we are not
here speaking of the way of propagating the Gospel; but of defending the truth
from violent and crafty foxes, who would spoil the vines, yea and destroy the
whole vineyaird. Though we cannot with cudgeling change a fox into a lamb; yet
we may by force keep him from devouring the lambs: And the Church desires to
use no other weapons, than such as are spiritual, and appointed by Christ
himself. The man talks, he knows not what.

12. He ci^eth Page 319. the parable of the tares, Mat. 13. Little adverting
how hereby he contradicts himself; for he granted, that erroneous persons
might be cast out by the Church, or he spoke Parables to us; and is not that
contrary to this Parable, as he would now interpret it? He granted also, that
Magistrates might punish Murderers, and the like: And are not they also
children of the Devil, the seed of Satan, that offend, do iniquity, and shall
be cast into the furnace of fire etc? What will he now say? Must these all be
let alone until the day of judgment? He needs not tell us, that heretics
are here included, for he must prove, that none else are included, no
Murderers, no Robbers, no Whoremon^ers etc. But the truth is, the parable is
against such, who would think to have a Church here on earth so pure, that
there should be no hypocrites in it, and are so severe in their rules and
examinations, that while they think to hold out and cast out all hypocrites,
they hold out and cast out some of the good wheat; from whom all hypocrites can
hardly be discerned; though this Quaker tell us, that he that has a spiritual
judgment can discern hypocrites, as well as heretics; wherein we will not
believe his bare word, if he mean all hypocrites; I know, the servants here saw
and discerned some tares: but we find not that they saw all; nor such as could
not be plucked up without hazard to the good wheat; as there are some tares,
that can hardly be discerned from the good wheat, as Scultetus shows us, in
his observations on the place. He is no less impertinent, when he adds, that
some Magistrates have condemned that for heresy, which was not: for it is as
true, that false judgment has been given in civil matters, and innocent men
have been condemned: and yet he dar not say, that Magistrates may not meddle in
these matters.

14. Then. 3. Page 319. He comes to speak to our Arguments, and he cites but
three in all: the first is Deuteronomy. 13:1. etc. where the false Prophet, and
dreamer of dreams, who would draw them away to serve other Gods, is commandded
to be put to death. (To which he should have added Deuteronomy 17:2. -- 7. Levit.
23:16, 23, and 20:2, 3, 4, 27. Exodus 22: v. 18. Deuteronomy. 18: verse. 20, 22.) The
moral equrty of which laws bind us Christians, the ground being the same, the
sin being an open denial of the one God, contrare to the first command moral;
and a drawing of people away both from the fear and from the love of God Deuteronomy.
13:2, 4. and a seduceing of them to turn away from God; which is called an
evil, that should be put away from the midst of them verse. 5. and an evil that
all should fear verse. 11, 13. lest the anger of the Lord were kindled against
all, verse. 17. These, I say, being moral grounds, and the law founded thereon,
we cannot think* but the law is also obligeing. Now what says he to this? He
thinks, that it is no more a rule to us, than the Jews their borrowing of gold
and silver from the Egyptians; or then their invadeing of Canaan, can warrant
Christians now to invade the land of their neighbors, and kill all. Ans. (1.)
What will this say to instances, before the Jewish law was erected as Job.
31:26, 27, 28. and of others that were not under that law, as Ezra. 7:36. (2.)
By this one dash, he makes the whole judicial law, as to its moral equity,
quite useless; And so may hence cast all arguments, proving that Magistrates
may punish whoredom, theft, murder etc. (3.) There is a difference betwixt a
transient fact once commanded, and a standing law made to continue* the
transient act had its peculiar reason, that perished with that occasion; but
the law is founded upon, and backed with moral and lasting reasons. (4.) By
this means the law made against such as gave their seed to Molech Levit. 20:2,
3, 4. should be null, as also the laws against blasphemy Levit. 24:10.-14, 16.
and witches Exodus 22:18. Levit. 20:27. and the like. (5.) Nay, upon this
ground, he may reject all the law moral, which was given to the Jews; for
these moral commands were given to them, as well as the other: And if he make
no difference, all must go together, and so the whole Old. Test. must be laid
by, as an almanac now out of date, as said the old Simoniani and the
Manichees, and of late the Antinomians and Anabaptists: and if he shall grant a
difference betwixt these commands, let him show the difference, and see if it
will not plead for us; for we plead not from the Law, simply as a Law given to
the Jews, but as a Law founded on moral equity, of perpetual use, and
necessity for the same ends, for which it was given unto them; and not upon the
account of any thing typical, or proper and peculiar unto them. I say not, that
all these precepts oblige, unless they be rescinded under the Gospel; and so I
need take no notice of his reply; I know, upon the ceasing of that polity,
their whole judicial Law, in so far as concerned that Polity, ceased; but not
what was founded upon moral equity, and was common to other Nations. Nor is
that which he urges from verse. 9. of any weight; for the matter was to be
brought before the judges; only the brother, the Father, or husband, as
witnesses, in this horried crime, were, according to the usual manner, to lay
their hands upon the guilty condemned persons, and to cast the first stone at
them; not that they were to judge them, and execute them themselves, for verse.
8. thou shall not pit^, nor spare, neither shall thou conceal him, says, that
they were to delate him, and give him up as a malefactor, that he might die
publicly; that so all Israel might hear and fear, and do no mo^e any such
wickedness, verse. 11. And further, though a circumstance of the Law, enjoined
upon some peculiar account, may cease, the Substance of the Law may abide.

14. He speaks next to Romans 13. and granting that heresy is an evil deed,
yet he thinks, the place will not prove any thing; for, he says, hypocrisy is
an evil; and yet he cannot punish it. Nor do we say, that he can punish even
heresy, that is in the heart, and is not breaking forth, to the infecting of
others. But says he, If matters of doctrine were here understood, what
absurdities would hence follow, seeing the tyrant Nero is here understood, who
could not understand these questions; and this will justify him in persecuting
the Christians, for he acted according to his knowledge. Ans. (1.) And are
there not many questions, in moral things, as our Quaker calls all civil
matters, that are hard and difficile for every Magistrate? Shall he therefore be
no Magistrate, having power to judge in any particular, who cannot understand
all the intrigus of every question and controversy? See Deuteronomy. 17:12. If this
argument hold, many commands must be laid by, as that given to every Master of
a family, 2 Ioh. 10. and these. 1 Cor. 5:11. Romans 16:17, 18. and the like; for
every person is not sufficiently qualified in these matters. (2.) Though Nero be
here included; Yet he alone is not here understood; and so though he, being an
heathen, was not qualified to judge heretics in Christianity, Christian
Magistrates being qualified may judge, and should judge such evil doers.
Magistrates, as such, have power to judge evil doers, some Magistrates in
particular cannot judge of some particular evil doers; Yet others, who can, may
and ought: Fathers, as Fathers, are to teach and instruct their children, Genesis
18:18, 19. Exodus 12:26, 27. Ephesians. 6:4. 2 Timothy 3:14, 15. Prove. 4:3, 4, 5. Yet
heathen Fathers cannot teach Gospel doctrine; shall therefore Christian Fathers
be exeemed from this duty? It follows not. (3.) Hence no ground to justify
Nero in persecuting the truth, no more then for an ignorant Magistrate to kill
an innocent man, as guilty of murder, because he so judged, through want of
understanding.

15. He adduceth next Gal. 5:12. And tells us, that it proves no more, than
that such should be cut off from the Church by excommunication. Ans. I shall
urge it no further; as also that Revel. 2:20. When it is said, that heresy is
reckoned among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5:19. He tells us Page 321. that
Magistrates may not punish all the works of the flesh, as hypocrisy, anger,
envy, hatred. And we grant this; Yet heresy is a work of the flesh, that is
open and apparent, and can be proven by witnesses and evidences: but these
latent evils cannot; as neither can heresy, that is latent in the heart; but
then it cannot be called properly heresy, But he says, that heresy falls
not under the Magistrates authority, as long as it breaks not forth to the
hurt of humane society, but only abides within these duties of doctrine and
worshipe, that stand immediately betwixt God and men. Yet if these duties of
doctrine and worshipe, wherein this heresy consists, appear openly (and how
opinions lying in the heart can be called doctrines and worshipe, I see not)
they tend to the hurt of humane society, as being of an infecting nature, and a
God-provoking evil; and so being tolerated or connived at, become the evil and
guilt of the whole society, before God; and render all obnoxious to his wrath,
who are not, in their places and stations, seeking to root it out.

16. Passing all the rest of our Arguments, he comes Page 322.. 4. to tell us,
that this compulsion of conscience is contrare to sound reason, and to the Law
of Nature. And in this he beats the air: for we speak not of such a
compulsion* as he imagines: We know, as well as he, that the intellect cannot
be forced: but we are speaking of outward actions, and words spoken by the
tongue, which can be suppressed; and which, if not suppressed, are noxious and
hurtful. We know the Ma^istrates sword cannot convert; yet it can drive away
ravenous Wolves, and punish evil deeds. We know, the civil Sword cannot make
sincere Professors; Yet it can keep persons from blaspheming God and his
Truth. If to make Laws for preserving of Religion, were against the Law of
Nature, how came it, that Heathens that had no other light did make such Laws,
as Historians witness, such as Plutarch, Livie, Justin, Diogenes Laertius,
Caelius Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, Xenophon, and others, Seneca de Benefic.
Lib. 3. C. 6. is express for this, saying, Violatarum religionum aliubi atque
aliubi diversa poena est; sed ubique aliqua. And all this way of argueing will
take away the Church censures, which yet he has granted; for they cannot
truly convert, but rather make hypocrites: and then let this man answer all
his own Arguments. He infers Page 323. this absurdity, That Christ was
deficient in not useing Legions of Angels, to defend his Church: But how this
will follow upon our Assertion, I desire him to show: He man with more color
say, that if God has given power to Magistrates to punish civil crimes, he
should be deficient to humane society, in not making all Magistrates wise as
Angels, to understand the mystery of all questions. But it becomes us to
adore, and not call God to our bar. The next absurdity, which he mentions,
has bin spoke to already; for our doctrine gives no countenance to
persecution for righteousness sake: and he might hence as well argue, that
Magistrates might not punish murderers, because hereby they teach Murderers
to pursue them, when they have power in their hand. Nor does our doctrine give
ground to say, that as heathens persecuted Christians with fire and Sword,
Christians, when they have power should deal so with heathens: So that all that
which he says Page 323, and 324. is to no purpose. Because men in power abuse
their authority to suppress truth; it will never follow, that Magistrates
should not use their power to suppress wickedness and Error, that eats as
does a Canker. So an heretical Church may excommunicate an Orthodox person; yet
he himself will not hence infer, that an orthodox Church may not cast out of
their fellowshipe an heretical person, as we saw above

17. The sayings of some Fathers. which he adduceth Page 325. and 3^6. are to
no purpose; for we willingly grant, that Christianity is not to be propagated
by Fire and Sword; and that ministers ought not to use violence: And none of
these Fathers say, that Christian Professors should not be punished by
Christian Magistrates, when they openly practice false worship, and seduce
others by error and heresy, openly vented and preached. And what they wrote
was against the persecution, that heathens exercised against Christians, or
what the wicked Arians used against the orthodox. And though Augustine spoke
sometimes after this manner; yet he retracted it Retract Lib. 2. C. 5. and
declared, that Donatists were to be punished by the Magistrate. And our Quaker
might as well infer, that because a Magistrate cannot make persons abstain
from theft, murder and other wickedneses, in a Christian manner, but at most
hypocritically, therefore he cannot, he may not punish murderers, thieves and
the like. What he cites out of Luther Page 327. will make as much against his
own concession, vi^. that Churches may exclude erroneous persons; as against
us. What he says of Calvines procureing the death of that blasphemer Servetus,
is sufficiently answered by Calvin an^ Beza. We regard not his repeating again
Page* 328. and saying, that our practice justifies Papists; for it is often
answered already; nor yet his saying, that we are more Mahomet's then Christ's
Disciples, and are not the followers of the Apostles doctrine 1 These. 5:21.
Phil. 3:15. because it is utterly goundless; and he has forgetten, that this
takes away his own concession, as to Church Power; for these sayings Phil.
3:15 and 1 These. 5:21. will as much condemn that, as our Assertion; but in
truth neither, as one with half an eye may see: but our Quaker has put out
both his eyes.

18. What he talks afterward. 6. Page 328.329. etc. of their wonderful
patience, in endureing wrongs for their profession; is but an open declaration
of their Pertinacy; And no proof of their being Martyrs; for it is not the
suffering, but the cause, that makes a Martyr. Heathens and Pagans can endure
as much for their Idolatry and Devil worshipe: Shall we hence infer, that
their way is the truth? Yet I must confess, the carriage of the Quakers in
this, may shame Christians, who rather than suffer less, then they will
undergo, will shamefully deny the truth: but I know, Suffering for the name of
Christ is the gift of God, as well as Faith, and in some respects, a gift above
it Phil. 1:29. for unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. I only take notice of what he
says Page 331. to wit, That it is now twenty five years, since they were a
distinct and separated people: I doubt it be so long, since he adjoined himself
unto them: And if he speak of the whole generation of Quakers, we see by his
confession, that they are not an old Seck; and that if they be only Christians,
Christianity is but of yesterday, and a new upstart opinion, never heard of in
the world before: Yet I ^ear that another Quaker wrote An. 1659. and then said,
it is now about seven Years since the Lord raised us up, in the North of
England, and opened our mouths, in this his Spirit. See the mystery of the
whore, Epist. but if we reckon back from the Year 1676. wherein this Quakers
Apology comes forth, the Quakers, in his account, appeared first, as a
congregated people in the Year 1651. that is, fifteen Years later, then the
other account: But it may be he will say, that as that English Quaker speaks
of the first rise of the Quakers, in the North of England; so he speaks only
of the first rise of the Quakers, in the North of Scotland; and I shall not
contend about this, only observing, according to the old Proverb, all evil
comes out of the North. I see however their seck is not very old, and so has
less affinity with true Christianity, then they suppose; for I am sure
Christianity is older, then the eldest of their seck; and their Seck is but New
Paganism, or New Paganish Antichristianisme.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Wars.
1. WE are now advanced unto his last Thesis, in vindication whereof, he
handles several distinct things, which we must speak to severally, and shall
begin with what he speaks to, in the last place, because of its affinity
with what was last spoke to, concerning the power of the Magistrate, He, as we
heard, denied power to the Magistrate, to punish heretics and seducers; and
though there he granted, that the Magistrate had power to judge in civil
matters, and to punish such as wronged their Neighbors, in life or goods, or
did any thing hurtful unto humane society; yet here he condemns all war
joining with Anabaptists and Socinians of late; and with the Marcionites and
Tertullianists of old. And thus, as their doctrine and principles tend to
destroy Christianity, as has been abundantly shown; so in this, they would
destroy all Commonwealths; and in a manner, destroy the very office and use of
Magistracy: and whether their intent in this may be, to obtain the fuller
freedom and liberty to rage over all, according to their own mind, I leave to
themselves to judge; this however is not our, that though the Anabaptists
cried out likewise against Magistrates, who are Christians, their useing the
power of the sword, as incompatible with Christianity; yet no persons did more
cruelly and barbarously use the power of the sword, then they, when they got
it once into their own hands. I do not find this man, with Anabaptists,
denying, that Christians may be Magistrates; but both with them and with
Socinians, he would take from them the use of the sword, which they are to
bear, and that not in vain, but to execute wrath upon him, that does evil
Romans 13:4. And though he speak particularly against War, yet when he adds
no limitations or restrictions, but opposes himself to all kind of War,
without any difference, he takes away, in effect, the power of the sword, as
his arguments will clear; and when the sword is taken from the Magistrate, the
Magistrate is made no Magistrate; and thus Magistracy is destroyed: But it may
be he means, with Socinians, that Magistrates may not shed blood, how ever
they may punish malefactors; See Socin. Epist. 6. ad Val. Smalcium, and this
will be acceptable doctrine to Murderers, Paricides Sodomites, etc. but I
would suppose, the Sword imports blood.

2. I shall willingly grant, that in nothing more, than in war, is the fruits
of man's rebellion against the Lord to be seen, men appearing against other, as
so many ravenous Beasts, Wolves, Tigers and Lions, tearing, devouring and
destroying one another, when they know little wherefore: I shall also grant,
that it were a most desirable sight to see that Prophecy, Esai. 11:6, 7, 8,
9. fulfilled; and all the Professoures at least of the name of Christ, living
together as brethren; But while matters thus stand, as they do this day, in the
world, to deny the lawfulness of war, even in self defense; so that a
travailer may not defend himself from robbers, nor Merchants from Pirates, nor
a Magistrate defend his land and subjects, from the invasion of Turks and
Pagans; I think, is so far from being a medium to prevent the effusion of
blood, and to procure peace and tranquillity; that, on the contrary, it should
prove the strongest encouragment imaginable unto bloody Enemies, to prosecute
their bloody designs, and shed the blood of innocents, like water; for there
is no such encouragement as this is, to know and be assured of no resistance,
for such birds of prey, as delight in Rapine and Violence: Yet this bloody
design, (for I can call it no other thing, let men cover it over with what
pretexts they will) seems to me suitable enough to the genius and doctrine of
these Quakers; who, so far as I can discern, drive at nothing else, then the
reduceing of us to Paganism: And by this means of disarming all Christians, by
persuading them, that it is not lawful to defend themselves by arms, against
invadeing Pagans, give all Christendom up as a fit prey unto the lusts of
Turcks or Pagans, who may come, when they please, to cut, at freedom, all their
throats, that will not with them burn incense, and sacrifice their children
to the Devil. The Quakers seem very mild and meek, and more ready to suffer,
than to do wrongs; but let wise men judge, whither this their doctrine tends,
and what enemies they make themselves hereby unto all Christian societies; They
speak here only of Christians, as if Christians might not have the privilege of
beasts, to defend themselves against unjust violence. But say they any thing of
Pagans^ No: Pagans must wear the sword, and may offend, if they please; but
Christians may not defend themselves; for they themsel^es are nearer of kin to
Pagans, than to Christians, as I have cleared all alongs.

3. But let us see, what he alleges for this. He cites Mat. 5:38. to the
end; And with Socinians tells us, that Christ is here enjoining a more perfect
and excellent way of manifesting love, patience and suffering, than was
required of the Jews by the Law of Moses. But this, his one and only ground,
is abundantly disproved by our orthodox Divines, writing against the Socinians;
and the text it self makes it manifest, that Christ is here only vindicating
the Law, from the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, and Jewish doctors; and
therefore, in the very beginning of his vindication, tells the Jews, that they
should not exspect that of him, which they had of their own doctors, viz. that
he should also destroy the Law: for he was not come for that end, but to fulfill
the Law verse. 17. and to maintain it by his doctrine; and therefore threatens
heavy judgments against such, as would teach men to break the Law verse. 19. And
as to the part of Christ's discourse, which he here pitcheth upon; we need do
no more, but show, that there is no new precept here. It consists of two
particulars, first concerning not retaliating, and the next about loving our
enemies: As to the first, Socinus himself grants, that Christ here looks to
the false interpretation of the Law of Moses, whereby some took the meaning of
the Law to be, that private persons might, in their private revenge, retaliate,
whereas Moses's Law was given to Magistrates, as is clear Exodus 21:22, 24, 25.
Levit. 24:19, 20. Deuteronomy. 19:18, 19, 20. And against this private revenge, and
retaliation, Christ speaks: and also against this did the Law of Moses speak
Deuteronomy. 32:35. comp. with Romans 12:19. Levit. 19:18, 19. See also Genesis 49:5, 6, 7.
Prove. 20: ver. 22. and 24:29. Ier. 51:36. Ezech. 25:12. So that Christ's
meaning is, that private persons should be ready rather to receive more wrongs,
then to revenge themselves, for wrongs received: And Socinus himself assenteth
to this: It is true Socinus thinks, that Christ here does prohibit
Christians to seek a redress of their wrongs by the help of Magistrates: (which
afterward he contradicts) I know not if our Quaker will say so too, seeing in
the end of his foregoing Thesis, he would have the Law exerced, and right done
to every one, without respect of Persons, in the matter of injuries done to
persons, in their goods and lives: And sure, the words of the Apostle Romans 13.
are express enou^h for this. However we see, there is nothing here binding up
the hands of Christians from necessary self defense by Arms and Wars; for
nothing is here required but what was required of old, notwithstanding whereof,
wars were lawful, as cannot be denied. The same we say, as to the second
particular; where Socinus also grants, that Christ is not here directly
correcting Moses's Law: Yet he says, that Moses's Law by Neigh^our understood
only a Jew, and that hatred of enemies, that is, such as were strangers, did
natively flow there from: In both which his ignorance of the Law and the
Prophets appears: For there is nothing appearing, that can justly restrick
the word neighbor, to the Jews only; else it must be so also restricted in
the very moral Law, in the decalogue, as Command 9. and 10. which yet Paul
extends to others Romans 13:8, 9, 10. Gal. 5:12, 13. And that under the Old
Testam. there was a Law for loving and doing good to enemies, is clear Exodus
23:4, 5. Prove. 25:22. Thus it also appears, that this particular can make
nothing against the lawfulness of Wars; seeing Wars were lawful under the
Law, when this same command of loving enemies had place: The inconsistency
then, that this man conceives, betwixt these explications of the Law, or
renewed Laws by Christ, and lawfulness of self defense, and war for this
end, is in his own imagination: And for as confident as he is hereof, Page
364. his ground fails him.

4. But he thinks to prove this inconsistency. Page 364. etc.. 14. thus. 1.
Christ commands us to love our enemies; and this is contrary to war. Ans.
(1.) The Jews were under a command to love their enemies, and yet they might
lawfully defend themselves by War. (2.) We are under a command to love
ourselves, Families and Relations, and therefore under a command to defend
their and our own lives from unjust violence; yea others also, that are not so
related to us, Prove. 24:11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn
unto death, and those that are ready to be slain: If thou say, behold we
knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? And he that
keeps thy soul, does not he know it? And shall not he render to every man
according to his work? (3.) We are not to love our enemies more then our other
neighbors; And the Law says, that we should love our Neighbor, as ourselves;
and therefore we are not to love our Neighbor more then ourselves: Nor with
that degree of affection* that we are to love Ourselves: And therefore, we are
bound to defend ourselves from the unjust violence of Enemies or Neighbors.
(4.) Yea love can consist with repelling unjust violence with violence; for
thereby our enemies are restrained from bringing the guilt of more innocent
blood upon themselves, and from doing more mischief and wrong: Binding of an
enraged man's hands from committing murder, is consistant with love; so is
wageing war against an invading bloody tyrant, who can no otherwise be
restrained, or hindered. (5.) Love to enemies may appear, in seeking, by all
means, fair and possible, to satisfy even their unjust desires, to provent a
war, and in a readiness to lay hold on all lawful and saife occasions of
making peace. (6.) Love to enemies can consist with war, when in wageing of
the defensive war, a private desire of revenge does not principle, nor
animate to the war; but conscience to the command of God, enjoining us, even
by the Law of nature, to defend our Life, Relations, Neighbors and Country,
from unjust and bloody invaders. (7.) The whole scope of the place is to press
his followers, to lay aside all private self revenge, and to be so far
therefrom, as to follow with all toakens of love, kindness and respect, even
such as were handling them as enemies, hating them, persecuting them,
dispitefully useing them, by praying for them, blessing them, etc. But there is
no ground to suppose, that our Lords intent was to dissolve the Law of Nature,
and to loose Magistrates, Parents, and all Persons, from its obligation; so as
a man might not defend himself from an implacable blood-thirsty murderer and
robber; nor a Master of a family might not defend his Wife and Children
together with his own life, from the unjust invasion of night robbers and
murderers; nor a Magistrate might not defend his Subjects and Kingdom from
bloody cut-throates; to which the Law of Nature, engraven deeply in the heart
of every rational man, does perpetually oblige.

5. Next says he, The Apostle says, that we wrestle not against flesh and
blood; but in wars, we do so. Ans The Apostle shows indeed Ephesians. 6: verse.
11, 12. what necessity there is for us, to put on the whole armor of God,
which is spiritual armor, seeing it is not men only (though wicked men also,)
but Devils, both within men, and without men, that we must fight against: Will
he hence infer, that we have no adversaries here in the world, or that we are
not to defend ourselves against their unjust malice and cruelty? He may better
infer, that we have not an evil heart of unbelief to wrestle against: But
how impertinent this reason is, children may see. 3. Says he. The Apostle
says 2 Cor. 10:4. that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. Ans. True,
when we are to cast down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivety every thought to
the obedience of Christ, verse. 5. But when we have to do with cutthroats,
comeing with guns, swords granads, stinck-pots, pickes, etc. to kill and
murder us, we must have, I suppose, suitable weapons 4. Says he, James says,
that wars and fightings come from our lusts, that war in our members, Iam. 4:1.
Answ. But James says not, that necessary self-defence comes from lusts. And
might not all this be said of the Jew^s? 5. Says he, It is foretold by Esaias
Chapter 2:4. and Much. Ch 4:3. that they shall beat their swords into plow shares,
etc. Answ. Let us pray for the fulfilling of this; and for the day, when upon
all the glory, there shall be a defense, Esai. 4:5. And when the Beast shall be
taken, and the false Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them, that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped
his image; and both cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone; and
the remnant shall be slain with the sword of him, that sa^e upon the horse,
etc. Revel. 19:20, 21. And when the armies of Gog and Magog shall be destroyed
Revel. 20:8, 9, 10.6. Says he, The Prophet says Esai 65:25. they shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain. Ans. Let us pray for the fulfilling
of this also. 7. Says he, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, Ioh. 18:36.
Answ. True, and therefore there needs not be carnal weapons to carry on his
spiritual interest: Yet while we are in the world, and surrounded with Wolves
and Lions of this world, who would destroy us, and drive us out of the world,
we may defend ourselves, according to that Law, which has bin in force, since
the foundation of the world. 8. Says he, Christ said to Peter, put up thy
sword, etc. Ans. Yet at another time, he said to all his discipses, sell your
coat and buy a sword: But what says this against wars, managed by
Magistrates, in the defense of their Kingdoms, Subjects and Liberties? Would
this Quaker have all the Subjects answering their King, when environed with
enemies seeking to dethrone him, and crying for their help, with this, Christ
would not have Peter draw a sword in his Masters defense, and therefore, no
more must we draw our swords in your and our own defense? These look not like
loyal and faithful Subjects to their Superiors. 9. He cites that Romans 12:19.
Answ. And the place answers it self, speaking against private revenge, and a
taking of God's prerogative from him, in avenging ourselves; but it speaks
nothing against innocent, necessary self-defence. See verse. 18. If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peacably with all men. He requires not
this, when it is impossible, and we have done as much as lies in us, and all
in vain, The robber will cut our throat, if we resist not, purse, and clothes
and all we have, will not satisfy him, must we hold up our throat when we can
help ourselvs? The Apostle gives no command for this. Lastly he says, Christ
calls his to bear their cross, to patience, to simplicity. Answ. ^t is no
small cross, to have such ill Neighbors, as necessitate us to the labor and
patience of watching, and keeping our walls and borders, night and day, when we
should be sitting under our vine and Figtree in peace and quietness, serving
the Lord, in truth and singleness. These are all his reasons: and how childish
and frivolous they are, let every one judge.

6. He comes next Page 366. etc., 15. to answer some of our Arguments, and
first to that taken from the practice of Abraham before the Law, and of the
people of Israel under the law, he says four things. 1. That they also
circumcised, which is not now lawful. Answ. Circumcision was a Ceremonial Law,
and no precept of the Law of Nature; as necessary sinless self defense is;
which was practiced by all Nations; but the Lord did not prescribe any thing in
the Ceremonial Law, which was the common practice of all nations; yea the
Ceremonial Laws were to discriminate them from all nations. He says 2. That
the Israelites might not make war neither offensive, nor defensive, of their
own will, nor by their own counsel or conduct, but were to consult the Oracle
of God. Answ. (1.) I do not say, that war should now be undertaken without
consulting of God, and his Oracles; his word, I mean, and standing Law, whereby
we may understand his mind, as well, as if we had the Vrim and Thummim to go
to. (2.) I find not that in all cases, the Israelites did consult the Oracle
of God, in their undertaking a war, but only in difficult cases: When they
heard, that the two tribes and half had built an Altar by Jordan, the whole
Congregation gathered themselves together at Shiloh to go up to war against
them; but of their consulting the Oracle of God, we read not Josh. 22:12. So
also in that war undertaken against the tribe of Benjamin Judge. 20. only they
asked counsel, who should go up first verse. 18. though after a defate they
changed the question verse. 23, 26, etc. He says 3. Their wars against the
nations were figures of the inward war of Christians, against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil. Answ. (1.) This is said, but not proved. (2.) What says
this to the wars among themselves; or betwixt Judah and Israel? This was said
by Saltmarsh the Familist, before now. He says 4. Something is prohibited by
Christ Mat. 5:26. which was permitted to the Jews, because of their rudeness.
Answ. The contrary is manifest, as appears from what is said: It is but a
groundless notion of Socinians, to say, that Christ there gives any new
precepts; while as he, who came not to dissolve or weaken the Law, in the
least, did only vindicate the lasting moral Law from corrupt glosses, and
interpretations; as is manifest.

7. To a second Argument, to wit, That defense is of the Law of nature, which
Religion does not destroy: he Answers, Be it so; yet by obedience to commend
ourselves to God, in faith and patience, is not to destroy nature, but to
perfect it. Answer, But the argument is not taken from the corrupt nature of
man, which grace changes; but from the standing Law of Nature, which is Gods
perpetually obligeing Law, and is not weakened, or altered by the Gospel,
whatever alteration grace makes in us. To a 3 Argum. taken from John Baptists
not disproving of wars, in the Soldiers, that came unto him, to ask him what
they should do? Luke 3:14. He answers What then? The question is not of
John's, but of Christ's doctrine, John was not that Prophet, yet John did
prohibit them, what is proper to Soldiers, to wit, violence and deceit,
without which there is no war. Answ. (1.) Though John was not that Prophet,
yet he was his forerunner, and preached Repentance; and would have taught
Repentance from warring, if it had been unlawful. (2.) Even Christ himself,
when he spoke with the friends of the Centurion, at whose faith he marvelled,
saving he had not found so great faith, no, not in Israel Luke 7:9. Yet does
not say to them, that the Centurion should war no more: And Mat. 22. He bids
render unto Caesar the things, that are Caesar's, among which things was
tribute, wherewith the Soldiers were paid; but if war had simply been
unlawful, Christ would not have permitted this for that end. (3.) He fo^ba^
them to use violence or deceit toward friends, to use any rapine etc. and for
a remedy prescribes to them, to be satisfied with their wages; whereby it is
manifest, that he means not their actions against enemies; for if they were
not to fight against enemies, why were they to receive wages? The Roman Laws,
though they allowed, Soldiers to take prey from enemies; yet did not permit
the least injury to friends, nor suffer the taking so much as a chicken or
e^ge: See what Beza on the place cites to this purpose. He may consult Calvin
also on the place, who expressly says, it is a frivolous cavil, to think that
John here prescribes to rude persons, what is not consistent with Christian
perfection; seeing his work was to fit them perfectly for his Master, and that
they load the Gospel with a sacrilegious calumny, that would thus set it in
opposition to all humane command; as if Christ would destroy what his Father
had ordained; and without the sword, Laws die, and justice has no efficacy;
nor can the Magistrate without soldiers maintain peace.

8. To our Arg. taken from that Centurion mentioned Mat. 8:5* and him of whom
we read Act. 10. He might have added another instance Act. 13:12. He answers
we do not read, that they did continue in that office. Answ. But our Argument
is not taken from their not laying down that office; but from Christ and his
Apostles their not enjoining them so to do; or not showing, that it was
repugnant unto their Christian state. As for what h^ cireth out of Marcus
Aurelius and others, is sufficiently confuted by the Legio fulminatrix, which
consisted of Christians, and did serve in the wars. To that Luke 22:36. --
and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one. He tells us,
that Ambrose thought that this was only for that occasion: and that Origin
interprets the words mystically: And himself adds that Christ by his
answer, saying, that two was enough would not have the rest selling their
garments to buy swords: but however, says he, the use of Arms is unlawful
under the Gospel. Answ. Then the Quakers conclusion must be good, whatever the
Scripture say to the contrary: But the Disciples saying they had two swords of
metal; and Christ saying, it was enough without the least hint of their being
in a mistake, is enough to prove, that there is no allegory here* Nor have we
warrant to suppose, that this was only for that occasion, as if Christ after
would have none of his followers thinking it lawful to fight for their civil
Magistrates and Masters, against their enemies, be the cause never so just.

9. To that which we say, to wit, That though the Scripture prohibiteth private
revenge; Yet it does not prohibit Subjects, under the command and conduct of
their Magistrate, to fight in defense of their Lands, Lives, Wives, Children
and Goods, he answers. That if the Magistrate be a Christian, he himself
should love his enemies, and so not command his Subjects to fight; but if he be
not a true Christian, the Subjects should obey Christ. Answ. We have shown
above, that lawful war^es are not inconsistent with this duty, which was
required under the Law, as well as under the Gospel. He adds Page 370. As
concerning the present Magistrates, who are in the world, though by reason of
the public profession, they make of the name of Christ, we do not deny them
the title of Christians; Yet we may confidently say, that they are far from the
perfection of the Christian religion; and while they are in that state, we
grant that war is lawful for them, upon just causes; as the use of circumci^ion
and Jewish ceremonies was permitted for a time, not as being either necessary,
or yet lawful, in themselves, aft^r Christ's resurrection; but because as yet
that Spirit was not risen in them, whereby they were to be delivered from these
rudiments. Answ. (1.) He takes that here for granted which is denied, and
which he will never be able to prove, to wit, that warring was a part of the
ceremonial Law; or a Law peculiarly given to the Jews. And why does he not
once tell us, where and when this Law was first made, and where we shall find
it among the ceremonies? (2.) If it were granted to have been a ceremonial Law,
how can he now say, that it is lawful, in any case, to any person, whether
Christian or not Christian? Is it lawful now to use circumcision, or the
passover, and other such ceremonies? Will he say, that Christians, who are not
become Quakers, or are not come to that pitch of perfection in Christianity,
which he supposes the Quakers are come unto, may now lawfully offer beasts and
sacrifices; Yea and observe the whole ceremonial Law? What doctrine is this? We
must not wonder to hear this of them, who are utter enemies to the Gospel; and
so care not what be done, that may tend to the abolition thereof. (3.) We hear
not that the use of circumcision was ever permitted to the Gentiles, though in
a lower degree of perfection. (4.) Circumcision was for a time permitted even
to the highest advanced Jews; for Paul, after the Spirit was arisen in him,
did circumcise Timothy.

10. This is all he says upon this head; for he touches not others of our
maine arguments; such as that Romans 13. where the Apostle tells us, that higher
powers are of God, to be a terror to evil works; and have a sword for this
end; and are the Ministers of God, revengers to execute wrath, upon such as do
evil: and orders that tribute and custom be paid to them, as to God's
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. They must then have
power to suppress Injustice and Iniquity, and to ward it off; and so to defend
their Subjects from Injustice, and Oppression: But this they cannot do, but by
the sword, which they must use against all Oppressors, whether within, or
without the Kingdom, that would wrong and enjure their Subjects, who otherwise
shall not be in case to lead a quiet and peacable life under them, in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2:2. whence we might also adduce another
argument. Further, though he seems to grant the office of Magistracy to be
lawful; Yet his arguments will as well prove that unlawful, as the use of
Arms: and Anabaptists will alleige, that Magistracy it self was a Jewish
ceremony; and that with as great probability, as he can alleige war to have
been ceremonial: And as he grants it lawful, for such as are not Christians
to make war; so will they grant it lawful for such to be Magistrates; but not
for Christians. Yea Socinus himself, though he will not have it lawful for
private persons, to war; Yet he grants it lawful for Kings, Princes and
Magistrates, without any impeachment of their Christianity: and why it should be
lawful to these, and not also to those, I see not: And it seems he would have
the Magistrates warring without soldiers, which how they can well do, I know
not.

11. By what this Quaker grants to such Magistrates, as are not yet
Christians, after his mode, he must needs say, that it is not in it self unjust
and iniquous, for Magistrates to defend, with the sword, Justice and Peace; for
if it were unjust and iniquous in it self, it should be lawful to none: And if
it be just and right in it self, why should it be unlawful to Christians? The
Gospel destroys not what is just and right, it takes not away Magistracy,
nor that which is necessary to Magistracy, and without which Magistracy cannot
subsist, nor Magistrates execute their office. Will any man say, that it is
more just and equitable, that Magistrates leave their Subjects as a prey to the
lust of every oppressing, plundering, robbing and killing enemy, then with
arms to withstand and resist these oppressing and murdering adversaries? And
if not, were it not a great act of injustice to his own Subjects, thus to
expose them to the cruel and bloody sword of invaders? And must Christianity
countenance injustice, and warrant that, which the very light of Nature
teaches heathens to abhore? Shall Christians be worse than infidels? 1 Timothy
5:8. Then it is saifer to live under Pagan Magistrates, than (...) Christian
Magistrates? Would he have us running away to Pagan Places, for t^is end?

12. What will this Quaker say to the Prophecies in the Revelation, concerning
the wars, that have bin and are to be waged against the Turk, and against
Antichrist; when God shall give them, that before shed the blood of Saints, and
of the Prophets, blood to drink, for they are worthy; whereupon thanksgiving
was to be rendered, saying. Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be, because thou have judged thus. And, even so Lord God Almighty, true
and righteous are thy judgments, Revel. 16:5, 7. If wars be utterly unlawful
under the New Test. how shall that be fulfilled, which we have Revel. 18.
concerning the total and final ruin of mystical Babylon? Why is it there said
to God's own people verse. 6, 7, 8. reward her even as she rewarded you, and
double unto her double, according to her works: in the cup which she has
filled, fill to her double: how much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her -- she shall be utterly burnt
with fire, for strong is the Lord God, who judges her? And how shall that be
accomplished Revel. 17:16. And the Ten horns, which thou saw upon the
Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire? And how shall these songs be
sung, which we have Revel. 19:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7? And how shall he, who is
called faithful and true, and in righteousness does judge and make war, and is
clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and has on his vesture, and on his thigh
a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords, make a Supper of the flesh of
Kings, of Captains, of mighty men, of horsemen, etc. unto all the fowls, Revel.
19:11. to the end? But it seems our Quaker has no will, that any evil should
befall that Whore, and her Seat. and therefore would prevent her destruction,
so far, as he can, by soweing this doctrine; that Christians, in no case, must
make war. But we believe, our King shall find armies to follow him, when he
takes the fields, and comes, to tread the winepress of the fiercness and
wrath of Almighty God, whatever Quakers say.

13. We will therefore close this point, with the words of our Confession of
faith Chap. 23:. 1, 2. God the Supreme Lord and King of all the world, has
ordained civil Magistrates, to be under him, over the people, for his own
glory, and the public good: And to this end has armed them with the power of
the sword, for the defense and encouragment of them, that are good, and for the
punihment of evil doers (Romans 13: verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2: verse. 13, 14.) It
is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the office of a Magistrate, when
called thereto (Prove. 8: verse. 15, 16. Romans 13: verse. 1, 2, 4.) In the managing
whereof, as they ought especially to maintain piety, justice and peace,
according to the wholesome Laws of each Commonwealth (Psalm. 2: verse. 10, 11,
12. 1 Timothy 2: verse. 2. Psalm. 82: verse. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 23: verse. 3. 1 Pet. 2:
verse. 13.) so for that end, they may lawfully, now under the New Testament,
wage war, upon just and necessary occasion. Luke 3: verse. 14. Romans 13:4. Mat.
8:9, 10. Act. 10:1, 2. Revel. 17:11, 16.)

CHAP. XXX. Of Lawful Oaths.
2. OUr Quakers, that they may quite destroy all Polity and Government, ^oyn
in with Anabaptists, and Familists of N. England of late, and the Esseans,
Manichees and Pelagians of old, in denying it to be lawful to swear before a
judge, when called thereunto, in matters of moment. I willingly grant, that all
Profane, rash, and godless oaths, used too ordinarily in common discourse, are
wholly unlawful, and a manifest breach of the third command; and such a sin, as
provokes the Jealousy of the Lord of hosts, who is holy, and will not hold
them guiltless who take his name in vain. I shall also willingly grant, that
such reverence should be had unto the holy name of God, that in matters of
lesser moment, and matters, wherein the verity may be possibly found out,
without an oath, none should be urged to take an oath; nor an oath received
from persons, who willingly offer it, in such triffles, and without necessity.
But as to this question, let us view, what our Confess. says Chapter 22:. 1, 2, 3,
4. A lawful oath is a part of Religious worship (Deuteronomy. 10* 20.) wherein, upon
just occasion, the person swearing solemnly calls God to witness what he
asserteth or promises; and to judge him according to the truth, or falsehood of
what he asserteth (Exodus 20:7. Levit 19:12. 2 Cor. 1:23. 2 Chronicles. 6:22, 23.)
The name of God only, is that by which men ought to swear; and therein it is to
be used, with all holy fear and reverence (Deuteronomy. 6:13.) Therefore to swear
vainly, or rashly by that glorious and dreadful name; or to swear at all by any
other thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred (Exodus 20:7. Ior. 5 ^. Mat. 5:34,
37. Iam. 5:12.) Yet, as in matters of weight and moment, an oath is warranded by
the word of God, under the New Test. as well as under the old (Heb. 6:16. 2
Cor. 1:23. Esa. 65:16) So a lawful oath being imposed by lawful authority, in
such matters, ought to be taken (1 King. 8:31 Neh. 13:25. Ezra. 10:5.) -- Yet it
is a sin, to refuse an oath, touching any thing that is good and just, being
imposed by lawful authority (Numb. 5: verse. 19, 20. Neh. 5: verse. 12. Exodus 22:
verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. The only ground of his contrary opinion, is Christ's words Mat. 5:34 -- 37
and Iam. 5:12. which he so understands, as simply prohibiting all Oaths
whatsomever, wherein he is worse than the Socinians, for they say, that Christ
added this unto the Law, that we should not swear rashly and vainly; nor make
promissory Oaths concerning things future. But the Quaker will go a greater
length, and say that Oaths imposed by Magistrates, in things weighty and
necessary, are here also prohibited: Yet he walks upon the Socinians ground;
and supposes, that Christ is here amending and correcting the Law, or adding
to it; and so giving new Laws: For if Christ only be interpreting the Law, (as
we say) and it be certain, that the Oaths, we maintain, were warrantably used
under the Law; Christ's Words must not be so largely taken, as he would. But a
right consideration of Christ's Words, together with his scope, will make all
clear. Christ being here interpreting* explaining and vindicating the Law, and
so correcting and reprehending the false, laxe and erroneous glosses, which the
Pharisees, and the jewish Doctors, had corrupted the Law withal; he comes in
these verses to vindicat the third command, which these loose Casuists (whom he
means, when he says verse. 33. ye have heard, that it has been said by them
of old time) had so interpreted, as if nothing had been thereby prohibited, but
only forswearing, that is, not to perform, what was vowed and sworn to be
done, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord, thine
Oaths: And thence gave way to rash, idle, vain, and inconsiderat Oaths, yea
and to swearing by other things, than by the true and living God* To correct
which corruption and abuse, Christ rightly interprets the Law, as prohibiteing
all such swearing by any creature at all, saying verse. 34. But I say unto you,
swear not at all. But how is this not at all to be taken? The following words
clear, Neither by heaven -- nor by the earth -- neither by Jerusalem -- neither
by thine head. And then adds, to correct their rash and profane Oaths in
common discourse verse. 37. But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay.
Whereby he shows, what should be our ordinary assertions, or negations, in
our ordinary discourse; and what way we should take to guard against rash and
unnecessary Oaths; to wit, that we should use uprightness and sincerity in our
dealings, and speeches, that so no more may be required, then asserting or
denying, or at most doubling of our assertions, or denials? And then adds,
for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil, that is, whatsoever is
superfluous, or redundant and not necessary, (as all vain, and needless Oaths,
and asseverations are) is sinful, and of the Devil. So that there is nothing
here, in the least, giving ground to reject all Oaths, as sinful; but only
such, as are by Creatures, or are needless and superfluous, in our ordinary
communication. And to this same purpose does James speak Chap. 5:12. saying,
But above all things, my brethren, swear not; how that is to be understood, he
explaineth in the following words, Neither by the heaven, neither by the eart^,
neither by any other Oath, which is the same with what Christ said; and to
prevent this sin of rash and profane swearing, he adds, as Christ did, but
let your yea be yea, and your nay nay: And to confirm all, adds lest ye fall
into condemnation, looking to the threatening annexed to the third command; and
thereby giving us to understand, that he is but explaining that command, and
enjoining no new thing, but what was there enjoined; for James is very much, in
his Epistle, in pressing the Law, and obedience to it, which he calls the
perfect Law James 1: verse. 25. and Royal Law James 2: verse. 8. But now if he
should have urged any thing, in these moral duties, but what was commanded in
the Law, he should have condemned the Royal Law, as imperfect.

3. The matter being thus clear and manifest, we need not regard his telli^g us,
that we ought to feign no exceptions; for we faigne none; but interpret the
words, according to the clear and obvious scope; which he with the Sociniant
must inverte, before he make his assertion so much as probable. Nor do we, as
the Reader may see, here make use of consequences (which yet are allowable, and
himself, as we saw above, went about to confirm some of his notions, yea a
special part of their Solemn Worshipe, by consequences from Scripture) or
probabilities, as he alleigeth, which are obscure and uncertain; but walk upon
fixed and certain grounds; which may fully quiet the consciences of such, as
stand in awe of the word: and I cannot but wonder, how he, who denies the
word, to be the rule of faith, and practice, can thus press the words, contrare
to the scope and intendment of the Spirit of the Lord, and stand so stiffly to
the express words; yea and, for any thing I see, ground their judgment and
practice, wholly and alone, upon these words: but, as we heard above, though
the light within them be their supreme and only Rule, they can alleige the
Scriptures, and pervert them too, against us.

4. He comes next Page 354.. 11. to reply to our grounds. We say, that Christ
forbids all Oaths by creatures, and all vain and rash Oaths: To which he
replyeth, That the Law did forbid these Oaths; but Christ forbids here
something that was free under the Law: to wit, to swear by the Name of God; and
so discharges even such Oaths, as were made by the Name of God Mat. 23:22. And
he adds, by any other oath. Answ. That the Law does forbid both swearing by
the Creatures, and also rash and unnecessary swearing by the Name of God, is
true; but the Law did not prohibit, but enjoin swearing in some cases, before
Magistrates, as we see Exodus 22:7, -- 11. Number. 5:19, 21. (2.) That Christ
corrects or amendeth the Law, or discharges any thing, which was lawful by
the moral Law of God; is but a Socinian dream, without any ground, or warrant,
as is apparent, through that whole Sermon, and from the very first words of
this part thereof verse. 17, 18. Think not, that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but fulfill: for verily I say unto you,
till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one-title, shall in no wise pass from
the Law, till all be fulfilled. But sure, if Christ had added to the law, or
taken away from it, he had in so far destroyed it, and made it an imperfect
law, and had taken away from it many Jotes and Titles, contrary to his own
express profession and declaration. (3.) The place Mat. 23:16 -- 23. does
clearly explain this; for there, their unlawful ways of swearing are
reproved; and they discovered to be fools, in alleiging such grounds, as they
did, for their profane licentious swearing, and satisfying themselves with such
pretexts; but not one word declareing it unlawful in all cases, to swear by
the Name of God. (4.) These words by any other Oath, are to be explained by
what went before; and so to be understood of any other such like Oath, as he
had instanced in; otherwise Christ's discourse shall be incoherent.

5. To that, which is said, That swearing by the Name of God, was commanded by
the Father, and so cannot be now contradicted by the Son, who is one with the
Father, he says, That the father appointed many ceremonial Laws which were
shadows of good things to come, whereof Christ was the substance. Answer,
This is very true; but nothing to the purpose; for he shall never prove that
swearing by the Name of God was a ceremonial thing, being a part of natural
Worship, taught by the Law of Nature Genesis 21: ver. 23. Josh. 2: verse. 12. 2 Chronicles. 36:21. and is several times put for the whole moral Worshipe Esai. 19:
v. 18. and 45:23. Psalm. 63:11. And where, I pray, and when, was this ceremonial
precept (if it be such) first given? But this one thing is enough to confute
this dream (not to mentione, that we cannot understand, whereof it can be a
shadow, or type: nor how then, as we shall hear, it was used, when types were
abrogated) to wit, that Christ did not so early begin to cry down and to
annull the force and power of the ceremonial Law; but being made under the Law
(ceremonial, as well as moral) was observant thereof in all points, to his
dying day: for in the very night wherein he was betrayed, he observed the feast
of the Passover; and he came to ful^il all righteousness: How shall we then
imagine, that in his very first Sermon, he should abrogate the Ceremonial Law,
and that in more points then one, if our Quaker be to be believed? For he will
have the matter of Wars a ceremony too; and will affirm, that Christ
abrogated that ceremony also, in the last words of this Chapter, as we heard?

6. He moves this Argum. in the next place Page 355. That Oaths cannot be a
part of the ceremonial Law, because they were in use before the promulgation of
the law: An Argument, wherein I see little strength; yet I think it concerns
him to tell us, when this ceremonial law was first given, and to whom? What
answers he? It must be shown, says he, that it is an eternal and immutable
precept* Answ. And what needs more for this, then to show, that it is a part
of worshipe performed unto God, which the law of Nature has taught all
nations, and which has no affinity with what is typical and figurative, having
a manifestly moral import; for it is a solemn acknowledgment of Gods
All-seeing eye, of his Truth and Veracity, of his Righteousness and Justice,
and of his Power and Might: for therein he is called to witness a secret and
hidden truth, and the swearer does profess, that God is acquanted with the
secrets of all things, and with the Intentions of the heart: Therein we
acknowledge, that God abhors lying and dissimulation, and will be a swift
witness against false swearers; and in justice will be avenged of such, as mock
him, in calling the God of truth to bear witness to an untruth, and show his
power in punishing and pursueing such: all which being engraven on the heart of
Man by nature, and being laid, as the ground of this practice among all
Nations, and having nothing ceremonial in it, evince this duty to be moral, and
the commands enjoining it, perpetually obligeing. He tells us, that Abel and
Cain did offer the tithes of their fruit, and the first fruits of their land.
But I read not this in Scripture: I find it said Genesis 4:3, 4. that Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground, and Abel of the firsilings of his flock,
but no more: no word of Tithes, nor of First fruits.

7. He moves another Objection, after his own mind; as if we said, that
Swearing by the name of God is a moral duty, because it is mentioned with God's
essential and moral worshipe: But what he means by essential worshipe, I know
not; nor know I, who uses that term. This argument I shall thus urge: If
swearing by the name of God be not only urged, together with other acts of
moral worship; but also as a comprehensive part of moral worshipe, and as
further exegitical and explicative of other parts of moral worshipe mentioned;
then it must be a part of moral worshipe: But the former is true. Therefore,
etc. The Major, I suppose, needs no proof. The Minor is clear Deuteronomy. 6: verse.
13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his
name: And Deuteronomy. 10:20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy good, him shall thou serve,
and to him shall thou cleave, and swear by his name. In both which places, we
see, it is not only attended before and after with precepts purely moral; nor
only joined in the same verse, with duties purely moral; but, as the other
duties, mentioned in the same verse, are truly comprehensive of that moral
obedience that is due to God; so is this, and each one of these commands
contribute to explicate the other; so that all are but various expressions of
that one duty, of owneing the true God, for their only God, conform to the
first commandment. Add to these passages Ier. 3:4. where it is pressed as a
comprehensive duty of all moral obedience, as being the manifest declaration of
their true Repentance and Turning unto God, and of their putting away all
abominations out of God's sight, verse. 1. If thou will return, O Israel, says
the Lord, return unto me; and if thou will put away thine abominations out of
my sight, then shall thou not remove: And thou shall swear, the Lord lives in
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, etc. So Ier. 12: verse. 14. to the
end, where the Lord is offering salvation to the Nations about, upon condition,
that they will perform this comprehensive duty, and shall learn to swear by
my name, says the Lord, the Lord lives, as they taught my people to swear by
Baal, then shall they be built in the midst of my people; but if they will not
obey, I will utterly pluck up, and destroy that nation. Add Psalm. 63:11. The
King shall rejoice in God, and every one that swears by him shall glory. Let
the Quaker now see, if his answers will suite this argument, thus proposed.

8. Another of our Arguments he mentions, in the fifth place, which is this,
as I shall form it: If that which Christ forbids, be of the Devil, then he
forbids not the swearing by the name of God: But the former is true, from
the words of the text, for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil, verse.
37. or of that evil one (...) out of that evil one, who is exercised in all
wickedness. See Beza on the place. The Consequence of the Major is clear; for
swearing by the name of God, was once commanded of God; but God never commanded
that, which did flow from the Devil: Nor can it be said, with any face of
reason, that any of the ceremonial Laws, were of that evil one, or comes of
evil. How then can this man say, that this which Christ says, comes of evil,
was a ceremonial Law, enjoined by God? What replyeth he? Some things, says he,
are good because commanded, and evil because forbidden, and some things are
commanded because good, and forbidden because evil: Thus cerem^nials are good,
as long as commanded, and evil when forbidden under the Gospel, Ans. (1.) But
to me, there is nothing good morally, but what is commanded, and as commanded;
and no duty of man can be said to be commanded because morally good,
'antecedent to the command of the great Lawgiver, whose good will and pleasure
is the ground of all morality among men. (2.) Though the observation of
prohibited ceremonies, be evil under the Gospel; Yet we cannot say, that they
are or ever were of that evil One, or come of evil. Here he tells us Page 356.
That oaths did prefigure God's truth and fidelity. Ans. That which is
prefigured, is something to come; then it seems God under the Law, was not
true and faithful; for these attributes were but prefigured to exist in the
days of the Gospel: Is not this Blasphemy? He would do well to retract this,
otherwise his error is worse, then he is a war of. He gives us another
morality of oaths, viz. Testification of truth, which was before all oaths,
and will abide, when all oaths are away. Answ. This is indeed the proper end
and use of oaths, to testify to truth: But what he means, when he says, it
is its morality, I must wait till he explain himself. As long says he, as
men abide true, there is no necessity of oaths: and for this he cites some
words of Polybius and Grotius and others. But what then? This would rather
plead for the necessary continuance of oaths, because men are not true enough:
And knows he not, that good civil Laws may be occasioned by evil manners?
Knows he not, that by reason of the fall, many things became moral natural,
secundarily, that were not primarily natural? And why may not oaths come in
among these? He gives us an Argument, thus, That which was not from the
beginning, nor had any use in the beginning, that had not its rise from the
will of God, but from the work of the Devil, being caused of evil. viz. of
infidelity, lies and deceit, and was chiefly invented by men, as a remedy of
this evil, in which they did invocate the names of their idols, and which was
granted to the Israelits as children, that they might abstain from the
heathens Oaths Ier. 12:16. is no moral and eternal command. But such a thing is
an Oath. Answ. This is, I confess, a very ill favored argument: For the
assumption is pregnant with blasphemy, and that upon his own grounds; for he
said before, that this swearing by the Name of God was a ceremonial command of
God: Now is it not blasphemy to say, that any of the ceremonial Laws of God
had not their rise from the will of God; but from the work of the Devil? Is it
truth to say, that any of Gods commands, especially such, as belong to the
Gospel, as all ceremonies do, are chiefly invented by men? Faith in Jesus
Christ was not from the beginning, nor was of any use in the beginning, and was
occasioned only by the fall; is it true therefore, that i^ had not its rise
from the will of God, but from the work of the Devil, and was chiefly invented
by man? (2.) If swearing be such a thing, it must be intrinsecally evil: how
comes it then, that we hear sometimes of Gods swearing? What, would God do
that, or any thing like that, which had its rise from the Devil? (3.) Many
things became moral, yea natural, after the fall, which were not necessary from
the beginning; these are called moral natural secundarily; and yet had their
rise from the will of God; and not from the work of the Devil, as covering our
nakedness, which this man will grant, unless he be an Adamit too. (4.)
Infidelity, lies and deceit, among men after the fall, might be an occasion of
a law, and the law be good, necessary and immutable for all that, and be no
invention of man, but the command of the great God. (5.) It is not proved^,
that the Lord commanded the Israelites to swear by his name, because they were
children, far less, to bring them off the useing of Heathens Oaths; the place
Ier. 12:16. evinceth the contrary, viz. That God would have the heathens
learning to swear by the Name of the true God.

9. A Sixth Argument of ours, he proposes Page 357. thus, God has sworn,
therefore to swear is good: And indeed this does manifestly evince, that to
swear is not intrinsecally evil, nor flows not from the work of the Devil;
nor was principally invented by Man: and the Scripture brings God frequently
in swearing Genesis 50:24. Exodus 13:5, 11. and 33:1. Numb. 14.16, 23, 30. and
32:10, 11. Deuteronomy. 1:8. and 8:35. Josh. 5:6. Psalm. 95:11. and 110:4. Heb. 6:17.
and 7:21, 22. For answer he tells us out of Athanasius, That God cannot swear
properly, because he swears not by another, but by himself. Answ. And this is
very true; But yet the Scripture saying that he swears, and expressing his
Counsels and determinations, as confirmed by an Oath, to assure us of the Truth
and Immutability thereof, confirms what we say, to wit, that it is not simply
unlawful, and to be condemned. God cannot properly Repent, and yet he is said
to Repent, and this has a moral instruction to us. God has not properly
bowels of pity and commiseration, and yet what is spoken of the moving of his
bowels, shows that our pity and commiseration is not simply sinful, but good
and lawful in some cases. A Seventh Argum. is this, Christ did swear. Out of
what Author, he has this, I know not: of Christ's swearing I read not; but of
that earnest asseveration Verily Verily, I read often: And if our Quaker will
so strickly interpret these words of Christ, whatsoever is more then these, to
wit, then yea and nay, comes of evil, as he does; he must also condemn these
asseverations; for they are more, then yea and no? And that same asseveration
may be construed for an Oath, if we consider Heb. 6.13, 14, But he answers,
That though Christ did swear, yet it will not follow. that we may; because he
was under the Law, w^ under the Gospel. Answ. (1) It is not proven, that this
belongs to, or is any part of the Ceremonial Law. (2.) Christ did abrogate
that Ceremonial Law, as our Quaker thinks, in that sermon of his upon the
mount; and if it was then abrogate, it could not oblige him thereafer. (3.)
This agrees not with Hierom's answer, which he adds, but rather
contradicts it; for Hierom draws his answer from his being Lord, and under
no Law.

10. An Eight Argument we use, which is better founded, and that is taken from
the practice of the Apostle Paul, who several times, in weighty matters, and at
necessary occasions, did use solemn Oaths and Attestations Romans 1: v. 9. God
is my witness. and 9:1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience
also bearing me witness, in the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 1:23. moreover I call God
for a record on my soul. and 11:10. as the truth of Christ is in me. Gal. 1:20.
Now the things, which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. Phil.
1:8. for God is my record. 1 These. 2:10. ye are witnesses and God also: To all
which he answers three things 1 That these are not Oaths, and that they
refused not to give such Attestations themselves; but were urged to give more,
(sais he) an Oath with the ceremony of laying the hand upon, or kissing the
book, of lifting up the hand or the fingers, and adding this form, so help me
God. Answ. To these agrees the definition of an Oath; to wit, a solemn
callin^ of God to witness, and to judge according to the truth or falsehood of
what is said. And whereas he says, that they would not refuse this, but often
used such; but would not add the outward ceremony required; he shows, how
easily they can strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel, as the Scribes and
Pharisees did Mat. 23: v. 24. As if Abraham's servant would have sworn
willingly by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, but would
have scrupled at the putting of his hand under Abraham's thigh Genesis 24:2, 3. who
sees not what a childish vanity this is? Yet I will not plead for any
ceremony, that may justly give offense. But (2.) Must he not grant, that even
this much is more then yea and nay, and consequently comes of evil? Was this
much from the beginning? Was it of any use, in the beginning? Was it not caused
of the evil of infidelity etc? And was it not therefore the work of the Devil?
and was it not invented of men, for a cure of infidelity and deceit? How then
can he defend it according to his own principles? It seems the Quakers may
do, what we may not. He answers 2. That this contradicts our opinion; for
Paul was not here swearing before a Magistrate. Answ. Nor do we adduce this
instance to prove that; but only to prove, that all swearing under the New
Testam. is not unlawful: will he say, that Christ Mat. 5. speaks only of
Oaths taken before Magistrates? Or that such only were a part of the Ceremonial
Law? He must then restrick these words of Christ and of James, swear not at
all, to Oaths imposed by Magistrates, contrare to his own forementioned
glosses. What difference is there betwixt our solemn calling God to witness to
a particular, of our own accord, when necessity and the urgency of the matter
presses to it, and doing this at the command or desire of the Magistrate, for
ending of a controversy? I should think, that if I may do it, of my own
accord, I may much more do it, when called thereto by a Magistrate. But his 3.
Answer will cut the knot, The question is not, what Paul or Peter did, but what
their and our Lord taught, says he. Answer, Then Paul must be a
transgressour, and that oftener then once or twice: But I suppose, in writing
of his Epistles, he was acted immediately by the Spirit of God: and I shall not
readily think, that the Spirit would have acted him so frequently to have
transgressed Christ's express command, swear not at all, if our Quakers
exposition be genuine. Augustine, Lib. de mendacio ad Consentium Chap. 15.
learneth from this practice of Paul, how to interpret Christ's Words, Iuravit.
ipse Apostolus, in Epistolis suis, and sic ostendit quomodo accipiendum esset,
quod dictum est, dico vobis, non jurate omvino -- sed quia praecepti violati
reum Paulum, praesertim in Epistolis conscriptis, atque editis ad spiritualem
vitam, salutemque populorum, nofas est dicere. Intelligendum est illud, quod
positum est, omnino, ad hoc positum, ut quantum in te est, nox affectes, non
ames, non quasi pro bono cum aliqua delectatione appetas jusjurandum.

11. To that Prophecy of the days of the New Test. Esai 65:16. -- he that
swears in the earth, shall swear by the God of truth; he answers, That it
was usual with the Prophets, to express the great duties of the Gospel times,
in Mosaic terms as Ier. 31:38, 39, 40. Ezech. 36:25. and 40. Esa. 45:23. And
what the Prophet here speaks of swearing, Paul interprets it of confessing,
Romans 14:11. Answ. That the Prophets use this way, I confess: But see no ground
for this from Ier. 31:38. etc. where the Prophet is foretelling the rebuilding
of I^rusalem, which was accomplished in the days of Nehemiah. And that Ezech.
36:25. is but a poor ground: Nor does that place Esai 45:23. give any
countenance unto this, though the Apostle Romans 14:11. uses another word for
swearing, which is but exegitical thereof, and the same upon the matter. The
only doubt remains, whether swearing was properly ceremonial, or not; which
the Apostles frequent practice, mentioned in the preceding argument, and other
arguments mentioned and to be mentioned, evince not to have been ceremonial:
And there is more ground to make the bowing of the knee ceremonial, then
swearing by the name of the Lord.

12. In the tenth place he mentions that argument, taken from Heb. 6:16. For
men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an end
of all strife: he answers Page 359. That Paul only shows, what men, in
those days of controversy, were wont to do; but not what they should have
done; nor what the Saints did. Answ. This being a practice, not of any one age,
or people, but of all ages and people; whereby a principal end of swearing, to
wit, the ending of a controversy, and the right manner of going about it, to
wit, in swearing by the greater, is held forth; and this being brought-in
hereas an argument from the less to the more; as if the Apostle had said, if we
believe a man, who by nature is a liar, when he swears, and confirms what
he says by attesting God; how much more ought we to believe God, who is truth
it self, when he swears by himself, having no greater to swear by, shows
the lawfulness and usefulness of this practice: So that if this had been or
were, in it self, a thing ^imply evil, the Apostles argument would want its due
force; and cause men question, if ever G^d did or would swear; it being such a
sinful and an abominable thing, ^roceeding from the Devil: And so the whole
argument and conclusion of the Apostle should be annulled, and the maine pillar
of our assurance and hope s^aken. And though this differs from these
instances, 1 Cor. 9: ver* 24. and Luke 14: verse 31. which he adduceth to
invalidate this; Yet neither can he prove, that these are simply sinful and
unlawful, in all cases.

13. As for the argument he proposes next, I own it not; and so am less
concerned in his answer: Only I would know, what he means by that
expression, a Christian, whom God has called unto his essential verity, may no
way swear? What means he by this essential verity? And was not Paul called
thereunto, whatever it be? How came it then, that he did swear some way? Were
not the holy men of old called unto this essential verity? how came it then,
that they did also swear? Such as Abraham Genesis 21:24. Jacob. Gen 31:53.
Joseph. Gen: 47:35. Moses Josh. 14:9. David 1 Samuel 20:3. and 24:22 Jonathan 1 Samuel 20:16. Eliah. 1 King. 17:1. Gedaliah. 2 King. 25:24. Asa. 2 Chronicles. 15:14.
Obadiah. 1 King. 18:10. and Elisha. 2 King 2:6? Are not Angels called unto this
essential verity? How came it then that they did swear Dan. 12:17. Revel. 10:5,
6? He cites some passages of some heathens Page 360. who would not swear: And
what can this prove? And what will Pythagoras prohibition evince? Or Socrates
his requireing that men's words should be firmer than oaths? Or Plato's
appearing against it? These and the like may be good arguments for him, whose
Religion is but Paganish; but have no force with us? though I grant, these and
the like may shame Christians, who regard even oaths so little. He has Page
361. a number of bare citations of places of some Fathers and Others, without
giving us their words; any, who has these books, may peruse them, and see what
they say: All that I shall say is this. Though it be true, that many of the
Fathers, did in this assent to Pelagius; yet the more common opinion was, that
Christians might in some cases lawfully swear, which they grounded upon the
practice of Paul: See Vossius Hist. Pelag. lib. 5. par. 2. Antith. 1. Page 513.
etc. And let the Reader peruse the citations he has there adduced, and he will
see, that some of this Quakers citations, and Authors, are against himself;
such, as Cyprian, Tertullian, Augustine, Polycarp, and others. The primitive
Christians would not swear, it is true, neither by the Genius, nor by the
fortune of the Emperious: See Tertul. Apol. Cap. 31. and from this some might
gather, that they would not swear at all: which was certainly a mistake. And we
read, that the Primitive Christians did swear to be faithful to the Emperor,
as Vossius shows out of Vegetius lib 2. Cap. 5. and Arnobius lib. 4. see also
Dio in M. Antonino; Tertul. de Cor. mil. c. 1. Eusebii histor. lib, 5. c. 5. He
shows also how they used to swear by the Eucharist, out of Eusebii Histor.
lib. 6. Chap. 35, The last argument, which he mentions, is not worth the
naming, and so I leave it.

14. For a Conclusion to this, let us take notice, that Augustine was only
laboring to keep often unnecessary oaths; and would have one and other shuning
what they could the giving of oaths: But would not simply condemn the taking
or giving of oaths, in weighty matters, even under the Gospel: And therefore
speaking upon that sermon of Christ, on the mount; and having mentioned the
expressions of Paul, formerly spoken of, he adds. Ita intelligitur,
praecepisse Deum, ne Iuretur; ne quisquam sicut bonum, appetat jusjurandum, and
assiduitate jurandi, ad perjurium per consuetudinem delabatur. Quapropter qui
intelligit, non in bonis, sed necessariis jurationem habendam; refrenet se
quantum potest, ut non ea u^atur, nisi necessitate; cum videt, pigros esse
homines ad credendum, quod ets utile est credere, nisi juratione firmetur.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Civil Honor.
1. BEside what belongs properly to Civil Honor, of which we are now to
speak, there are other two particulars, which he is pleased to speak something
to, in his Vindication of his last Thesis, to wit, against Vanity and
Prodigality in apparel, and against Comoedies and such Plays; concerning
which, I mind to be no adversary unto him; only I must say, he must be very
affronted and shameless to suppose, let be to say, That all his Adversaries
conten^ for these as lawful, and as no way contrary to Christian Religion; as
he says Page 334. for howbeit we love not to place too much of Religion in the
outward garb; nor think, that people should affect to be singular therein, and
too pharisaically make a proclamation of their being such or such persons, as
if the outward vestment could make the man a Christian of such or such a
magnitude; nor like we such clothes of distinction, as the Popish Orders have,
knowing how much Superstitious vanity moves thereunto, and works under it:
Yet we as much hate and abhore that prodigious abuse, that so much abounds
this day, and provokes the Lord to anger, as he can. We know Christianity
requires all Gravity, Sobriety, Modesty and Moderation; and howbeit
distinction of Qualities, Conditions, and Offices, will admit a distinction of
apparel, both for matter and fashion; Yet in all there ought to be gravity and
modesty studied and followed: we remember, as well, as he, and press the
following of that word of the Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 2:9, 10. In like manner also,
that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety,
not with broidered hair, or pearls or costly array: but (which becomes women
professing godliness) with good works. And of that of Peter 1 Pet. 3:3, 4.
whose adorning let it not be that outward, of plaiting the hair, and of
wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel; but the hidden man of the heart,
in that which is not corruptible, the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price. Yet we dar not say, that it is
sinful to wear any thing more, than what is simply necessary for covering of
nakedness, and keeping from cold; knowing that there is an Ornament allowed,
that suiteth with Gravity, Shamefastness and Sobriety, according to the various
conditions and qualities of Persons; though notwithstanding we would have no
offense given, in things indifferent; nor any just cause of stumbling, either
to one or other; but do rather desire, that persons would keep within that
measure, which their condition, and the custom of the place, would allow, than
that their good should be evel spoken of, and Christianity fall under a
reproach. And as to Ribbens, Laces, and the like, which, it seems, he
inveigheth most against; though we could well desire, that they were utterly in
disuse, where any ground of offense is given thereby; and willingly confess,
that both as to these and several other things, there is too much Vanity,
Lightness and Prodigality obvious and apparent; Yet we dar not simply condemn
all the use of such things, as sinful, and repugnant to Christianity: And we
suppose, there may lurk as much real Pride, Vanity and Conceit, under a garb
outwardly modest, and free of those toys; as sometimes will do under a garb
accompanied with them. As for this Comoedies, he may know, that some, who are
no Quakers, have said as much and more against them, than he has done, or can
do: And yet we dar not simply condemn the use of all lawful and sinless
Recreations, the use whereof with Christian moderation and sobriety, may be
useful, if not necessary, to some bodies, and a mean to fit them for more noble
service and work.

2. Having thus dispatched these things, and having now considered all the
parts and pieces of the Quakers Profession, held forth by this their Advocat
and Patron, in the forgoing Theses and their Vindication; we come now, in the
last place, to speak to that, which I look upon, as their proper and peculiar
characteristick; as that which really differenceth them from all other
heretics, schismatics, or erroneous persons, that have appeared to this day,
in the Christian world, so far as I can yet learn: Hither til I have met with
nothing in all their Opinions, and Practices, which he is pleased here to lay
before us, as owned by them, and defended by him (except their Quaking, which
groundeth their denomination, and which assimilateth them more unto the old
heathenish Consulters of the Devil, than to Christians) which has not been
asserted and maintained by others, who have been condemned, upon that account,
by the Church of Christ, before the generation of Quakers were ever heard of,
as I have shown all alongs. Only I must confess, that in this they are also
singular, That before them, there was never a Seck heard of, that owne^ and
maintained such a full and complete body of error and heresy, and gave forth
such a perfect systeme of devilish doctrine, tending to the overthrow and
destruction of all Christianity and true Divinity, and to the propagating and
strengthening of the Kingdom of darkness, as the Seck of the Quakers has done;
whose maine intent, or the Devil's in them, seeme^h to have been to gather
together, in one mass, all the errors and abominable opinions, formerly
scattere^ up and down the Christian world, through all ages, and vented by
several persons, raised up by Satan for that effect, which might contribute any
thing to the utter extirpation of Christianity, and of all true Religion; so
that, what the Devil could not effectuat by Arrians, Pelagians, Socinians,
Papists, Arminians, Anabaptists, Familists, Enthusiasts, Antiscripturists,
Muns^erians, David Georgians, Manichees, Antitrinitarians, Montanists,
Donatists, Heracleonites, Ascothyptae, Messalians, Swenckfeldians,
Carpocratians, Valentinians, Gnosimachians, Priscillianists, Marcionites,
Tertullianists, Mareites, Quintinus, Simon Magus, Menander, Saturninus,
Basilides, and others not a few, he thinks now to accomplish by these
Miserable Quakers, who have gathered together in one cloud, what these
severally, and in pieces, did vent and propagate, to darken the truth of God.
But we are confident, that the Lord, who has appeared against, and broken the
scattered forces, shall, while rallyed and combined together in one, and in
their fullest strength, beat them out of the fields, and consume them with the
Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy them with the brightness of his coming.

3. Beside this wicked composition, which sufficiently discriminateth them from
all, who have formerly troubled the Church of Christ; they must have something
peculiar to themselves, which, as an open badge, must be owned and avowed by
them; and this must also be such a Cognizance, as may discover them to all
onlookers to be the men and women of such a profe^sion: And this consists in
their denying of all outward civil honor and respect, and all significations
thereof to any person whatsomever, not only their Equals but their Superiors,
whether in higher or lower degree; for when they pass by any, how high so
ever; or compear before any Judge or Magistrate, they will not so much, as
signify their respect, by uncovering of their head, as if they were all Turks*
or brought up among them; or so many Heathenish Priests, who as Plutarch
witnesses, used never to take off their cap, which was the insigne of the
Flamines, See Mr Durham on the Revel. Page 563. And when they are speaking to
any, even to greatest Personages, not only they will not make use of any
titles, or expressions importing reverence and respect, according to the common
usage and custom; but they speak to such, in the very same dialect and manner,
that the greatest uses, or can use, while talking with or speaking to the
meanest of their inferiors: Hence is there Thou and Thee, instead of you and
ye; Yea, which is also remarkable, in their answers, they use yea and nay: and
will not say, yes and no: so Mr Grigge, the writer of the Quakers Jesus,
informs me, in his Epistle Prefixed to that book: And what can this import,
but some characteristick Tessera, or note of distinction, whereby they may be
discerned from all others whatsomever; and who can tell, if in such foolish
niceties, there lie not some piece of outward homage, which they must pay to
their Master, who will take little ere he want all; and will be as well pleased
with a toy, if it be given in sign of homage, as with a greater matter? And it
is remarkable, that the first and only person among Christians, that we can
hear of using this mode, was the founder of the Jesuits, Loyala: but he did it
but once, that we hear of, before a Governor, where he was challenged for a
Spy, and yet it may be sufficient to make him also the Father, and founder of
the new order of uncivil Quakers.

4. It may seem strange, that these Men, who own no other Christ or Scripture,
but the Light within, and take that for all, are thus against all good manners
and civility, refuseing to salute persons, in the way; or to give the least
civil signification of honor and respect to equals or superiors; when even
among the wild savage Indians, such moroseness and pedantick clownishness
would be abhorred, being taught some other thing by the natural Light within
them? However, as upon the one hand, we may observe, the enmity, that Satan
has at Mankind, is such, as makes him hate all things, that looks like
humanity, for their sakes; and therefore will have these his deluded followers,
wear no other character of cognizance, but such, as may make them openly
appear as enemies to humanity and civility; so upon the other hand, we may
observe the holy hand of a righteous God, in this, giving them up, to an
unmanning of themselves, and to a denying of that, which, in their outward
carriage and gesture, might difference them, not only from the ruder and more
clunish sort of mankind, but even from beasts, who have renounced all
Christianity, and every thing that looks like serious Religion.

5, But as to the matter it self, we know, that honor is to be rendered to whom
hon^ur is due, and fear to whom fear is due Romans 13:7. that Elders are to be
accounted worthy of double honor 1 Timothy 5:17. that we must honor all men 1
Pet. 2:17. and in honor prefer one another Romans 12.10. We read that the
virtuous woman's children arise up, and call her bl^ssed Prove. 31:28. We read
that Sarah called Abraham, Lord 1 Pet. 3:6. It was given for a Law, that they
should rise up before the h^ary head, and honor the face of the old man Levit
19:32. We read that even Solomon a King rose up to meet his mother, and bowed
himself unto her 1 King. 2:19 the Angels called Sarah, Agars Mistress Genesis
16:9. the Disciples has a Master, and the Servant a Lord Mat. 10:24. Paul said
to the Governor Festus, most noble Festus Act. 26:25. We read of some women
styled honorable Act 13:50. and 17:12. John writteth to a Lady 2 John 1. Moses
said to the two Hebrews that strove against other, Sirs Act. 7:26. one said to
Elisha, Alas Master 2 King. 6:5. Paul and Barnabas said to such, as were ready
to sacrifice to them, Sirs Act. 14:15. The jaylour said to Paul and Silas, Sirs
Act. 16:30. So did Paul to the mariners Act. 2^:10, 21, 25. Luk styled
Theophilus, most excellent Luke 1:3. Shecaniah called Ezra, my Lord Ezra. 10:3.
Christ's sermon on the Mount teaches us, not to salute our brethren only, as
the Publicans did Mat. 5:47. We read that Abraham bowed to the children of Heth
Genesis 23 7. Jacobs Sons to Joseph Genesis 43:26, 28. David bowed to Saul 1 Samuel
24:8. Mephibosheth to David 2 Samuel ^:8 So also Abigail 1 Samuel 25:23. Araunah 2 Samuel 24:20. and Nathan the Prophet 1 King. 1:23. the Shunamit fell down at the
Prophets feet, and bowed herself to the ground. 2 King. 4:36. Abraham bowed to
the three Angels, supposing them to be men, Genesis 18:2, 3. So did Lot Genesis 19:1,
2. Jacob bowed himself seven times before his brother Esau Gen 33: verse. 3. and
styled himself Esaw's servant verse. 5, 14. And Esau, Lord verse. 8, 13, 14, 15.
Jacob's wives and his children also bowed verse. 6, 7. Joseph bowed to Jacob
Genesis 48:12. Ioab bowed to David 2 Samuel 14:22. and also Absalom verse. 33. How
often read we of that title, O King, used by good folks? Dan. 2:29, 31. and 3:17,
18. and 4:22, 27, 31. and 5:18. Act. 26:13, 19. and of, my Lord O King 1 Samuel
26:17. 2 Samuel 14:9.22: and 16:4. and 19:26. 1 King. 1:13, 20, 24. and 20:4. 2
King. 6: verse. 12, 26. and 8.5. Moses did obeisance to his Father in Law Exodus
18* 7. Bathsheba to David 1 King. 1:16. Mary saluted Elizabeth Luk 1:40. Paul
the Church Act. 18:22. the brethren at Ptolemais Act. 21:7 James and the Elders
at Jerusalem Act 21:21. Christ commanded the seventy disciples to salute the
house they came to Mat. 10:12. How often does Paul desire such as he wrote
unto, to salute others in his name? See Romans 16:5 12.13. Phil. 4:21. Heb. 13:
verse 24. and how often does he mention others as saluting them? Heb. 13:24. Tit.
3:15. Phil. 2:3. 1 Cor. 16:9. 2 Cor. 13:13. Phil. 4:22: Romans 16:16, 23. Col.
4:10, 12. So does Peter 1 Pet. 5:13. and John 3 Ioh. 14. Here is enough to show
how groundless their rustic singularity is; and that there must be something
else in this, then what they give out and pretend: I grant, it suiteth them
well, who would have us renunce all Christianity, and turn Pagans, to drive
us, at the next step, to outstripe Pagans in incivility: but we know Religion
is no enemy to Civility; nor Christianity to Courtesy; and that we should
think on such things as are Honest, or Venerable, Pure, Lovely, and of good
report Phil. 4:8.

6. We shall now come and see what this man can say in defense of their
practice. He begins to speak hereof Page 336. And first speaks to the
matter of titles, telling us, That they expressly affirm, that it is not lawful
for Christians, either to give or receive such titles of honor, as, Your
holiness, majesty, excellency, Eminency, etc. Answ. But what if all this were
granted? All this might be granted, and yet their practice no way justified;
for though some titles of honor were not to be approven (as what Protestant
will allow of that given to the Pope?) Yet it could not be hence inferred, that
no titles were to be given: there may be a mid way betwixt two extremes. And
though no titles were to be given to any, to testify our respect to, and
esteem for persons of eminency, whether as to Power and Authority, or as to
gifts and parts; Yet this could make nothing for their blunt and rustic thou
and thee. He adds some Reasons, as. 1. These titles are no part of that
obedience, which we owe to Magistrates; nor is any thing thereby added to that
subjection, which consists in obedience to their lawful commands. Answ.
Though it be no part of obedience, to use titles; Yet it may be a part of that
Honor and Respect, which is due unto them. And the fifth command says, honor
thy Father and thy Mother; and certainly it is no sign of honor to
Magistrates and great Personages, to speak to them, no otherwise then we would
do to our footboyes, as the Quakers do. 2. Says he, We find not such titles
in the Scripture, either under the Law, or under the Gospel; but when Princes,
or Nobles, and Kings were spoke to, this simple compellation was used O King;
or with the addition of the name of the Person, as, King Agrippa. Answ. (1.) We
have seen other titles of honor and respect, above; as My Lord O King, and
this our Quakers will not give to the highest; nor does this man, in all his
Epistle dedicatory to the King, prefixed to his Apology, say so much, as once,
O King, or my Lord O King; only he gives him thee and thou, as he would give
his own servant. (2.) These compellations, according to the then custom* were
the highest, and only given to Kings; and inferior Persons had their own
peculiar titles; and as no man did then scruple to give high persons, titles or
styles, due to their places, according to the received custom of the time and
place; why should these scruple now; and not only refuse to give them such
titles, as are now usual; but refuse to give them any at all; or to put any
difference betwixt them, and the poorest beggar, that sits on the dung hill?
This evinceth, that though they pretend want of Scripture warrant; Yet there is
some other thing, which is the real cause.

7. His. 3. Reason is, This lays a necessity on Christians to lie, in giving
the titles of Grace, and Eminency, etc. to such as have nothing worthy of
these, or answering them. Answ. Under favor of his Thouship, he mistaketh the
ground of these titles, supposing that they are given because of personal
corresponding enduements; while as they are only given, because of that Place
and Power, which they, in the providence of God, are in possession of: But
neither can this pretext be a real ground of their practice; for they will not
give any titles to their own brethren the Quakers, in whom they dar not deny,
but Christ is, and lives; Yea and the whole Trinity; which, when I think upon,
I wonder they do not fall down and worshipe one another, seeing they acknowledge
that Christ, and the Trinity, is in every Quaker; But I remember what was said
to be done to I. Naylor at Bristoll; it may be, they shall do so to one
another, ere long, and would have done so, ere now, if fear had not hindered
it: And what means their gazeing one upon another a considerable time, when
they first meet? This would look like some sort of worshipe: If not, it is like
the reason is, that (and thus can only their practice be reconciled with their
principles) their God, and their Christ, and their Trinity, which they say is
in every man, dormant; but living, (the light having got room and enlargment)
in the Quakers, is not the true and living God, but a God of their own making
and imagination: and this I believe to be true. His 4. Reason touches the Pope
and his clergy: And there we reject both place and title. His 5. Reason is
against the Title of majesty given to Kings, which he says is especially and
peculiarly given to God, in the Scriptures, and not to men: But he is here also
mistaken, for though it be spoken of God 1 Chronicles. 29:11. Yet verse. 25. (which
his Concordance might have pointed him to) it is said, that the Lord magnified
Solomon, exceedingly, in the fight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him royal
majesty: And Psalm. 21:5. (another of the places cited by him) it is not given
to God, but by God to the King: And Psalm. 29:4. (another of his citations) it
is attributed to the thunder: What means this man, thus to cite Scriptures at
random, without once considering what he is doing? He adds, that Proud
Nebuchadnezzar took this title to himself, Dan. 4* 30. and was shortly
therefore rebuked. Answ. Why did he not look also verse. 36. where excellent
majesty was added unto him, after his restoration? And why did he not look to
Dan. 5:18. where Daniel says, that the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar a
Kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor? And again verse. 19. and for the
majesty that he gave him, etc? His Concordance could have helped him here, to
have corrected his own mistake; but his light was asleep.

8. He adds a 5. Reason Page 339. all these titles are to be rejected,
because we are to seek the honor, which is from God, and not that which is
from below. Answ. We are not pleading for ambitious seeking of honor from men,
more then the praise of God; and upon this account the rejecting of Christ and
the profession of his name, for fear of missing thereby the honor, applause
and esteem of men: This is not it, we plead for; and this is it, which Christ
condemned Ioh. 5:44. and 12:43. But we are pleading for giving honor to whom
honor is due. What he speaks of arts and wiles used to obtain these
honors, makes nothing to the purpose; for this is not the ground of their
practice; else they should give honor to some: For it is hard to say, that all
use such indirect courses, as he seems to be acquanted with. What he says of
honoring the just and holy ones, is against himself; for they will not honor
one another, at least not in a way, that we can understand: If they honor one
another inwardly, without these outward significations; what know they but we
do so to the poor, who are righteous and holy. If he think, that we should,
according to our principles, give titles of honor to the poor, who are godly;
He is mistaken; for our principles are not, that these outward titles are given
to any, upon the account of their personal enduements; but because of their
Station, Place and Authority: Yet we say, that honor is to be given to all,
and due and competent significations of respect to the poorest, that fear God,
upon the account of the grace of God shineing in them.

9. He comes next. 4. Page 340. to speak against Complements: of which as I
love not to be a practitioner, so I resolve to be no patron, or advocat: and
all that I shall say is, that, as I wish, the sin in this practice were more
considered and laid to heart, and this great evil amended; so I cannot approve
the Quakers, in running to the other extreme; and, out of a pretense to shun
vain and idle complements, becoming brutishly rustic and clunish: But here P.
341. he coineth an answer unto that of Luks calling Theophilus, M^st excellent;
and of Paul's calling Festus, most noble: saying, Seeing Luk wrote that, an
infallible Spirit acting him, we must not doubt, but that Theophilus deserved
it. Answ, I shall be loath to ^oubt of it: but though we will not say, that
this title was given to him by reason of his birth, or merits with the
Emperor; nor yet will improve it to the confirmation of that, there being no
necessity: Yet we have ground enough from hence to reprove their affected
Morosity, who will not give this title; or any like it, to any flesh breathing;
no not to one of themselves, of whom they have the most singular opinion, upon
the best account. Sees he not now, what can hence be deduced against him? But
what says he to Paul's practice? Festus, says he, was also truly noble, in
that he would hear Paul in his own cause, and gave not way to the Jew, fury
against him. Answer, It was but a poor evidence of true nobility in him to
hear Paul speak for himself, when the Laws of the Romans bound him to it. And
as to the Jews fury, he gave as much way to it, as he might. Why did he else
constrain Paul to appeal unto Caesar, which if he had not done, he might have
bin a free man, in the judgment of King Agrippa Act. 26.32? what else imports
these words of Paul. Act. 25:11. -- but if there be none of these things,
whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them; (that is, the Jews)
I appeal unto Caesar. But once more, I wonder where was his true nobility, when
he said Act. 26:24. and that with a loud voice, that all present might have
heard him; Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning does make thee mad?
This I am sure was a very sorry evidence of true nobility: and yet upon the very
back of that, Paul said, I am not mad, most noble Festus. Sure then this title
was not given him upon the account of true nobility, as this Quaker supposes;
but upon the account of his Place and Authority, it being the title, that was
ordinarily given to Felix, his predecessor; though we read not, in express
terms, that Paul used i^, yet it was used by others.

10. At length. 3. he comes to speak in the defense of their Thees and Thous;
and very learnedly tells us, that we cannot use the plural number for the
singular, in latin, every school boy knowing, that it is incongruous to say,
vos Amas. Answ Yet every school boy knows, it is not incongruous to say, vos
amatis: And why may not the Verb be as well plural, as the Pronoun? If he say,
that is not usual, when we are speaking of or to another single person: What
will he say to this use, when we are speaking of ourselves? He has not
forgotten the old rule, At de me solo numerus dicetur uter vis. But be it so,
that the latin will no way suffer this, other languages may; as for example,
the Low dutch, where through the whole Bible, we shall not find any other
word, for thee and thou, then what signifies properly ye and you. And what
rule or ground, can he find in latin, for their constant useing yea and nay,
and never yes, and no? But let it be supposed, that few languages will
countenance such an abuse, as to say ye and you, to one single man: What will
that help the matter? must all languages follow the same rules? knows he not,
that use is the master of language? and that in our language, thee and thou, is
never used, when one equal is speaking to another (except where it is the
expression of most intimate friendshipe and affection, as betwixt man and wife)
far less, when one is speaking to his Superior? and knows he not, that in
our usual manner of speaking, if we should say thou and thee to our equal, let
be to our Superior, it would either be construed to flow from the hieght of
Pride and Contempt, or from Rage and Anger? And is it handsome for them to
speak so disdainfully to all persons; and pretend conscience for it too? What a
ridiculous whimsical folly is this? What he cites out of James Howel, and John
Maresius, confuteth what he said just now; for they tell us, that even in
latin, Vos, you, was used of one person; and though they say this change came
through pride and flatery, it will say nothing, unless he can show the like in
our language; and though he should show it, yet use being, as I said, master of
words, his pedantick singularity will but savoure of Vanity and Pride: and for
what he cites out of Mr Godeau it is to no purpose, for he knows, that
whatever we do, while speaking to others, yet we use the singular number, while
speaking to God, which may convince him, that language is not always ruled by
reason, but by use and custom. He tells us, They were necessitate to testify
against this, by speaking in the singular number to singular persons; because
to speak otherwise, came from pride; and so is joined with a lie. Answ. How
proves he, that it came from pride, with us? Because it was so with the
Latin? the consequence is not good (2.) Is every thing that comes from pride
joined with a lie? (3.) Our Quakers will be both proud, and speak despicably of
others, (as thou and thee evinceth) that they may testify against pride: I
appeal to any, that knows our language, whether it savoureth more of pride
and worse, to use thou and thee to our and equals superiors, then to use you
and ye. But I will not impute it to pride, in the Quakers, supposing that it
comes from a more stinking root, than either pride, or contempt, though these
may some time be admixed too; hence the Proverb, as proud as a Quaker.

11. Then he comes to speak of salutations Page 343.. 6. for they will salute
no man; nor uncover their head, not only to their Equals, but neither will they
do it unto their Superiors; nor give the least sign of respect, of honor, or
of reverence, in their gesture and carriage, unto any whatsoever. And he says,
he cannot see what we can say in defense of our practice. But we have shown
above, what is our ground: and we have seen the same practiced by other worthy
persons, mentioned in Scripture. But to this he replieth, That these actions of
the Patriarchs are no rule to us; nor is it sufficient, that these actions were
not expressly reproved, for neither was Abraham reproved, for knowing Sarah's
maid. Answ. Abraham's practice, in the matter of Hagar, was against a law; for
the Lord created but one woman to Adam, though the residue of the Spirit was
with him Mal. 2:14, 15. But Abraham's practice in civilly bowing unto the sons
of Heth, was against no Law of the creation. (2.) When he and Lot both bowed
unto the Angels, supposeing them to have been men, shall we think, that if that
had been sinful, that the Angels would not have reproved them upon that
account, as we find the Angel did reprove John, when he fell down and
worshipped him, Revel. 19:10. and 22:9? As concerning, says he, the fashions
and customs of the Nations, it is an evil argument for the practice of
Christians, who should follow a better rule. Answ. And so we do follow a better
rule; and yet we may follow the Law of nations, which is mostly gathered from
the practice of nations, in things not contrary to the Law of God; for even the
Law of nations, in such things, is a part of the Law of God, being but some
particular applications, or explications of the Law of Nature: And though no
particular gesture, as a sign of respect and reverence, due to our Equals or
Superiors, be universally received by all Nations, yet the Law of Nations, and
their practice, may teach us, that by some one outward gesture or other, we
ought to witness our respect, and declare that reverence, that we owe to
others: Christianity is no enemy to humanity, and civility, whatever our morose
and unmanerly Quakers dream.

12. But let us hear his arguments. 1. Says he, God alone is to be adored: But
bowing of the body and knee and uncovering our head, are the only external
signs of our adoration of God, 1 Cor. 11. Answ. What a silly thing is this? He
may as well infer, that a man must never bow his body to tie his shoes, nor
uncover his head to have his hair cut; Can he not distinguish betwixt a stated
act of worshipe, and other actions civil and natural? It is true, in a stated
act of worship, the uncovering the head, or bowing of the body, were it but to
a stock or stone, or any dead creature, or any thing beside God, would be
Idolatry; but to construe so of every bowing of the knee, or uncovering of the
head, in every other action whatsoever, is ridiculous folly: And it seems,
these Quakers put no difference betwixt God and men; nor betwixt stated acts of
worshipe, and other common actions. But he adds, If we should apply ourselves
to men, as to God, there should be no difference, in the outward signification,
but only in the Intention, whereby a door is opened unto the Papists worshipping
of images. Answ. He sees, we put the difference, in the nature and statedness
of the action; and not in the bare intention; though that also be included in
the nature of the action: And what door this opens unto image-worshipe, he
should have declared. He possibly thinks, that it is our judgment, that if
the worshiper do not intend to worshipe the image, it is no image-worshipe;
This is his mistake: If the worshiper intend divine worshipe to God, in bowing
before an idol, we account him guilty of image-worshipe; for his intention
there declares the action to be a stated act of worshipe; but we say not so of
a craftsman bowing down to help or amend something in the image, for his
intention shows, that he is about no act of worshipe; ^or does the nature of
that action require it: If he could evince, that while we bow our bodies or
uncover our heads unto men, that we are intending thereby worshipe to God, his
argument were good; but while there is no such intention, nor does the action
it self require it, being a stated civil action, and no more, his argument
evinceth but his own Folly and Ignorance.

13. His second argument is but the same; to wit, that men should not be
adored: Which we willingly grant; for in adoration, there is a r^cognition and
acknowledgment of the Absolute Power and Soveraignity of the person, whom we
adore; and therefore this is due to God only: But civil honor, and reverence
is another thing, being but an acknowledgment of excellency in men because of
their place, and a testification of our respect toward them; and can import no
^ishonour unto God. He adduceth next the fact of Cornelius Act. 10. and of John
Revel. 19. and 22. But to no purpose; for Cornelius fell down to worshipe
Peter verse. 25. And so did John to the Angel Revel. 19:10. and 22:8. We plead
not for worshipping of men; for worshipe is due to God only, because of his
Supereminent and Transcendent Excellency; and requires inward Love Faith and
Hope, in and upon the object worshipped. He should prove, that these external
significations of honor and respect, cannot be without, or do essentially
include, worshipe performed toward the Object; but this is impossible; for
then if one bow his body to tie his shoes, or to lift up a pin, he shall be a
worshiper of his shoes, and of a pin. He adds, If it be said, that John would
adore the Angel with religious worshipe, it is not proved. Answ. Is it not
proved, when the text says, he fell down to worshipe? where find we civil
honor or respect called worshipe, in Scripture? He tells us next, that such as
blame them, would also blame Mordecai. Answ. But hereby we see, that the
Quakers think no otherwise of all men, than Mordecai did of Haman, who was an
Agagite, come of Agag, the King of the Amalekites, who were devoted to
destruction by the Lord Exodus 17:14. Deuteronomy. 25:19. 1 Samuel 15:3. Again, thinks
he that it was mere civil honor and respect* that conscientious Mordecai
refused to give to that wreatch? We are told, that the Persian Monarchs did
arrogate to themselves divine honor, and h^nur of this kind would that
foolish Monarch have all his Subjects to perform unto Haman; for he set him
above all the Princes, and gave a special commandment for bowing and
reverenceing him, which had not been necessary, if it had be no other but that
civil honor, which was paid to the other Princes. And suppose it had been but
only civil honor; Yet Mordecai's case was singular, because he was a Jew, and
the Jews were under a prohibition to do any homage unto these cursed
Amalekites; and this, as it appears, was the ground of his refusal; for it is
said Esth. 3:4. -- for he had told them, that he was a Jew; thereby holding
forth the ground and reason of his refusal to obey the Kings command. One thing
I would ask, what he thinks of that honor and worshipe, that was given to
James Naylor, as he rode into Bristol. Oct. 24.1656? We are not pleading for
the like of that to any man breathing: But I see Quakers will give divine
worship to one another, though they will not allow to any others so much as
civil honor.

14. This is all, that he says to defend their rude practice: And I judge, as
he says, that it flows not from their rustic breeding, for they have bin
otherwise educated; but from a more corrupt spring: And though he is pleased
to call it Conscience; and that therefore they would rather choose to die, than
do other ways; we look upon it as a small evidence of tenderness of conscience
in them, even suppose it were a thing not lawful and warranted, seeing they make
so little bones of greater matters: We know, what Christ said Mat. 23:23. Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise
and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy
and faith. We may know also, what power a deluded conscience may have, even in
small matters. But I am apt to think, there is some other thing, that lies
here at the bottom, when I consider what wide consciences these men have; and
how directly and avowedly, they set themselves to cry down all Religion, and
to cashier all Christianity; and in a word, to bring us back to Paganism, let
them pretend what they will. God may discover this in due time.

CHAP. XXXII. A View of the Conclusion.
1. HAving thus examined all the Principles of the Quakers; (if this Man has
given us a full sheme of their opinions) and though it be the fullest, that any
of them have yet given, so far as I know? Yet there may be something latent,
which is to come out in due time. And having considered all, that he has said,
in his large Apology, for their defense; I thought good not to let his
conclusion pass without some due examination. Thus then he begins to
bespeak his Candide Reader. If in the fear of God thou consider this Systeme of
Religion, delivered in these papers, together with its consistency and harmony,
either as it stands in it self, or with the holy Scripture of truth; I doubt
not but thou will say, with me and many others, that this is the spiritual day
of the manifestation of Christ, in which he reveals again his ancient paths
of truth and justice. Answ. We have here a Systeme, I confess, not of Religion,
but of Pure Paganism; And a more complete Systeme of abomination, and
contradiction to the truth of God, revealed in the holy Scriptures, I doubt was
ever brought forth by any Instrument, that ever Satan employed to darken the
truth of God. And whatever consistence may be in it, (though we have found also
some inconsistencies) unto it self; Yet I am sure, there is nothing in the
whole, and in every part thereof, but manifest and palpable inconsistency with,
and opposition to the Scriptures of truth. And that this is so far, as to them,
from being a spiritual day of the manifestation of Christ, that it is a day of
the dreadfulest delusion of Satan, and of darkness, caused by the Prince of
darkness, that ever was heard of in the Christian world, there being nothing,
but a new broaching of all (few excepted) the old Paths of error, heresy,
and abomination: for verification of which, I shall only refer the Reader, in
whom is the least grain of the true fear of God (...), and faith to the
Revelation of the mind of God, in the Scriptures, to what is said above.

2. He goes on and tells us, that here his Reader may observe Christian
Religion exhibited and vindicated, in all its parts, in so far, as it is
lively, inward, spiritual, pure and substantial, and not a mere form, shadow,
notion and opinion, as many hitherto have held, whose fruits declare, that
they wanted the inward power of that, whereof they bore the name, who yet
adhere so to their forms and shadows, that they cease not to calumniat us, as
if because we comm^nd unto them the substance, and call them thereunto, we did
deny or neglect the true form and outward part of Christianity, which God the
searcher of hearts knows to be a horride lie. Answ. The wise King, or rather
the Spirit of God by him Prove. 18:17. tells us, that he that is first in his
own cause seems just; but his nieghbour comes and searches him. If this
cause be referred to this Quakers decision, we know what will be the sentence;
but light discovers darkness. And if any Reader, be he who he will, who
knows, what true christian Religion means, shall find the same, in the
Quakers doctrine, and in this man's defense thereof, I am deceived: Nay, if he
shall not find more direct, plain, downright opposition and contradiction to
the whole of true christian Religion, in their tenets, thus explained and
maintained, than in the writings of the most notorious, and branded heretics,
that ever had a being, since Christianity was heard of, I am far mistaken: Nay,
I am sure, he shall find nothing, but an hotch-potch and mixture of almost all
Errors, Heresies, damnable Opinions, and Heterodoxies, that have troubled the
Church of Christ from the beginning, together with something, that smells
more of Devilrie, than of humanity, let be of Religion; I mean not here, their
pedantry, and silly unmanlike, and rustic carriage; but what is by this man
expressed, concerning their more solemn worshipe, beside their quaking,
shivering, or foaming, like persons possessed of the Devil, or under the bodily
distemper of an Epilepsy. It is true, they talk of something Lively, Inward,
Spiritual, Pure and Substantial; but when we have searched after it, following
this man's thread of explication, we have found it nothing but a light within
every man, and in many things agreeing with the light which is in Devils, and
yet this is their all; their God; their Father; Son and holy Ghost; their
Christ; their Grace; their Spirit; their Scripture; their Supreme Leader, Rule,
Teacher and judge; their Jesus, the only Savior; their Gospel; their only way
to the Father; their Justification; their Sanctification; their Adoption, their
Perfection, their Supreme Caler; the God which they consult and worshipe: the
Word in the beginning, that made all things; and what not? And truly this
being their all, no wonder they be enemies to all outward Ordinances, and
account these mere shadows, notions and forms. They talk of fruits, and we
shall willingly confess, to our shame, that our carriage is not so Christian,
as it ought to be: but what their carriage is else, then may be among Pagans,
we are yet to learn. He says, we calumniate them, when we say, they are
against all the ordinances of Christ (for what he means else, by the true
form and outward part of Christianity, I know not) and I would feign know,
what ordinance of Christ it is, which they own? Have we not heard enough of
him against the Ministry, Preaching, Prayer, Singing, Baptism the Lords
Supper, etc? And hear we not what others say? Parnel in his Shield of truth
Page 17. said (as it is cited by Mr Faldo (whose Book is but lately come to my
hand) 2 Part. Page 11. of his book) And here is the difference of the Ministers
of the world, and the Ministers of Christ -- the one of the letter, the other
of the Spirit -- for they are mere deceivers and witches, bewitch people from
the truth, holding forth the shadow for the substance. As for the Church, so
speaks Isaac Pennington, in his Questions P. 49. Q. What is the fold of the
sheep? Answ. The wisdom life and power of the Father, even the same that is the
shepherd. Obj. Is not the Church the fold? A. This in the Church, or the Church
in this, is the fold, but not out of this. As for prayer or thanksgiving at
meat, hear James Naylor, Love to the lost P. 57. But where the pure is not
(viz. the light) all things are defiled, when they are not sanctified by the
word and prayer, and therefore are to be received in fear, and therein
remembering his death till he come, (and so this is all their Lord's Supper too)
who is the word and Prayer. And Page 13. He casts all Prayer, that is not by
immediate inspiration, saying, But as every creature is moved by the Spirit of
the living God, who is that Spirit, who will be served with his own alone, not
with any thing in man, which is come in since the fall; so the imaginations,
thinkings and conceivings are shut out. And Smith Cat. P. 100. So must all come
to the S^irit of God, by the Spirit to be ordered, and cease from their own
words; and from their own time, and learn to be silent till the Spirit give
them utterance. And P. 107. So the same wisdom may deny the prescribed way, as
being formal, and may invent something instead of it, in a higher mystery of
iniquity; and though they may not speak in such formal words composed yet in
the same wisdom their words are formal, they can set their own time to begin
and end and when they will, they can utter words; and when they will they can
be silent and this is the unclean part, which offers to God, which he does
not accept. Found we not his Man's doctrine ab^ve consonant hereunto? As for
Baptism Parnel Page 11. else us. They own the Baptism, which is the Baptism
of Christ, with the holy Ghost, and with fire; but they deny all other. And P.
12. and now I see the other (that is water Baptism as they ordinarily call it
out of scorn) to be formal imitation* and the invention ^f Man, and so a mere
delusion. Smith Prim. P. 39. and Higgins warning P. 5 say we have this, and the
Lords Supper both from the Pope Nay, James Naylor, Love to the lost P. 52.
gives us one word for all; for this I say (says he) that the Father has
given his Son for a leader and guide to all ages, and into, and out of all
forms at his will. and in his way and time, in every generation. And therefore
it is, that all who know his will herein, cannot endure that any visible thing
should be set up to limite his leadings in Spirit. And C Atkinson said, I deny
that God did ever. or will ever reveal himself by any of these things, thou
call the means of grace. And G. Fox in his Great Mystery P. 16. And we say,
he, (Christ) has triumphed over Ordinances, and blotted them out, and they are
not to be touched; and the saints have Christ in them, who is the end of
outward forms, and thou art deceived, who thinks to find the living among the
dead. And after all this, and much more of the like kind, we must be accounted
slanderers, for saying that they deny the external part of Christianity? Nay
not only so, but we must be horride liars; and the searcher of hearts must be
attested hereunto This is but an inconsiderable thing with them, who account
all, that our Preachers say from the word of the Lord, nothing but lies, and
satanical delusions, because it is not from the immediate teaching of the
Spirit, and them but Professors of the Devil, upon this account: See Fox's
Great Mystery P. 5. and 62.

3. Yet more, Hence is it (says he,) that because we exhort people to return
and feel God within themselves, saying unto them, that if they feel not God
near them, the notions, which they have of God as he is in the heaven, above
the clouds, will not much profit them; they maliciously endeavor to infer,
that we say, that God does not exist without us. Answ. Thinks he, that we have
no other Notion of God, but as of one, that is up in the heavens above the
clouds? Supposes he, that we deny him to be every where present? But if they
believe, there is a God in deed and in truth, why talk they so much of a
measure of God, in every man? Is the true God such a devisible thing? Why do
they make the soul of man a part or particle of God? What mean they by the
Vehicle of God? Do these and the like expressions smell of orthodoxy in this
matter? The true God that is revealed to us, in the Scriptures, is a God, that
is one in essence, and three distinct persons, the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost: do they believe this? Furthermore if they believe really a God without
them, why do they ascribe to something within them, that which is peculiar unto
God? Does not the morning Watch Page 5.6, 7. assert the light within every man,
to be that word, which John speaks of John 1:1? See Fox the younger P. 50, 53,
54. Is that a savoury expression, which E. B True faith, has, when he says,
every man has that which is one in union, and like the Spirit of Christ, even
as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to its measure. Was that orthodox,
which Ed. Buroughs said, the morning before he died (see F. H. Testimony) Now
my soul and Spirit is centred in its own being with God, and this form of
person must return from whence it was taken. Another, has these expressions
(See Mr Faldo, as above P. 124.) Again thou makes a great pudder, that any one
should witness, he is equal with God. Answ. A Cathechisme of the Assembly of
the Priests -- in which they have laid down -- that the holy Ghost, and Son is
equal in power and glory with the Father; yet if any come but to witness the
Son revealed in him, or come to witness the holy Ghost in them, as they gave
out the Scriptures, or witness the mind of Christ, and witness that equal with
the Father, they cry out, horrid blasphemy. Hear what another says, Now
consider what a condition these called Ministers are in They say, that which is
a Spiritual Substance is not infinite in it self, but a creature; that which
came out from the Creator, and is in the hand of the Creator, which brings it
up, and to the Creator again, that is infinite in it self, which the hand goes
against him, that does evil, in which hand the soul, which is immortal and
infinite, which hand is infinite, which brings it up to God is infinite. Though
little good sense can be made of this, yet blasphemy enough is legible therein.
And G. Fox says, Is not the soul without beginning, come from God? It is not
horride blasphemy to say, the soul is a part of God, for it came out of him,
and that which came out of him is of him. Fisher, in his Velata quaedam
revelata Page 13, calls that, whereby man became a living soul, and a soul,
that did partake something of Gods own life, a living principle of the divine
nature. And P. 17. He calls the Spirit of man, the immortal and incorruptible
seed of God, even something of the living word, which is said to be made flesh.
Pennington Q. 27. calls that which is in the saints, that which the Lord from
heaven begets of his own image and likeness, of his own NB.) substance, of
his own Spirit and pure life Decla^: against Popery, queree 2. Whether do you
wait and believe -- to have the same mind, which was also in Christ Jesus,
who thought it no robbery to be equal with God -- yet he was no Pharisee,
though of the Pharisees judged a blasphemer, and as be is so are we* Is not
this plain enough?

4. Hence also is it (says he further) that because we say, that the inward
light and Law, and not the outward letter is that, which can truly discover to
them their state, and bring them out of all evil; they say, that we vilify the
Scriptures, and honor our own imaginations, more then them. Answ. We would
rather say, upon this account, that they vilify the Spirit of God, then the
Scriptures; for hereby these expressions, it is manifest, that they ascribe
that unto the light within, which only the Spirit of God, and of Christ can do,
viz. truly and effectually, (which may be imported by his revera) discover the
state of a sinner to him, and bring him out of all evil. This last we do not
ascribe unto the Scriptures. But as to their vilifying of the Scriptures, we
have heard enough above from this man's own mouth, and some others, whose words
we cited. Mr Faldo in his book against the Quakers, part. 1. Chapter 3-12. helps
me to much more. Let us cull out of a great heap a few instances. (1.) Do not
all the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be the word of God? Do they not say,
that it is blasphemy to say the letter is the word of God, and it is the Devil
that contends for the Scriptures to be the word of God? And what can more be
spoken to the disparagment of the Scriptures, than to deny them to be his word
or the signification of his mind, who spoke them; and did indite them by his
Spirit, immediately inspiring the Prophets and Apostles, and other holy men of
God, in the writing of them? Is not this directly to divest them of all that
Authority, which they have from God* as his Law? Is not this to render them
contemptible, when they are denied to be that, which only makes them have
weight with consciences? (2.) Do not the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be the
rule of faith and manners; and the judge of Controversies, in the matters of
Religion? We remember what himself aid above. Hear Parnel, in his shield of the
truth p. 10. And he also that says, the letter is the rule and guide of the
people of God, is without, feeding upon the husk, and is ignorant of the true
light, which was before the letter was. Hear Smith Prim. p. 10 And if thou
look upon the Scripture to be for a rule and for trying, thou give that
unto them, which belongs unto Christ. And is not this enough to disparage the
Scriptures, to deny that chief use and end of them, for which they were given?
If any should say of the Laws of any Land, and of the acts of Parliament, that
they are not a rule to the Subjects, would not that be accounted a disparagment
done to the Laws? Were not the Scriptur^s given as a revelation of the mind
of God, concerning our faith* and concerning our walk? How can any th^n d^ny
these ends, and not disparage and vilify the Scriptures? (3) Do not the
Quakers speak more highly of their own writings, than they do of the
Scriptures? The Scrip^ures with them, are but the letter, which kills; Paper,
ink and writing; the old and dead letter; Part of it words of the Devil, and of
wicked men* Precepts and traditions of men; they have no light in them; they
sheir not our faces; an earthly root, a shadow; and dangerous to feed on, etc.
But their o^n writings, are the voice of the Son of God, by which the dead are
raised; a shield of the truth; spoken in the freshness and quick sense of life;
written from the Lord; a Spiritual glass opened; light rise out of darkness:
and by revelation of Jesus Christ; and by the Spirit of the living God. See for
this Mr Faldo ubi supra pa^. 40. etc. Can men devise a way more effectual to
effronte the Scriptures? 4) Do they not prefer the light within them un^o the
Scriptures* See Smith^s Catech, p. 2. Q. does God manifest himself within Man?
Answ. Yes, and man cannot know him by any other way, but by the manifestation
of himself in his light within him. See the Scorned Quakers account p. 20.
Christ by his light within shows you in a g^ass your own faces, which the
Scriptures cannot do. Parnel p. 10. And by the same light do we discern, and
testify against him, to be in darkness and blindness, and is a deceiver, who
puts the letter for the light; and so draws peoples minds from the light
within them, to the light without them, seeking the living among the dead. John
Story, in his short discovery. p. 2. says, and although the holy Scripture
without, and the Saints practices are lights in the world; Yet far be it from
all true Christian men so to idolize them, as to set them in esteem above the
light, which is sufficient to guide, or to esteem them equal with the light and
Spirit of Christ within. And Smith. Prim. p. 12. tells, us, that Christ the
light within alone searches the heart, and not the Scriptures. Martin Mason in
his loving invitation. p. 4. It Is not your flying to the Scriptures, that can
save you from the fire of his wrath, -- nor overcome the least corruption for
you; no verily, nothing then but a Christ within you -- come thou then, O come
with boldness to God's faithful witness within you. Fisher where above p. 7.
says, such were the Scribes, who were ever scraping in the Scriptures to find
God and his life; Yet never knew him at any time, nor saw his shape, because
they heard not his voice, nor heeded not his word within themselves. Are not
these sufficient to evidence to all the world, how the Quakers vilify the
Scriptures of truth? (5.) Do they not dissuade all, in their writings, (as the
cited passages evidence) from reading or studying the Scriptures, or from
expecting any light or comfort from them? Though Christ in express terms
commanded to search the Scriptures. Yet they persuade to the contrary: And is
not this a clear proof of their undervalueing of the Scriptures? (6.) Whereunto
else tends that expression of Fisher's in his Velata quaedam revelato p. 4.
Ye have Moses and the Prophets within you, but to disparage and vilify the
Scriptures? See also Parnel p. 11. For the Scripture is within, and was read
within, before it was read without? (7.) Is it not a manifest vilifying of
Scripture, to say that there is no light in it: Yet so faith, The lip of truth
opened p. 7. That light is in the Scriptures, prove that or tell me, what one
Scripture has light in it? (8.) Do not they say, that wha^ is held forth in
the Scriptures, is not bindeing to us? Naylor, love to the lost p. 16. for all
the Saints have their commands in the Spirit; but yours is in the letter: and
so another ministration. We have mentioned more above Chap. IV. to this
purpose: and is not this sufficient to declare the Scriptures null in their
esteem? (9.) What else does that of John Story in his discovery savor of? And
I. A. further says, let light without be guide to light within. Reply, if by
this exhortation I. A. means that light without should try true light within,
which shines in the hearts of the Saints; then I must needs say, it is a very
absurd and foolish exhortation: and being spoken upon a divine account, it is
full of idolatry and evil. (10.) Do not the fore cited passages fully clear,
that in the Quakers judgment, we cannot come, by the Scriptures, to the
knowledge of God, or of Christ, or of ourselves? And is not that sufficient to
disparage the Scriptures? (11.) When Christ himself made use of the Scriptures
to repel the temptations of Satan Mat. 4. Can we think the Quakers have any
high esteem for the Scriptures, who declare them utterly useless, as to this,
as Martin Mason does in his Loving Invitation. p. 11? (12.) Can they value the
Scriptures aright, who desire the Lord, that he would stripe us of all our
knowledge of the Scripture, and say, that they only make us wise to oppose
truth, and so bring us into a state of condemnation, wrath and misery, beyond
the heathen? See Pennington's quaest. p. 12. See also W. Pen's Spirit of truth
p. 23. (13.) Do they not undervalue the Scriptures, who still set them in
opposition to the Spirit? And is not this the common language of the Quakers?
(14) If the Quakers have an high opinion of the Scriptures, what means all
these expressions, in the Morning watch Pap. 22.23. of them, and of the
doctrines received from them, viz Traditions of men, earthly root, darkness and
confusion, Nebuchadnezzars image, Putrefaction and corruption, rotten and
deceitful, all out of the li^e and power of God, Apostasy, the whores cup, the
mark of the Beast, Babylon the Mother of harlots* Bastards brought forth of
flesh and blood, the birth that persecutes the son and heir, Babylons brats
and children, graven images, etc. These sure, are no expressions of great
estimation. (15.) What shall we think of what the same Author says p. 45. So
amongst the words you find, how the Saints in some things walked, and what
they practiced, and then you strive to make something to yourselves, and to
observe it, and do it, as near as yo^ can; and here you are found
transgressors of the Law of God, who says, thou shall not make to thy self
any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing: Now what difference is there
in the ground betwixt you and the Pope? Has this man the same esteem of the
Scriptures, that Paul had, when he said Romans 15:4. For whatsoever things were
w^itten before time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope? (16.) Do we not all know, how
reproachfully the Papists speak of the Scriptures? And do not Quakers and they
go one way here? Let any look Mr Faldo's parallel, in the end of Chap. 12. of
his book Page 131. etc. and judge. If this be not enough to discover what
enemies to, and undervaluers of the Scriptures the Quakers are, I know not if
we can get any more out of hell. See what is said above Chap. IV.. 2. and 4.
and 12.

5. What says he more? H^nce moreover, because we say, that their clatterings,
and outward faith of an external life, passion and death of Christ, will no
more justify them in the sight of God, then the Jews crying the Temple of the
Lord, etc. but that they must acknowledge a Christ within themselves, whom they
have crucified, to be risen and justifying and redeeming them from all
iniquity; they say, we deny the li^e, suffering and death of Christ, and
justification by his blood, and remission of sins through him. Answ. What
means he by that ill favored word, clatterings, garritiunculae? It has no
sound in lat^ne, and no good sound in Eng^ish, in this matter. And what means
he by an external faith? And what meane^h he by an external faith of an
external life and death of Christ? These expressions are very quakerish, that
is, unsavory salt of nonsense. But when he lays all the weight of
justification and redemption, on a thing, which they call Christ within every
man, formerly crucified, but now risen; is not that as much as if they denied
all that Christ did for our Redemption, and Justification an Pardon, through
his righteousness and blood? What this man has said of these things, we have
seen and examined; and because he would fame wipe off this Aspersion from his
fraternity, let us see what they say in this matter: Mr Faldo will help us to
some others, then we have seen and mentioned formerly. (1.) What means that
expression of Ed^ Burrughs, Tru^pe^ etc. ^. 17. All that are called
Presbyterians and Independents, with their seeding upon the report of a thing
dead many hundred years ago. And that of Farnworth, what righteousness Christ
performed without me was not my justification, neither was I saved by it. Is
not this a plain denial of justification through Christ and h^s righteousness?
Pennington quaestions p. 2^. is clear enough. Can (says he) outward blood
clause the conscience? Can outward water wash the soul clean? Parnel's Shield
of truth p. 30. And this we witness, who through the Lamb our Savior do reign
above the world, death, hell and the Devil: But none can witness this, whose
eye is outward* looking at a Redeemer a far off. Morning watch p. 21. And
conclude to themselves a belief in Christ, and apply his promises, what he did
for them in the body, that suffered without the gates of Jerusalem; and by his
death and offering all things is accomplished for them, and no sin shall be
imputed to them though they live in it (that is, are not Quakers*) and through
his Mediation and Intercession for them, as ^e is at the right hand of God at a
distance from them* they bele^ve* that they have access to God, and are
accepted of him, and yet they neither know God, nor Christ, nor the place,
where they sa^ he sits at the right hand of God; and being in their mind
persuaded that Christ has satisfied, and has reconciled them to God, though
they be yet in their sins (that is, not, Quakers.) This evidenceth what
account they make of a Christ without, and of his Righteousness. (2. What does
their common taking of a Spiritual body and blood, which Christ had, and which
came down from heaven, mean? Do they mean by the blood of Christ, the blood
that came from that man, that died a Jerusalem, as a sacrifice for sin? No,
they cannot mean that, for that is but outward blood, that cannot cleanse the
conscience: This body was but his Temple or Vessel, and not his body, which
went to heaven: And this it seems they have learned from Mahomet, who
speaks of Christ, in his Alcoran not much unlike to this Azoar XI. what mean
they by that Spiritual body, whereof that blood was a part, which Christ
brought with him from heaven, and which dwelt for a while, in the man Jesus,
who died at Jerusalem? Can such as talk thus be orthodox in this matter? Do they
not mean by the blood, through which Justification and purifying comes, the
blood of that spiritual body, which Christ brought from heaven with him, and
which is in every Quaker, as really, as in Mary^s Son? Do they mean by the body
of Christ, that bo^y, which was crucified at Jerusalem? Or not rather the
thing, which they call a Spiritual body, which tabernackled in the body of
Jesus, the Son of Mary, and which is as well in them, as it was in him? And is
not this to deny the life and death of Christ, without us, and Justification
thereby? Do they mean by Christ, by whom we are justified and saved, God-man,
or a real man, that was born of Mary, assumed into the subsistence of the
Godhead? Or any thing created, and that was visible to the bodily eye; or any
thing, but that which is within themselves? What else means that expression
of Penningtons quaest p 20. For that which he (that is Christ) took upon him,
was our garment -- but he is of an heavenly nature, and his flesh and blood and
bones are of his nature. And p. 33. This we certainly know, and can never call
the bodily garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the body. Do
they not hereby deny the man Christ Jesus, and any interest in him, who was of
the seed of Abraham, and had our nature, and is man still in glory? Of all this
we need doubt no more now, since G. Keith has so fully unvailed this mystery,
in his late book, now come to hand, wherein, instead of confuting that
Postcript to Mr Rutherfoords letters, which he pretended, he has more then
sufficiently confirm^d the same, as may be shown, in due time. (3.) Do they not
deny that Christ, who came in the fullness of time, according to the Prophecies
and promises, and took on our nature, and suffered therein; and renunce all
benefit thereby, when they say, that Christ's nature is not humane, and talk
of his being now manifested in the flesh, that is, in them, who are Quakers.
See Fox's mystery, etc. p. 71. what else can be the import of their denying a
Christ without, and calling it a carnal Christ; but a plain denying of him,
who was touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and was in all points
tempted, like as we are, yet without sin? (4.) When they ascribe salvation to a
Christ within, do they not deny the Christ without? Fox in his great mystery p
8. And no one knows salvation, but who knows thi^ Christ in you, who is the
Salvation; and where he is within, there is salvation. Fox the younger p.
49.50.54. And you, whom the power of the prince of the air has led out of me,
you scorn me, the light in you. -- They have disobeyed it and called it a
natural light; and ye have said, that I the light am not able to save those
that believe in me. -- That if you would believe, and wait in me the light -- I
will purg out all your iniquities, and forgive all your trespasses, and I will
change your nature, and make you new Creatures* if ye will hearken to me, and
obey the light in you. Smith Cat. etc. p. 64.71. And this (Christ in us) is he
in whom our salvation stands, as the mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus -- and we also know and believe, that he is the same Christ in us,
which in dispensations past did humble himself to the cross. Mason's loving
Invit. p. 5. If ever man be justified by his maker, then by believing in God's
Covenant of light, which in the conscience bears its testimony against all
iniquity -- then let me ^or ever be condemned from the presence of the
righteous God. Smith prim. p. 9. tells us expressly, tha^ the Christ without and
the Christ within have no more followship together than the East has with
West: And therefore the asserting of the one must be a quite destroying of the
other. Hear once more the Morning watch p. 41. And as you give up to that
measure of light in your own consciences, and wait to be guided by it and
exercised in it, you will know Christ revealed within you, whom you are looking
^or without you, and put his day far off from you and so live in want of him,
and know not how to come to him, nor the place where to find him; but live in
the dreamings and night visions, and have a talk of him, and what he has done
for you, and so spend your precious time in slumbering and dreaming etc. (5)
What means that of Ed. Buroughs p 31. (cited by Mr Hicks in his 2. Dial.
Page 21.22.) Silence flesh, would thou, who art an enemy to God, know how we
are reconciled to God, and by what obedience? Own the light in thy conscience,
and be obedient to that, then thou shall know by what obedience we are
r^conciled to God, etc. is this to speak soundly of the Righteousness of
Christ? (6.) What mean they by Christ's sufferings still, and by satisfaction
made by Christ's sufferings in his saints? Buroughs p. 31. says, Thou
blasphemer ask thou know not what: is not christ the same as ever? And is
not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory wherever? We need add no more, there
being enough here to discover their renunceing of the sufferings and death of
Christ, who died at Jerusalem, as being any way satisfactory to the justice of
God or sins:

6. He addeeh, H^nce again, because we say to them, when they clatter and
determine of the resurrection, that it were more necessary for them to know the
righteous one, whom they have killed in themselves, to be arisen, that they may
be made partakers of the first resurrection; and that, if that be, they will be
more able to judge of the second; they say, we deny the resurrection of the
body. Answ. What unsavory language is that, clattering about a resurrection?
Is this spoken like a Ch^istian? Is the Resurrection such an inconsiderable
thing with him? Or is it a mere problem, or a thing that shall never be? Next,
see we not here, in his own words, a confirmation of what we were last saying,
to wit, that the Quakers deny a Christ without, dying and riseing; and all
advantage for us thereby? What means he by the killing of the just one within
us, and the riseing again of that just one? Is that the just one crucified at
Jerusalem, whereof Peter speaks Act. 3:14. And Stephen speaks, Act. 7 52.
and Ananias Act. 22:14? And if not, to what else te^deth this, but to banish
away the very historical faith of that? But now, as to the Resurrection, if he
believe any such thing, how comes it that in all his great book, he has made
no mention thereof? Is it no article of our faith? Or is it a whimsey, and a
fictitious notion? Then let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die and no
matter, whether we be Quakers or Christians. Again, seeing he made no mention
of h^s fundamental article in his whole book; who did he not, upon this
occasion, speak alittle to it, to manifest his r^al belief of it? And as to
others of the Quakers, they give, at best, a most instinct sound, in this
point, wherein they are worse then some heathen philosophers, as may be seen in
Mr Hicks 1. Dial. Page 57. etc. But Turn^r a Quaker is more positive against
it, disproving it by these arguments. If the bodies of men rise again, then
there is a pre-eminence in the bodies of Men, above the bodies of Beasts, which
is to give Solomon the lie, Eccles. 3:19. Again, If the bodies of men should
rise again, this is to give Job the lie, who says, The eyes that see me shall
see me no more. Job 7:8. And 3. That flesh and blood shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. The same Mr Hicks, in his Quakers appeal answered p. 21.
shows, how Will. Pen in several of his books denies the resurrection,
saying, Such a resurrection is inconsistent with Scripture, reason and the
belief of all men right in their wits: And again, for shame let us never make
so much stir against the doctrine of Transubstantiation: For the absurdity of
that is rather outdone than equaled, by this carnal resurrection; And again,
he calls it a barbarous conceit. Mr Faldo in his book against them Chap. 17.
clears how they speak of a Resurrection, and means thereby only
Regeneration: and shows, how they shift the giving of any distinct and
positive answer thereanent: All which is enough to show, that it is no calumny
to say, they deny the resurrection of the body. Add that passage of W. Pen in
his book against Mr Faldo, cited in his answer Page 88. Either the
resurrection of the body must be without the matter, or it must not: If it must,
then it is not that same numerical body; and so their proper and strick taking
of the word Resurrection, they must let go -- if it must not be without the
same gross matter it died with, then I affirm it cannot be incorruptible,
because it will carry with it that which will render it corruptible ad
infinitum. -- I say, we cannot see, how that which is of the dust should be
eternal, whilst that from whence it came is, by nature, but temporal; and that
which is yet most of all irreconcilable with Scripture and right reason is,
that the loss and change of nature from corruptible to incorruptible, natural
to spiritual, should not make it another body.

7. Yet more he says, Hence finally, because, when we hear them speak
inadvertently of heaven, hell, and the last judgment, we exhort them to come
out of that infernal condition, in which they stand, and come unto and believe
the judgment of truth within their own hearts, and follow the light, that in
this life they may sit in celestial places, which are in Christ Jesus; they
maliciously say, that we deny all heaven and hell, but that which is in us; and
that we deny the last and general judgment. Answ. But if they do account this a
calumny, why do they not blame themselves, for not being more plain and
distinct in these necessary and fundamental points? Why does not this Man, in
his great book, which he styles an Apology of the Christian Religion, deliver
in plain terms his judgment hereof? Mr Faldo tells us in his key, that he
could never hear or read them mention any other heaven to be enjoyed by them,
as distinct persons, but what they have within them, in this world: And by hell
he tells us, they mean the present torment and loss within: And that by their
Trembling and Quaking, they mean the horror and consternation they are under,
from (as they say) the wrath of God, while the flesh is judged, and they are in
the hell of condemnation (and he can find no other hell, that they hold:) And
this trembling and quaking, they say, is such as Moses and other Prophets were
seized with, at the appearance of God. And by the State of glory he tells us,
they mean, the state of peace and joy, resulting from the witness of the light
within, in the life: And that by the judgment of the great day, they mean, sin
being judged in the conscience by the light within, in this life: And it is
considerable, that when Mr Faldo had said; let them profess, that they believe
a happiness, to be enjoyed by Men and Women, after their bodies be rotted to
dust, distinct from the being of God, or that which they had not a thousand
years before they were born, i. e. to be in God (from whom, as of his being,
they say, the soul came) and it will be news to me, and all that are acquanted
with them: Yet Will. Pen in his answer will not be plain to declare their
meaning. What can this silence import else, than that they are guilty in this
matter? And as for the last judgment, how can they believe it, when they deny
Christ's second coming visibly and personally? so does Whitehead: see Mr Hicks
in his 2. Dial. p. 43. and 75.76.

8. Notwithstanding of all this, this bold man dar say, that God knows, all
these calumnies are ^alsly and undeservedly cast upon them: And yet they
neither can, will, nor dar vindicat themselves. What follows being but a mere
commendation of themselves, which we have heard so often, I think it not worth
the translating, let be answering. And for his confidence of their prospering
still, adding that, So has the mouth of the Lord spoken, I account it one of
his many groundless assertions, and evidences of his conceit and vanity; and a
further demonstration of his being under the power of a strong delusion. And
though they should for a time prosper, as a plague unto a secure and formal
generation; it shall be no convincing argument to us of any divine approbation,
as long as we know, what success for so many ages, Antichrist has had* and
also the abomination of Mahomet, with which their delusions have greater
affinity, than with true Christianity; not to mention other particular errors,
such as Arianisme, Pelagianisme and others, which have, for a considerable
time, proven a sharp exercise unto the Church of Christ. We will wait for the
day, wherein light shall break up, that shall for ever shame the hellish
dakness of Quakerisme, or Neopaganisme, out of the Church. Even so come Lord
Jesus, AMEN.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader.
IF I could weep out this Postscript, or write it with tears of blood, I am
convinced it would be short of that just signification of deep sorrow; which I
judge duty; and wherewith the souls of all the lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity, should be swelled, in this day, even to an overflowing, while
their ears are filled and made to tingle with the din of that doctrine of
Devils droping from the ^ongues, and falling from the pens of Satan's Ministers
and Amanuenses: Neither falls it under any debat with me, if thou have any love
to the precious souls of men, whether thou will look upon the persons of these
principles, and persuasion, as the most compassion-moveing and heart-melting
object, that ever was seen or heard of amongst any sort of men, since God made
man upon the earth, or the Devil enticed and prevailed with men, to murder
their own soul by an insurrection against God, and pure opposition to his
Christ: Or if thou have any love to him, who loved, and so loved poor sinners,
as he gave himself for them; (and if any man love him not, the Anathema
Maranatha, which these desperate dreamers cannot escape, must fall upon him)
thou can not hear, read or consider what horrid? What hell-hatched, bold*
blasphemies this blake brood belcheth forth against him, without a transport of
horror, and crying out with the Prophet, Oh that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night! Oh that I had in
the wilderness a lodging place of a way-fareing man, that I might live without
the noise of the hellish bellowings, which burst forth at the blake mouths of
these, whose rage against the Savior of sinners, and the alone way of
salvation by him, shows them to be set on fire of hell. And as I am persuaded
if these poor creatures were not smitten with judicial blindness of mind and
heardnesse of heart, they would sooner jump in hell, then so far outdoe Devils
in blaspheming the holy one of God; so I nothing doubt, upon the other hand,
but it would eat the marrow out of all thy mirth, and make thy moisture drop
out at thine eye, to consider that ever the name of Christ, that blessed name,
was called upon a company of poor catives, who, in renuncing him, and riseing
up against him, appear monsters of a sise and shape, of a bulk and bigness,
of a malice and bitterness, beyond any that ever the Devil listed under his
blake banner, or engaged in an opposition against the Savior of sinners: Nay,
as to my self, I must profess, if some of them had not been known before to be
really men, I would suspect them to be true Devils in disguise. But now it must
satisfy us to know them to be men possessed of him. And so our next work is to
think what is duty as to these demoniacks; which needs no long demur; for sure
the first have, as to these poor possessed creatures, is to haste to carry them
on our knees to Jesus Christ, even that Christ whom they b^aspheme, and cry,
have mercy upon them. It is true, they would abhor and hate us the more for
this, and complain that this were to torment them before the time; But that
does the more certainly prove their possession, and makes the thing the more
unquestionably our duty; for hereby its manifest, (yea put out of all doubt by
these abominations, which proceed out of their mouths, and the dawbings of
their blasphemous pens,) that they are under the power of and possessed by the
same Spirit, which cried out of that poor creature, what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth (this is pure and perfect Quakerisme, and the very
Spirit that possesses them, and speaks out of them) or a worse and more
heterodox Devil; (if such a word might be made use of in the case) for they
were in some sort cured, if they were brought the length of that Devils
Confession, Who said, I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God: At least
all that they talk of this holy one of God, and the Testimony that they give
him is upon the same devilish design, that this holy One, the true Jesus, the
Christ of God, may not be believed in, but opposed. Oh that he, who alone can
say the word and do the thing, would once say, hold thy peace and come out of
them! It were no great matter, though they should be torn and thrown in the
middle, if he were driven out of them; for it is rare for Devils to get such a
possession, but when he sees he can hold it no longer, he endeavors to break
down or burn the house, out of which he is driven. And though of all men in
the world there is least hope of them (for their disease lies in blaspheming
the very remedy of sin, and the alone releife of self destroyed sinners;) Yet
because we know not, whether the righteous Lord, for holy ends and just causes,
may not suffer for a season some of the Elect, whom it is impossible finally to
deceive, thus to be possessed; we would set about this work of prayer on their
behalf, yea earnest prayer, adding fasting thereto: for if ever there was a
Devil, of whom it holds true, this sort goes not out but by fasting and
prayer, it holds true as to that Devil, that dw^lls in them, and speaks out of
them. We would essay therefore to strain our own souls, in lifting up a prayer
on their behalf (without offering to limite him) and seek so to save them if
possible with fear, pulling them out of the fire; for they are more them half
in hell already, when they are become dens for such a Devil, as dwells in them,
and drives them. If we hereby obtained no more, yet our love to our blasphemed
Lord Jesus Christ, and to these perishing souls, who, through Satan's malice and
their own madness, are thus acted, would be manifested; and our prayer, if it
did not prevail as to them, would return into our own bosom. And besides,
this migh be the reward of serious wrestling with God on this behalf, that
that Devil, who drives them at this rate of opposition to his Christ, should be
seen to be the Devil, and so the snare would be broken, and the elect preserved
from falling in it, and the folly of these reprobats concerning the faith,
these Ianneses and Iambreses, who resist the truth, and withstand a greater
then Moses, might be made so manifest to all men, as they should proceed no
further.

Secondly, I judge this monstrous appearance of men, so madded against Christ,
and the alone way of salvation by him, calls aloud to all, upon whom the blessed
name of Christ is called, to fall a weeping and pouring out their hearts before
him, in the remembrance of the procuring cause, whereby the just and holy Lord
has been provoked to let loose such a Spirit, and leave so many souls to be
seized upon by him, as we see (O sad sight!) are become a prey to him in this
generation, and are taken (and held by the cords of their own consent) captives
of him at his will. Alas! we may read, in this allaruming and wrath-speaking
dispensation, the high and hot displeasure of God at our sin, in not prizeing
this glorious Gospel of the Grace of God, wherein life and immortality is
brought to light; men's not truthing it in love, or receiving the love of the
truth; men's pleasing themselves with names, and pursuing of notions, while
Christ was not received to dwell in the heart by faith; their not departing
from iniquity, on whom the name of Christ was called, and who seemed to call
on his name, has been the bitter root springing up in these spruts of hell,
whereby the Church is this day troubled, and so many are defiled with this
leprosy and soul-destroying contagion. This, this is that root, which has
brought forth these cursed fruits; Because after all the pains he had been at,
to reform his Church, and setle pure ordinances amongst us; Yet our scum
remained in us, and there were so few who made it their work, to walk worthy
of the Lord to all pleasing, and to render unto him according to the benefit
received; therefore he suffered Abaddon to plant that vine of Sodom, within the
pale of his visible Church, and in that vineyard, on which he had taken so much
pains; because it brought not forth fruit unto him, by whom it was dressed, and
it has been most fertile in bringing forth these grapes of gall and bitter
clusters; and he has conduced many trafficquers for him (which he could not
have found without the pale of the visible Church; nay which he could not have
found in any Church, but in a Church, on which so much pains had been taken,
and wherein ordinances had been settled in such purity) to tread these grapes
of gall, and vend this wine to poor souls, which is the poison of Dragons, and
the cruel venom of Aspes; and they are hell-busie, for he must run whom such a
Devil drives, though it be down a steep place, as is manifest in this Barclay,
and his accomplices, who are long breathed in compassing sea and land, to
proselyt poor souls, and poison them beyond the power of an Antidot; for then
mercy it self is engaged to destroy them, by their trampleing under foot that
blood of the Covenant, whereby the blessed surtie was sanctified, or whereby he
sanctified, seperat, and set himself a part for their sakes, for whom he became
a propitiation; I say, we are to remember the peccant and procureing cause of
all this. Alas! how may many remember their laughing, at the first appearance
of this prodigy, and making light of the matter, with shame and confusion of
face? How may they, under the conviction of their guilt in this matter, go
groaning to their graves? O will it not be an indelible mark of infamy, and
an evidence that we knew not the signs of the times, and what they called us
to do? Will it not be a reproach never to be rolled away from this generation,
that one day, upon the Devils appearance in this shape, to destroy the all of
Christianity at once, was not set apart in all the Churches of Brittan and
Ireland, to weep before the Lord; Yea day after day by common consent? Shall
the posterity hear that this was not done, and yet hear that we were alive
when cursed Naylour, (whose name and notions will be for a curse to all that
love the name of our Lord Jesus Christ for ever,) appeared upon the stage?
Shall it be recorded how in his Bristol-road, and what followed upon it, he
outdid the very Devil; and also hear, that what was acted against Christ the
Lord, did not put us all to cry upon our knees and weep day and night before
him, (and here by the way give me leave to insert a Parenthesis, this unhappie
Author R. Barclay boasts in his Universal love, that they have not the name of
any particular person called upon them, as other sects (so he calls them) have:
I shall not here tell him what of untruth is in this vain boast, for whose name
is called upon the Antinomians, etc. nor shall I suggest the difficulty a
person of as happy an ingine and invention, as he tells us he is, would have
found, if he had set himself to essay the designeing of them by a particular
name; seeing they have monpolized, and soudred into one mass, all the most
damnable heresies ever came out of hell; and so in their Camp are congregat and
mustered against Christ all particular heresies, whereby under several Leaders
the Savior has been opposed from the beginning. But this I Will say and
confes^e unto him, there was a wrong done them, that they were not called
Naylorists; i. e. the most perfect audacious opposers of Christ, that ever the
Devil brought on the stage; and that their doctrine, instead of Quakerisme, was
not called Naylorisme, i. e. the purest blasphemy against Christ, that ever
any of Abbadon's brood belched forth: And therefore hereafter I shall, since
they are his very spawn, and as like him as if he had spitted them out of his
mouth, do them that piece of justice, as to design them Naylorists, i. e.
Blasphemers of Christ; for the Devil should have his due) may not the very caul
of our heart be rent in this reflection? Gracious Hezekiahs zeal (and I dar say
upon a less clamant emergent, and a less crimson blasphemy) will rise up in
judgment against the luke warmness of this generation: and our liveing in
such a day, and not lamenting before the Lord, will witness that we had
outlived our zeal, and be too plain a proof that our holy fire was gone out,
since our heart did not boil over at our eye, on the seeing and hearing of
such a thing. Oh if at last we would awake and weep, that we had been a sleep,
while Satan was so busy in sowing these tares!

Thirdly, We would labor each of us to have our souls deeply impressed with
the preciousnesse of Christ, and the absolut necessity of making use of him
for salvation; for the Devils great and manifest design is by these his
Trustees and Traffickers, to dispute men and debauch their spirits, into a
contempt of the precious Savior, and that great salvation, which is purchased
by his death; and never since he began has he made use of a mean, which has
so clear and close a connection with that end. Now Christ can be precious to
none, he can be prized by none, who is not vile in his own eyes: he who lives
not within sight of his own loathsome leprosy, and who is a stranger to the
plague of his own heart, will reject the counsel of God against himself, and
despise the great salvation. And it is clear beyond debate, that the Devil, do
his best, can never proselyt any man into this delusion and damnable haeresie
of Naylorisme, (ali^s Quakerisme) till, as the God of this world, he have first
perfectly blinded their minds, that he may harden their hearts, into a final
rejection of the true Christ, the Savior, as the alone and only way to be
clothed with a suffic^ent righteousness, and cleansed from all that
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, whereby they are defiled; and from which
they can only be cleansed by that blood, which these blasphemers tred under
foot. Let every one therefore, who would keep himself in the love of God and of
Christ, keep his finger upon his sore, that his eye may be keept ^^xed upon the
remedy; for if the Devil get not his finger into a man's eye, and blind fold
him as to the uptakings of his own misery and the precious remedy, he will
never turn him into a Naylorist, that he may turn and tumble him into hell
with his own c^nsent. Study thy self, till what thou see force thee to say, I
am the chief of all sinners; and then all that the Devil can say to the
contrare, will never put thee from thinking it is a saying faithful, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ came in the world to save sinners. Growing in
this grace of the right knowledge of a man's self, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
is the only expedient to defeat the design, he drives by these drivers, and
to be preserved from being led away with the error of these wicked.

Fourthly, Study to know the great principles of the Oracles of God, and to
have these impressed upon thy soul; that so, when assaulted by Satan, thou
may hold fast that truth, which can only make thee free: And let the
fallings away of others make thee the more closely cleave to that blessed Guide,
who leads in all truth. In a word. Let each one be busy in studying the word
of God, and his own heart; and be much in holding up his heart to him, who
writs the Law in it, that so his heart may become the Epistle of Christ; and
then he is guarded against taking on blasphemous and cursed Naylors blake
mark. Let the sad sight of that swarm of Apostats put thee to study to know
the truth in its power and sweetness: And then, when by the fallings away of
others, Christ is saying unto thee, will thou also leave me; thou will answer,
with that man, whither shall I go from thee, for thou have the words of eternal
life? This will blessedly arrest the soul to an abode with him, when others
will be carried away, and never be seen any more to walk in Christ's company.

Now to make thee give thy self in some seriousness to study the precious
Truths of God, and to know him, whom to know is life eternal; thou may
observe (and be provoked to that exercise by thy observation) what the Devil,
who is still going about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, is a
doing, and what he is thereby designing: When he had for a long time bawled and
blasphemed in not our nonsense, lest his trade should decay, and the market of
these traffickers for the souls of men (for the precious souls of men are the
commodity they deal in) should miss their mark, to the end that he may make
merchandise still of such, with feigned and fair words, he prompts some to
polish as well as they can with their parts and pen these blasphemies, and give
them some color; for which service, his Apostle, the Author of the Theses and
Apology, is shaped and set apart, as the sharpest and neatest pen.

I shall not here, as I intended, digress into observations upon the address
of this book, wherein he Chartals all the learned men in the world; since it
can escape no man's observation, who reads his book with judgment, and compares
it with the address, that this novice, being lifted up with pride, is fallen
into the condemnation of the Devil. Neither shall I take upon me to hint any
thing, as to the bulk of the abominations, wrapped up in his voluminous fardell
of blasphemy (that being so excellently handled by what thou have read in this
exquisitly clear Examen:) Only, as it seems, that as the Devil thought to
serve himself by a Barclaij Argenis, the scope whereof was to teach how
effectually to destroy Protestant Religion, and swallow up the Truth in the Sea
and sinck of Romes abominations; so we have a second Barclaij Argenis, the
scope of which is, under sceptick and introverted notions, and new coined
names, to destroy Christianity, and introduce pure Paganism; and thus with a
confidence peculiar to that party, and like him who prompted him to the
undertaking, he would rant and Romance us into heathenisme.

But since he has taken upon him to give us a Confession of a kind of faith,
(after he and his accomplices have made shipwreck of precious faith, and flout
without fear at the faith of Gods elect) which is a systeme of Paganism; And
since he has published to the world the Naylorists Alcoran, whereby he
intends, as Mahomet's Mufti, to Mustelman the Christian world, and Mancipat us
to the Turks galleys or worse: The Good Lord, to prevent the Devil and this
desperado's design, has found out and fitted for the undertaking amongst the
men, whom of all others he most despises and abhors, the singularly acute,
solidly learned and truly gracious Author, who has in his Masters cause and
strength undertaken the work, and taken this Turk to task, and, in his
convincingly clear examen, so discussed and dissected that carcass and carrion
of all abominations, as by the light of that Spirit of truth, which has led
him in the Examen, he has manifestly discovered Barclay's pretended
Revelations to be the horrid illusions, and hellish suggestions of a Spirit of
a blaker color, then Mahomets pigeon, and himself to be the Devil in Samuels
mantle, perswadeing us by the assistance of his Mephystophilus, instead of
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be found clothed upon with that
rob of his righteousness, that so the shame of our nakedness may not appear,
to put on I know not what, something common to us with heathens, who never
heard of Christ, a Iapan gown; and place ourselves when we have done, in the
expectation of the Turks Paradise, or of none.

When Satan, in pursueance of his project, having gotten possession of this
poor vainling, and swelled him with the conceit of that felicity of
understanding, whereof he boasts in his Universal love. (But more truly a
plain discovery of an Universal hatred to the Gospel of the Grace of God) he
puts him on, having puffed him up, to publish to the world, what he had
poisoned the poor creatures spirit with, thereby to leaven the spirits of men
with this hell-hatched heresy. And now this parturient mountain, having with a
great stridor and Nayloristick noise, to the end he may be heard in all Europe,
peched out this Pagan mouse: Reader, there is no jest here. Alas! there is no
matter of jest, when the Devil is in so nettle earnest to destroy all, and
makes use of this poor creature for that end; I only make use of a known
Proverb, commonly made use of, in the like case) he thinks by the felicity of
his ingine, he is able so to pourtrey and paint this Pagan birth, as to make
poor simple and shallow us, short of his searching and soaring wit, believe it
is an Angel; and he endeavors to cloth this brat of his own deluded brain in
such a buske, as will make every one, who sees its face, fond of it, and fall
in love with its beauty. But he is mistaken; for so long as the light of this
glorious Gospel does shine amongst us, every one that is led by that true light
will perceive by the face, feature and foaming of this brate, he has brought
forth, that it is hellborne, and that it is a Demon incubus, who has begotten
it, to which the Pagan Parent has prostitute his darkened understanding. Nay I
suppose, and not without ground, that if the Devil, who drove the Author on,
and was at the dictating of these dreams, had his Doctors Dictats again in
his hand, he would bury or burn them, ere he subjected them to such an Examen,
whereby the Authors Hell-Craft, or to please the Naylorist, in speaking in
their own dialect, witchcraft, is so manifestly detected, as Satan, who set him
on, missed his mark in driveing his deluded Trustee to belch forth what was so
blake; as now, after the discovery made by this Examen, it passes the power
of his blake art, to give it any color, besides his own who is its true Father.
Moreover, I doubt not to say, if the Author of these Theses and Apology be not
brought to see and acknowledge the blakenesse and abominablnesse of his Errors,
by the shineing light and sharpness of this Examen, it is not because there
is not a sufficiency of Scripture light, in what is by the judicious Author
adduced; but because Satan has engaged the Author of that Apology in an
opposition to the truth, beyond a retreat; and then what might otherwise prove
a remedy, must fret the disease, and fire him into a heat of hellish
indignation, to see his desperate design so far defeat, as the light which he
intended to darken and extinguish, shines more brightlie, after the smoke of
the pit which came out of his mouth is blown away, and the truth in its radiant
beauty and brightness is the more cleared up, that he essayed to overcloud it.

But that I may not exceed the length and limits of a Postscript, let me desire
these things of every Professor of the name of Christ shortly; First, seriously
to peruse and ponder this Examen, for thy own establishment in the truth: But
more particularly (since the arrogant, here answered, did address himself to
Clergiemen as he calls them and students,) let me beseech and obtest both
Ministers and Students of Divinity to a serious perusal and pondering of this
piece, not only as the most full, clear and satisfying confutation of the
hellblake abominations of that prating and perverse gang of enemies to Christ,
that has, si^e the dismal appearance of that prodigious party, come from any
pen (for though I do not design to derogat from the due praise of those worthy
servants of Christ, who have stood up for truth, and withstood these
blasphemers of Christ, for which their name shall be favourie, and their praise
in the Church, yet none of them had a complete systeme of all their wicked
dreams to answer, till the Author of these Thesis and Apology undertook to
give it us* and now it is answered.) But also because the party here dealt
with having first swallowed down, and then vomit up what ever is mortal to the
immortal soul amongst other Adversaries to Christ, beside these dottages
peculiar to themselves, here thou have a most learned and elaborat refutation
of all these now gross and grassant errors, whereby the souls of men are in
hazard to be murdered, and the truth corrupted by these perverters of the
Gospel of Christ; such as Arminianisme and Socinianisme, etc. And I am sure, by
the diligent perusal of what is here brought to thy hand, and the blessing of
God upon thy pains, thou may not only be singularly edified, established
and built up in the most holy faith, but put in case to speak with all the
enemies of the Grace of God in the gate; and if this may excite thee, I
profess that by the reading hereof I have found my self confirmed in the
truth, and much established in that doctrine, which is according to godliness.
And forget not to bless the Lord for his goodness to his Church, in
preserving beyond expectation the Authors life, and for enabling him and
holding his hand, as in all the several encounters he has had, with the
Adversaries to the truth, so in a remarkable manner and measure in this
rancountre with the Naylorists Goliath, he has been helped to dis^over these
depths of Satan, which are in their doctrine; so that this Naylorist may well
hereafter sprawl and spurn, but a solid reply is beyond the felicity of his
understanding. And every on will judge, he has but little reason to boast of
that felicity, if he be so unhappily dull, as not to understand this. But if
he intend a reply he had better cause some bold bawler undertake it, and
instead of all other refutation, tell the learned and judicious Author, that he
is in the Imagination and Witchcraft, and this will be the short cut: And if he
will take my advice, he will find it the saifest course: only let him
remember that this course will be a confession in obliquo, that Goliah's head
is cut off, and now the whole host of these uncircumcised Philistims must flee
from the face and force of a little Presbyterian David.

But to such as are not able to follow and fathom the Authors reach, or have
not so much time as thoroughly to peruse this large examen (though I would have
every one to have it by him, that he might, in their perversions of the
Scripture, have recourse to it for a help to be cleared) I would besides other
pieces particularly recommend a little piece lately published, called a short
survey of Quakerisme, wherein the Author has solidly and clearly said much in
little, for guarding the people of the Lord against the contagion of these
soul-murthering heresies. But above all (and with this I close all) that thou
may be able to stand, when so many, once looked upon as persons of some
understanding, have fallen, gird thy loins about with the truth of the
Scriptures, O prize the word of God, that blessed word, which these men
contradict and contemn, as if they would be avenged upon the Scriptures,
First, for foretelling that such a race of Runagadoes from the truth would
arise; whereby we are confirmed, that they are the word of the living God;
Secondly because of their passing sentence upon them, when arisen, as seducers,
and condemning their sentiments as the doctrines of Devils; Thirdly, because
they most peremptorily inhibite us under the pain of his displeasure, who has
given us these Scriptures for our rule, to converse with such deceivers, or
receive the^ into our houses; and charge all, who would not fall into the same
snare, and so bring sore and swift damnation on themselves, to stand aloof from
the men of these abominable and damnable heresies. And you are the rather to
observe and do this, that you find Satan rages and goes mad, if this be
urged; and no wonder, since he knows well what he has gained by the contrary
practice, and is very sure that he, who breaks so clear a command, has
wrested himself out of the hand of his guide; an^ so has put himself out of
case to pray or hope for leading, which Satan knowing and observing, way-layes
him, when he has him in his own Synagogue, or conversing unnecessarily with
his domestics, and thinks himself sure of him: And Alas! the success often
answers his expectation. And therefore he who put that deluded soul to draw up
and de^ile paper with this systeme, and compound of all abominations, does
prompt him in the next place to pen and publish a piece, which he calls
Universal love, just of a piece and complexion with cursed Naylor's love to the
lost (for the men are of the same core and kidney, composed of hatred to the
Gospel; so that if you receive their expressions of love to the lost, you are
lost) however this is a pretty page and pimp to his Apology, and wears its
livery, and is calculat exactly for the design of Apollyon. O so kind as they
will appear! as kind as the cruel spider to the flee, who, while it seems to
embrace and kiss it, kills it with poison. Let them be but warmely welcomed,
and have access to whisper you in the ear, and drop-in their poison at that
passage, it will quickly reach your soul, and flee up into your head, and so
distract you with themselves, into a pure and perfect hatred of the way of
Salvation; but I must tell you, he, who would not have the Devil run away with
him to hell, should not throw himself in his embraces, or suffer that evil one,
that liar and murderer to come so near him as to touch him.

Much about the same time also (at least much about the same time both came to
my hand) his brother in iniquity George Keith, in answer (as he calls it) to a
Postscript to Mr Rutherfoords letters, written on purpose to dissuade all the
Lovers of Jesus Christ to converse with these his stated enemies, flies
furiously into the face of that Author; and in his furious transport foams out
in that piece his own shame. Concerning which at present I have only this to
say to the Reader, that he may expect ere long to have G. Keiths notions
examined by the same person, who has answered his brothers Apology: and for
what relates more particularly to the Postscript it self, against which he
rages, he may expect to have it considered by the Author of the Postscript.
But not to detain thee longer, consider ^ beseech thee, and comply with that
serious and seasonable exhortation given by this same Author, in the preface to
this sharp discovery an^ solid confutation of these damnable doctrines. If
not, I must tell thee, this piece shall rise up in judgment against all, who
over the belly of so clear a discovery of the damnablenesse of these delusions
and dreams, will without fear expose themselves to the hazard of being
bewitched by the Seducers. But I hope better things of thee, though I thus
speak, and so wishing thy soul prosperity and establishment in the truth, I
bid thee fareweel; and am

Thy servant for Christ, and souls well wisher. R. M. C.

AN INDEX OF PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE, Perverted and abused by the Quaker, and
here vindicated, and explained.
Chap. Verse. Page
GENESIS
Chap. Verse.1; 2. Page.26 Chap. Verse.2; 17. Page.98 Chap. Verse.4; 6, 7. Page.221
Chap. Verse.5, 1, 3. Page.131 Chap. Verse.6; 5. Page.101, 150. Chap. Verse.9 Page.345
Chap. Verse.8; 21. Page.101, 130 Chap. Verse.17; 14. Page.132
EXODUS
Chap. Verse.34; 6. Page.2^2
NVMB.
Chap. Verse.11; 25, 29. Page.27 Chap. Verse.14; 18. Page.222
DEVT.
Chap. Verse.4; 4. Page.74, 75 Chap. Verse.^1; 32. Page.74, 75 Chap. Verse.13; 1.
etc. Page.509 Chap. Verse.17; 2. etc. Page.509
1 KING.
Chap. Verse.8; 16. Page.347
NEHEM.
Chap. Verse.9; 30. Page.27
ESTER.
Chap. Verse.3; 2. Page.542
JOB
Chap. Verse.1; 1. Page.345 Chap. Verse.2; 13. Page.429 Chap. Verse.14:4. Page.130
Chap. Verse.15; 14. Page.131
PSALM.
Chap. Verse.25; 3. Page.43, 421 Chap. Verse.27; 24. Page.420 Chap. Verse.37; 7, 34.
Page.420 Chap. Verse.51; 5. Page.126 Chap. Verse.13. Page.27 Chap. Verse.69; 6.
Page.421 Chap. Verse.110; 3. Page.508 Chap. Verse.139; 7. Page.27
PROVE.
Chap. Verse.8; 24. Page.225 Chap. Verse.2; 22. Page.420 Chap. Verse.28:1. Page.459
Chap. Verse.30; 5, 6. Page.74, 75
ECCLES.
Chap. Verse.7; 20. Page.347
ESAI.
Chap. Verse.2; 4. Page.517 Chap. Verse.5; 1, 2, 3. etc. Page.224 Chap. Verse.8; 20.
Page.7^ Chap. Verse.30; 18. Page.421 Chap. Verse. 40.31. Page.421 Chap. Verse.42; 23.
Page.421 Chap. Verse.45; 23. Page.531 Chap. Verse.48; 16. Page.27 Chap. Verse.49; 6.
Page.285 Chap. Verse.53, 4. Page.364 Chap. Verse.59; 2. Page.308, ^38 Chap. Verse.21.
Page.44 Chap. Verse.65; 16. Page.530, 531 Chap. Verse.25. Page.518
IEREM.
Chap. Verse.1^; 16. Page.529 Chap. Verse.17; 9. Page.101 Chap. Verse.18; 9, 10.
Page.225 Chap. Verse.23; 29. Page.266 Chap. Verse.31; 33. Page.44 Chap. Verse.34.
Page.45 Chap. Verse.38.39, 40. Page.531
LAM.
Chap. Verse.5; 25. Page.421
EZEKIEL.
Chap. Verse.14; 2. Page.429 Chap. Verse.^6; 6. Page.304 Chap. Verse.28; 20. Page.119
Chap. Verse.20; 3. Page.429 Chap. Verse.33, 11. Page.151 Chap. Verse.36; 25. Page.531
HOS.
Chap. Verse.12; 6. Page.421
AMOS.
Chap. Verse.2; 12. Page.245
MICAH.
Chap. Verse.4; 3. Page.517 Chap. Verse.6; 8. Page.262
ZACH.
Chap. Verse.3; 8. Page.471 Chap. Verse.4; 6. Page.508
MAT.
Chap. Verse.3; 11. Page.471 Chap. Verse.5; 2^. Page.519 Chap. Verse.34 -- 37,
Page.523, 524 Chap. Verse.38. etc. Page.515, 516 Chap. Verse.48. Page.344 Chap.
Verse.7; 21. Page.344 Chap. Verse.8; 5 Page.520 Chap. Verse.^0; 5, 6. Page.380 Chap.
Verse.8. Page.407 Chap. Verse.10. Page.405 Chap. Verse.20. Page.44^ Chap. Verse.23; 3.
etc. Page.258 Chap. Verse.18, 19. Page.226, 227 Chap. Verse.24, etc. Page.509 Chap.
Verse.18; 32, 33, 34. Page.225 Chap. Verse.21; 33. Page.224 Chap. Verse.23; 22.
Page.625 Chap. Verse.37. Page.22^ Chap. Verse.24; 42. Page.421, 457 Chap. Verse.^^;
13. Page.421 Chap. Verse.26; 41. Page.421, 422 Chap. Verse.28; 19. Page.477
MARK.
Chap. Verse.4; 1. etc. Page.258 Chap. Verse.7; 21. Page.320 Chap. Verse.12; 1.
Page.224 Chap. Verse.13; 11. Page.445 Chap. Verse.33. etc. Page.421, 424, 457 Chap.
Verse.14; 38. Page.457 Chap. Verse.16; 15. Page.195
LVK.
Chap. Verse.1; 3. Page.539 Chap. Verse.6. Page.346 Chap. Verse.2; 10. Page.195 Chap.
Verse.3; 14. Page.519 Chap. Verse.8; 5. etc. Page.258 Chap. Verse.9; 55. Page.508
Chap. Verse.10; 17. Page.405 Chap. Verse.11; 4. Page.349 Chap. Verse.12; 12. Page.445
Chap. Verse.13; 34. Page.225 Chap. Verse.17; 10. Page.320 Chap. Verse.20, 21.
Page.279 Chap. Verse.19; 41, 42. Page.217, 225 Chap. Verse.20, 9. Page.224 Chap.
Verse.21; 26. Page.424 Chap. Verse.36. Page.421, 457 Chap. Verse.22; 36. Page.520
IOH.
Chap. Verse.1; 4. Page.252 Chap. Verse.5. Page.253 Chap. Verse.7. Page.252 Chap.
Verse.9. Page.251, 252, 254 Chap. Verse.3; 3. Page.277 Chap. Verse.5, 6. Page.131,
132 Chap. Verse.16. Page.204, 205 Chap. Verse.17. Page.206 Chap. Verse.30. Page.474
Chap. Verse.4; 23.24. Page.426 Chap. Verse.5; 39. Page.71 Chap. Verse.10; 1. Page.373
Chap. Verse.12; 36. Page.257 Chap. Verse.47. Page.206 Chap. Verse.13; 3, 4, 13 --
15. Page.495 Chap. Verse.17. Page.320, 344 Chap. Verse.18; 36. Page.518
ACT.
Chap. Verse.1; 4. Page.421 Chap. Verse.2; 1. Page.428 Chap. Verse.4* Page.446 Chap.
Verse.17, Page.399 Chap. Verse.42, 46. Page.497, 499 Chap. Verse.4.12. Page.285 Chap.
Verse.8.22. Page.462 Chap. Verse.10.25. Page.54^ Chap. Verse.34. Page.287 Chap.
Verse.11.6. Page.471 Chap. Verse.13.46. Page.225 Chap. Verse.14.15, 16, 17. Page.107,
108 Chap. Verse.15.29. Page.499 Chap. Verse.17.11 Page.72 Chap. Verse.20 -- 24.
Page.107, 108 Chap. Verse.19.5. Page.479 Chap. Verse.20.7, 11. Page.497 Chap.
Verse.31. Page.421 Chap. Verse.32. Page.69 Chap. Verse.33.35. Page.408 Chap.
Verse.26.25. Page.539
ROMANS
Chap. Verse.1.16. Page.2^9, 260 Chap. Verse.17. Page.260 Chap. Verse.18. Page.262
Chap. Verse.19. Page.26, 107, 108, 217 Chap. Verse.2.4 Page.222 Chap. Verse.13.
Page.280 Chap. Verse.14. Page.288 Chap. Verse.14, 15. Page.102, 103, 107, 108 Chap.
Verse.3.20. Page.289 Chap. Verse.20, 21. Page.321 Chap. Verse.25. Page.308 Chap.
Verse.28. Page.389 Chap. Verse.4.15. Page.119 Chap. Verse.5.10. Page.317 Chap.
Verse.12. etc. Page.123. etc. Chap. Verse.13. Page.119 Chap. Verse.18. Page.284 Chap.
Verse.6.2. Page.348 Chap. Verse.^, 4. Page.473 Chap. Verse.14. Page.69 Chap. Verse.14,
15. etc. Page.344, 345 Chap. Verse.16. Page.339 Chap. Verse.7.14. etc. Page.34^
Chap. Verse.8.2. Page.69 Chap. Verse.4. Page.344 Chap. Verse.26, 27. Page.458 Chap.
Verse.30. Page.315 Chap. Verse.9.11, ^2. etc. Page.138, 141 Chap. Verse.10.18.
Page.226, 227, 248 Chap. Verse.12.6. Page.391 Chap. Verse.19. Page.518 Chap.
Verse.13.3. Page.510 Chap. Verse.14.17. Page.500 Chap. Verse.15.2. Page.82, 83, 85.
1. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse.1.17. Page.4, 6, 476 Chap. Verse. 2.2. Page.446 Chap. Verse.2, 3, 4, 5.
Page.446 Chap. Verse.14. Page.104 -- 106 Chap. Verse.3.7. etc. Page.68 Chap. Verse.6,
11. Page.311, 312, 315 Chap. Verse.7.19. Page.320, 344 Chap. Verse.9.11 -- 14.
Page.403 Chap. Verse.27. Page.358, 359 Chap. Verse.10.16. Page.402 Chap. Verse.17.
Page.489, 493 Chap. Verse.21. Page.493 Chap. Verse.11.5. Page.399 Chap. Verse.26, 27.
Page.491, 493, 498 Chap. Verse.12.3. Page.458 Chap. Verse.7, Page.227, 278 Chap.
Verse.28, 29. Page.391 Chap. Verse.14.15. Page.459 Chap. Verse.20. Page.447 Chap.
Verse.39. Page.393 Chap. Verse.15.22. Page.132 Chap. Verse.16.13. Page.421
II CORIN.
Chap. Verse.1.22. Page.469 Chap. Verse.3.6. Page.372 Chap. Verse.4.10, 11, Page.317
Chap. Verse.5.16, 17. Page.277, 278 Chap. Verse.19, 20. Page.302, 30^ Chap.
Verse.18, 19, 21. Page.310 Chap. Verse.10.4. Page.508, 517 Chap. Verse.13.5. Page.318
Chap. Verse.11. Page.344
GAL.
Chap. Verse.3.1. Page.246 Chap. Verse.27. Page.473 Chap. Verse.28. Page.339 Chap.
Verse.4.19. Page.319 Chap. Verse.5.^9. Page.511 Chap. Verse.6.6 -- 10. Page.402
EPHESIANS.
Chap. Verse.1.14. Page.569 Chap. Verse.2.1, 2, 3. Page.116 Chap. Verse.5. Page.317
Chap. Verse.15. Page.30^ Chap. Verse.4.5. Page.469 Chap. Verse.30. Page.469 Chap.
Verse.5.13 Page.226, 227, 248 Chap. Verse.25 -- 27. Page.441 Chap. Verse.6.11, 12.
Page.517 Chap. Verse.18. Page.458
PHIL.
Chap. Verse.1.6. Page.358 Chap. Verse.^.15. Page.512.513 Chap. Verse.4.7. Page.400
COL.
Chap. Verse.1.23. Page.226, 259, 282 Chap. Verse.27, 28. Page.319 Chap. Verse.^8.
Page.195 Chap. Verse.2.8. Page.385 Chap. Verse.9. Page.238 Chap. Verse.12. Page.473
Chap. Verse.16. Page.500 Chap. Verse.4.2. Page.421 Chap. Verse.12. Page.342
1. THESE.
Chap. Verse.3.13. Page.342.343 Chap. Verse.5.6 Page.421 Chap. Verse.19, 20. Page.397
Chap. Verse.21. Page.512, 513
1 TIMOTHY
Chap. Verse.1.19. Page.3^7, 358 Chap. Verse.2.2, 3. Page.197, 201 Chap. Verse.3.
Page.151 Chap. Verse.3.2. Page.379 Chap. Verse.5 17, 18. Page.405 Chap. Verse.6.7, 8,
9, 10. Page.409 Chap. Verse.20. Page.385
II TIM.
Chap. Verse.3.16, 17 Page.74, 82, 83, 85 Chap. Verse.4.5. Page^21
TIT.
Chap. Verse.^.8. Page.379 Chap. Verse.2, 11. Page.283 Chap. Verse.3.5, 6. Page.299,
318, 322
HEB.
Chap. Verse.2.9. Page.205 Chap. Verse.4.12, 13. Page.203, 264 Chap. Verse.6.4.5.
Page.357 Chap. Verse.16. Page.531 Chap. Verse.8.10. Page.44 Chap. Verse.1^.1. Page.36
Chap. Verse.12.14. Page.320 Chap. Verse.16, 17. Page.217 Chap. Verse.22. Page.346
JAMES
Chap. Verse.2.17. etc. Page.320 Chap. Verse.4.1. Page.517 Chap. Verse.5.12.
Page.523, 524 Chap. Verse.14. Page.499
1 PET.
Chap. Verse.1.5. Page.358 Chap. Verse.2.22. Page.305 Chap. Verse.3 18, Page.305
Chap. Verse.20. Page.222 Chap. Verse.21. Page.472 Chap. Verse.4.2. Page.421 Chap.
Verse.7. Page.424 Chap. Verse.10, 11. Page.379
II PET.
Chap. Verse.1.12. Page.83.84 Chap. Verse.3.9. Page.151.207 Chap. Verse.15. Page.222
Chap. Verse.20. Page.222
I IOH.
Chap. Verse.1.7. Page.255 Chap. Verse.8. Page.346, 347 Chap. Verse.2.1, 2. Page.20^
Chap. Verse.27. Page.45 Chap. Verse.3.9. Page.333 Chap. Verse.4.10. Page.304 Chap.
Verse.13. Page.48 Chap. Verse.5.6. Page.48 Chap. Verse.14. Page.459
IVD.
Chap. Verse. Verse 14. Page.557 Chap. Verse.20. Page.458
REVEL.
Chap. Verse.3.20. Page.489 Chap. Verse.19.10. Page.542 Chap. Verse.22.8. Page.542
Chap. Verse.14. Page.320 Chap. Verse.18. Page.74
READER.
I intended once to have given thee some short animadversions on G. Keith's way
cast up, so far as concerned matters of doctrine; but finding that they would
make this book too big, I thought best to reserve these to some fitter
occasion. Only to fill up some vacant pages, I shall present thee with some
heeds of abominable Quakerisme, contained in that book, which, together with
the Index, insert after the Preface, will give thee a fuller view of the many
blasphemous heterodoxies, which the Apostate Quakers maintain; The pages here
cited are of his book, and such as have it may, if they please, see that I
wrong him not.

1. CHrist and his Apostles preached Christ within men, as well, as his coming
in the flesh, in that prepared body, which was crucified. 72 2. Christ, as Man,
was and is before all, the first and the last 38, 93, 96, 97, 101 3. To say,
there are three distinct persons in the Godhead, is to darken that mystery 86,
87 4. The Godhead of Christ is not properly a person, but an invisible power
and life 89 5. It is a most foolish distinction, to distinguish betwixt the
Personality, and the nature of man, in Christ 89 6. Christ as man excels all
other men, in nature and substance, as far as heaven does the earth 90 7. Of
this distinction betwixt the nature and soul of Christ, as man, and the souls
of other men, speaks Paul 1 Cor. 15:45, 47. 90 8. The man Christ influenceth
all men by his life, and is in them 90, 106, 107, 108, 109 9. The Word made
flesh created all things, an^ the lord only is not properly the Christ 93 10.
Christ as Man came down from heaven 94 11. Christ's flesh and blood came down
from heaven 94 12 Thus Christ has spiritual flesh and blood 94, 95 13. Of his
spiritual flesh and blood did the saints of old eat and drink 95 14. The Man
Christ Jesus is the mediator 96 15. The Man Christ is to be understood Prove.
8:23. Psalm. 110:1, 2, 3. 97, 98 16. The Man Christ is God's High Priest 98 17.
A measure of the life of the Lamb lived in Adam in innocence 99 18. This
measure came to be slain by transgression, and to undergo deep sufferings 99
19. Thus Christ was the lamb slain from the foundation of the world 99 20. It
was this life of Christ, as man, that was pressed as a cart, etc. Amos 2:13.
99, 100, 108 21. Thus Apostats crucify to themselves again the Son of God,
Heb. 6: verse. 6. 100, 108, 109 22. Thus has Christ been crucified by the
wicked from the beginning 100 23. Christ the heavenly man li^ed in Abraham and
Moses, etc. 100 24. Christ was true and real man before he was borne of Mary
102 25. The soul of Christ, or the inward man that dwells in the outward
flesh, is the man 102 26. This is the man, that was seen Ezekiel. 1:26, 27. Dan.
7:9. Rev. 1:13-19. Esai. 6. Genesis 3:8, 9, 10. 102 27. The Word was made flesh
from the beginning, and dwelt in us 103 28. The center and spring of Christ's
soul and life, was for the most part in heaven, until it descended and clothed
it self, with the likeness of our flesh, in the Virgins womb 103 29. In all
the Scripture it will not be found, that Christ became Man, and took to himself
the soul of Man; but only that he took flesh 104 30. According to his heavenly
nature, even as Man, he was the Son of God 104 31. Christ is not only in Men,
but in all the world, else he should be discontinued, in and discontinued
places 110 32. Christ is hid and veiled in unbeleevers 112 33. Christ is
otherwise in the Saints, then he was in that Vessel or Temple, that suffered at
Jerusalem 113 34. The spring and center of Christ's Soul, light and life, is in
that Vessel 113 35. Christ has given to all mankind eternal life, as to its
seed and principle 115, 116 36. The Man Christ is the object of divine
Worshipe, as well as the Father 118 37. Christ as Mediator is to be Worshipped
121 38. The Man Christ is every where 123 39. That is, his soul is extended
into all, in his divine seed and body, which is his heavenly flesh and blood
123 40. And this they prove by their Worshipping of this heavenly body, and
praying to it 123 41. It is not enough to say, Christ is present as God; for if
the Man be not present, he is not to be Worshipped 124 42. The Man Christ, could
not know our inward prayers, if he were not immediately present in us and with
us 125 43. That which Christ has left with us of his divine body, is God's
throne of grace, in which we have access, Heb. 4:15, 16. 126, 127 44. It is of
the same nature and one entire being with that above, the altar, the mercy
seat, the cherub Ps. 18:9, 10. 127 45. This Cherub is the Man Christ 127 46.
Christ is the heavens, that God boweth ibid. 47. Christ as Man knew the
thoughts of men, in the days of his flesh 128 48. Christ as Man is
omnipercipent, and therefore omnipresent 129 49. Christ thus near us in his
divine life, soul, seed and body, is the Incarnat Word 133 50. The word made
flesh, which James calls the ingraffed word, dwells in them 134 51. And
that by way of an emanation 136 52. The blessed Deity is as centrally and
essentially in us, as in the Man Christ Jesus 136 53. The soul of Christ is
that ladder, Ioh. 1:51. 142 54. This soul of Christ is not the Nephesch of his
soul, but the Neschamah 143 55. Even that divine Spirit of life, that God
breathed into Adam, the candle of the Lord, the ingraffed word, the word made
flesh ibid. 56. The Nephesch is that of the soul of Christ, which is common to
the souls of other men ib. 57. By the Neschamah they underderstand the
substantial dignity and excellency thereof ib. 58. Whether these two be two
distinct principles; or two faculties of one principle, he determines not
ibid. 59. Christ cannot sanctify us, but by his soul extended to us 144, 145
60. The Spirit or Soul, that was in the Son of Mary, is in all men, but not in
its fullness, as it was in him, but by emanation from him 157 61. And thus
Christ is in us immediately, and God through him 157 62. If Christ be mediator
in the Saints, then he is Man, and the word incarnat, in them 158 63. Christ
sowed the good seed of Regeneration, in all ages, and in all places of the
world, and not in some corners only 159 64. This seed is a measure of the same
divine and heavenly nature, that is in himself ibid. 65. The universal presence
of Christ, as Man, is proved from Luke 2:49, 50. 160
By all which, considered and laid together, though may see, What the
Apostate Quakers think of our Lord Jesus Christ; and how this Man more then
confirms the charge given-in against them, in that Postscript to Mr
Rutherfoords letters, Edit. 3. which I would desire all to read, and read over
again, that they may see their duty in this day, wherein the very air of
Christianity is made blak and infected with Quakeristick Antichristian
Blasphemies.

FINIS.

