THE REASONS OF Mr. Bays Changing his Religion.

Considered in a Dialogue between Crites, Eugenius, and Mr. Bays.

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
Hor. Ante bibebatur, nunc quas contingere nolis
Fundit Anigrus aquas.
Ovid. Met. LONDON, Printed for S. T. and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. 1688.

The Preface.
I Have read somewhere in Monsieur Rapins Reflections Sur la Poetique, that a
certain Venetian Nobleman Andrea Naugeria by Name, was wont every year to
Sacrifice a Martial to the Manes of Catullus: In imitation of this frolic, a
Celebrated Poet, in the Preface before his Spanish Friar, is ple^sed to
acquaint the World, That he has indignation enough to burn a Bu^^y Damboys
annually to the memory of Ben Johnson: Since this Modern Ceremony of offering
up one Author at the Altar of another, is likely to advance into a fashion, as
having already the authority of two such great men to recommend it, the
Courteous Reader may be pleased to take notice, that the Author of this
following Dialogue is resolved (God willing) on the Festival of the Seven
Sleepers, as long as he lives, to Sacrifice the Hind and Panther to the Memory
of Mr. Q^a^les, and John Bunyan: Or if a Writsr that has notoriously
contradicted himself, and Espoused the Quarrel of Two different Parties, may be
considered under Two Distinct Characters, he designs to deliver up the Author
of the Hind and Panther, to be l^^h^d severely by, and to beg Pardon of the
Worthy Gentleman that wrote the Spanish Friar, and the Religio Laici.

It is not to be denied, but that a Poet is as unfit to manage the serious part
of a Controversy, as an Irishman is to write the Miracle Part of Church
History: For besides that his Integrity is as much to be suspected as his
Judgment; the least Thought, or extravagant Fancy, is apt to lead him a Hundred
Pages out of his way, and then it is Ten to One, he will lie on a Fortnight in the
Advertisements of a Gazette, before he recovers the Road. But then on the other
hand, I think Mr. Bays ought to be Acquitted for Treating his Subject in Rhyme,
(which he very Iudiciously somewhere calls the Vehicle of Nonsense) and I am
clearly of Opinion, That the chief Points in Agitation betweent he Church of
Rome and Us, are so easy to be decided (if the Party concerned could but once
Disingage themselves from Prejudice, Pride and Interest) that they ought not to
employ the serious part of Mankind, or put Christendom to the Expense of
Convening a Council, while a Synod of Poets may better Discuss and Determine
them at their own Cost and Charges. Why cannot Purgatory be as well traced out
of that Famous Verse in Virgil, Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni,
as out of the Dreams of some few Hypocondraic Authors, and a poor single
misapplyed place of Scripture, that for fear of making a Blot, like a Solitary
Man at Bacgammon, wants the assistance of another Text to bind him? Or the
Pope's Supremacy be made good from that Passage, Imperiumque Pater Romanus
habebit,
as well as out of Pasce oves meas, and the Decretal Epistles? Virgil too may
be considered as a Person that lay under to Temptation at all of Complementing
the Christians, being himself of another Persuasion; and so whatever comes from
him in favor of the Catholic Tenets, is to be looked upon with extraordinary
regard and veneration. And perhaps Mr. Bays, after he has for some time
Consulted the Fragments of the Sibylls, and begun a little acquaintance with
Rabbi Galatinus, or any of his Relations, may be able to prove that Virgil had
his Notion of Purgatory, and the Pope's Supremacy, from the very same Sybill
that helped him to the Prophecy of our Saviors Incarnation in the fourth
Eclogue. Certainly that good Eastern Bishop, who at the second Council of Nice
urged that Text in the First of Genesis, And God made Man in his own Image, in
defense of Image Worship, was a very great Poet, though from so long a
Devolution of time we have lost that part of his Character; and might as well,
when his hand was in, as vigorously appeared to have Man-Midwifery declared to
be of Divine Right, because Vulcan played the Midwife, when his Old Father was
Delivered of Minerva. I am heartily sorry that this Judicious Prelate had not
the good Fortune to live in our Age, where he might have made a more
considerable Figure, and conversed with Two able Disputants, exactly of his own
Temper and Constitution, the Oxford Editor, and the Worthy Convert of Putney. I
observe, that as there are two sorts of Prologues in the Rehearsal, the one
Composed in Terrorem, to frighten the Audience into Civility and good Manners,
by Huffing and Railing at them; the other Imbellish'd with kind Language, and
some pretty Surprising Thought or other, in order to Steal and Insinuate into
your Favor: So likewise the Modern Polemics have pitched upon Two different
ways to reduce Us, for either we are Accosted with such kind of Complements as
these; Have a Care what you do Gentlemen, you are got within the Territories of
Heresy and Sacrilege, and you had as good Ride your Horses full Gallop in a
Coney-Warren, as continue in a Country where nothing but utter Ruin and
Desolation can attend you: Or else the Scene is altered, and some humble
Accommodator hangs out the White Flag, and proposes milder Conditions; Well
Countrymen, there have been ill offices done on both sides; we have been
misrepresented to you, and you have labored under as bad a Character amongst
our party; a little Christian compliance will set all matters straight again.
Your Authors and ours are agreed well enough in the main; and therefore let us
sacrifice half a dozen troublesome ill-natured distinctions to the Peace of
mankind: But first we desire you of all loves to lock up that troublesome
companion called Reason, for one quarter of a year, and if you could but
prevail with your self to discard your five Senses, the business would be
presently at an end. Of the two late Converts abovementioned, that have listed
themselves in the Service of the Western Patriarch, one has published a
specious Treatise, to prove that the Papists and Protestants are agreed in
their Notions of a Real Presence; the other pretends, That the Catholic
Doctoas, and the Jewish Rabbis, are likewise agreed in the business of
Transubstantiation: Indeed, after this rate of arguing they may very easily
prove their Church to be Universal; which thing if rightly considered, I am
confident will bring above three parts of the Globe into the Popes Chamber of
Dependencies. I know there are some Malicious Persons in the World, who are apt
to conclude, That this calling in the Gentlemen of the Circumcision to the
Assistance of the Catholic Cause, is a very plain that they dare not hazard
the fortune of a set Battle upon their own Forces: That Prince is in no good
circumstances at home, who is obliged to employ an inveterate Foreigner to
support his Dignity; and we have read (say they) how the Christians have taken
the condition of the Holy Land into their consideration, have unanimously
fought, and recovered it out of the hands of Infidels, but we never hear to
this day that the Jews retaliated the kindness, or gave 'em any thanks for
their pains. The truth on it is, men that are disposed to talk, will, in spite
of all the World, say what they please, tho they are sure to be as troublesome
as a Welshman when the Spirit of Genealogy possesses him: But I pray why may
not a man that has kept Rabbi Solomon Iarchi, Ben Sira, Ben Manasses, and the
rest of the Tribe, in Meat, Drink, Washing and Lodging, at his own proper
Expense some Twenty Years, be as well allowed upon an emergent occasion to draw
them out in Battel-array, to confound us Protestants, as a Neighbor of ours on
the other side the Water to call in the Grand Seignior to humble the Emperor.

But I find this Speculation has occasioned me to digress farther than I
intended: therefore to return to Mr. Bays, I must make bold to acquaint him,
That of all men in the World he ought not to have interested himself in the
quarrel, whatever his private sentiments were, since he had so publicly, and so
virulently exposed that party before. If he pretends he took his copy from
Arnobius, who was obliged to write his Learned Treatise Contra Gentes, to
satisfy the Christians, who somewhat doubted the sincerity of his Conversion,
that he had in good earnest quitted Paganism, much good may it do him. But I am
afraid this instance will not do his business, for, I suppose, had Arnobius stood
charged with half those scandalous ill things, which Mr. Bays is like to answer
for, his admission into the Church had not been purchased at the easy terms of
libelling his old Friends, and Sacrificing that, which is lighter than the
Honesty of a Bawd, the Chastity of a Midwife, the Valor of an Atheist, the
Honor of a Pimp, the Integrity of an Usurer, even a Poets Reputation. But I
find a man may hold all the seven deadly sins in Commendam with a Saintship;
and that there is a certain Society of men in the World, who to fill up their
Numbers against the next Muster, make no scruple at all of entertaining such
kind of Proselytes, as Romulus picked up when he opened his Asylum.

Mr. Bays in his Life of Plutarch, occasionally discoursing concerning the
Report that Seneca Cuckolded his Patron Claudius, is very sorry that Petronus
Arbiter was not the man, because he could better have bore it from a man of his
Character (for you must know, Petronus Arbiter was a Poet, and consequently the
fitter Person for such a business) and he can conceive nothing in the World
next to an Elephant upon Stilts, so awkard in the pursuit of an Amor as a
Philosopher in a Gown. The Truth on it is, Divines and Philosophers never had a
good word from Mr. Bays since his Mother bound up his Head for him. Here was
the finest opportunity imaginable for a Philosopher to have made his Market,
The old Gentleman gone abroad to smoke a Pipe among his Tenants, the Lady
consenting, the happy hour of Assignation come, the Chambermaid upon duty at
the door, the Sheets perfumed, the Curtains drawn, the trusty Brandy-bottle at
the Beds-head: Nothing in the World, one would have thought, could have
defeated and spoiled so promising, so hopeful an intrigue. But O the Fates!
just in the Critical minute appears Mr. Bays, forbids the banet, turns the poor
Philosopher, with his Breeches dangling about his heels, down stairs; and in
that surly humor nothing would serve his turn, but a Poet only must Cuuckold
the Emperor. Now to apply this story to Mr. Bays; as he seems concerned for
his friend Petronius, that he had not the good fortune to be engaged in the
affair we were now discoursing of, so I am sorry with all my heart, that since
Mr. Bays's Stars so ordered the matter, as to condemn him to the drudgery of
Writing everlastingly, that instead of barren Controversy (which is not a
province so capable of being cultivated by a Poet as other provinces are) he
had not either set himself upon reforming the Anthems of his own Church, which
exceedingly want such a charitable hand as his to Revise 'em; or employed his
Talent in Spiritual Madrigals to good Saint Wilgefortis, or Apollonia, (who
might perhaps have remembered him for it in a fit of the Toothache) or lastly,
Since he is read in Cares,
And bends beneath the weight of fifty years:
that in his Old Age he had not chosen out for him self some peaceful Province
in Acrostick Land: I make bold here to use his own Expression in Mac Flecno, if
it is his I say; for Mr. Shadwell in the Preface before his Translation of the
Tenth Satyr in Juvenal, has been lately pleased to acquaint the World, that he
publicly disowned the Writing of it, with as solemn imprecations as his friend
the Spanish Friar did the Cavalier Lorenzo.

For to Deal Honestly with Mr. Bays, however in his other Composures he has
obliged the World with the Delicacy of Language, and the Agreeableness of his
Fancy; yet in his last Essay we only find such novel kind of Discourse between
the Hind and Panther, as passes between the two Judicious Grave-makers in
Hamlet: In short, we meet nothing but a dull heap of Insipid stuff, so
lamentably Ridiculous, that one could not in conscience desire to have an
Adversary write worse: so that whatever advantages his Soul has made by the
exchange of his Religion (though I wonder in my heart how that queasy stomach
of his, which about See the Preface before the Religio Laici.
four years ago could hardly digest the Apostles Creed, should now be able to
digest not only that, and Athanasius's Creed, but a more unpalatable one of
Pope Pius's making) his Muse I am sure is sensibly the worse. Were I his
Confessor, who am only his Adviser, I should prescribe him no other Penance
for every Transgression, than to make me a Copy of such miserable Doggerel
toties quoties, which I believe would be Mortification enough for him; and the
reading of them, I Am sure would be sufficient Penance to my self. But after
all, perhaps Mr. Bays writ for the Irish Nation, and then he is to be excused,
for he that writes to please the relish of that Noble Kingdom, must do the same
by his Wit and Language, as Valerius Poplicola did with his House, even level
it to the ground.

I met the other day a certain passage in Monsieur Montaign's Essays, which I
little imagined to have found in an Author of his Gravity; he is pleased to be
angry with Carvers and Statuaries, for making the nudities of their Images so
large: for (says he) the Ladies who form an Idea of the Abilities of Mankind by
such exterior representations, must certainly find themselves extremely
disappointed, when they come to consult the Originals. This so strange a
passage, as I said before, one would scarce expect to meet in Montaign; and
indeed, with respect to the memory of so great a man, it is extravagant enough
in all conscience. But Mr. Bays in his Preface, before the second part of the
late Printed by Tonson. 1685.
Miscellanies, has as much out done this, and any thing that was ever said in
the World, as a Hero of his own begetting, Almanzor by name, has exceeded all
the Bullies before him. On one side of the page, he appears with extraordinary
Zeal for the Immortality of the Soul. What considering Person (says he) who
observes how Fools and Knaves batten in the World, while men of Merit and
Integrity (meaning himself I suppose) starve and are despised, can suppose that
there are not allowances to be made in another? That is, because Mr. Bays
missed of his Eaton-preferment, he was humbly content to expect his reward
elsewhere; and truly I am so much of his Opinion, as to think he is to expect
it in another World: On the other side of the Leaf, as if his Petronius Arbiter
had got the Weather-gage of Thomas a Kempis, he makes you a very formal Apology
for Translating a certain luscious part of Lucretius (he could not find in his
heart, he tells you, to give it a worse name) though some people are apt to
believe it ought only to keep company with Culpeppers Midwife, or the English
Translation of Aloysia Sigea. If Mr. Bays would have been ruled by me, that
very moment when he fell from the highest step of Jacobs Ladder, and from a
grave contemplation of Eternity could on the sudden condescend and truckle to
the Patronage of downright obscenity; he should not have made so small a leap
on it, as to have vaulted over the little Rubicon that parts the Reformed
Churches, and the Church of Rome, (for that had been too inconsiderable a
performance for a man of his Agility) but have gone over in good earnest to
Mahomets Church, who makes that business he so pathetically there describes,
one of the chiefest rewards for his Disciples in the next World: And who knows
but this may come to pass, things were not brought to an extremity when I left
the Story. The worthy Gentlemen that have set him upon the Heroic design of
writing the Hind and Panther (for I must beg Mr. Bays's pardon if I am so
unmannerly as not to believe every thing he says in his Preface) have so far
secured him to their Party, that he cannot in honor return to the Protestant
Territories; they have cut off all hopes of a retreat from him; the back doors
are shut, but the passage before is open enough, and the way to Meccha and
Constantinople as easy to be found as ever; and I dare lay a wager that Mr.
Bays is too much a Poet, not to pass the same judgment of his newest choice in
Religion, as of his newest Plays, that the last is always the best.

To draw now to an end, Mr. Bays I hear has lately complained at Wills
Coffee-house, of the ill usage he has met in the World: that whereas he had the
generosity and assurance to set his own name to his late piece of Polemick
Poetry, yet others who have pretended to answer him, wanted the breeding and
civility to do the like. Now because I would not willingly disoblige a person
of Mr. Bays's Character, I do here fairly, and before all the World, assure him
that my Name is Dudly Tomkinson, and that I live within Two Miles of St.
Michaels Mount in Cornwall and have in my time been both Constable,
Churchwarden, and Overseer of the Parish, by the same token that the little
Gallery next the Belfry, the new Motto about the Pulpit, the Kings Arms, the
Ten Commandments, and the great Sun dial in the Churchyard, will transmit my
name to all Posterity. Furthermore (if it will do him any good at all) I can
make a pretty shift to read without Spectacles, wear my own Hair, which is
somewhat inclining to Red, have a large Mole on my left Cheek, am mightily
troubled with Corns, and what is peculiar to my constitution, after half a
dozen Bottles of Claret, which I generally carry home every night from the
Tavern; I never fail of a stool or two next morning: besides I use to smoke a
Pipe every day after Dinner, and afterward steal a Nap for an hour or two in
the old Wicker-chair near the Oven, take gentle Purgatives spring and fall; and
it has been my custom any time these sixteen years (as all the Parish can
testify) to ride in Gambadoes. Nay, to win the heart of him for ever, I invite
him here before the Courteous Reader to a Country Regale (provided he will
beforehand promise not to Debauch my Wife) where he shall have Sugar to his
Roast-beef, and Vinegar to his Butter; and lastly, to make him amends for the
tediousness of the Journey, a parcel of Relics to carry home with him, which I
believe can scarce be matched in the whole Christian World; but because I have
no great fancy that way, I don't care if I part with them to so worthy a
Person: they are as follows.

St. Gregory's Ritual, bound up in the same Calves-skin that the Old Gentleman
in St. Luke Roasted at the return of his Prodigal Son.

The Quadrant that a Philistin Tailor took the heighe of Goliath by, when he
made him his last Suit of Clothes; for the Giant being a man of extraordinary
dimensions, it was impossible to do this affair any other way than your
designers use, when they take the height of a Country-steeple.

The Ioynt-stool that St. Christophers Barber stood upon when he shaved him.
Now to satisfy Mr. Bays of the necessity the Barber had to make use of a
Ioynt-stool in this affair, and that it was no foolish, malapert or arrogant
humor in the Barber so to do, he is to understand that St. Christopher, if he
were alive, could have drunk the Monument full of Mum for his mornings draught,
with as much ease as the Presbyterian Divines swallowed the Covenant; and if he
wont believe me on my word, let him e'ne ride his Horse to Paris, and if St.
Kits Statue in the Nostre Dame do not convince him of his error, I will give
him free leave to swear before any Justice of Peace that I am the Seditious
Author of the Letter to the Dissenter.

A Knife of great Antiquity, the Handle of it is made with the same Ivory that
Jupiter supplied Pelops's Shoulder with; the Blade originally St. Peter's Sword,
fought by Pope Hildebrand, and Julius the Second, into a Dagger, and since
converted into the use aforementioned. If Mr. Bays should quarrel with the
Handle, by reason of its Pagan extraction, he is to be informed that a certain
Author, who has lately obliged the World with a learned discourse concerning
the Catacombs at Rome, has demonstrated that worse Relics, in all
probability, are adored and worshipped every day in his Mother Church.

And now I find I have transgressed somewhat too much upon the Readers patience
in so tedious a Preamble, but I have this comfort to carry along with me, that
I deal with an Adversary, who cannot in Justice reproach me for making a long
Preface.

St. James's PARK.
Crites, Eugenius, and Mr. Bays. Crites. MR. Bays, Mr. Bays, prithee why in
such haste man? Have you forgot your old acquaintance, that you pass by 'em
without taking the least notice of them.


Bays. Your pardon Gentlemen, I protest I did not see you; it is at least some
twenty years ago (as I remember) since we had our last long discourse
concerning Drammatick Poetry upon the Thames -- But Gentlemen, I am at present
engaged elsewhere, you see my Rosary and Beads, and may guess for what place I
am bound.


Eugenius. Prithee, dear Bays, adjourn this fit of Devotion to some more
convenient time, and let us take one Edifying Glass at the Rhenish-house,
yonder by Charing Cross.


Bays. As for the Tavern, I desire to be excused, I seldom appear at such
unsanctify'd places; you might as soon Cajole the Plain-dealer into
Westminster Hall, a Fanatic into a Playhouse, or an Usurer into a Suretiship,
as persuade me into a Tavern. Alas! I am not the man you took me for; upon my
Sincerity Mr. Eugenius, I have not tasted a drop of Claret these two years, but
what I have met among Innocent Strawberries, or in a Sauce, or so.


Crites. This renouncing of your Wine, Friend Bays, is a greater wonder to me,
than the renouncing of your Religion; and I can scare fancy thee to be the same
person thou wast formerly.


Bays. Why, truly Gentlemen, I dare not say of my self, that I am the same
individual-man I was some years ago; for let me tell you, Matter is in a
perpetual Flux, and the whole Mass both of Accidents and Substance are thrust
away by the continual Succession of new ones. Now, as I have not one drop of
the same Blood, nor one Particle of the same Clay about me which I had then, so
I thank my Stars, I have not the least Tincture of that Religion left behind,
which engaged my former state of Ignorance; that state I mean, which I may more
properly call the Ded. Epist. before Limberham.
Parenthesis of my Life, than that wherein I was not acquainted with the Noble
Lord to whom I dedicated my Limberham.


Crites. Faith, little Bays, I am so much of thy Opinion, as to believe that
after so many changes thou have as well shifted the Christian as the man; and I
am persuaded, we shall have more Religions contend for thee, after thou art
dead and rotten, than Citys strove for the birth of a certain person of your
own profession; from whose Achilles, you would needs persuade the World that you
copied the fierce Almanzor. I am told, your friends of Dukes Place, expect the
next change you make should be to their Party, which I suppose may be the more
easily effected, unless you are bribed beforehand by a Chiaux with the
government of a Turkish Hospital, because two of their best Kings, and most of
their Prophets were Poetically given; and I see no reason, Mr. Bays, after you
have traded somewhat longer in Parable, and Allegory, but that you may step in
among their Minor Prophets.


Bays. O Sir, your Servant; But I Will allow men of your Persuasion to be
Scurrillous, it is the distinguishing Character of your Church; and I expect
e're long, your Bear-garden, and Bartholomew-Fair Men, will arrive to such a
pitch of Brutality and Irreligion, as to discuss their Assemblies with an Ite
Missa est.


Eugen. But why all this ado about Religion, Mr. Bays? Why cannot we quit this
Subject, to make way for more Diverting Conversation? Come Sir, I Will show you
some words which were made by a friend of mine, upon that dismal noise and
hurry we have lately had among the Traders in Controversy, if you will vouchsafe
them the hearing.


Bays. With all my heart Sir, provided there are no touches upon the
Government, no subtle Insinuations, no --


Eugen. Not so much as one single Reflection Mr. Bays. Let the Motly dull Herd
for Religion engage,
Let them urge the Dispute with Clamor and Rage;
Let your Authors keep on the vain method of writing,
And set (if they can) both your partys a fighting:
We never make replys, but are fully contented,
Tho good Fellows and Drink have been misrepresented.
Let their musty grave Volumes to Thames Street adjourn,
Or rot in Duck-lane, or in Coffee-house burn:
Let the Monarch of France keep his Subjects at home,
And forbid the Mad Zealots abroad for to roam,
So he lets his boon Claret but cross the kind Main,
We shall never be angry; we shall never complain.


What do you say to these lines now Mr. Bays?


Bays. The last turn there upon the French Protestants, is well enough rallied,
but the rest is exceeding profane: And pray good Mr. Eugenius, will you advise
your Friend from me, to employ his Talent to a better use, and squander no more
of it in Sonnet. You cannot imagine what a Mortification it is for a noble
Author, who has, at the great expense of his fancy, writ something which is
vigorous and fine, to have his Song tagg'd with half a dozen gouty Stanza's, by
a Grub-street-hand, then advanced into a Ballad; and last of all, plastered up
in a Country Alehouse, to confront the five Senses, and the four Seasons of
the year.


Eugen. Indeed Mr. Bays, this is very hard usage as I take it.


Bays. You may believe me Sir, it is one of the greatest afflictions in the
World, for I have had most of my best words so served; and therefore if your
friend finds him inclined to write, there are several places of Casimire,
Urban, and Scribonius, that deserve his consideration. Oh! there is an Epigram
in Scribonius, which I could repeat forty times a day, and never be weary on it;
the subject so divine, the language so excellent, the thought so noble, Lac
Matris miscere volo cum Sanguine Nati,
Non possum antidoto nobiliore frui.
I Will give you a Copy of it Mr. Eugenius, if you will promise me to use your
interest among any of your acquaintance to get it Translated.


Eugen. I Will see Mr. Bays what may be done, though I fear I shall not succeed.
But prithee, once more, Dear Rogne, let me ask thee what news about the Town?
What Plays? What Lampoons? What Operas? What Sonnets?


Bays. Troth Sir I cannot tell, for of late I have not herded with those
Graceless Rake-hells the Poets of the Town: and as for the Gazette, I consult
it as seldom as a Quaker does the Concordance, or a Physician the Bible. -- But
because I see by my Watch I have half an hour good, if you please, Gentlemen,
to take a turn or two in these Walks, I will for our old acquaintance sake,
impart a secret to you, which give me leave to tell you, is the most
astonishing, the most surprising, the most uncommon; and if you make a right
use of it, the most useful secret in the Universe.


Crites. Dear Bays, thou art always so obliging.


Bays. Hold -- Are the Walks clear? So -- Why then, Gentlemen, to my certain
knowledge, the Conflagration is at hand: and it is as impossible for the World
to continue above ten years, as it is for a Town-Debauch to live as long as one
of the Patriarchs before the Flood.


Crites. Faith Mr. Bays, this, as you say, is the most surprising secret
imaginable. And now to return you one secret for another, I believe if this
secret were communicated to the World, it would ruin the Ensuring Office, to
all intents and purposes: For who the Devil would give Money to have his Houses
Ensured, and the Uuiversal Burnfire so nigh? But prithee, little Bays, tell me
how you came by this Secret?


Bays. After the most strange, unconceiveable manner in the whole World. The
Story is somewhat of the longest, and therefore, Gentlemen, if you have any
occasions to call you aside, at present, I Would defer it till some more agreeable
opportunity.


Crites. Oh by no means, Sir; we have no business at this time to divert us, or
if we had Mr. Bays, we would freely sacrifice it, tho it were a Female
assignation, to have the honor of your company.


Bays. Sir, you perfectly overwhelm your humble Servant with kindness. But to
proceed to the Relation -- You are to understand that in the year 1685. some
three weeks before my Conversion --


Crites. Hold Mr. Bays, were you no Christian at all before that time? What had
become of your immaterial part, if you had dropped off before this late
Conversion?


Bays. Lost assuredly, and in as wretched a condition as the poor Gentleman
that would have begged a little Small-beer of Abraham.


Crites. Why then, I find Mr. Bays, you have more Charity for the Heathens than
most of your fellow Christians; for in a certain piece of yours, which shall be
nameless, but may easily be known by a remarkable passage in the Preface, that
says, you believe a Popish Plot: in this piece of yours, I say, you make no
question at all of a Heathens Salvation, provided he live but up to the
Principles of Nature.


Bays. So I say still; but where did you ever find a Protestant, or a
Mohammedan, live up to the sober Principles of Nature? The Jolly Luther, reading
him, began
To Interpret Scripture by the Alcoran.
But all this while we are beside our Story -- and therefore, to begin it
again, you must know that at the time abovementioned, it was my fortune to go
down the River as far as Greenwich, with some honest Irish Gentlemen of my
acquaintance.


Crites. Under favor Mr. Bays, how durst you hazard your self among any of
that Nation, since you had put so gross an affront upon them, in a certain
Oxford Prologue? First part of the Miscell.
Rogues, that like Cain, are branded with Disgrace,
And wear the Country Stamped upon their Face.


Truly, Sir, if I had said half so much of the Dear Ioys as this amounts to, I
should have been as loath to have trusted my self in Irish Company, as I should
be now to trust my only Bottle of Vsquebah with an Irish Servant.


Bays. Trust my self, quoth a! I perceive Mr. Eugenius, your friend Crites, is
very ignorant in these affairs. Why, Lord Sir! No man that is acquainted with
me, thinks the better of himself for my commending him, nor ought, I Am sure, to
think himself a farthing the worse for my Lampooning him: Did you think I could
have flattered so many quibbling, overgrown Lords, as I have done in my time,
or have Libelled so many honorable Persons of both Sexes, from whom I never
received the least disobligement: And mean all really? No, no -- When I commend
any body, it is either a little foolish Interest, or the gayety of my Humor,
that inclines me to it: And when I touch upon the Coast of Satyr, it is not, I
vow to Gad, out of any Malice (for a true Poet, like a true Jilt, is neither
acted by real love, nor real anger) but only, as they say, Dr. Busby sometimes
whips his Boys at Westminster, for my Health Mr. Crites, and the purging of
Choler.


Crites. I find then Mr. Bays, the passing of an Illnatured Jest upon a man, is
much like the passing away a bad Half-crown at a Tavern; you don't do it out of
any particular spleen to the House, but only to shut your hands of a cumbersome
piece. But, pray did not you mean really when you made that noble Panegyric to
Oliver Cromwell?


Bays. Not I, I protest to you Sir, 'twas my own advantage I considered, and
not any kindness to the person which inflamed me; for you must note, it is much
the same case with us Poets, as it is with the Jews, no sooner can a Hero start
up in any part of the World (let his quarrel be right or wrong) but both of us
are apt to think him the Messiah, and presently pitch upon him as the fittest
person to deliver the Twelve Tribes, and the Nine Muses out of Captivity.


Crites. Then let me tell you, the Usurper was the less beholding to you* but
methinks whatever your sentiments were of the man, you had a great kindness for
your Subject: You spoke as many lofty things concerning it, as any occasion you
ever handled in your life.


Bays. That may be. But always observe this as an infallible rule, from your
friend Bays! If you write Panegyric, tho you have done your utmost, and said
ten times more than the person deserves, be sure to tell him that you have not
passed through half the inventory of his Virtues, and wanted a Genius to manage
so extraordinary an affair to any advantage. But if you Lampoon any party,
forget not to make them sensible of the civil usage they have received from
your hands; as your City Tradesmen, when they have exacted double the price of
any commodity, stick not to tell you they have used you kindly: And though your
stock is all exhausted, and you could not say one malicious word more to save
your life, yet pretend that you could go ten mile further, if you pleased to
continue in that surly humor.


Eugen. I perceive Mr. Bays, you have often made use of this expedient.


Bays. Very often Sir, but to avoid prolixity I Will only produce you two
instances of it at present.

They may think themselves to be too roughly handled in this paper, but I who
know best how far I could have gone on this Subject, Religio La^^^ the Pref.
must be bold to tell them they are spared.

They who can Criticize so weakly, as to imagine that I have done my worst,
Pref. to Absol.
may be convinced at their own cost, that I can write severely, with more ease
than I can gently.

And I find this conduct is extremely serviceable to a man when all his quiver
is spent; for the party concerned must needs find themselves indebted to the
person, who so generously spares them, when they lie all at his mercy: And as
for the unconcerned part of Mankind, at the same time they applaud your
generosity, for giving off when you might have utterly confounded your Enemies
with the other blow; so they must certainly admire the inexhaustible store of
your wit, that can advance forward, and still urge something that is new.


Eugen. But pray, Mr. Bays, suppose the world should not believe a man that
tells such and such things of himself, where lies the jest then?


Bays. Why then, I tell you Sir, that the world would be very uncivil I*gad,
and all that; if the World should offer to question the Sincerity of an Author
who makes so open and so free a discovery of his own abilities. For between our
selves, Gentlemen, I think an Authors bare word in his Preface, as Sacred as a
Peers attestation upon his honor, and ought no more to be disputed than the
Traditions of the Church, or the Privileges of Parliament.


Eugen. And to my certain knowledge Mr. Bays, both those things are more
subject to be disputed and examined, than any two things in the Universe.


Bays. Ay, and so have Prefaces too been examined by your peevish,
ill-humour'd, Tobacco-taking Critics, whose censures I mind no more ^gad, than
a Bully of the Town minds the swearing forfeits in a Fanatic Ordinary. But
this signifies nothing as long as the greater part of Mankind make no enquiry
into the matter, but swallow it by Wholesale: And surely Sir, you may rely
upon my Opinion in this affair; I that have Blasphemed the Gods, Huss'd Kings,
libelled Princes, laughed at all Religions, scandalized City and Court; and in
my anger spared no Sex, no Country, no Age, nor Order, nor Degree; but I'Gad
thrown my Bombs promiscuously at all.


Crites. How escaped you a hanging Mr. Bays, you that have been so universal an
Aggressor? Methinks the least that could be done to you, had been to have sent
you a grazing to Malmsbury Common, among some of Mr. Hobbs's well-bred Citizens.


Bays. A little private discipline I have met with I must confess; an Almanac
or so beaten into my Bones, but that is nothing at all to a man of a true
passive constitution. But, as I told you before, no man of tolerable sense
thinks either the worse of me or of himself, for having his name exposed in any
of my Satyrs; and that is the reason why so few people give themselves the
unnecessary trouble to batter my Tabernacle. I bless my Genius for it, Mr.
Crites, I have not that respect for any person breathing, as to lose a good
thought for his sake; and I have almost as strong inclinations to suffer
Martyrdom for my Wit as for my Religion: It Is the love to the jest, not any
private picque to the man, that sets me upon such hazardous undertakings, as
Prentices on a Shrove-Tuesday, use to demolish Bawdy-houses, tho they have not
the least disrespect to those noble places of pleasure and convenience. I have
insisted upon this point the more largely, because I would once for all,
undeceive the world as to this particular; and let them know, that a man may
possibly lash three parts of the Creation with his Pen, who at the same time
has not the least grudge or quarrel to any individual person thereof. -- And
now worthy Gentlemen, if you please to afford me the hearing, I will recount my
triumphs to you, which are as large as the Universe, and as extensive as
Mankind. I survey my Victories with a Savage joy, and in the greatness of my
imagination, despise all the Caesar's and Alexanders.


Eugen. What Enthusiastical hint has seized thee now little Bays, I profess I
understand thee no more than a Fifth-Monarchy Comment upon the Revelations.


Bays. Understand me! no: How the Devil should you understand me! Now I speak
in my Son Almanzors blustering vein. But Gentlemen, to deliver my self in a
style which is a little more familiar to your apprehensions, I design to run
through the circle of my Conquests, and name you the Nations I have triumphed
over, and all the degrees of Mankind, I have assaulted.


Crites. With what'l prithee Mr. Bays?


Bays. With my Wit Man: It could never enter into the Sphere of your
imagination sure, to suppose a Poet could conquer whole Kingdoms with his Sword.


Crites. No I can assure you Mr. Bays, for I ever thought a Poet as unfit and
unlikely a man to subdue Kingdoms with his Sword, as Convert Kingdoms with his
Arguments. But let me request you then to begin with your Nations, for I long
as much to be made acquainted with your Victories, as a fumbling Alderman does
to hear the happy news that he has got an Heir apparent to his Law-band and
Satten-doublet.


Eugen. Tho you cannot say Mr. Bays with the Hero in Shakespeare, that the
World's your Oyster, and you have opened it with your Sword; yet you may safely
say the World's your Sheet of Paper, and you have blotted it with your Ink.


Bays. You are much in the right on it Sir. Now the first Country I pitch upon
shall be Holland, and I think in one Distich I have done the States more
Injury, than the French King did them in 71 with all his Bombs and Grenades;
but pray mind them Gentlemen. Prol. to the Spanish Friar.
They Cheat, but still from Cheating Sires they come,
They Drink, but they were Christened first in Mum.
Here I Am sure the whole Commonwealth is concerned one way or another; their
Merchants, Burgomasters, and in effect, all the trading part of the Republic
are arraigned for Cheating their Seamen; professors of all Sciences, and
Divines are likewise reflected upon for Drinking. Don't you think now friend
Crites, but that half the Min-heers will be ready to hang themselves in the
very reading of this?


Crites. No indeed Mr. Bays, if it be true what you have remarked before, that
no man of tolerable sense would show himself concerned at any of your Libels.


Bays. That Is true; no man of sense I grant, would hang himself for the matter,
but surely you will allow me that a man of little or no sense may do such a
thing; and if so, what person fitter than a Dutchman. I Will tell you Gentlemen,
a Dutchmans Soul circulates no more than the Butter-milk he has in his Veins,
but Stagnates like nasty Water in a Kennel: He Is made of Mud, and not of Clay;
and consequently in my poor Opinion, has no title to any of those promises that
were made to the Sons of Adam.


Crites. Pray Mr. Bays, why so severe upon this industrious Nation? Methinks at
this time of day they deserve some little favor at your hands, if it were only
for their indulgence to all persuasions, and leaving every man to the free
disposal, and sovereignty over his own Conscience.


Bays. That circumstauce as you observe Mr. Crites, does somewhat atone for
their other sins; but for all that, I cannot heartily forgive them, for like a
Phlegmatic, Sun-begotten Tribe as they are, they have not had the grace to
produce one Poet, either since their first Rebellion, when they excluded the
Sea from his Hereditary Provinces; or since their latter defection, when they
passed the same Bill of Exclusion upon the Spaniards. So much for the
Butter-boxes -- and now at the Messieurs, and of them I have said so many tart
bitter things, that I gad, I cannot tell which to choose at present.


Eugen. And to the best of my remembrance Mr. Bays, you have spoke abundance of
fine complaisant things in praise of those Airy Gentlemen. You have commended
their Language, the freedom of their Conversation, the gallantry of their
Amors, their Civility, their Wit --


Bays. Oh Sir, there was a great deal of reason for it; for much about that
time, Mr. Eugenius, a certain Staffordshire Gentleman was pleased to Dedicate
to me a very Ingenious Mr. Blunts Religio Laici.
Book, I vow to Gad, in which Dedication, after several other Complements, he
tells me that Monsieur Rapin, one of the greatest Critics of this Age, had
studied English on purpose to learn my Poems: Now this I thought was such a
particular condescension, such an extraordinary sign of respect shown to me and
my works, that I found my self obliged in Conscience to speak all the tender
pretty things I could in behalf of the French Nation. But when, after a long
run, I was given to understand that it was only a complement of my Friend, and
that Monsieur Rapin was not furnished with English enough to qualify him for a
City-Intelligencers Secretary, or an Accomptant to a Mackarel-boat, I presently
reassumed my old temper, and gave the Messieurs no quarter at all, as may
appear by a thousand passages since, too numerous to be cited at present: Nay,
to pursue my malice to the utmost extremity, I prevailed with my acquaintance
at this end of the Town to wear Shoulder-knots no longer, to discard the janty
Cravat-string, and the ceremonious Muff, and what was the hardest case of all,
I absolutely refused to naturalize one word that was of French extraction for
the space of two years. The next that comes upon the Stage is the melancholy
Spaniard, with a stride and a stand, like a Peacock in a backside; and the
truth on it is, tho I ought to have shown him some civility for that divine,
that immortal invention of making Snuff, yet when my hand is in, I neither
spare friend nor foe; and I have not only mauled the poor Don with the
Quarter-staff of Prose, but also with the Back-Sword of Verse; Prol. to the
Spanish Friar.
Their Patrimonial Sloth the Spaniards, keep,
And Philip first taught Philip how to sleep.
Pray Gentlemen mind that dead-doing Epithet Patrimonial, by which I inform the
World that the Castalians have their laziness bequeathed to 'em by their
Parents, as well as the Majestic Cloak, the starched Golilia, the diminutive
Breeches, and the trusty Dagger; and so with one circumbendibus (to use my own
Friar Dominicks expression) I lash the precedent Ages, at the same time that I
chastise the present Generation. Nor have the Ultra montani, the Italians met
with better entertainment, but are attacked and ridiculed in their own
dearly-beloved diversions of Harlequin and Scaramouchi. The Italian Merry
Andrews took the place,
First part of the Miscell.
And quite debauched the Stage with lewd grimace;
Instead of Wit and Language, your delight
Was there to see two Hobby-horses fight.
But because I hate the dull, insipid, phlegmatic way of conquering Kingdoms
singly, I here storm all the Universe at one instant: Where Banished Virtue
will thou show thy face,
Ind. Emp.
If Treachery infects thy Indian Race.
In the first Verse here I suppose Virtue gone from the old World, which I
protest is exceeding tart and Satirical; and in the next I cunningly insinuate
that her Ladyship is not to be found in Mexico, Peru, or any of the
Tobacco-plantations; and consequently that she is not to be met with any where
upon the face of the Earth. And now, because it would be a very unkind, not to
say an uncivil part, in Madam Conscience to loyter, and squander away her time
here amongst Mortals, when her Cousin-german Virtue was gone to better quarters
in another World, I get a Habeas Corpus for her also, but at the same time was
so civil to the modest Virgin, as to allow her the liberty of leaving a
Reverend old Gentlewoman, Interest by name, to do her drudgery, and supply her
place in her absence, which I gad I think she does every whit as well, if not
better. And this passage I have excellently well touched in a late Poem of
mine, which we may take occasion to discourse of more largely by and by. Hind
and Panther, p. 119.
Immortal Powers the term of Conscience know,
But Interest is her name with men below.
As for the Swedes, the Danes, the Swisses, the Laplanders, etc. I let 'em
alone, because they are a poor scandalous sort of people, do you observe, Mr.
Crites, and not able to defray the expenses of a Conqueror; but then as for
Scotland --


Crites. Why I thought Mr. Bays, that Scotland was no more able to defray the
expenses of a Conqueror than Lapland.


Bays. No more it is not, but at that time my Passion prevailed over my
interest, and pray Sir take notice how I have lashed that Nation. First part of
the Miscell.
Clean Linen there would be a dangerous thing,
The Scot that wore it would be chosen King.
And now, because I am never to be reconciled to the Scots, for more than one
or two reasons, you shall have me e're long set out an History of their
Reformation, where I design to acquaint the world, that the true reason of
their demolishing Religious Houses, and decrying the Surplice ever since, was
not for any Superstition, as they pretend, but only because they could not
furnish half your Clergy with clean Linen.


Crites. Pray Mr. Bays, is it not high time now to think of steering our course
homewards? Methinks we have made a pretty handsome ramble on it this Morning.


Bays. Sir, I thank you for your seasonable advice, and design to follow it,
though it was once in my thoughts (being so nigh the place) to have stepped out
of Scotland, and made a little tour in the Duke of Saxonys Country, to see the
ravage which the Baptist Boar has made in the German Forests, afterward to
have unearth'd a Socinian Fox, with some of the Duke of Newburgh's Catholic
Terriers in the Plains of Poland; and lastly, to have fetched a compass round
the Country as far as Geneva, to beg a Presbyterian whelp of Calvin's last
litter, in order to train him up at Long-Acre, to bark at Ceremonies, and the
Episcopal Church. -- But upon second considerations, `I think it better to make
all the sail we can for little England* and so Gentlemen, you are heartily
welcome, as I may say, to your Native Country again.


Crites. Troth Sir, I must needs own my self a little weary, after so tedious a
walk, but if you please Mr. Bays, pray let us know what you have to say to old
Albion.


Bays. With all my heart Mr. Crites. Now there being but three remarkable
places in the whole Island, that is the two Universities, and the great
Metropolitan City; I shall consequently confine my discourse only to them: But
first of all, I must tell you, that I am altogether of my Lord Plausibles
Opinion in the Plain-dealer; If I chance to commend any place or order of men
out of pure friendship, I choose to do it before their Faces; and if I have
occasion to speak ill of any person or place, out of a principle of respect and
good manners, I do it behind their backs. You cannot imagine Mr. Crites, when I
visit either of the two Universities in my own person, or by my Commissioners
of the Playhouse, how much I am taken with a Colledge-life. Oh there is nothing
like a Cheese cut out into farthings; and my Lord Mayor amidst all his brutal
City-luxury, does not dine half so well as a Student upon a single Chop of
Rotten-roasted Mutton; nay, I can scarce prevail with my self for a month or
two after to eat my meat on a Plate, so great a respect have I for a
University-Trencher; and then their Conversation is so learned, and withal so
innocent, that I could sit a whole day together at a Coffee-house to hear them
dispute about Actus perspicui, and Forma misti. From this beginning I naturally
fall a railing at London, with as much zeal as a Buckingbam-shire Grazier who
had his Pockets picked at a Smith-field entertainment, or a Country Lady whose
obsequious Knight has spent his estate among Misses, Vintners, Linnen-drapers*
and then I tell my audience, that a man may walk farther in the City to meet a
true Judge of Poetry, than ride his Horse on Salisbury Plain to find a House.
First part of the Miscell. p. 274.
London likes grossly, but this nicer Pit
Examines, Fathoms, all the depths of Wit.
You see here Mr. Crites, that Scholars will not take Alderman Duncombs
Leaden-half-pence for Irish Half-crowns, while a dull Londoner swallows every
thing; and takes it with as little consideration, as a true Romanist takes a
Spiritual dose of Beleits that are Sealed up with the Council of Trents Coat of
Arms.


Eugen. How was that Mr. Bays, about the Council of Trent? Pray let us hear it
again.


Bays. Gad forgive me for it -- it dropped from me e're I was aware, but I shall
in time wear off this hitching in my gate, and walk in Catholic Trammels as
well as the best of them; nature I must confess, is not overcome on the sudden
-- But let me see Gentlemen, whether I have any more lines to our last purpose;
Oh here they are! P. 264.
-- Poetry, which is in Oxford made
An Art, in London only is a Trade.
Our Poet, could he find forgiveness here,
Would wish it rather than a Plaudit there.
You are sensible without question, how little beholding the City is to me,
when I am upon my progress elsewhere. But it is a comfort that this peremptory
humor does not continue long upon me. For as I have the grace to disown my
Mother-University, with a Jug in one hand, and a Link in the other, when I am
at Oxford. First part of the Miscell.
Thebes, did his green unknowing years engage,
He chooses Athens in his riper age.
So when I am got amongst my honest acquaintance here in Covent Garden, I
disown both the Sisters, and make my self as merry as a Grig with their greasy
Trenchers, rusty Salt-sellers, and no Napkins; with their everlasting drinking,
and no intervals of Fornication to relieve it. In fine, I make a great scruple
of it, whether it be possible for a man to write sound Heroicks, and make an
accomplished through-pac'd Wit, unless he comes to refine and cultivate himself
at London; unless he knows how many Stories high the Houses are in Cheap Side
and Fleet Street, is acquainted with all the gaming Ordinaries about Town, and
the rates of Porters, and Hackney-Coachmen; has shot the Bridge, seen the Tombs
at Westminster, heard the Wooden-head speak, can tell you where the Ensuring
Office is kept, and which of the Twelve Companys has the honor of precedence.

Thus I have been as good as my promise, in naming the Citys and Countries to
you, which I have had occasion in my time to visit. Now for the several orders
and ranks of men, that have felt the indignation of my Satyr.

The first that I begin with shall be that ^tourdy beat, that humble admirer of
Jost and Quibble, the Melancholy Clergyman* Come out therefore Mr. Levite, by
what Names or Titles soever dignified and distinguished. Prithee observe Mr.
Crites, how dejected tho poor Passive Rogue look^^ How Mal a droitly he makes
his entrance, like Mrs. Days Heir apparent in the Committee: And by my Faith he
has a great deal of reason for it -- For first and foremost, in my Postscript to
the Siege of Granada, I have imputed the Corruption of our Language and
Eloquence, to their dull way of haranguing in the Pulpit. A heavy charge this
same I protest to you, and how they will answer it this Term at the King's Bench I
cannot tell; but I am sure of this, if it had not been for some of the beaux
esprits of this end of the Town, and for my self in particular, who cheerfully
assisted in so charitable a work, and left no stone unturned to enrich and
refine our Native Tongue, we had e're this, been reduced to as miserable a
state of Parbarity as our Forefathers were in the time of the Saxon Heptarchy
-- In the next place, I have chastised the Clergy with a vengeance* for Spanish
Friar. p. 36.
engrossing Laysins, as they have done Lay-preferments to themselves, and
scarce leaving the poor Laity that uncomfortable subsistence of a Tenth part;
for putting the Paniers of their Church Discipline upon us when we are young,
and afterward (which is my greatest quarrel to the whole Tribe) for loading us
with a Wife, which they cannot ease us of, though both parties are fully agreed
for a divorce. Lastly, to make short work on it, and not give my self the
trouble of distinguishing between Church and Church, and the professors of
this, and the other persuasion, I arraign the whole Fraternity from London to
Iapan for a pack of Jugglers and Impostors. Absol. and A^bi^.
This set the Heathen Priesthood in a flame,
For Priests of all Religions are the same.
That last line Mr. Crites, unless I am mistaken, touches the Copyhold of all
these spiritual Gentlemen, from a Christian Patriarch, down to an Indian
Bramyn; now I fancy you are apt to imagine, when you see a Pagan Priest
severely used in any of my Plays, that I had no further design in my head, than
to ridicule that party, but I must take the freedom to assure you of the
contrary; For as it was the policy of the Fanatics in their late famous
Procession on Queen Besse's night, to wound the Established Church through the
sides of the Romanists; so it has over been my Method, to do 'em the same
injury through the sides of Pagans. But to give you a clearer Satisfaction in
the matter; carry this instance along with you. -- In my Oedipus, I bring in a
certain ^^t speaking to the People, to make way for the old Tiresias to pass,
Don't tread on the Blind Prophets Corns (says he) we ought to show him respect,
because he says he comes from the Gods. Ay, Ay, replies a Neighbor, whom I had
tutored before at Long-Acre* He Is not the sooner to be belived for saying so,
all of the Profession can pretend as much as that for themselves -- and so
Gentlemen for the future if you find me expose, kick, and toss some poor
Heathen-Priest in a Blanket, you may be sure I mean some sleepy Prebend of a
Cathedral, or else some Imprimatur-man, who lives at the Scandal-office, a
Bishops Chaplain. Now if you please Mr. Levite, to go about your lawful
occasions, you may Presto vade be gone, and make room for the Fraternity of
Poets to enter.


Crites. Methinks Mr. Bays, if you had observed the true Order, your Lawyers
and Physicians ought to have succeeded the Divines.


Bays So they should Mr. Crites, if I had any reason now to introduce them upon
the Stage: But I was ever master of so much Christian Prudence, I bless my
Stars for it, as not to meddle with the Velvet-coat and Urinal, or the Green
Bag, and long Robe; for as I have had from my Cradle a greater regard to the
Welfare of my Body than my Soul, so I was always so circumspect, as to consider
that a Physician might revenge his quarrel upon my Tenement of Clay, and the
Lawyer either hang me, or ruin my Cause, when I was to appear before him, and
he made a Judge. But as for your Divines, you may as safely assault them as a
Herd of naked Indians, (otherwise you may swear a Poet durst never venture to
invade them so often) they have only a pointless poor Weapon, Curtana by name,
to defend themselves; and as my Son Gomez well observes, if there were no more
in Excommunication than the Churches Censure, a wise man would lick his
Conscience whole with a wet finger. --

As for the Poets Mr. Crites, of which Company I am the present Master, they
are without doubt, the poorest Company about Town, (tho at the same time the
largest, if you take in the City Writers, and the out-lying Deer in the
Suburbs) and to the best of my knowledge, cannot say they have produced one
Lord Mayor, one Alderman, one Sheriff; nay, scarce one Common-Council-man or
Constable, since the Conquest: They are besides, a very ill-natured, querulous,
complaining sort of men, much of the same constitution with the Old Hebrews;
always railing at Fortune, and damning their own Function.


Eugen. And in my opinion Mr. Bays, it is as preposterous a way in these
Gentlemen to endeavor to recommend their profession to the World by railing at
it, as to think to Palm a bad Play upon an Audience, by calling them Fools and
Sots, and Hobby-horses, in the Prologue.


Bays. It Is very true Sir, and therefore the rest of Mankind have generally the
discretion to speak well of their own present condition; your Married men to
wheedle more Company into the Magic Circle, can say a hundred pleasant things
of the conveniences of Matrimony; nay a Scotchman shall enlarge as much in
commendation of his own ragged Country, as a Millenese for Lombardy. But Poets,
as I told you before, are the only men in the Universe that rail at their own
calling, and upon this very score, think they may be somewhat excused for
making bold with other men, and other profession. For my part, I have taken
better and wiser methods, it is but telling the world that my Maker is an
Almighty Poet, and the Ball we live in a true, sublime, well contrived Heroids
Poem, and the honor of our vocation is sufficiently secured from any scandals
that may afterward be fastened upon it. I must confess I never had a good word
from my Brethren the Poets, nor they from me, since I presided in the Chair:
But a man may very well allow the losers the liberty of talking, and I am apt
to flatter my self that my assuming the Glorious Title of Poet Universal, and
degrading the rest of my Brethren so far, as to make them take all their
Commissions from my own hands, was as great and as Politic an undertaking, as
--


Crites. But pray Mr. Bays, oblige your old acquaintance so far, as to let them
know how you managed your self in this important affair.


Bays. With all my heart, for you cannot impose me a more grateful province
than to recount my past labors, and acquaint you from what inconsiderable
beginnings I aspired to my present Grandeur and Dignity -- In the first place,
after some years spent in the University, I quitted all my preferment there to
come and reside at the Imperial City, because it was likely to prove a Scene of
more advantage and business, by reason of the great resort of strangers to it,
and likewise because it was the fittest place in the whole Island for a Monarch
to settle his Court, issue out orders for his Subjects at home, and entertain a
commerce with his Allys abroad. At first I struggled with a great deal of
persecution, took up with a lodging which had a Window no bigger than a
Pocket-Looking-glass, Dined at a Three-penny Ordinary enough to starve a
Vocation Tailor, kept little Company, went clad in homely Drugget, and drunk
Wine as seldom as a Rechabite, or the Grand Seignior's Confessor. Much about
this time Mr. Crites, as you may very well remember, I made my first addresses
in Panegyric to Oliver Cromwell, and that puissant Usurping Phocas had
certainly conferred the Title of Ecumenical Universal Poet upon me, if a
Tempest had not hurried him out of the World before his time. --


Eugen. Under favor Mr. Bays, would not you have refused the Title, coming
from a person of his Charecter?


Bays. Refused it! No, not I'gad: I beg your parder Sir, a better person by far
than your self was glad to accept the same Title from a worse hand, no
dispraise to the Protectors, by the same token that his Successors have the
grace to keep it to this present minute. Being unfortunately disappointed of my
hopes in this place, I tacked about with the times, and applied my self to the
Almighty Grandees at Court, flattered Lords whom no body else would flatter,
but especially made it my business to win the affections of the Ladies, who I
knew had the disposal of their Husbands; and consequently would prove sure
Cards in time of need. Finding some little encouragement here, and resolving to
weather all storms that might happen, I began to reform the Theater, and
restore it (as I gave out) to its Primitive Splendor and Purity, received the
appeals of my younger Brethren of the Stage, Coined Heroes as fast as
Brumingham-Groats, dep^sed Kings, divorced Qu^ees, damned and ejected all those
that opposed my Novel Constitutions, and pretended to square themselves by
uncorrupted antiquity: Lastly, instead of sense, reason, and true passion, I
introduced nothing upon the Stage but mere Show and Pageantry, Dancing, Flying,
Singing, Fighting, Visions, Dreams, Exorcisms and Revelations* Charms,
Witchcrafts, Fire and Gunpowder, Thunder and Lightning* till at last Spirits
and Apparitions turned out the men, and poor Tragedy it self was swallowed up
in an Opera.


Crites. But pray Mr. Bays, what did you say to Shakespeare, Johnson, and the
rest of them? Methinks your new-settled Monarchy should stand in a great deal
of danger, as long as these Authors continued in any respect and authority
among the People.


Bays. To prevent, Sir, all storms that might have issued from that quarter, I
presently set me up an Index expurgatorious, by the virtue of which I so
castrated these grave Old-fashioned Gentlemen, so disguised their true features
by putting them in modern apparel, that upon the Stage, few, very few I'gad,
could distinguish their works from my own proper Legitimate productions. Then I
fulminated Iohnsons affected Style, his dull way of making Love, his Thefts and
mean Characters: Shakespears Ignorance, long Periods, and Barbarous Language:
Fletchers want of a Gentleman's Education; so often, you do observe me Mr.
Crites, that scarce one in a hundred had the assurance to offer one good word
in their behalf. Having made these advances, I proceeded to Censure the living
Poets with greater vigor and severity, acquainted the world with the nullity
of their Ordination, and at the same time, published a manifesto wherein I
declared that the right of Investiture, with a Playhouse Jilt and a Bottle,
solely and wholly belonged to my self; that it should be lawful for a Poet to
keep his Whore, but whosoever offered to marry, should ipso facto, forfeit his
allowance from the Theater. That all the world besides lay under a mistake, but
only Mr. Bays was in the right. That the Stage had two great luminaries, Mr.
Bays and Mr. Batterton, to enlighten it, but that Mr. Bays was just as much
bigger than Mr. Batterton, as the Sun is bigger than the Moon, Finally, I owned
my self to be Apollo's Vicar here upon Earth, and Homer's Successor in the
ancient and unerring See of Parnassus. That the decrees of Mr. Bays ought to be
observed with the same deference as the decrees of Apollo. That all other
Writers were to be judged by Mr. Bays, but Mr. Bays was only accountable for
his mistakes to Apollo himself. And then I threatened to suspend all those Poets
from Stewed Prunes, Wine, Fire and Tobacco; nay, to confine them durante vita,
to Temperance, Sobriety, and no Fornication, who should presume to convene any
Assemblies in Grub-street without my order, or appeal from my Sentence to
Aristotle, Longinus, or any other person whatsoever.


Crites. Dear Bays, how I could hug thee for this! Oh thou true and invincible
Hildebrand of Poets! But prithee, for more security, get an Act of Parliament
to confirm the Title to thee and thy Heirs for ever, and the business is
settled past dispute.


Bays. There you hit me Mr. Crites, and indeed I have designed such a thing a
long while ago, as I shall inform you presently at a better convenience. -- But
Gentlemen, when I had thus in the plenitude of my power issued out the
abovementioned Decretal Epistles, you cannot imagine what abundance of
Adversaries I created my self; some were for appealing to a free unbiased
Synod of impartial Authors, others were for suing out a Quo Warranto to examine
the validity of my Charter. Not to mention those of higher quality, I was
immediately set upon by the fierce Elkanah, the Empress of Morocco's Agent, who
at that time commanded a party of Moorish Horse; in order to raise the Siege of
Granada; and a fat old gouty Gentleman, commonly called the King of Basan, who
had almost devoured the Stage with free quarter for his men of Wit, and
humourists: But, I countermin'd all their designs against my Crown and Person
in a moment, for I presently got the one to be dressed up in a Santenit, under
the unsanctified name of Doeg; the other I coupled my self with his namesake
Thomas Ster^h^l^: Being thus degraded from their Poetic function, and made
incapable of Crowning Princes, raising Ghosts, and offering any more incense of
Flattery to the living and the dead, I delivered them over to the Secular arm
to be chastised by the furious Dapper-wits of the Inns of Court, and the young
Critics of the University. Furthermore, to prevent all infection of their
errors, I directed my Monitory Letters to the Sieur Batterton, advising him to
keep no correspondence, either directly or indirectly, with those aforesaid
Apostates from Sense and Reason; adding, that in case of neglect, I would
certainly put the Theater under an interdict, send a Troop of Dragoons from
Drury Lane to demolish his Garrison in Salisbury-Court; and absolve all his
Subjects, even the Subdeacons and Acolyths of the Stage; his trusty
Door-keepers and Candle-lighters from their Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance.
There remains yet behind a little stammering Sonnetier, whom I suspended a
beneficio some two years ago for a Play of his called the Banditti; but because
he understands no more Latin than Iacta est alea, Anguillam cauda tenes, for
which he quotes at second hand Erasmus's Adagies, and consequently is not
capable of forming any great designs against my Government, I have forbore to
treat him with any further severity, and allowed him the humble privilege of
charming Country Ladies, and City-Prentices.

Now clear the Stage of Poets -- And enter thou Many-headed Beast, the Mobile
of England. It had been an endless piece of trouble, Mr. Crites, to have run
over all those several parts which make up this heterogeneous Monster; or to
have treated the Inkle-weavers, the Porters, the Tankard-bearers, the dealers
in Ribbons, News-books, Wall-Divinity, and Penny-Cust^rds, and the rest of that
Mechanical herd, in a Chapter by themselves: Adam's naming all the Beasts in
Paradise had been nothing to it. So in the twinkling of an eye I have ranked
the Almighty Rabble in one continued line, from (...) to Charing Cross. But
what do you think now will follow up in this same business?


Crites. Nay the Lord knows, Mr. Bays, for I cannot imagine what should.


Bays. Why Sir no more than this; if they reached two mile further, I have a
Verse for all that which shall go beyond 'em: It Is a most exceeding sharp
reflection upon the whole body, but I'gad so cunningly disguised with a hard
word or two, that it is not in the capacity of every mean person to understand
it: and I dare engage to speak it as safely before 'em all, as a Justice of
Peace may quote a false Statute at a Sessions, or a Priest may speak false
Latin in giving the Absolution.


Eugenius. And I dare also engage for my part, Mr. Bays, before I hear what it
is, that this same Almighty Rabble of yours shall be apt to mistake it for a
complement, as some of their Predecessors before 'em took Si populus vult
decepi, for a Patriarchal Benediction.


Bays. Pray Sir mind your own business, and don't trouble your self for any
concern of mine -- But, Mr. Crites, you shall hear now with what freedom I have
censured this fickle multitude, this Neutrum modo, mas modo vulgus: Not Truth
nor Reason make thee at a stay,
The Medal.
Thou leap'st over all --
I find I must take breath again before I can compass it, it is so very long --
Thou leap'st over all eternal Truths in thy Pindaric way.



Crites. This is a cutter, by my faith Mr. Bays, it lashes somewhere with a
vengeance; and I am now persuaded if the Rabble did but understand how severely
you have affronted 'em, that you would have a greater Mutiny about your ears than
the late Cow-keeper, or Sir Nicholas Gimcrack in the Virtuoso.


Bays. I am much of your opinion Mr. Crites, but prithee is it not a noble
Majestic Verse that last? Thou leap'st over all eternal --
To tell you the truth, I measured it not by my Fingers, but a pair of
Compasses; and I dare safely say it is the longest line except one in
Christendom. Now because you are my extraordinary good friends, I will tell you
whence I borrowed the hint: It was my fortune once in my Travels to drop into a
Country Alehouse, where some few stories of the Old Testament were represented
in very ancient Hangings: Amongst the rest, that famous passage between Pharaoh
and Moses was touched upon, with some old-fashioned Poetry beneath it to
explain the Figure, and these individual lines that follow, as I very well
remember, walked clearly round the room. Why was not be a Rascal
Who refused to suffer the Children of Israel to go into tho Wilderness --



Crites. What have you not done with it, Mr. Bays?


Bays. No, no, -- with their Wives and Families to eat the Paschal. There Is a
line for you, Mr. Crites, if all the Pindari^ in the World were lost, this
would certainly retrieve it from oblivion. I had the curiosity to measure it,
and it is just forty six foot of Meter, no more, nor no less. I warrant you any
other man might have seen it twenty and twenty times, and never edified the
value of a brass farthing at the sight; but I am an inquisitive person you
know, and like a good Chemist, can extract rich Spirits of Poetry out of the
most insipid matter. -- So much at present for the several orders and degrees
of mankind: But I wish with all my heart my quarrels had stopped here, or been
only confined to my fellow creatures; but I faith I have been so unfortunate in
my time as to make a step higher, so that, if it is with Angels, as with any
particular society of men here upon earth, where, if you disoblige one, you
disoblige all the rest; I must confess to my shame and sorrow, that I have
affronted the whole Celestial Hierarchy: For, Mr. Crites, I have put the
grossest abuse imaginable upon one of their Tribe, who, as I am informed, makes
no inconsiderable figure amongst em even the Archangel Gabriel.


Crites. How Mr. Bays, the Archangel Gabriel! what occasion had you to quarrel
with him?


Bays. Troth Mr. Crites, none at all: How should I? I never saw him, or spoke
with him, to the best of my knowledge in all my life: But now and then it is my
misfortune to be possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction, and at that time
should you attempt me with all the kind language, and the most convincing
arguments in the world, I am not to be persuaded. Thus in my Life of Plutarch,
when it lay in my power either to have waved the business, or at one words
speaking, to have made as good a Christian of that Reverend Philosopher as ever
lived; and I might easily have prevailed with good St. Jerome to set his hand
to the Affidavit (for you must know that honest Father inserted a worse man,
the Cuckold-maker Seneca by name, into his Catalogue) yet I'gad, I make him, in
spite of his Teeth, to continue in his old Pagan persuasion, and present him
with half a dozen objections against the Christian Religion, which I Am sure
will never relish as long as the World stands, with a Philosophers critical
palate. Thus also in the Conquest of Mexico, a foolish freak took me in the
head, and I must make not only the Indian Priest, and Montezuma himself (who
was in truth a very illiterate Prince) but even some of his Courtiers (who are
a sort of men you know that seldom trouble themselves either with the
Speculative or Practick part of Religion) so confound the Spanish Chaplain and
the rest of his Countrymen, that they were forced in the Fifth Act, when other
methods failed, to betake themselves to the Infallible Arguments of the Rack,
in order to make the Emperor and his Priest set their hands to the Apostles
Creed, and the Popes Supremacy.


Eugen. That was very unkindly done, indeed Mr. Bays.


Bays. So it was Sir, and I have reckoned it ever since among one of my crying
Sins, and design to do hearty Penance for it as long as I live. But to pursue
the business in hand, the very same Spirit of Contradiction I was mentioning
before, seized me when I undertook to clear Miltons Paradise of Weeds, and
garnish that noble Poem with the additional beauty and softness of Rhyme. He,
like a blind buzzard as he was, makes Adam perform his addresses so
ungracefully, introduces him discoursing so unlike a Gentleman, with that
negligence of Language, and stupidity of Spirit, that I'gad, you would pity his
condition. And then for Eve, as he has drawn her Character, she talks so like
an insipid Country Housekeeper, whose knowledge goes no farther than the Still
or the Dairy, who is as little acquainted with the tenderness of passion, as
the management of an Intreague, that one cannot choose but wonder at it. Now
when I came to fall upon this work, I was resolved to bestow a little good
breeding upon our first Parents, to show them the Gallantry of a Court, and the
Discipline of an Academy, to give them a turn or two in the Mall, and the
Galleries at Whitehall, to entertain 'em with a Play in the Kings Box at the
Theater, and afterward with a fashionable Oglio at Lockets or the Blue-Posts,
that so they might be prevailed with to leave the contemptible frugality of
feeding upon Sallads, and shake off all that Clownish rust which they had
contracted in a former Education. For this reason. Mr. Crites, I have made that
great Grandmother of ours, discourse after another rate then she did before;
she talks of love as feelingly as a Thrice-married Widow, yet rails at
marriage with the same concern as if she had seen the misfortunes of half her
Daughters; tells her Gallant that it was the Practice of all his Sex to decoy
poor Innocent Maids with sham stories of their Passion; and that he would be as apt
to forget her after the enjoyment was over, as a Sharper of the Town forgets
the last friend he borrowed money of: In fine, she discourses of Flames, Darts
and Transports, of the performances of Lovers, and the Fatality of Matrimony,
(though God knows, the poor Gentleman had no occasion to understand them
before) with as much familiarity as the Emperor Montezuma discourses of the
Sea, who had scarce seen or heard of a puddle greater than a Horse-pond in all
his life time. And then as for Adam, I have put my self to the charges of
giving him a year or two's running at the University, made him as well
acquainted with all the arguments of the Supralapsarians, as a Justices Clark
is with all the She-traders in his Masters Dominions: So that when the
Archangel Gabriel came to pay him a visit at his Summer House, he presently
engages him before the second course was removed, in the Mysterious
Controversy about Freewill, Proposes Mediums, solves Objections, tells his
guest that his Major was open enough to let a whole Shoul of Arminians in at
the Breeches; that his Minor would not hold water; and sometimes I'gad, in
plain downright English, assures him that his inferences had no more relation
to the premises, than the Alcoran to the Four Evangelists.


Crites. Pray Mr. Bays how long ago is it since Angels have made use of
Syllogism? I thought that those Intuitive Gentlemen had never put themselves to
the trouble of tracing causes by their effects, or drawing conclusions from
their premises.


Bays. Why there is the mischief on it, I knew well enough that the Angels stand
in no more need of a Grammatica Rationis, than a ready Wit does of a
Common-place-book; but such is my unhappiness now and then, that I must run
contrary to the Sentiments of all Mankind, though my whole Family suffers by
it: Nay to aggravate the matter, I made this great Progenitor of ours, so
ba^^le the Archangel in the intricate point of Free Will, that I should have
been most mortally afraid that the discontented Gabriel had carried some dregs
of Calvinism along with him into Heaven, and infected the rest of his fellow
Angels, but that I have heard nothing of it since: However I am in a fair way
now, I hope, to be reconciled to him, for I employ my Tutelar Genius every
morning to solicit his pardon, and to let him know from me, that if ever this
unfortunate Opera of mine lives to a second edition, I design to write a Poeta
loquitur on that part of the page where the Angel discourses.


Eugen. That will do very well Mr. Bays, to recover his lost reputation with
the reader, and no question on it, but it will go a great way to incline him to
better thoughts of your repentance: Put prithee little Bays, may I make so bold
as to enquire the reason why you are so great an enemy to Freewill? Is it not
because you are willing to plead fatal necessity at the day of Judgment, and
lay all your miscarriages at your Makers door?


Bays. I must give you the same answer to this question, as a Country-Physician
gave a friend of mine, who came to enquire of him how he cured himself of his
last Ague; for you must note, that this same Blunderbuss, by some accident or
other, had dropped upon a right medicine: No Sir (said he) I beg your pardon, for
I am under an obligation never to disclose the secret to any person breathing,
but if you are so lucky as to name the true remedy, for our old acquaintance
sake, I Will not conceal it from you. Is it (says the Gentleman) Octabis Hilarii?
No I protest: Why then, I Will lay all that I Am worth in the World, continues he,
that it is Quindena Paschae. Neither is it that upon my life, but for your
comfort, it is something as like Quindena Paschae as may be; nay, to satisfy
you farther in the case, Quindena Paschae is one of the chief Ingredients. In
like manner Mr. Eugenius, I must tell you, that you have not pitched upon the
true reason why I am so bitter an enemy to Freewill (for that relates to a
particular affront which I received from an Arminian Divine) but I can assure
you upon my Integrity, that it comes as nigh the true reason, as any thing in
the World can come nigh another. I am sure it is not only my own interest, but
the interest of half Mankind, that we carried no such troublesome thing as
Freewill about us, for then I know who must bear the blame of our
extravagancies another day; it would remove all those peevish Melancholy
distinctions of good and evil, and score the frequent Sallies and Excesses of
our life upon the unavoidable influences and failures of humane nature. But
Gentlemen, I have somewhere in the compass of four lines, urged this Opini^^^
except I am mightily deceived, with all the accuracy and strength of (...),
which so nice a subject can well allow of. Oh now I remember ^^em! The
Priesthood grossly cheat us with Freewill,
Will to do what, but what Heaven first decreed;
^.
Our Actions then are neither good nor ill,
Since from Eternal causes they proceed.



(...). I fancy Mr. Bays, that these Verses, with some little alteration, would
not be amiss in a young Poets Prologue, who is to excuse the Errors of his
Essay to an Audience. The Critics basely charge us with Freewill,
Will to write what, but what our Stars decreed;
Our Poems then are neither good nor ill,
Since from All-ruling Planets they proceed.


Ha! Mr. Bays, What think you now? Would not this mollisie the cruel hearts of
the most prejudiced Spectators?


Bays. Mollisie them? No question on it Mr. Crites, unless the old Gentleman in
black possessed them all. I could enlarge very copiously upon this hint of
yours, but that I am desirous to finish the relation of my Conquests, before I
proceed to any other business; and therefore to draw my Victories into a
narrower compass, I have affronted the men of Wit in my Gallants, exposed the
men of Valor in my Heroes, ridiculed the men of Love and Ecstasy in my Jealous
Coxcombs, the Ladies in my complying Females, Country Parsons in all my Pagan
Priests, and Princes in my lawless Maximines of the Theater; I have lashed the
State of Matrimony in my Marriage A-la-mode, the state of Celibacy and a
Monastic life in my Spanish Friar, and love in a Nunnery; the state of
Cuckoldom in my Limberham, the state of Innocence in my Opera of Adam: In a
word (if you will be pleased to allow me the benefit of the Clergy, that is, the
Christian Privilege of one single quibble at parting) I have lashed the States
of Holland in my Tragedy of Amboyna.


Eugen. And you have murdered good Sense and Comedy with a vengeance in your
Wild Gallant.


Crites. Now we talk, Mr. Bays, of the Wild Gallant, of all Loves remember me
to the Merry Tailor, and tell him, if he continues his old humor of trusting
people for the sake of a Jest, I Will help him to half a dozen Irish Officers,
that shall jest and quibble two hours by the Clock, for a new pair of Breeches,
and what shall be the best jest of all, never pay for them.


Eugen. But Mr. Bays, this long digression of yours, has clearly put you beside
the story you promised us.


Bays. Goodsookers, so it has! Oh this treacherous forgetful head of mine! It
serves me more unhandsome tricks I'gad, than a young Lawyers memory, who has
not attained to his Westminster Hall Compass of Fitz, Pere and Ayle: But how to
fall exactly into the same place where I left on the Lord knows how* unless you
can assist me Gentlemen.


Eugen. Very easily Sir, for all that we have hitherto heard concerning your
story, only comes to this, That some Three Weeks before your Conversion in
1685. it was your fortune to go down the River as fas as Greenwich, with some
Irish Gentlemen of your acquaintance.


Bays. Right Sir, with some Irish Gentlemen of my acquaintance, where out of an
excess of Friendship, and a mistaken principle of Honor, I drank a prodigious
quantity of Wine for two days together, tho to deal honestly with you, the Wine
was only sit to be drank in a Protestant Communion, or to Bury Prince Belzebubs
Subjects.


Crites. Have a care Mr. Bays, you are always abusing some Princes Subjects or
other; but pray Sir to what part of the Globe do these strangers belong, or
what do you mean by Prince Belzebubs Subjects?


Bays. Why the Flies Man! Oh Lord that you should be so Ignorant: I hope Sir a
Man may pass a jest upon the Flies, without offending you, or any body else


Crites. No question on it Mr. Bays. But prithee Man, why so severe upon the
Protestant Communicants?


Bays. Because it is so unseemly a sight to see a Fat Two-handed Layman, with a
Face which you may divide as Dr. Heylin has done the Kingdom of Poland, into
the Champain and the Woody, overgrown with Beard, and looking like the Moon
half recovered out of an Eclipse (pray mind the comparison) spill half the
Chalice upon his Whiskers, and afterward wipe 'em with his greasy Elbow.


Crites. Rather than break squares between both Churches as to that particular,
I Will engage, Mr. Bays, that the Laymen shall all of 'em be shaved before they
come to Church.


Bays. It can never be done Sir, say what you will, or propose what expedients
you will; for a Laymans Face (and the experiment was made before no worse
Company than the Council of Constance) can never be made so sleek and all that,
as a Sacerdotal countenance: I have, Mr. Crites, since I was reduced, labored
in this affair to accomodate it, as much as any person whatever, for I would
not willingly pay for Wine and not have my Share, but it will not do. Another
project I have thought upon, which is a great deal more feasible, may be of
infinite advantage to the Kingdom, and I hope may meet with better success.


Eugenius. Pray Mr. Bays what is that?


Bays. Why, you know Sir, what a dull time the Poets have had of it lately,
since the Considerers and Answerers of both sides have invaded the Press, no
more to do I'gad than a Player in the Vacation; and Wit as perfect and mere a
drug as Wool was before the Burying Act. Now what do you think I intend to do
in this case, Mr. Crites?


Crites. Faith Sir, I cannot tell, for I have no extraordinary hand at
supposition and conjecture.


Bays. No, you may think and pump your imagination these forty years, and never
be the wiser. Why, I intend -- But you will half kill your selves with laughing
at the conceit -- I intend to get a Burying Act for the Muses.


Crites. A Burying Act! As how I pray?


Bays. I will make my application to the Worshipful Members of the next
Parliament, and represent to them the miserable condition of Nine Muses, which
is more to be pittyed I'gad, than all the sufferings of the French Protestants.
In order to make my petition meet with better entertainment* and move their
compassion, I Will tell them a lamentable story of Apollo, the Father of these
Girls, how I saw him the other day Eating Spoon-meat amongst Porters in the
Stocks-market, in a little greasy old-fashioned Black Cloak, which hung about
his Shoulders like a Heralds Coat without sleeves, and scarce reached so low as
one of your Subdeacons Surplices at Sumerset-house; likewise with a little
Extinguisher-like Hat on, and that when I enquired of him, how it came to be so
unmercifully paired and circumcised, he should answer that he parted with a
Groats worth of the brim, to equip a Basket-hilt in Lincolns Inn Fields; nay,
to secure my self from all possible dangers of a disappointment in the case, I
design to acquaint them with what the Old Gentleman had informed me concerning
his Daughters; that unless their relief came presently, they must be forced
like the City Orphans, to marry below themselves, and take up with Lawyers
Clerks, Penny-Chroniclers, and Smithfield-Sonnetiers, for want of better; that
they durst not make their appearance at any places of public resort, because
they wanted the necessary accommodation of Night-rails and Top-knots; and that
the trusty Keepers of Westminster had discarded 'em, ever since they retrenched
their families, and turned out their Servants to Board-wages. And then as for
himself, he protests that he has not tasted a drop of Wine since the Conduits
pist Claret at the Coronation; that he could not be trusted a week ago in Paul's
Church yard for half a dozen strings to his Welsh Harp, tho he was amoagst so
many of his own Tenants, the Booksellers; and lastly* to use his own expression
(by which you may perceive his necessities have made him profane as well as
desperate) that he has subsisted of late years like the poor melancholy
Accidents in Transubstantiation, without a subject to quarter upon.


Crites. Nothing certainly will prevail upon 'em, Mr. Bays, if this story will not.


Bays. Nay you may let me alone to move the hearts of any assembly in
Christendom. After I have prepossessed 'em with this doleful Tale, I will
humbly offer to their charitable considerations these following Proposals.

That for encouraging the manufacture of Poetry, (pray observe me Gentlemen, I
call it a manufacture, because to my self it is more the trouble of the fingers
than the labor of the brain) which has of late years, to the ruin of several
Families, the decay of Trade, and the loss of the Kingdom in general, been
discontinued; both Houses of Parliament think fit to order for the future;

First, That no person above the Degree of a Lord shall presume to be buried
under a dozen Stanza's of good lawful Pindaric Poetry; for which his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators shall pay a Crown a Stanza.


Crites: But why not, Mr. Bays, as well be buried in good Heroic?


Bays. For a certain reason Sir, which I am sure will make you bepiss your
self, it is so extremely diverting. You know Sir, that Princes, Dukes, and Earls
(I cannot help reflecting for the heart of me) are a sort of lawless,
ungovernable people: Now what kind of Poetry is so suitable, do you think, for
these persons, as that which defies all rules, leaps over all constitutions,
and, in fine, does what it pleases.

Secondly, That all people, from the condition of a Lord down to a Baronet,
shall be embalmed in twenty pair of Heroic Verses, for which they shall pay a
Noble. Now the reason why I am for burying these worthy Gentlemen in Heroic is
this, That as the Nile seldom mounts above the 18th figure, and seldom ebbs
below the 14th, so true Valor rarely rises above a Lord, and rarely falls
below the quality of a Baronet.


Eugen. Why could you not, Mr. Bays, have borrowed your instance from the
Quicksilver in a Weather-glass, as well as traveled for one as far as Egypt.
I find you are for hedging a stake in your old age amongst the men of Valor.

Thirdly, That Country Squires, Heads of Houses, Doctors of Divinity, and the
Civil Law, Prebends of Cathedrals; all Mayors, Bailiffs, and Aldermen, etc.
shall be buried in their dearly-beloved Acrostics, (you see I am tart upon half
the Nation) for which they are to pay seven Groats (cheap enough I'gad) and
that the Poet shall be bound to bait the last distich either with pun or
quibble; otherwise to receive nothing for his labor; any thing in this Act or
Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.


Crites. Methinks Mr. Bays, you ought in Conscience to have excepted the Mayors
of Wooden-basset and Queenborough, I dare engage the Magistrates there had
rather be interred without the solemnity of an Epitaph, than go to the charges
of paying for it.


Bays. No, no, they must pay, if it were only for representing his Majesty.

Fourthly, That all others of meaner rank and families, shall be content to lie
wrapped in a wholesome short ditty, to the melancholy Tune of St. Sepulchers
Chimes, for which they must pay one single Tester.

Fifthly, That whereas Mr. Bays has done the Nation such important service, and
gratified all parties; that is, libelled the Priests to please the Laity, and
railed at the Laity to get himself reconciled to the Priests; lampoon'd the
Court to oblige his trusting friends in the City, and ridiculed the City to
secure a promising Lord at Court; exposed the kind Keepers of Convent-Garden to
please the Cuckolds of Cheapside, and drolled upon the City Do-littles to
tickle the Convent-Garden Limberhams; drawn his Pen against the Romanists, to
win the hearts of Fanatics and Socinians, and afterward attacked all the herd
of Dissenters, to retaliate the injury done to the Romanists; railed at
Matrimony to ingratiate with the superannuated Maids of Honor, and damned a
single life to get a Dinner amongst the fond Husbands: That in consideration of
these, and several other important services, the Members of both Houses think
fit to settle the privilege of Licencing all Poets whatsoever, from the humble
dealers in Tobacco-box-inscrip^ions, to the wholesale Traders in Drammatick, on
him and his heirs for ever; which Poets are to renew their Licenses every half
year; to obey all his Orders and Instructions, are never to exceed five
hundred, and to be marked in the back as Hackney-Coaches are. -- So much for
this project, (which is not much amiss, considering every body at Court, not
the meanest Irishman excepted, are now in the begging humor) but I forget the
main business, my Story -- We continued at Greenwich full two days, all which
time we did nothing at all I'gad but drink and tipple: A certain passage
happened the second day, which is not unworthy the relating, but because we
have already been so much upon the digression, I Will e'ne forbear it --


Eugen. Nay, Mr. Bays, if you will promise to be Laconic, let us have it.


Bays. A certain Gentleman came accidentally into the room where we were
drinking, and desired to be admitted into the company; we told him any civil
person was welcome, and so he was received. Some short time after there
happened a little occasional discourse concerning Purgatory, and this Spark was
so unfortunate to say he disbelieved it; now to the everlasting shame of all
those persons who have the assurance to deny Purgatory, I mauled him so by dint
of Argument, and Wit, sheer Wit I gad, that he had not one syllable to say for
himself.


Crites. I thought, Mr. Bays, that your dear self at that time had been of the
Gentleman's opinion.


Bays. Troth Sir I must needs own that I had no overgreat opinion of the place
till this lucky passage confirmed me. Indeed I had little dawning of the Gospel
upon me for a fortnight before, but it was a doubtful glimmering sort of a
light, and as I may say, just like that by which Corinna obliged her Gallant,
Pars adoperta fuit, pars altera clausa fenestrae.



Crites. Is not that comparison of yours, Mr. Bays, somewhat of the lewdest?
Methinks you might have resembled the dawning of the Gospel to something else.


Bays. Tho it is a little luscious, it is exceeeding witty, and that is all as
I desire in a simile: Sir, said I to the Gentlemen, you don't believe Purgatory
it seems, because it was not discovered before the 11th Century, by the Abbot
of Clugny. Right, says he. Why don't you as well, Mr. Wiseacre (rejoined I)
believe there is no such place as America, because it has not been discovered
above two huudred years ago; upon which we all fell a laughing, and the poor
Gentleman looked with as mortifyed a countenance as Pharaohs Baker, of famous
memory, when his dream was interpreted to him.


Crites. Faith Mr. Bays, and that was ill enough in all conscience.


Bays. Lord, Mr. Crites, I have a hundred times more to say in behalf of
Purgatory than this comes to, and all I'gad, my own Iuvat ire jugis qua nulla
priorum orbita -- I cannot endure to follow any man's footsteps, and that is the
reason I so mortally hate your Ficulnea Argumenta, your Artillery drawn out of
the Bible. What do you think I design at this very present, but to write a Play
called the discovery of Purgatory, and to bring in the Abbot of Clugny in the
first Scene; with these lines in his mouth. Abbot. On what new slaming Country
are we thrown,
So long kept secret, and so lately known,
As if the Seats of Erebus withdrew,
And here in private had conceived a new.

Rare I'gad; and now the Monk answers him: Monk. Fire, Charcoal, Pipes, Tobacco
here are found,
With which our Countries plenteously abound;
But Cider and Cool Tankards here are scant,
Right Lime-juice we, and Punch moreover want.

Mind that more Moreover I pray, methinks it is so natural for a Monk, or a
Country Parson. As if this infant --



Crites. What do you as if again, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Ay, Sir, and perhaps will As if it this hour longer if I please; should
not the Monk, I pray, answer his Abbot. As if this Infant World yet unarray'd,
Like House with Bill on door were starved for want of Trade.
The Quintessence of Wit, by my Faith, Gentlemen, but now it comes to the
Abbots turn to speak, who because he was something of a Scholar, I have made
him demolish all the Peripatitic Philosophy in a moment. Abbot. Here the true
elementar fire resides,
And over the spacious Fields in Triumph rides;
Down then the Stagyrite with all his Crew,
Let Infamy and Scorn his Name pursue;
He held that Fire dwelt in Concavo Lunae,
But here it is lodged, say I, the learned Clerk of Clugny.

It Is new, and out of the rode, this same reflection, Mr. Crites; and the
Abbot, you must know, was the more willing to take this opportunity of
quarrelling with Aristotle, for his Pestilent Heretical Doctrine about
Accidents; for my part, I owe him a grudge also, but design as soon as I can,
to get out of his debt; it is but saying openly in a Coffe-house, that Jesuits
Powder is the Bark of his Predicamental Tree, and you destroy his Reputation
for ever amongst the Mobile. But to the Monk again. Monk. Heaven from all Ages
wisely did provide,
And for the bravest Church these Mansions hide,
That we whose Head Supreme and unconfined,
Is neither God nor man, but of a middle kind;
Should neither climb to Heaven, nor sink to Hell,
But in some place between for endless Ages dwell.

There Is a thought for you, Mr. Crites, match it me if you can in the whole
Universe, it is all flame and Spirit, and nothing but a Soul that has run
through a course of Chemistry and Purgatory, could have uttered it. After this
follows one of the finest Scenes you ever read, but because it is somewhat of
the longest, I will only give you the heads of it: As soon as the Monk had done
speaking these last words, a Messenger comes in from the Podesta of
Pensylvania, to acquaint the Abbot of Clugny, that his Master and the
Superintendent of New England, did intend that morning to try a brace of
Congregational Bull-Dogs, at an Episcopal Panther in the Bear-Garden, in the
Ecliptic, and afterward fully resolved to give him a meeting at his
Toleration-apartment in Purgatory, and that if they liked the situation of the
Country, the temper of the Clymate, the convenience of Trading, and found the
place capable of being improved and cultivated, they would presently send him a
Colony of huge Mortals, with large Hats and no Cravats, to inhabit it.
Whereupon --


Eugen. Under Correction, Mr. Bays, this same Abbot of Clugny is a very uncivil
person to put you out of your road thus. Come Sir, your half hour is already
past, and we will not be so unmannerly as to hinder your Devotion, and make you
more matter for the next Confession.


Bays. Goodsookers, Mr. Eugenius, are you going already? Why, I am but just
entered upon my story, and the best part of it is still behind: I Will trespass
this once on Father what do you call him -- If you will sit down on the next Bench
and hear it out.


Eugen. With all my heart, provided it will be no injury at all to you, Mr.
Bays, for I should be as loath to hinder a Poets Devotion, as an Aldermans
Alms, or a Soldiers Sobriety, the Reformation of a Player, or the Loyalty of a
Dissenter.


Bays. 'Twill be no injury at all I'gad -- Now once in my life, Mr. Crites,
I Will borrow my method from a Country Parson. You know it is the way of those
dull, formal, insipid Animals, after they have made a long tedious harangue in
the Morning, to serve it up in the Afternoon as people do their cold Meat, the
better to imprint it in the memory of their Flock, as they pretend; but I'gad,
I say only to wiredraw the Afternoons discourse, and save themselves the
expense of a little Candlelight and thinking. Even so, Gentlemen, if you
please to remember, I told you that in the year One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty
Five, I chanced to go down to Greenwich, with some Irish Gentlemen, where for
the space of two days (pray observe the expression, because it came from the
other side Wapping) Drinking had got the Weather-gage of Sobriety. But now I am
come to tell you, that the next morning after, I looked as ill as a poor
Gentleman of the Town, who has past through a System of Natural Philosophy some
half a dozen times at the Bagnio; I was all over in a flame, and so very sick
(that though I am far from complementing the place) yet I should be very well
content to have no other punishment inflicted on the Council of 25 at Geneva,
than to share that illness between them, which I endured in my own person.


Crites I thought Mr. Bays, that the man who could endure such a brunt for two
days, was a confirmed seasoned Debauch, and that nothing could hurt him.


Bays. Alas Sir, I seldom used to engage upon such hot service, unless an
extraordinary occasion happened, and then I was sure to do sufficient Penance
the next morning. But to proceed Sir, my Wife would of all loves persuade me to
repair the breaches of Nature with a little Dyet-drink: No, replied I, not for
all the World, I scorn to be indebted to scandalous Dyet-drink for my health,
as much as I do to steal Verses from a Gravestone, to purchase the Reputation
of a Poet: nay (continued I) I scorn it more than a Fanatic does to bind up
his Bible in the same Calves-skin with the Common Prayer Book and Apocrypha.


Crites. What relation, pray, Mr. Bays, has the Common Prayer Book and
Apocrypha, to your Wifes Dyet-drink?


Bays. None at all, how should it? It is only a Comparison, Mr. Crites, and a
Comparison always ought to be surprising: Well, after I had consulted my
constitution a little, I was resolved to relieve my self with Brandy, which
accordingly I did, in a Corner-shop of the Street, and there fell into the most
profound contemplation, that ever any uninspired person was possessed with:
But, pray, Gentlemen, what do you think it was that employed my meditation?


Crites. Why Hellfire, Mr. Bays, for any thing I know to the contrary; if, as
you say, your contemplation was so very profound.


Bays. Well, I protest to you, Mr. Crites, you are enough to make any body
split with laughing: Hellfire! I can assure you such a thought never came into
my Head since my Nurse bound it up for me. Gad forgive me, that you could ever
imagine a Poet should mortify himself with such a consideration; I am sure I
have made more advances this way than any of my Tribe, yet could never, for the
heart of me, travel further than Purgatory. But to deal honestly with you, I
thought of a certain business that was full as terrible I gad, and that was
this: I considered with my self that the general conflagration of the World
could not be above ten years often at the farthest; which made me resolve to part
with* all my darling sins on the sudden, and betake my self to the protection
of that Church, which could give me the most convincing assurances of Salvation.


Eugen. But pray, Mr. Bays, upon what ground was it that you believed the day
of Judgment was so nigh?


Eugen. If you have a mind to edify, Gentlemen, by what I am going to relate, I
must entreat you to be very attentive; for, as the affair we treat of is
exceeding nice and delicate, so if you lose but one chain of the Demonstration,
you had as good have heard not one Syllable* I considered with my self, that
from the first peopling of this Island till the Reformation, a little Ale,
encouraged with Sugar and Rosemary, passed for an universal Cordial all the
Nation over -- This is my Principium -- Which Levitical Aqua Vitae now and then
interposed; and I can exactly tell you how long the Eclipse endured; that is,
how the Ale labored under a disrespect, and likewise how many digits were
obscured; that is, how many Counties were guilty of using modern Aqua Vitae
instead of primitive ancient Ale: but this being a nicety, which perhaps needs
not be so curiously examined, twill be better to wave it, and therefore I shall
only desire you to remember, that Ale, prepared after the abovementioned
manner, continued in very good repute and credit till the Reformation.


Crites. Yes, yes, Mr. Bays, and as I take it, this Ecumenical Cordial of
yours, was confirmed in half a dozen Provincial Synods, held in Cutlers
Theater, in Warwick Lane.


Bays. As for that, I cannot pass my word, friend Crites, nor am I willing to
say any thing but what I have from unquestionable Tradition -- Now when the
heat of Controversy and Enthusiasm had set the body Natural of the body
Politic in a ferment, it was observed, that Ale and Beer were too cold for the
Constitutions of the people, and that they could no longer pass for Cordials.


Eugen. Alas! Poor discarded Ale, how do I pity thee! That thy old companion
Rose-mary, the reliever of thy Infirmities, and the support of Old Age, should
be forced to abandon thee! But pray, Mr. Bays, is Religion so great an
Inflamer? I never understood that piece of Philosophy before.


Bays. Your Protestant Religion inflames as much, or rather more than a Hectic
Fever; which I can make good by an undeniable demonstration to you, if you will
both of you promise not to forget the foundation I have hitherto been laying
down.


Bays. Why then I have this question to ask you, Mr. Crites, Were you ever at a
Quakers meeting?


Crites. Very frequently Sir.


Bays. Then tell me bona fide whether you ever saw a handsome Woman of that
sullen persuasion? Come confess the truth.


Crites. That I have, I can assure thee, little Bays.


Bays. You may take it from me, she was a Novice then, or else the heat of her
zeal had certainly discolored and sowr'd her countenance, and made her look
like the rest of her Sex in those Pagan Assemblies. It is an Article of my
Faith, that it is as impossible for a Woman to be a Quaker any time and
handsome, as it is impossible for one to be a man of business and not dull: If
you take a Barrel of Ale and place it to the Sunshine of your backside,
perhaps in the first week you will find no alteration, but in two or three months
it certainly turns to Vinegar.


Crites. Very right, Mr. Bays; but prithee shut your hands of this simile as
soon as you can.


Bays. So likewise a She- Quaker for the first half year may make a shift to
preserve her Beauty; but afterward, in spite of all Spanish Wool and
Pomatums, the heat of her Religion will contract the Muscles in her face: Which
is the reason that all your thorough-paced Women of that opinion have an
awkward grinning sort of a look, (for grinning, whether you know it or no, is
nothing else but a contraction of the Muscles) and are as easily known by it
all the World over, as the men are by their set looks, formal Hats, and short
Cravats.


Eugen. If you have done with this point, Mr. Bays, pray let me entreat you to
reassume the business of the Cordial.


Bays. Well then, Ale and Beer being, for these reasons I mentioned, thus
disbanded, we were forced to travel to the Canaries for a Cordial, and
accordingly brought over Potent Catholic Sack; Sack had not long danced about
in Thimbles and Spoonfuls, but it desired to acquit the Apothecaries Shop, was
very ambitious to inhabit a Tavern-Vault, and longed extremely to converse with
men of Wit and Gayety, instead of Gossips, Nurses, Mid-wifes, and decrepit
Aldermen: But as familiarity makes every thing in the World contemptible, so in
a short time Sack grew out of fashion, ceased to perform its ancient office of
a Cordial; and toward the latter end of the late Usurpation, when we took
Iamaica from the Spaniards, was forced to resign it self to potent Brandy.
Brandy having had a large uncontrolled, but a short reign, stands now upon its
Tiptoes, and is making way for the Spirits of Wine.


Crites. From what signs is it, Mr. Bays, that you conclude the downfall and
overthrow of Brandy? To my poor judgment now, it seems as puissant and
well-beloved a Monarch as ever.


Bays. Because it has of late years removed out of the City into the Country,
where I am sure it must, like the Goddess of Justice, take its last farewell of
Mortals. Now after we have accustomed our selves to Spirits of Wine one half a
score years, and consequently, heated our Tenements of Clay, our bodies, to the
highest degree imaginable, if, as I told you before, the Conflagration does not
then happen, according to this sure Infallible Calculation, mind me, Mr.
Crites, I give you free leave before your fuiend here, to post me up in a
Gazette, for as scandalous an Author as the Modern Dealer in Natural History;
or, if that will not serve your turn, as the whole litter of Narrative-mongers,
bound up in a Volume.


Eugen. Truly, Mr. Bays, this is a very astonishing, strange notion of yours,
as I ever heard in my life.


Bays. I must needs value my self somewhat upon it, because it is properly the
product of my imagination, and no person in the World ever thought of it
before. But, Gentlemen, you will entertain more favorable thoughts of this
discovery, I Am confiden^, if you will do me the honor to judge impartially of
these two following collateral arguments, which unless, I am extremely deceived
in passing my opinion of things, very strongly back, and confirm the aforesaid
Hypothesis. The first is the immoderate and excessive taking of Tobacco, which
pestilent, noisome weed, was brought into Europe much about the time when
Calvin tapp'd his Anti-Hierarchichal Hogshead of Presbytery at Geneva. You are
sensible that Children smoke more now-adays, than even Soldiers and Carmen did
heretofore; and that more of this nasty stuff is spent at a beastly City-feast,
than would have served the whole Kingdom formerly. Now Tobacco drys the Brain,
inflames the Blood, increases Choler, and takes away all that radical moisture,
which even the Brandy had the generosity to spare. So much for the first --


Crites. Before you proceed any further, Mr. Bays, pray what do you think of
the mighty request that Snuff and Coffee are in? You know both of them are
exceeding dryers; will not this hint now serve to illustrate your Cause?


Bays. You may say what you please of Coffee, but not a word of Snuff, Mr.
Crites, as you value your reputation, it is too sacred a thing to be jested
with; you have free liberty from your Friend Bays, to make bold with every
thing in the world, excepting Snuff and the dispensing Power. The other thing
which confirmed me in this opinion, is likewise very shrewd and convincing, I
could not but observe, Gentlemen, the great use of Deal within these few years
every where.


Eugen. And what of that, Mr. Bays, you have no quarrel sure to the
Norway-Company, for importing so much of the King of Denmarks Timber.


Bays. Not the least Sir; but Deal, you know, by reason of its unctuous
resinous substance, is the soonest fired, and the hardest to be extinguished of
any Timber in Dodona's Grove, and therefore it seemed to me a flat design of
providence, to engage mankind in this tickle, short-lived sort of building, to
fit their Houses as well as their Bodies, for the Universal Conflagration: You
know quos vult perdere Jupiter dementat; and I am sure, those that Jupiter
intends to destroy by fire, those will Jupiter by several methods and
qualifications prepare and fitten for that business; for it is not the way of
providence to do things on the sudden, but to proceed by degrees, to dispose
every particular circumstance for the ensuing affair, and stay till there is a
joint concurrence in all the parts to advance the mighty Catastrophe. Thus,
Gentlemen, you have my opinion of the whole, and if you think it deserves the
name of an Essay, perhaps I may have it published amongst the curiosities of
the next Bibliotheque Universal, or printed by way of Appendix, or Suppliment
to Burnets Theoria telluris.


Crites. I must confess, Mr. Bays, it deserves a public appearance, if you
please to oblige the world so far, which however you seemed very loath to do;
but under favor, Sir, how came this same Speculative point to bring you over
to the Catholic party.


Bays. I Will tell you Sir, hoping that the reasons I am going to ennumerate,
which were of that efficacy as to reduce me, may be able to prevail upon both
of you to quit your erroneous persuasion: I must confess my unskilfulness in a
business of this nature; and that I have not taken upon me the weighty province
of gaining Converts long enough to say I shall make no mistakes in the
management; and therefore I must secure my self of your pardon before I advance
into so intricate an undertaking -- After I had thus fallen upon this
metaphysical contemplation, I found my self concerned to make the best
provision for my Soul that I could, and that it was high time to consider the
circumstances of my wretched condition. I reflected upon the unhappy
miscarriages and over-boilings of my Youth, the solemn transgressions of my
manhood; the passion, pride, and complicated sins of my Old Age; I called to
mind the injuries I had done both Church and State, and all those unlawful,
brutal attempts, which in my former days of Ignorance, I had made upon all the
degrees of mankind, and which I have so copiously related to you. At last,
after an impartial unprejudiced scrutiny into all the visible Churches of the
Universe, I found that the Catholics only proceeded upon sure grounds; that
theirs was the well constituted Church which maintained Infallibility at its
own cost and charges, while all other Assemblies declined the expense; that it
had the discretion to keep an Ensuring Office in the Camera Apostolica, and for
a small consideration would secure a man's Tenement, with setting a Papal
Phoenix upon it, from all damages of Fire hereafter. -- Wherefore, at that very
moment I shifted my party, and betook my self to that Primitive Indulgent
Mother, which heretofore converted our Ancestors from Paganism, and has ever
since been attended and adorned with a continued series of Miracles.


Crites. I hope however, Mr. Bays, you will preserve a charitable thought of the
established Religion, for all it came from King Henry's incontinence, since
your own Reformation proceeded from a Debauch, and had its birth, growth and
full maturity in a Brandishop.


Bays. I might be inclined Sir, to do such a thing, if it could be allowed with
any tolerable convenience, but if you once forbid a Romanist to meddle with
that Topic, he has as little to say as a Bully when you tie him up from
swearing; or a Poet, when you debar him the liberty of repeating* It Is not to
be granted, Mr. Crites. But now, because I will proceed regularly in my
discourse, you shall first of all hear those exceptions which I made to the
Protestant Assemblies; and secondly, the reasons which confirmed and settled me
in the bosom of the Roman Catholic Church.


Eugen. With all my heart, but I think we had best retire to some more
convenient place in the Walks, for I see some company coming forward.


Bays. God so* It Is the Learned Author of the Nubes Testium, and the worthy
person who has done the Christian World such Service, in proving that the
belief of a Trinity is not settled upon a better bottom than
Transubstantiation: I have promised, now I remember, to dine with them at a
Noble Gentleman's in the Hay-Market, and therefore I must request you to excuse
me at present -- But if you please to give me the meeting at Wills
Coffee-house, about Three in the Afternoon, we will remove into a private room,
where over a Dish of Tea, we may debate this important affair with all the
solitude imaginable.


Crites. Agreed, Mr. Bays, We Will not fail at the place and hour appointed to
wait upon you. Antiquam exquirite matrem is the word, and so farewell.


FINIS.

