A LETTER Sent To Mr. SPEAKER, From the Commissioners in the County of ESSEX,
concerning the MILITIA.

Together with A Relation of diverse passages in Ireland, sent over in a Letter.

June 8. 1642.
Ordered by the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, that these two
Letters be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.

A Letter sent to Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker,
HAving in obedience to the Order of both Houses attended the Lo. Lieutenant of
the County of Essex this day to Brent Wood, for the putting of the Ordnance of
the Militia of this County in execution; his Lordship has directed us to give
you an account of the service, so far as it could be yet prosecuted, as he
has himself done to the house of Lords. There were five Companies of the
ordinary Train bond, this day drawn into the field, being about a 4th part of
the trained bonds of his County, and all that were directed to meet at this
place, their numbers were full, and their Arms complete, a supply being made
by volunteers of those Arms that were carried forth of the County, upon the
late expedition for Scorland; and one of the said Companies (being under the
charge of Captain Massam) was doubled to the usual proportion, a sixth
company did appear at this place, consisting of about five hundred
Volunteeres, under command of Captain Barrington, youngest son of Sir Thomas
Barington. The Declaration of both Houses touchtheir indempnitie, was read in
the head of each Company, and the Captains, Officers and Soldiers being
req^ired by the Lord Lieutenant, to observe such further directions as in
pursuance of the said Ordinance should be hereafter given them in charge by his
Lordship, or us his Deputy Lieutenants, for the service of his Majesty, and the
Parliament, in defense of the Kingdom, they did unanimously express a
resolution so to do, and in the same cheerfully to spend their lives and
Fortunes*

Brentt Word 7 of June 1642. Thomas Barrington William Masham William Hicks
Mars. Loomley, Thomas Cheek. Henry Mildmay. Har. Grimston. Ric. Everard. John
Barrington.


Carlingford the 24. of May, 1642.
Master Maurice Tomson.
SIR,
HUmble salutes; my last unto you was from Carrickvergus of the 25. past,
wherein I declared at large, what I conceived of the affairs of this Country,
as also how that I was designed for this place, laden with provision for the
Army, who then was designed to take the Newry. It pleased God, that on the 18.
past, I arrived here, where I found my self surrounded with great companies of
the Rebels, whom I did know, expected daily a supply of Munition, wherefore to
put them in hopes, I displayed no Colors, our men seeking the Channel, came
with their boats somewhat near the shore, whom the Rebels bid very welcome,
and demanded whence we came, the one side of the Harbor, my men answered from
Hamborough, and on the other side, they said from France, (both which sayings
was without my consent) but fourteen of the Rebels soon came aboard, in hopes
to buy Powder and Arms, (whom I laid in Irons) and presently shot diverse guns,
as healths, in hopes to get some more from the shore, it being toward night,
my project failed, wherefore the next morning, I fell to battering the Town of
Carlingford, but the same lay so far off, that I could do no great execution
from our Ship, she being almost without distance, wherefore I presently raised
a platform upon a great open boat, which the night before I had taken, and
thereon mounted two pieces of Ordnance, and so with all my force I could spare,
leaving my Ship well manned, I approached within a Musket shot of the Town,
and battered the same with our two guns, and being within call of the Kings
Castle, the Rebels challenged me to land, promising they would meet me with
half my number, whereupon I forthwith drew to a point, where I knew my self
secure, and their landed 64. men, being within a Musket shot of the Town,
having my great guns, ready to charge them at or as they should approach, There
I continued a long while in order of battle, but the Enemy approached not,
though in great numbers, but from that time began to burn the Town, and carry
their goods into the Mountains, and the next day we had a Parley, wherein I
was resolved to have redeemed some English people, against my prisoners. But
the next morning before day, they fearing our coming a shore, fired all the
Town and Castles, and left them on fire unto us, wherein are six Irish
Castles, and the Kings Castle besides, being a strong hold, wherein I forthwith
put a garrison of my own Seamen, and kept the same about fifteen days, unt
ill I procured from Sir Henry Tichbourne relief from Dundalke, unto whom I
surrendered the said Town and Castle, about the time of our taking this place.
The Army was likewise come to the Newry, which they took in without many shot,
the Soldiers flying away from them, as soon as they hea rd the Army marched
toward them, the Ditto Army for want of some necesseries, are marched to
Carrickvergus, where three days since they are arrived without any opposition,
being not above 3500, men, under command of a gallant Soldier Colonel Mouro,
and for my own part I am designed thither, only wait for a fair wind, where I
hope to find some letters from you, being exceedingly desirous to hear your
News. It Is now daily more and more to be seen and expected that famine must
do that which our swords cannot, for I do now conceive they will never stand
to fight any considerable battle, but will continue in the Woods, Bogs, and
Mountains, all day, and in the night they steal, fire and burn, and will so
continue still, removing as the Army moves, and will never fight except upon
great advantage, and indeed as yet they have very little powder and few arms,
and are daily more and more discouraged, finding no supply. As for the common
poor people, I believe a great part of them were at first forced to this
action, by the threats of the great ones, and the curses of Priests if they did
not; it is believed most of them would lay down their arms at the feet of the
British, provided they might save their lives only, but this were
dishonorable, and soon would beget a new Rebellion, they have great store of
Cattle in the Mountains with them, but it is hoped this winter coming will
shrink them, and their Garrons which they in holes have hid, so that I doubt
not but famine will soon come in among them afterward, and do much more
execution then all our Armies if they were five times more, especially if they
be deprived of this summers course by our forces, as is hoped.

I have Cowes enough, but as yet they are hardly man's meat, nor will not be
this two months. The Ship Peter is guarding the North Coast, and has relieved
Colraine and London Derry with ammunition. Thus hoping to hear of your
welfare, I take leave for present, and rest,

Your Humble Servant John Brookhaven.

FINIS.

