THE SAINTS Imperfection. OR A Sermon wherein is made apparent, 1. That in
Christian Religion, there may be a true pretense, with a real intention,
without sufficient intention, or attendance therein. 2. That neither Covenant
nor Promise, etc. are sufficient in the way of salvation, without a
methodicall, continual, and profitable proceeding therein. 3. That knowing
Christians are to be taught the first principles of Religion. 4. That it is a
believers duty to advantage his spiritual estate, by a right and profitable
Progress therein. 5. That neither privilege, nor large capacity, seconded
with saving grace, can exempt the elect from a loss in spiritual affairs,
except heed and pains be taken therein. 9. That neither Nobility, nor honor,
knowledge, nor virtue, may detain a Minister from telling a people of their
sad and dangerous condition. Whereunto is added an Use of direction, or
information unto all Hearers.
By Jo. Brookbank, Minister of Gods Word.

1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with Milk, and not with meat. 1 Pet. 2.2. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. Heb
1.2.1. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us. London, Printed
for VV:L, at Pauls-Chain, 1656.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, since the turmoyles of these present times, it was my hap in
one of the tempests thereof, to meet with one of our Novellists, whose tongues
are better furnished with the words of Scripture, then their heads with the
understanding thereof: him I found, (as it is the property of all Sectaries) to
carry a greater sound then substance of true Religion, which does certainly
conclude, that their spiritual building is not only upon a sandy foundation,
but without frame or fabric: experience whereof I found in him, with whom I
then met, who was altogether ignorant, what is meant by these terms Principles
of Religion; which weakness I much lamented, not only in him alone, but
generally in most part of Christians: which out of my well-wishes, for the good
of Gods people) constrained me (though the unworthiest of Christ's Ministers) to
contrive somewhat, advantageous to Gods Church, in directing and advising weak
and ignorant Christians, how to learn a sure and safe method, profitable for
the laying down of a firm and certain foundation of saving knowledge, and that
those who will be pleased to make use thereof, may know how to make the
spiritual building of their souls, permanent and eternal: for this purpose I
made choice of this Text, (whence I have raised this Discourse,) in the
pondering whereof, this piece first praesented it self unto my meditation,
which now for thy benefit, I praesent unto thee, as a praeparation to that my
purpose which if thou will be pleased to entertain courteously, I shall (God
willing) in due time praesent thee with my first intention, however according
to my abilities, I am ever

Thine in Christ Jesus, Jo: Brookesbanke.

THE SAINTS Imperfection.
HEBR. 5.12. Ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God.


THis whole verse is an Apostolical reproof, Objurgatio Apostolica, Bez.
wherein the Hebrews are checked, both for a non-proficiency, and a loss in
Christianity: and it does consist of three Generals.

1. Their Negligence. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers.

2. Their Ignorance. Ye have need that one teach you again.

3. Their Loss, and weakness. And are become such as stand in need of milk,
and not of strong meat.

converted Jews) discovers unto us this truth; that, A people may be truly
religious, and yet so far deficient therein, that though the high Priest, and
Bishop of our Souls, (Christ Jesus) be therein truly praetended, and really
intended, yet he may be therein too slightly attended: for they were dull of
hearing, v. 11. having too remissely spent their time, and were both weak and
ignorant, For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one
teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are
become such as stand in need of milk, and not of strong meat.

My text is the middle or second part of the verse, viz. their Ignorance; Ye
have need that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the
oracles of God: which like unto a book opens it self, into two full and
profitable pages or parts.

1. Their Necessity; Ye have need that one teach you again.

2. What they were necessitated to know: Which he the first principles of the
Oracles of God. Method and brevity enforce me (for the present) to forbear the
latter, and to fall only upon the former, which is their necessity; Ye have
need that one teach you again. Wherein we may observe four sections or
columns.

1. The parties to be taught; (...), ye, you, that is, the believing Hebrews,
unto whom (in particular) this Epistle was directed.

2. (...).
Their want, (...)need, ye have need.

3. That whereof they stood in need, (...), to be taught, that one teach you.

4. Their decrease in knowledge, (...), again, Ye have need that one teach you
again.

Of each which in their order, Of the parties the Hebrews.
and first of the parties (...), ye, you; the Hebrews, a people noble in their
Pedigree, honorable in their titles, eminent in their Praerogative, exceeding
in their Privileges.

1. Noble in their Pedigree, Noble in their Pedigree.
being a Nation too excessively curious in their Genealogies, and able to
derive their Lineage punctually from the first of men, their Original taking
its rise almost with time it self, beginning in our great Grandparents Adam,
and Eve, and continued by the warrant of Canonical scripture, (in the nine
first chapters of 1 Chronicles. and Luke the 3. from the 23 verse, unto the end of
the chapter) unto the birth of him, who is the joy of the whole earth, Jesus
Christ our Savior, by whom they had the greatest, highest, and most peculiar,
outward nobility, that ever did or could befall them.

2. Honorable in their titles, Honorable in their Titles
called Hebrews from Eber son of Salah Noah's great grandchild, Genesis 11 14.
which by them who understand that language is translated. Passage, or Passing.
Passage in a passive signification, they being an intermedium in the conveyance
of grace, betwixt God and other people, they receiving (if I may so speak) all
Gods ordinances at the first hand, which were by them delivered unto all other
Nations at the second hand. Passing in an Active signification, they being more
near unto God, in their services then other people, and therefore surpassing
them, in the truth and purity of a religious worship, of the true pure and
eternal God. They be likewise called Israelites, from Israel, a name given
unto Jacob, Genesis 32.28. (which signifies Prince of God, or Conqueror of God)
who was a chief Patriarch of these people, which did praevail with God, in all
their services. viz. Prayers, Sacrifices etc. And therefore they be usually
called the children of Israel, as Deuteronomy. 33.1. and frequently the People of
Israel, and St. Peter seems to labor to insinuate himself into them, in this
appellation, ye men of Israel, Act. 2.22. These were a people, of whom it was
most properly said: ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar, or (as our last translation has it in the margent,) a
purchased people. 1 Pet. 2.9. They be likewise called Jews from Judah, Jacobs
fourth son, Genesis 29 35. which signifies Praise, they being the praise of God,
and the glory of the whole earth; they have titles far greater then these,
terms of a nearer relation to the Deity, as his peculiar treasure, Exodus: 19.5.
The people of the Lord, Dev: 2^ ^^. The children of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 14.1. His
first born, Exodus: 4.22. His Inheritance, 1 Kings 8.51. The lot of his
Inheritance, Jer. 10.16. which titles be neither bare nor barren, but
fruitful, profitable and pleasant, for they were his Vineyard, Psalm. 80.15.
Isa. 5.1. Mat. 21.23.

Thirdly, Eminent in their Prerogative. Deuteronomy. 10.15 and 14.2.
eminent in their praerogative: God chose them to be a special people unto
himself, above all people that were upon the face of the earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. To
make them high, above all nations which he has made, in praise, and in name,
and in honor. Deuteronomy. 26.19. Therefore was he more nigh unto them then any
Nation. Deuteronomy. 4.7. They received his word before any Nation. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
In Judah (that is, the country of the Jews) is God known: his name is great
in Jsrael, (that was the name of the ten Tribes.) In Salem (that is, Jerusalem,
the chief city of the Jews) also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in
Sion, (the name of the hill whereon the Temple stood) Psalm. 76.1, 2. And thou
(that is, mount Sion or Jerusalem) art more glorious and more excellent, then
the mountains of prey, that is, Ainsworth upon that place.
then other Nations which lived by Tyrranny, Robbery, Rapine, and cruelty,
from them is Salvation, Ioh. 4.22. and unto them only did Christ preach in the
flesh, Mat. 15.24. denominating them children, the Gentiles dogs, v. 26.
Therefore he would not permit his Twelve Disciples, to preach the glad tidings
of the Gospel of peace to the Gentiles, nor to any City of the Samaritans,
Mat. 10.5, v. 6. By Israel is to be understood Judah, the Jews being
Israelites, (...) by way of excellency.
6. before they had at the least heard of the same beginning at Jerusalem, Lu.
24.47. which concludes that as the Elect are said to be a kind of the first
fruits of the creatures, Iam. 1.18. so the Jews may be said to be a kind of
first fruits of the Elect, and therefore are they called primi Ecclesiae, the
first men of the Church; and St. Augustine calls them Primores Ecclesiae, the
chief men of the Church; which excellency, and praecedency, belongs unto them
by right of Covenant, which was first made with them and their seed, Act. ^.39.

Fourthly, Exceeding in their Privileges.
Exceeding in their Privileges, the Lord in an extraordinary manner
acknowledges himself to be the God of the Hebrews, Exodus 3.18. and promised
upon their obedience to set them on high above all Nations of the earth,
attending them with all blessings. Deuteronomy. 28.1.2. and Lev. 26.3.4. etc. and to
make them a kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation, Exodus 19.5.6. unto them he
did commit his oracles, Romans 3.2. but of all this was the greatest privilege,
that they enjoyed the honor of our Saviors birth, and the first proffer of
him: amongst eight several Privileges, S. Paul ends in this as the chiefest,
thus extolling them; who are Isaelites; to whom pertains the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants (or as the margent of our last translation,
testaments) and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the
promises, whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, Romans 9, 4, 5. And when the same Apostle goes about to make good the
authority of his Apostleship, and to defend it from reproach, he uses his
Privileges which belonged to him as he was a Jew, as the strongest arguments
to defend the same. Are they Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? so am I:
are they of the seed of Abraham? so am I. 2 Cor. 11.22. accounting them as the
greatest carnal blessings, which belong unto men. Phil. 3.5, 6. all which
Privileges belonged unto them as they were Jews, and were by them enjoyed as
they were under the covenant: Whereunto may be added, that these Hebrews had
greater Privileges then these, in being Christians, for they were holy
brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, chap. 3.1. of whom the Author of
this Epistle was persuaded things that accompany salvation, because of their
work and labor of love, which they had showed toward the name of Christ in
ministering to the Saints, chap. 6.9.10. Nevertheless here we see, they stand
in need to be taught again, which be the first principles of the oracles of
God. Whence we may learn; that, There is neither Covenant, nor Promise, (though
God bear a part therein) Claim, nor Title, Privilege, nor Praerogative, Love
nor Devotion, sufficient in the ways of salvation, without a methodicall,
continual, and profitable proceeding in the knowledge of Christ and his word.
Hebrews, though they were every way thus completely qualified, yet neglecting
time and method, they were dull of hearing, not able to receive, what was to be
delivered concerning Christ: and babes fit only for milk, and not for strong
meat; standing in need to be taught again, which be the first Principles of the
oracles of God: which brings me from the first part of the text the Hebrews,
which were the parties, unto the second which is their want; ye have need.

The Parties want is the 2d. column or section, The Parties wants.
in their necessity: (...)need; ye have need, which word in this phrase
(...)has several acceptions, signifying sometimes necessity, Mat. 14.16. they
need not depart, that is, (...).
there is no necessity of their departure; therefore Beza translates my text,
necesse habetis. ye have one thing necessary; ye have a necessity that one
teach you again: (...).
Secondly, it is sometimes taken for Indigence or want, Ephesians. 4.28. to give to
him that needs; that is, to him that is in want, therefore the vulgar
translation reads it in ligetis; (...) pro (...). per Hypallagen.
ye want or are in want: Thirdly it is translated Use. Ephesians. 4.29. which is
good to the use of edifying, that is, which is useful to edifying; whereupon
Erasmus reads it opus habetis ye have use, or it is useful that one teach you
again. In all our English translations which I have met with, it is need, a
word aequivalent unto all these several acceptions, and if we take it in any
or all these senses, it makes for our good: and first, in the first, if it be
taken for necessary or necessity; the thing that these Hebrews were, and we
are to be taught, being the scriptures here called the oracles of God; for the
word of God is a lamp or candle unto the feet of every believer, Psalm. 119.105.
whereunto we are to give heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
2 Pet. Willet Synop. p. 40.
1.19. The scripture is both a light of instruction, to teach us our way: and
of direction, to guide us therein. The law (or doctrine) of the Lord is
perfect, converting, (or restoring) the soul; the testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple. Psalm. 19.7. Therefore is it necessary that we be
taught again, which be the first principles of the oracles of God. In the
second sense we are in want of this Doctrine or teaching: for naturally we have
our understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in us, because of the blindness of our hearts. Ephesians. 4.18.
And the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them. 2 Cor. 4.4. Whosoever is a believer, if he do not
labor after Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly kindeness, and Charity, 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. he is blind and cannot
see afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. v. 9.
And therefore is in want that one teach him again which be the first,
principles of the oracles of God. Thirdly, it may be profitable unto us as it
denotates use, when we consider the end whereunto every man ought to tend,
whether it be external, the glory of God, which is happiness infinite and
eternal; or internal, the salvation of our souls, which is life everlasting:
if it be that former, all enterprises, our eating and drinking, and whatsoever
we do ought to aim thereat. 1 Cor. 10.31. And that our lives may conduce unto
the glory and praise of God, we must be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, whereunto love in an increase of knowledge, judgment, and
sincerity is requisite. Phil. 19, 10, 11. Which life will be a true praise of
him, who is glorified thereby, Psalm. 50.23. Who expects praise with
understanding, Psalm. 47.7. which understanding is attained by the holy
scriptures through Faith. 2 Timothy 3.15. Or if it be this latter which is
internal, our salvation, that is life eternal, we must receive the same by
Christ Jesus, who is the giver thereof, John. 10.28. and the way thereunto,
Ioh. 14.6. whom to know is eternal life, Ioh. 17.3. and is taught in the
scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. In this sense therefore ye have use, or it is useful
that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God.
Besides, Gods word is the joy of his Servants, Ier. 15.16. and their safety in
affliction, Psa. 119.92. it is unto them most pleasant, and nourishing food and
enriching wealth, Psalm. 19.10. better then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm.
^9.72. and 127. sweeter then honey, v. 103. all the elect be right branches of
the true Vine, whose meat and drink it is, to do the will of his Father that
sent him, Ioh. 4.34. they take a delight to do his will: his law is within
their heart, Psalm. 40.8. Thus collecting what has been said in this part, A
right knowledge in the word of God is so requisite in Christians, that though
they be commendable for religion, yet it is a necessary, releeving, useful and
delightful matter, to be taught which be the first principles of the cracles
of God. Hebrews were a people commended by the Apostle for their love, labor,
devotion, and religion, yet so shallow in the knowledge of our Savior Jesus
Christ, that they stand in need to be taught again the first principles of
this religion, which directs me from their want, unto the matter thereof,
teaching. Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles
of the oracles of God.

The third column or section, Whereof they stood in need.
of the first part or page of my text, is that whereof these Hebrews stood in
need, and that is (...)to be taught, that one teach you: teach? what is there
to be taught? which be the first principles of the Oracles of God. The word in
the Greek here translated oracles, properly signifies, eloquent words, but
usually, divine answers, and here both in the former and the latter sense, must
needs signify the written word of God, which is the Canonical scripture, then
which none is more eloquent, more Divine, nor more answering our doubts and
demands, the sum and end of which sacred scripture, is Jesus Christ our
Savior, of whom the Apostle had many things to say, and hard to be uttered,
not because they are difficult or abstruse in themselves, but because they to
whom they were directed, were dull of hearing, v. 11. and therefore in their
learning the doctrine of Christianity, they must first be taught, which be the
first principles of these oracles of God. Which may seem most strange unto
them who understand the state and condition, wherein these Hebrews were at
that time, when this Epistle was writ unto them: who might to the least
scruple, concerning their knowledge of their Savior, have answered in the
words of their forefathers, the men of Judah in another case, unto the men of
Israel concerning his type David, our high Priest, the King is near of kin to
us, 2 Samuel 19.42. was not he borne in Bethlehem of Judah? has not he been
conversant with us? has not he walked in our streets? preached in our Temple?
taught in our Synagogues? has nor he wrought many miracles amongst us? is it
not he that has caused our lame to walk? our blind to see? and our poor to
receive the Gospel? was not he crucified before our eyes? is not his Sepulcher
with us? did not he forty days after his resurrection, deprive us of his
bodily praesence, by his Ascension up into Heaven, from the Mount of O livet,
by his own power, where he sits, Propria virtute.
at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and shall come from thence, to
judge the quick and the dead? Did not his doctrine astonish his auditory, and
cause us to confess his supposed father, his mother, and kindred to live
amongst us? Mar. 6.2, 3. How should we be ignorant of him? that we should be
thus ignorant, is both strange and improbable: did not our country man, and
Apostle Peter, in one Sermon wherein this our Savior was taught us, Acts 2.41.
convert three thousand of our souls in one day, bringing us all therewith,
into such amazement, and astonishment, that we being pricked at the heart, with
a sense of our sins, verse 37.
cried out unto him and his fellow Apostles, men and brethren, what shall we
do? whereupon we received the Sacraments, which are signs and seals of our
profession of the Doctrine of Christianity, verse 42.
we continuing in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayers; Can there be any fuller or clearer demonstration of our
security and knowledge through a true faith in Christ? and be not these the
first principles of this faith? How is it the^ that we are thus upbraided that
we stand in need to be taught again, which be the first principles of the
oracles of God. This opinion of us must needs be too prejudicate and injurious.
To which it is replied. The Apostle does grant, they had some smattering in the
knowledge of Christ, for they were babes, that is, they stood in need to be
instructed in the first grounds and rudiments of Christian religion, for their
senses were not so exercised therein, that they were able to discern good and
evil. v. 14. therefore they stood in need of a strengthening, confirming, and
increasing of their understanding, that they might conceive fully and aright,
what that is which the Apostle was about to deliver concerning our Savior: and
though it may be granted that the Hebrews had so much knowledge, as ^^re
claim is laid unto, there is more requis^te to t^^ deserve the name of knowing
Christians, as to be able to give account of the prophesies of the old
Testament fulfilled in the new, by Christ who is the subject of both: and how
he is King over his Church: Priest to his Elect: and Prophet to his people:
how by him the typical Priesthood is abrogated, and the ceremonial Law taken
away, in all which the Apostle is very exact in this Epistle, all which in this
part considered together, make thus much, that, A good improvement of the best
means of saving knowledge, without a right and profitable use, and proceeding
therein, comes far short of a Christian duty. For these Hebrews though they
were auditors and spectators of the saving words and works, For when for the
time they ought to be teachers, they had need that one teach them again, which
be the first principles of the oracles of God: being babes which are unskilful
in the words of righteousness, and have need of milk, and not of strong
meat. Wherein it is very remarkable, that they were to be taught again; which
leads me from that whereof they stood in need, which was to be taught, unto
their decrease in knowledge expressed in this Adverb Again.

The fourth and last particular of this their necessity is their decrease in
knowledge, Their decrease in knowledge.
in this word (...) again, which here is the last and greatest aggravation of
their ignorance, if we consider Gods dealing with them, and their negligence in
a right use of his inconceivable mercies and favors, which he had so freely
and plentifully bestowed upon them. If we consider Gods dealing with them, he
was very precise, in the observance of their Prerogative. For as at the
promulgation of the Law in the old Testament, he made choice of them before any
other Nation, so in the new Testament at the first preaching of the Gospel, he
preferred them before all other people, Luke 24.47. and more then this, God
having raised up his Son, sent him to bless them first, in turning them from
their iniquities, Acts 3.26. And herein is their prerogative much extended,
that our Savior made choice of Jews and Hebrews to be his 12. Apostles, for
the first and principal administration of his Gospel: and as God was precise
in the observance of their Prerogative, so likewise he was strict in giving a
respect unto their Privileges; our Savior told the woman of Canaan, it is not
meet to take the childrens bread and to cast it unto dogs, Matthew. 15.26. and
those which were scattered abroad, upon the persecution that arose about
Stephen, preached the word to none but the Jews only, until they came to
Antioch, Acts 11.19, 20. To the children of the stock of Abraham was the word
of salvation sent, Acts 13.26. all which transcendent blessings (wherewith God
had ennobled them) we see they slighted and neglected; which mightily
aggravates not only their non-proficiency, but their decrease in the knowledge
of true Religion, by neglecting a right use of that extraordinary means of
salvation, which God had bestowed upon them: for whereas for the time they
ought to be teachers, they had need yet to be taught, and that again, which be
the first principles of the oracles of God, and though the first preaching of
the word of God, was necessary for them not only in respect unto their
Privileges and Prerogative, but also in a relation unto Gods promise made unto
them, the performance whereof was necessary for their salvation, Acts 13.46.
they were not yet able to receive strong meat, but were still babes fit only
for milk. Moreover they were men of a large capacity in the knowledge of the
law, which was the ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3.7. and the ministration of
condemnation, verse. 9. herein (which was but the Covenant of the Law.) They
knew the will of God, and approved the things that were more excellent (or, as
our last margent varies it, tried the things that differ) being instructed out
of the law, and were confident that they themselves were guides of the blind, a
light of them which are in darkness, instructers of the foolish, teachers of
babes, which had the form of knowledge and of truth in the Law, Romans 2.18,
19, 20. But in the understanding of the doctrine of Christianity, which is the
Covenant of the Gospel, they were babes and dull of hearing, which much
aggravates their ignorance and negligence; but this makes them more
inexcusable, (to be within the covenant of grace: (for the Author of this
Epistle was persuaded of their salvation, cha. 6.9, 10.) and to forget the
words of reconciliation and eternal life, after they had received the same
from the Lord of life in person, and his Apostles, who were eyewitnesses of
the same, chap. 2.3.4. and had entertained a confidence therein, that they
stand in need to be taught again, the first principles of the oracles of God:
This condition of theirs may teach us thus much, that, Christians endued with
greatest Privileges, and largest capacities, seconded with saving grace,
without a heedful care, and pains taken in their attained knowledge of the
oracles of God, cannot be exempted from a loss therein. For these Hebrews,
with them, not soothing nor clawing them, in their condition, but laying open
their wants. Ye have need that one teach you again; when for the time ye
ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the oracles of God: all which noted in such noble, Hebrews were,
may teach us thus much: that, There is neither Nobility nor honor, knowledge
nor virtue, sufficient to withold a Minister from telling his people of their
sad and dangerous condition. Hebrews, as has been sufficiently declared, were
all there, yet the Author of this Epistle reproves them of their negligence,
ignorance, and weakness, For when for the time, etc.

Thus I have in a brief and cursory manner, collected something from each
particular in the former part of my Text; the Hebrews Christian necessity in
their right knowledge of the word of God, from these words, ye have need that
one teach you again; wherein it may be expected, that having thus followed the
usual popular way, I should have made Use and Application, of each Doctrinall
observation, in order as they have been collected, which I hope Candid Readers
will be pleased to excu^e, because brevity has enforced a forbearance thereof,
I trusting (as I pray God they may,) that all heedfull and industrious
Christians which shall read this discourse, will of themselves make more
profitable use and application of all divine practical lessons, for their own
spiritual good and profit, then usually may by man be administered: but that
herein I may somewhat commodiously answer your expectation, note that in this
discourse of these believing Hebrews, we may observe their slight attendance
of Christ in his ordinance, and in their profession of him; their neglect of
their Privilege, Prerogative, Love and Devotion, by an immethodicall,
unsuccessefull, and unprofitable progress in their knowledge of Christ and his
Word; their want of a necessary relief, use, and delight in the Word of God;
their neglect of their duty in not profiting by a commendable improvement of
the best means of salvation that ever people enjoyed, and all these aggravated
with loss and decay in Religion, and laid open, checked and reproved by an
Apostolical chiding, are (more then signs) convincing arguments of their
deficiency, and imperfection in true Religion and Christianity, and in a saving
knowledge of God and his Son Christ Jesus, as they be taught in the written
word. And if it was thus with such Noble, Privileged, covenanted, able, and
capable Christians, as these Hebrews were, then is it so much more now with all
other Believers; a consideration and survey whereof may prompt and suggest much
sovereign and wholesome direction unto all that profess Christian Religion.
First, Hearers, secondly, Teachers.

Direction unto Hearers. It being thus that these Hebrews were Believers, and
a people of the promised seed, under both Covenants, endued with greater
Privileges, Prerogatives, and relations unto God, and his Son Christ Jesus,
then any other Nation, they having not only received the Gospel, but made some
Proficiency therein, and were endued with such graces as promise salvation: yet
for all this that they were at a loss in saving knowledge, which brought them
unto such dullness of hearing (that is, understanding) that they were
unprofitable hearers, not able to understand what was requisite to be known
concerning Christ, but were babes and weakelings therein, standing in want,
necessity, and need of relief, light, use, joy and comfort, of the true and
saving spirit taught and directed in the sacred word of God, by a methodicall,
orderly, and profitable receiving the words of reconciliation, which is most
remarkable in them, because they lived under a more able and sufficient
ministry of the Gospel, and means of saving knowledge and understanding, then
any age either before or since ever afforded, for it was first spoken unto them
by the Lord himself, and after was confirmed by them which heard him, chap. 2
verse 3. whom the Evangelist Saint Luke calls eyewitnesses, Luke 1.2. An
Epither proper only in this sense unto the Apostles, wherewith the Apostle
Peter confirms his Authority, in the delivery of this Doctrine, 2 Pet. 1.16.
and Saint John the Apostle desirous to put the first promulgation of the
Doctrine of Christ (whereof these Hebrews were partakers) beyond all
exception, and opposition, guards the truth with the Apostles, hearing,
seeing, and handling thereof, 1 John 11. Therefore the Author of this Epistle
gives these Hebrews a particular and special charge, to be obedient unto
these their Ministers. Obey them that have rule over you, and submit your
selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you,
Heb. 13.17. Nevertheless, here it is apparent, neither the authority nor
ability, nor the power nor care of these their extraordinary Ministers, nor
other rarest helps could keep them in a right Decorum, in their knowledge of
Christ, and the Scriptures, For they were in need to be taught again, which
be the first Principles of the oracles of God, being babes, whose senses were
unexperienced in discerning good and evil, and unskilful in the words of
righteousness, which made them dull of hearing, that is, understanding, many
things concerning Christ, and capable only of milk, that is, the first
principles and rudiments of the Doctrine of Christ, viz. concerning Repentance,
Faith, Baptism, laying on of hands, Resurrection of the dead, Judgment, Chap.
6.1, 2. The apprehension whereof in these honorable believers, may teach all
Christians by their neglect to take warning, and to be wary and circumspect,
lest they fall into the like relapse; for if it was thus with the Hebrews who
were the natural Olive: how much more may it be so with us Gentiles, who be
the wild olive graffed in, cut out of the Olive Tree, which is wild by
nature: and graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive Tree, Romans 11.24. The
Jews they were natural branches, which for unbeleefe were cut off, that we
might be graffed in, verse 19. therefore we ought not to be high minded,
presuming neither of our title unto happiness, for theirs was far nearer, they
being under both Covenants, we but only under the Covenant of grace: neither of
our knowledge, theirs was far greater, and more experimental then ours can
be: neither of our graces, for they were holy Brethren, partakers of the
heavenly calling, chap. 3.1. neither of works, for they had done a work, a
labor of love, which they showed toward the name of Christ, by perseverance
in ministering to the Saints, chap. 6.10. Therefore if God would not spare, nor
pass by their neglect of the right use of the means of saving knowledge, how
shall he spare it in us? for if he would not spare unbeleeving Jews, neither
will he spare unbeleeving Gentiles, Romans 11.21. And if negligence, ignorance,
and weakness in knowledge of Christ and his word, was not winkt at, nor
smothered in these believing Hebrews, neither will it be past by in believing
Gentiles: which ought to teach us all circumspection, humility, and fear in
our walking here, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Romans 11.20. ever taking a continual care
rightly to examine our estates (in respect to God and man, repentance, faith
and obedience) by the prescript rule of Gods word, which is ever the mind of
the holy Ghost, ever having likewise a sure and special care, lest we follow
weak and blind, secure and careless guides; men who undertake to be
Ministers, and preachers of Gods Word, without either calling or abilities, for
the execution thereof: who desiring to be teachers of the law, understand not
what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. Whose words will eat as
does a canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. Of which sort are they which creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, (...) wish that all Christians (especially in these
distracted times) would often very seriously read over the whole Chapter.
2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8, 9.

Postscript.
REader, for the present I am enforced not to exceed this sheet and half,
wherein I have proposed a second use of the Saints Imperfection, therein
showing the greatness of the Ministers great charge, weighty calling, and
excellency of abilities requisite for the function; with an answer unto all
those arguments which I have met with, wherewith Intruders into the ministry,
seem to maintain their intrusion; therefore I purpose (God willing) hereafter
to salute thee with that, if thou accept kindly of this.

FINIS.

