Heraclitus Ridens Redivivus: OR, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN HARRY and ROGER,
Concerning the Times.
Qui semel verecundiae fines transierint, eos oportet gnaviter esse impudentes.
Cicero.
Harry. OH Sir, I am glad to see you: what Anno aetatis suae 72. and yet so
brave and lusty? having not of late seen any thing from you, I was afraid that
the difficulty of finding out Selfmurderer, had tempted you to make upon your
self some fatal experiment; like the Philosopher, when he could not solve the
motion of the Sea, threw himself into it.


Roger. I must confess, Harry, I have been of late (but much against my
inclinations) very useless; my talent and the present current of Affairs are
diametrically opposite: had the Church of England men been our own, I could
have run divisions upon the Dissenters ad infinitum; I would have proved them a
pack of Rebels for a whole Century; I would have made the last 88 to be of a
plece with this; and the Invincible Armada should have been believed to be no
more than a Phanatick Conspiracy.


Har. Nay the Dissenters are not at this time to be provoked.


Rog. That I am very sensible of, and therefore I have endeavored all I could
to bring my self to speak for them; but I find I do it so aukwardly, that you
would as soon cure the Rickets in one of my age, as bring any thing of mine
into shape that pleads for them: my Answer to the Letter to a Dissenter, I
hope, was an ample specimen of my good will; but my wit lay so much the other
way, that my answer was looked upon to be the worst of the four and twenty;
besides my printing of the Letter at large, made me in danger to be brought in
as a disperser of the Libel.


Har. I must tell you, Sir Roger, that Answer with some other late Writings of
yours, has a little atton'd for your old Sins; and tho the Dissenters do not
look upon you as their best friend; yet it has in some measure allayed the
enmity between them and the Serpent.


Rog. Now you put me in mind. I think I have given the Dissenters in some of my
last Observators a very pleasing farewell: If I be not mistaken, I spoke notable
things for the Toleration; and were it not for the reproach of
self-contradiction, I could have said twenty times as much.


Har. What need you fear self-contradiction so much? Cannot you say, That upon
a change of circumstances, a man may likewise vary his judgment as to
Toleration, with a respect to hic and nunc; [R. L's. Answer to the Letter to a
Dissenter, p. 12.] and what was abominable in one Reign, may be Law and Gospel
in another?


Rog. You speak right; to alter one's opinion, tho at threescore and twelve, I
think, is no very great blemish: But I that have so often challenged the World
to discover two clashing Sentences in all my Writings; that have carried my
matters always so even, that to discover one flaw in me, was as difficult as to
find out Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey's Murder: For me to speak home for
Toleration, would make it a harder task, to find an agreement between my Works,
than it would be to reconcile the two Churches.


Har. What is it you have so unluckily said, that will make it so heinous in you
to write for Toleration?


Rog. O I have spoke against the Dissenters such hard words, that now I could
willingly eat them; but withal they are so full of Gall and bitterness, that
should I swallow them, they were in danger to come up again.


Har. It Is but gilding them then, Sir Roger; a sew, Presents from the
Dissenting Party, I suppose, will make 'em run down easily: But what are these
cutting Expressions?


Rog. Why among other things, I have said, That Liberty of Conscience was a
Paradox against Law, Reason, Nature and Religion: [Obs. Vol. 3. Numb. 4^.] and
should I now unsay all this, the Wags would make such work with me, as I
formerly did with Richard and Baxter.


Har. Have you never an old Distinction then left to help you out at a dead
lift? I remember when I had occasion to consult your writings, distinguishing
was the best part of your talent.


Rog. That you must know I have already attempted, when I perceived that an
Indulgence was a brewing; I thought it was high time for me to draw back, and
pull in my horns; and therefore I immediately fell to work; and split the hair.
I artificially divided an Indulgence, into an Indulgence granted and an
Indulgence taken; into an Indulgence that shall owe it self to the favor of
the Prince, and an Indulgence that shall be got by the importunities of the
People: [Observ. Vol. 3. Numb. 43.] By thus nicely distinguishing the matter, I
was in hopes to rescue the present Toleration from the strokes of my former
animadversions; and in my Answer to the Letter to a Dissenter, my telling the
Dissenters that The Declaration of Indulgence ran to them, and not they to the
Declaration, [Answ. to the Letter, p. 3.] I think was a full Comment upon the
Text as it stands thus divided.


Har. Methinks, Sir Roger, this Distinction is very ridiculous, and I can
compare it to nothing more, than to a Decree of the Council of Constance,
which, I remember ever since I writ my Packet, runs thus: Upon the Debate
about the Communion in one kind, it was ordered, that when the Laity desired
the Cup, it was by all means to be denied them; but if they would submit to the
non obstante to our Savior's Institution, and not desire it; then they might
be allowed to partake of it: So that, Ask and ye shall receive, it seems is a
Rule that will by no means hold in the case of Toleration.


Rog. I must confess I was there hard put to it, and you may be sure, that
'twas not willingly that I took my leave so abruptly of the Observator, and
went trailing, like a Blood hound, after the Murder of Sir E. B. G.


Har. Let Murder alone, when all comes to all, it is but saying that he was a
Heretic, and then Killing you know is no Murder. Our business must now be to
get off the Penal Laws.


Rog. Penal Laws! Had my endeavors succeeded, they should have been kept up to
the end of the Chapter, ay and as tight too as any Fiddle-string: could I but
have brought over the Church of England men, our business had been done; and I
think I drew as good a Scheme for accommodation, as ever Cassander did, or the
Bishop of Spalato: Had that project took, the Penal Laws would have been as
useful to us as the Inquisition; and then I had boldly affirmed, That neither
the Church of England, nor the Members of the Church of Rome, could be joined
in a Toleration with the Phanaticks, but with the certain ruin of both. [Obs.
Vol. 3. Number. 134.]


Har. These Church of England men are very obstinate.


Rog. Ay, and perverse too; insomuch that you would as soon persuade the Pope
to part with the Franchises, as bring them to pray to the People in an unknown
tongue. The Other day a Friend of ours (I suppose after reading my Project of
Accommodation) asked a Churchman; in case the Church of Rome should give up
Transubstantiation, what would the Church of England part with in order to a
reconciliation: And what do think the Churchman offered in exchange?


Har. Why, the nine and thirty Articles, I suppose.


Rog. I protest only Passive Obedience; and I would no more take that Principle
from them; than I would unshackle a Madman. Passive valor is a virtue I love
in an Enemy; and it is as necessa y for our preservation that they hold this
Doctrine, as it is for the Grand Seignior that a Bassa believes that of Fatality,
when he is to undergo the disclpline of the Bow-string.


Har. I give the Church of England men for lost; and therefore for my part, my
Province shall be to gain the Dissenters, I think the wind blows fairest from
that side.


Rog. Prithee, Harry, how came thee to be either beloved by the Papists, or
believed by the Dissenters? I am sure you have spoke as severe things of the
Papists, as ever I did of the Phanaticks, and yet by a sudden turn you are
become as gracious, as if you were a Convert of some considerable standing.


Har. I perceive you don't understand the virtue of Holy Water; this powerful
sprinkling will immediately restore a man to the state of Innocence: Had Adam
but known this easy receipt, he would never have been at the expense of
Fig Leaves. You must know I have all my old sins forgiven me, and I am now as
clean as if I had been over head and ears in Jordan.


Rog. But all thy washing will not clear thy contradictions; thy Packet of
Advice and the weekly Occurrences are as opposite as Fire and Water; and I
wonder how thou can so shamefully prevaricate, without one single blush to
alter thy complexion. When I was pressed hard with my former Opinions, I set
off the false Coin with some plausible Varnish, and always distinguished where
I could not sairly deny, but thou would fain cheat even in spite of daylight;
thy juggle is so easily detected, that by thus openly publishing thy Shame; one
would think this task was given thee, not so much that thy Masters had need of
thy pains, as to oblige thee to a Penance.


Har. Puh, Sir Roger, you know words are wind, and why should one no more than
the other be tied to one point of the Compass; he that can turn and double upon a
Stage, is always applauded for his performance; and why may not a dexterous
change of Opinion be as much commended for the activity of the Brain, as the
other is for the agility of Body.


Rog. In troth, Harry, I must confess thy Brain is of a very singular
constitution, and thy late Writings are such Originals, that for my part, I
think thou deservest to have a Patent for Scribbling; thou art of late the very
Darling of the Papists, and thou carriest on the business of Rome so
vigorously, that I do not doubt in a short time to see thee Secretary to the
Conclave.


Har. Why, I believe I do them no small service with my Occurrences; I take
from them the odium of Persecuti^n, by fixing it upon the Church of England; I
fill the Peoples heads so full with Penal Laws, that there is no room left for
the Inquisition; and if any one blabs about Q. Marys days, I immediately stop
his mouth with the thirty fifth of Elizabeth.


Rog. But you are very frugal in giving Instances of the Severitities of the
Church of England, not above one in a Paper.


Har. You must know he that has not much Butter, must spread it thin; I must
make the most of what I have, for I am afraid hereafter I am not like to have
from that side any more Examples: But if you observed, I manage matters to the
best advantage: When once upon a time, there was taken from a Quaker a
Warming-pan for the Church dues; I put in a notable innuendo, and hinted that
'twas then cold weather; what think you, may not that be called the Warmingpan
Persecution?


Rog. Ay that was indeed hot and fiery, to take a Warming-pan from a Quaker, was
a little too unchristian, whom not only the Season, but his Religion obliged to
frequent fits of shaking.


Har. And now you talk of your distinguishing, I think I have had lately a
notable fetch that way too: When I had in one of my Occurrences accused the
Clergy of London of cheating the Poor of Sion College, in keeping from them
the Charity of their Founder. [Occur. Numb. 11.] And the malice and falsehood of
my accusation being unluckily published, I was hard put to it to avoid the
Charge of Evil Speaking, Lying, and Slandering; therefore in my next Paper I
did protest, that in my former Story, I did not intend to reflect upon the
London Clergy: [Occur. Number. 12.] So that here is the Clergy of London, and the
London Clergy make up a very serviceable Distinction.


Rog. Your Occurrences then I perceive are to insult over the Church of
England, and thereby to divert the Papists and gain the Dissenters.


Har. You are in the right on it; this Church of England you know is our
greatest obstacle; it vexes me to think that an Heretical Church should be by
Law established; these Laws are such unlucky ways of fortifying, that they
stand more in our way than Walls and Bastions. Could we but once level their
Works, you would not find it long before we fell to storming, and I think we
have already made some considerable advances.


Rog. And do the Dissenters come on kindly?


Har. Why truly some of them are pretty forward, and we favor them
accordingly; we do as the Patriarch did of old, he that comes in first receives
the Blessing; if they promise fairly, then we place them in convenient
stations, we put them in such posts that are something for their honor, as
well as for our use.


Rog. I must confess for my part, I am not for advancing the Dissenters too
much; and tho I cannot but approve of their present behavior, yet I am not for
trusting them too far, for they are slippery creatures.


Har. Trusting them quoth a! Why who does? Have you ever seen a Dissenter at
the head of a Regiment? have you ever heard that any of them was made
Lieutenant of the Tower, or Governor of a Garrison? The Offices they are
generally put into, are places of Expense and not Profit. If any of them has a
Mandat to be Mayor or Alderman of a Town; he is so precarious in his Office,
that he dares not make one false step upon pain of another Regulation: and
withal they commonly act in conjunction with Papists; so that they are no more
than Under-Workmen, they are only employed, not trusted.


Rog. Here is a Dissenter coming; I guess he comes to beg your assistance,
Harry, either to present an Address, or to get a Commission to regulate some
stubborn Corporation. He looks as if he had a spite to the Tests and Penal Laws.


Har. Let me alone, I Will warrant you I manage him to advantage, and if I do not
make him as rank a Repealer as any is in England, I Will forseit all the gain of
my Occurrences.


Rog. Well I Will take my leave of you; and at our next meeting shall expect an
account of your Transactions, and in what forwardness Affairs stand for a
Parliament. Farewell.


Enter an Honest Dissenter.

Dissenter. Gentlemen, I am sorry I have disturbed you, and that I should be
the occasion of breaking up so choice and select a meeting. My business is only
with you, Harry, and not so urgent neither, but that I can retire, and call
upon you at your leisure.


Harry. Sir, you are heartily welcome, I am never so engaged, but that I am
always ready to wait upon a Person of your Character. Yours I am sure is
public business; and since I have not of late seen your hand to an Address, I
doubt not but you come now at least some hundreds strong.


Diss. That is not at present my business. You must know, there is a small
place in his Majesty's service lately fallen vacant, which lies so conveniently
in my neighborhood, that as it may not be of such advantage to another, so no
one perhaps can so easily attend the duty with so much diligence as my self;
and therefore since I am told, that now all Offices are disposed of without
distinction; I hope by virtue of former acquaintance, I may beg your interest
on my behalf.


Har. Before I can appear your Friend, you must answer me first to some few
Questions; for no man must expect his Reward, before he can say his Catechism.
Will you, whenever there is a Parliament called, endeavor to choose such men
as will take off the Tests and Penal Laws?


Diss. What is the meaning of this?


Har. You must know then, that no one Is to be either promoted to, or continued
in an Office, who will not answer affirmatively to this Question.


Diss. Why this is encountering Test with Test, setting one nail to drive out
another; if a man be not qualified for an Office but upon such conditions: You
seem to set up as hard things as those you would have abrogated. For what is
the difference between your obliging a man to abjure the Test, and the Laws
requiring him to renounce Transubstantiation? but only this, that for my part I
think renouncing Transubstantiation to be the more innocent.


Har. There is a greater difference than you may imagine: for the Declaration
that is required by the Law is a violence to a Man's conscience; it is obliging
him to renounce an Article of his Faith; whereas the Tests are matters purely
political: they were promoted by a Faction, and designed only to gratify a
Party, which is pleased to call it self the Church of England.


Diss. Hold there, Harry, these words are something too severe; let me tell
you, you cannot make the enacting of these Laws to be the business of a
Faction, without putting the late King and his Parliament at the very head
on it; and it does not become you to speak so irreverently of a Crowned Head,
tho it lies in ashes. But suppose a man should believe in his conscience, that
the Tests are a great security to the Protestant Religion, and that the
consequence of repealing them will be the introducing of Popery; (as I must
necessarily think of those many Noble and worthy Gentlemen, who lately lost
their Employments upon this very question) is not the turning of such a one out
of his Office, which perhaps is his whole subsistence, for not consenting to
repeal these Tests, not only a privative, but according to your wise
distinction, a positive inflicting of penalties on the score of conscience?
[Occur. Numb. 9.] For is not he that thinks his whole Religion to be in danger,
as much concerned in his conscience, as another that is so tender of one single
Article?


Har. But these are groundless apprehensions: the Protestant Religion will be
secure without these Tests; and I have over and over proved that they are but
Mud-Walls. Surely you have never seen my Occurrences.


Diss. Ay that I have, and at the same time that I could laugh at your Jests, I
was offended at your scurrilities: and now you put me in mind, I have seen your
Packet of Advice from Rome too: there I remember you say, That no mortal man
can embrace or countenance the Popish Religion, but either a designing Knave,
or a cajoled self-willed Fool. [Pacq. vol. 3. p. 15.] Now I cannot believe that
you look upon either of these Characters to be very honorable.


Har. I would have the Papists be admitted into Offices as well as other
Subjects; and they may sometimes happen to have better abilities to serve their
King and Country, than those that would exclude them. [Occur. Numb. 9.]


Diss. Certainly, Harry, thou art made up either of Knavery or Forgetfulness;
tho I am afraid Knavery is the chief ingredient in thy composition. Have not
you said in your Packet, that you could wish we were fairly rid of two and
fifty thousand Papists, and yet you believed, and durst undertake to prove the
King should not lose one good Subject by the Bargain. [Pacq. vol. 1. p 143.]


Har. You should not so spitesully recollect my former Opinions; you should
consider not so much my old faults, as my present arguments; and if my carriage
at this time may make you entertain any hard thoughts of my person: tho you may
not believe the man, yet I hope you will be convinced by his reasons.


Diss. Why truly whenever I see a forehead of Brass, I am apt to believe, that
what is within is of no better metal. To be always false and shifting, is
methinks a temper so mean and creeping, so very like the race of the Serpent,
that to be overcome by such a one's insinuation, is not to be persuaded but
betrayed.


Har. Is it not unreasonable that the Papists should be debarred of those
privileges and advantages which they are born to? And since they are under an
equal obligation of duty with other Subjects, why should not they have the same
right? as it is in other Countries, where Protestants and Papists have an equal
share in the government. [Occur. Numb. 9]


Diss. Prithee show me but one Country where there are but four Papists to one
Protestant, and the Protestants allowed to enjoy equal privileges with the
Papists: If this cannot be done, why then should the Papists of our Nation look
upon it as unequal dealing in this government to keep them from Offices, when
their number is not as yet perhaps above one in two hundred? unless they assume
some extraordinary privileges to their persons, as well as their Religion; and
pretend that their very Civil Rights are Catholic.


Har. But these Test-Laws are unjust: they set up an Inquisition into men's
thoughts, put their Souls on the Rack; so that a Papist must either starve or
violate his Conscience. [ibid.]


Diss. I perceive, Harry, your compassion leans much on the Popish side; and
you do not seem much concerned, whether a Protestant dies in his Bed, or on a
Dunghill, for if the loss of employments be an infallible symptom of starving;
I am afraid there will be found of late more Church of England men put into
those uneasy circumstances, than there are Papists of any note in the whole
Nation. And since you would persuade us, that the grand project is to employ
all men equally, without any regard to their persuasions; methinks it does not
at all become you in policy, to give such early instances of partiality.


Har. Are not there Church of E^gland men preferred as well as other men? do
not you see them daily made Deans, and Bishops, etc.


Diss. So have I seen Bulls and Bears wear Topknots; but I presume they would
never have gone to the expense of adorning the Brutes, were it not on purpose
to expose the fashion. Prithee, Harry, there are Knaves of all persuasions, and
the Church as well as the Barn breeds Vermin.


Har. Why are you so much afraid of Papists being put into public Employments?
I Will assure you they are not such men as you do imagine; and whosoever says
they are bloody and cruel, foully misrepresents them, and does not draw them in
their proper colors.


Diss. Pray, Harry, how long have you had such a favorable opinion of their
good nature? what, are all the holy Candles out, that you formerly told us,
were made of Protestant Grease at the Irish Massacre? [Pacq. Nov. 19. 1680.]
Are there no Popish Fires but that which burnt the City? Or have the French
Protestants think you, left their Estates and come over only for the advantage
of a Collection? These are too bitter things, Harry, to be so easily digested:
and if I be not much mistaken, I can show you that some of them are bound by
Oaths to give Heretics no better quarter.


Har. Surely there is no such thing?


Diss. I do assure you I had it from a very substantial Author.


Har. Pray who is it? I Will warrant you one of our modern Misrepresenters.


Diss. No I Will assure you; I had it from the worthy Author of the Packet of
Advice from Rome; and certainly he must needs know best what was done there,
where he kept his weekly correspondence. It Is the Oath, which all Popish
Bishops take at the time of their Consecration: My Author has it at large, but
I shall here only give you the Clause of it. And all Heretics, Schismatics,
and such as rebel against our Lord the Pope, or his Successors, I shall to the
uttermost of my power, persecute, impugn, and condemn. So help me etc. [Pacq.
Jan. 30. 1679.]


Har. And does not the Church of England with her Penal Laws come upon you and
your Brethren with the same severities?


Diss. Pray where is a Church better seen than in her Articles and Canons? And
if these are to be looked upon as the Standards of her Doctrine; to give the
Church of England her due, she in her 66. Canon requires her Bishops and
Ministers to endeavor by instruction and persuasion to reclaim all Recusants
within their respective limits: and if some of her Communion, did put the Laws
in Execution against us with too much rigor; the present promotion of several
of those Instruments of our Miseries, would tempt a man to believe, that what
they did was not so much out of mistak^, as by order.


Har. But now you have a Commission to enquire, into what money was taken from
you upon the account of your Religion; and so in some measure you may make your
selves whole again.


Diss. Prithee Harry, why do not send us to the Spanish Wrack to dive for
Gold and Silver? on my conscience I believe it would be to as much purpose. If
you will procure us all that was returned into the Exchequer, that will indeed
encourage and enable us to sue for the rest; and surely you do not think that
the Exchequer ought to thrive by oppression no more than a private Gentleman's
pocket.


Har. If you consent to take off the Tests, you do not know what may be done
for you; and methinks you of all people should be ready to comply, since you
are so much obliged for the Toleration: and you know one good turn always
requires another.


Diss. Suppose the Church of England men had complied to take off the Tests,
do think then we should have been such Favorites? I find it was our turn to
be asked last: we have something of Original sin that still sticks to us; and I
am afraid when Popery comes in, we that have no foundation, and are as it were
strangers in the land, must expect that this Liberty will only increase our
future risk, and put us further into the house of bondage.


Har. You shall have a Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience; and that you
know, is like the Laws of the M^des and Persians, unalterable.


Diss. I must be a fool by thy own Maxim, if I believe thee; for have not you
said in your Packet, that he is only fit to be Recorder of Goatham, who does
not foresee that if ever the Papists prevail, Magna Charta and the Bible must
down together. [Pacq. Nov. 21. 1679.] But now I think on it, how will this Magna
Charta, and the Magna Charta of the Council of Lateran stand together? which is
so far from giving Liberty of Conscience, that it will not allow Heretics the
common privilege of living.


Har. Has not Sir Roger cleared that difficulty sufficiently? when he told you,
that when they are rightly distinguished, they may very well stand together;
for the Decrees of the Church of Rome are Religious, this Liberty you are
offered is a civil point. [Answ. to the Letter to Dissenters. p. 7.]


Diss. Well now I find true, what I always suspected; that this Liberty was
grounded upon a trick of state; and not upon a Religious conviction of
Judgment. So that when the Government shall not stand in need of such Arts;
that is, when Popery is too powerful to submit to such condescensions; we must
expect to be thrown off, and sink again into the state of suffering.


Har. I do assure you, it has been the constant judgment of Papists, that men
all ought to have Liberty of Conscience: and they are very ill men, and you
ought not to join with them who would persuade you to the contrary.


Diss. Divide and impera, I know is the Papist's rule, as well as the
Politician's. Prithee Harry, he that is but Eight and twenty years old, has
lived long enough to see their methods of destroying the Protestant Religion:
and it is mostly by playing fast and loose with the Dissenters. Sometimes the
Dissenter is a Heretic and a Rebel, and all the cry must be, Crucify him,
crucify him; at another time he is all innocence, What harm has he done? We'll
release him and let him go. Thus by intermittent fits of ease and rigor, they
endeavor to shake and undermine that foundation; against which their arguments
have not strength to prevail.


Har. But this Indulgence was so frankly offered you, that you cannot choose
but make suitable returns for such unexpected civilities.


Diss. Proffered service in some case is not only unacceptable, but nauseous;
for when all the Arguments of Reason and Religion could not prevail; to find an
unexpected fit of affection, makes the kindness something suspicious, and all
the endearing expressions may proceed not so much from Love, as Dissimulation;
a politic design may be in the bottom, and a snake may lie in the grass that
looks so fresh and flourishing.


Har. I find you still continue in your groundless suspicion of the Papists:
methinks they are the most reasonable men alive; for if they do repeal your
Laws, they promise you Equipollent securities.


Diss. I must tell you Harry, the Papists are the worst men in the world to
pretend to insure the Protestant Religion from Fire and Faggot: their love to
Heretics, we know, is generally hot and flameing, and it is rarely that any of
them vouchsafes to kiss, but when it is to bring in others that come with Swords
and Staves. And what is this Equipollent security to be? an Act of Parliament?


Har. Yes, but such an Act that shall be unalterable, and not in the power of
future ages to revoke.


Dissenter, Hold, not too fast there, you will ruin the Dispensing power else;
for if the King may not suspend that Act too at pleasure, what will become of
those Officers, who have made so bold with the Laws in being? for the
consequence must reach all Acts alike.


Har. Ay, but these Tests are in their nature unjust, and dangerous to the
government in their consequence; and so no matter what becomes of them.


Diss. And will not that Law, think you, be unjust, which cramps the King's
natural and inherent right of suspending Acts of Parliament? so that this Law
or the mighty Prerogative of suspending immediately falls to the ground: and
which do you think will most likely get the better on it? Besides that Law, if
it be equipollent, must exclude all Romish Priests from Officiating in any
public Church or Chapel within the Kingdom: Now if it be, according to you,
so impious to exclude Papists from serving the King in public Offices; what a
monstrous piece of impiety will Popish Judges interpret that Law to be, which
excludes the Priests from serving God in his public Worship? and therefore the
apparent consequence of repealing our Laws to me will be this; that hereafter
we shall have all Popish Governors both in Church and State; and to us will be
left the Merit of obedience, and the Glory of suffering; only I am afraid we
shall much Eclipse that Glory, upon some melancholy considerations that we have
had a hand in our own execution.


Har. Well I perceive you will not give me a Categorical answer to my Question.
You will have the same more formally put to you ere long, and I do not doubt
when you have taken time to consider, but you will return a very satisfactory
answer.


Diss. To be short with you then; the sum of my opinion is this: That I
consider my self as an Englishman as well as a Protestant; and whatever I
conceive may directly or by consequence prejudice my Religion, or Civil Rights,
I think my self obliged not to consent to it, as I am to answer it to GOD and
my COUNTRY. So farewell.


OXFORD: Printed in the Year 1688.


