THE REASONS OF Mr. Joseph Hains The PLAYER's Conversion and Re-conversion.

Being the Third and Last PART TO THE DIALOGUE OF Mr. BAYS.

Ecce iterum Crispinus, and est mihi saepe vocandus
Ad parts.
Juv. Sat. 4. Non compositus melius cum Bitho Bacchius.
Hor. Sermon. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the
Old Bailey. 1690.

PREFACE TO Mr. BAYS.
I Lately published the Reasons of your Conversion, and, as in good manners
bound, gave you the honor of the Dedication. All the Town was very well
satisfied with the justice I allowed you in that Dialogue, unless some few
malicious Critics, who; as I have been informed, complained of partiality in
the case, and quarreled with me for assigning a dozen Reasons for your change,
when one, or two at the most would have served the turn. What ever these
envious persons said, does not signify much; for the better sort thought
otherwise, and were pleased to own, that the Conference was managed with all
the fairness imaginable on your side. This brought your Brother-Convert Mr.
Hains to me, who requested to have the same kind office done for himself, to
which I readily consented: Now his motives bear so great a resemblance to
yours, that I presently resolved to join them both together; for the very same
considerations, as I have been prevailed with, to bind the White-Chappel Answer
to the Vox Cleri, and some other Scriblers of the same comprehending Character,
along with the Pious Mr. Baxters Plea for Nonconformity.

To be plain with you, Mr. Bays, for the trouble of these two Dedications, I
expect no Guineas from you, no more, than I could expect a contribution from
the Clergy for dedicating a Treatise against Tithes to 'em, or from the Lawyers
for presenting, them with a new edition of the Ignoramus. I am acquainted with
your present circumstances, and therefore don't desire to put you to any
charges; only I must beg some of the following favors at your hands; to be
cursed duly twice a day over a dish of Tea, nay if you think it not too great a
trouble to you, as often as you pull out your Snuff Box: to be lashed severely
in the next Preface, or damned in the next Prologue, or coupled with the
Catachrestical Mr. Cleveland in your next Essay upon Dramatic Poetry; to be
invoked Spring and Fall with all the devout ejaculations in Boileau, and
Oldham, to be remembered every week in your Litany, and if you please to give me
some unlucky nickname out of the Bible; so much the better, for that will be
sure to stick by me for ever. Any thing of this nature will oblige me
everlastingly to you, but to think to sham me off with a bare dry pitiful
beating, it is below my merits, and I Will never accept on it. I hear you threatened
to send one of your Sons to give me a little bodily chastisement, if it were
not below 'em. Truly, Sir, I am heartily sorry for their sakes, that I am no
Liveryman as yet, or one of the City Common Council; next Spring it may be
you will find me advanced to that Honorable preferment, for I have above forty
of the best hands in the Parish in order to it already. But why, Mr. Bays, do
you talk only of one Son, send them both a Gods name, and rather than fail,
appear at the head of them your self. But if you design to ruin me to all
intents and purposes, even raise the Posse Comitatus upon me, for then the
business will be done effectually.

And here, Honest Mr. Bays, I take my final leave of you, unless you give me
some fresh provocation, that is, unless you follow Mr. Hains's steps, and
suffer your self to be reconverted to the Panther's Church; for then I shall
most assuredly publish the Reasons of your return, and according to my usual
civility, if I find your own Reasons weak and feeble, design to invent or
imagine some new ones for you. Nay, if you but speak the word, I Will Print an
account of your Re-conversion, even before you are Re-converted; as you know,
it has been many an honest fellows case to have his Execution-Prayer Printed
for him, before he came to Tyburn; and then you may enquire how the Town stands
affected to that matter, and accordingly dispose of your self.

And now, because the ancient family of the ays's, like that of the Attici, is
not to be treated after the ordinary common method of Epistles, I here take my
farewell of you in the words of Martial, to a person much of the same name with
your self.

Quod siccae redolet palus lacunae,
Piscinae vetus aura quod marinae,
Quod jejunia Sabbatariorum,
Quod Vulpis fuga, Viperae cubile,
Quod Spurcae moriens lucerna testae,
Mallem, quam quod oles, olere Basse.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. BAYS and Mr. HAINS.
Mr. Bays. MY Old Comedian still alive, and lusty!


Mr. Hains. What, the Ornament and Glory of the English Theater, my honest
Friend, Mr. Bays!


Mr. Bays. Dear Rogue, let me hug and caress thee a while. Well l' gad, Brother
Convert, I am as glad to see thee safe and sound again here in Town, as a fond
Citizen, that has lost his virtuous Spouse for two or theee days at this end of
the Town, is to see her brought home in a Coach by some obliging Gentleman, and
return to her family administrations.


Mr, Hains. And for my part, I take as much delight and satisfaction, to behold
the ingenious Mr. Bays, as an Italian does to see his Mistress at Church, or a
long-expecting Cardinal to see a Sede Vacant.


Mr. Bays. But, my Noble Count, where have thou passed thy time all this while.
It Is an Age, at least, since I had the honor of thy company. And how, and how
do our Friends of the Crusca at Florence, the Ricourati at Padua, and the
Lyncei at Rome? How goes Poetry forward in that refined noble Country? What
Sonnets and Pastorals, or Theological Discourses have thou brought over with
thee? Come l' faith, I must ask thee as many questions about this affair, as a
suspicious Spaniard asks his Wife on the Wedding-night, or a hot Priest does a
raw Country-girl at the Confessional.


M. Hains. Nay, not a syllable of Theological Discourses, as you love me, Mr.
Bays, in Poetry or business of that nature you may command me as far as you
please, but for Divinity I desire to be excused, it never suited with my
Complexion. To satisfy your curiosity then, I have been traveling abroad in
the world to cultivate my person, and acquire a little experience for the
relief of my old age.


Bays. Let me conjure thee, Dear Rogue, as thou hopest for no Gout, no Palsy;
or what is more mortifying, for no barking Lungs, no barking Creditors, and no
Small-Beer in thy declining years, to acquaint me with the history of thy
Travells; for I am more impatient to hear the issue of it, than a Poet is, to
hear the success of his New Play behind the Curtain; or a Gentleman that has
employed his Friend to try the Honor of his Lady, longs to hear behind the
Hangings how she comes off with the Temptation.


Hains. To make short of the matter, Mr. Bays, since I saw you last, I have
passed the Streights, shot the Gulf of Lions, seen the Vesuvio and Mont-Gibel,
dined with the Bey of Algiers, made the Giro of Italy, and the Tour of Malta,
sung before the Beau Monde of Tripoly, and danced before the Beglerbegs of
Tunis.


Bays. I see, you keep up your merry diverting humor still, Mr. Hains.


Hains. I have made seven Bashaws, two and fifty Knights of Malta, three
Italian Princes, fourscore and thirteen Friars, eight Fathers of the Society,
with about some thirty Neopolitan Barons, as drunk and tipsie as so many Bears.
At a Carnival-time, Prince Pamphilio and my self Lamblack'd ninety nine Signs
at Venice; we drank our Mistresses healths on the two Corinthian Horses in St.
Marks; we rubbed out all the Milkscores in the Strada Nuova, and bilked just
three hundred ninety nine Coaches, precisely and no more, in Lombardy.


Bays. Well, I Will say that for thee, Mr. Hains, thou art one of the most
accomplished ingenious Humorists in Europe.


Hains. I played upon a Key and pair of Tongs before the Pope and Cardinals; by
the same token that Innocent the Eleventh got his death by overdancing himself,
tho this is a mystery which you were never acquainted with before; but then as
for the Ladies Mr. Bays --


Bays. Ay, what have you to say to the Ladies, Mr. Hains.


Hains. Why, what with the agreeableness of my Mien, the gayety of my
Conversation, the irresistible Charms of my Singing, and the gallantry of my
dancing, I had the good luck to charm all the Ladies wherever I came; Signor
Giusippe says one, when will you come, and help me to string my Lute; Signor
Giusippe, says another, shall we see you at night in the Grotto behind the
Dukes Palace; Signor Giusippe, says a third, when will you come and teach me
the last Song, which you made for the Prince of Tuscany; and so l' faith they
Giusipped me on amongst them, till I had sworn, at least, to a dozen
assignations; and knew no more, Mr. Bays, where it was best to dispose of my
self, than a poor Needle that is exactly placed between two Loadstones, which
way to incline it self.


Bays. I warrant thee, Dear Rogue, thou did wish then with all thy heart,
that some honest Miracle-monger of a Priest could have transubstantiated that
sinful Body of thine, that thou might have been capable of answering half a
dozen appointments at a time. I am sure had I been in thy case; I had desired
the same blessing as heartily, as ever rising Favorite prayed for a plurality
of Titles, or a Town Bully for a plurality of believing Mercers.


Hains. Well, I was a graceless ill-natured Devil that is certain; I left seven
women of good condition languishing for me at Algiers, twelve at Tripoly,
fourteen at Tunis, eight and twenty at Saragosa, and thirty three at Naples.
Since my arrival into England I have been informed, half of 'em are dead, and
the rest in a fair way to be translated in a short time -- But what would you
have a man do in such a case, dear brother Squob? You know no bodies Tabernacle
is able to bear such perpetual skirmishing; and for my part, let me tell you, I
do not pretend to be a Sampson --


Bays. Nay, you need not excuse your self, Mr. Hains, as to this point; for to
my certain knowledge, a person acquits himself with honor and reputation
enough, that can contrive to come off a saver from one Assignation.


Hains. One of the best intreigues I ever had in my travels, was with the
Grand-masters Mistress in Malta; a fine, plump, two-handed* Bona Roba, l'
faith, with Eyes as sparkling as Canary, and Cheeks as red as Claret.


Bays. And how did thou compass her at last, dear Comedian --


Hains. Why, I attacqued her several ways, but to no purpose at all; at last I
thought a Serenade was the likeliest way to prevail upon her Affections; and so
I translated a certain Ode out of Horace, which was very suitable to the
occasion, and sung it under her Window.


Bays. May I pretend to so great an Interest in thee, Dear Rogue, as to beg it
of thee?


Hains. With all my heart, Dear Squob. But you are to understand it was first
translated into Italian, but since my coming into England, I translated it for
my own diversion into English, and such as it is, you are heartily welcome to.
Extremum Tanaim si biberes Lyce.
Ode 10. Lib. 3. I.
Tho you, My Lyce, in some Northern Flood
Had chilled the current of your Blood;
Or lost your sweet engaging Charms,
In some Tartarian Husbands icy Arms;
Were yet one spark of pity left behind,
To form the least impression on your mind:
Sure you must grieve, sure you must sigh,
Sure drop some pity from your Eye;
To see your Lover prostrate on the ground,
With gloomy Night, and black despair encompassed all around.
II.
Hark! how the threatening storms arise,
And with loud clamours fill the Skies.
Hark! how the tottering Buildings shake,
Hark! how the Trees a doleful comfort make.
And see! Oh see! how all below (...)
The Earth lies covered deep in (...)
The Romans clad in white, did (...)
And thus your Freezing Candidates, (...) you.
III.
Come lay these foolish niceties aside,
And to Soft Passion sacrifice your Pride;
Let not the (...) hours with fruitless questions dye,
But let new (...) of pleasure crown 'em as they fly.
Scorn not the flame, which your own (...) infuse,
And no (...) friendly minute lose,
While Youth and beauty give you leave (...).
As men (...) of Charity below,
Or (...) the next world, or think they (...)
So you (...) a Lover should engage, (...)
To make a sure retreat for your declining age.
IV.
Let (...) Souls by virtue be cajoled,
As (...) Grecian Spinstress was of old.
She, while her Sot his youthful prime bestowed,
To fight a Cuckolds wars abroad,
Held out a longer siege than Troy
Against the warm attacques of proffered joy:
And foolishly preserved a worthless chastity,
At the expense of ten years lies and perjury;
Like that old-fashioned Dame, never bilk your own delight,
But what you have lost in the day, get, get it in the night.
V.
Oh then if prayers (...) no acceptance find,
Nor vows, nor (...) your mind:
If all these powerful motives fail,
Yet let your Keeper's injuries prevail.
He by some Playhouse (...) misled,
Elsewhere bestows the Tribute of your Bed.
Let me his forfeited Embraces share,
Let me your mighty wrongs repair.
So Kings by their own Rebel-powers betrayed,
To quell a homebred Foe, call in a Foreign aid.
VI.
Love, let Platonicks promise what they will,
Must like Devotion be encouraged still.
Must meet with equal wishes, and desires,
Or else the dying Lamp in its own Urn expires.
And I, for all that boasted flame
We Poets, and fond Lovers idely claim,
Am of too frail a make I fear,
Should you continue still severe,
To brave the double hardship of my fate*
And bear the coldness of the winds, and rigor of your hate.



Mr. Bays. So, Mr. Hains, you compassed her at last, I don't question, with
this all-confounding persuasive of a Sonnet. Nay never blush for the matter,
noble Comedian of mine, for I have been in my time, as great a Virtuoso for
this kind of natural Philosophy, as thy experienced self.


Hains. I will not trouble you, Mr. Bays, to recount my Turkish, my African, and
my Greecian amors to thee; for then you must expect to find me as tedious, as
a Thrice-married Widow when she lanches out in commendation of her deceased
Husbands; or one of my own Brothers of the Theater, that has bound the Poet
apprentice to the Player, when he discourses very pertly concerning the ancient
and modern writers. -- But still dear Malta I shall never forget thee.


Bays. Nay, Mr. Hains, I must freely own, you have a great deal of reason to
remember Malta, considering the noble rencounter you had there with the Grand
Master's Mistress: And what sort of a place is it I pray.


Hains. Oh! dear Rogue, it is the finest, happiest Island in the World. The
sweetest Air, the Richest Wine, the bravest Gentlemen, the most obliging
well-bred Ladies; that methinks I could never be weary of discoursing upon so
entertaining a Subject. Thou may guess, little Bays, what plenty of Women
they have amongst them there, when I shall inform thee, that there are two or
three thousand Bawdy Batchelors always upon the spot: Men of fortitude, and
vigor, that have made a vow of Chastity, and yet Fornicate in abundance.


Bays. Thank you for that observation Mr. Hains. For I have always remarked, it
has been the fashion of the World for men to act just contrary to the
professions they make. Thus your super-annuated Old Lady, that is perpetually
declaiming on the vices of the Age, is the fondest, and most violent Lover in
private.


Hains. Thus your men of Sanctity and Devotion, are the greatest Libertines
within doors; your men of complaisance and Civility, the greatest Enemies
behind your back; your men of Latitude and Comprehension, the greatest
persecutors when they get uppermost. Your Ecclesiastical pretender to Poverty,
the rankest Miser; as your pretender to Wit, and good breeding is generally the
dullest, rudest Animal in the World. All this had been true Mr. Bays, whether
you or I had ever observed it, or no; but still dear Malta I shall never forget
thee.


Bays. Come, Mr. Hains, I am confident, there is something or other
extraordinary in the case, that makes this Malta run in thy Head so; prithee
Communicate it, for I can keep a secret as well, as a White Hall whisperer, or
a Chambermaid, you have lain with; a Minister of State you have bribed, or a
Simonaical Parson.


Hains. To satisfy your longing Mr. Bays, you must know I was converted to the
Roman Religion in this Island; and tho I say it, that should not, the manner of
my Conversion was a hundred times more strange, and surprising than ever yours
was.


Bays. And did the news then of my Conversion arrive to thee beyond Sea?
Prithee let me know, what were the sentiments of your part of the World upon
that occasion; for not to mince matters with you, every body here at home
looked upon it as a prodigy: I have had half the scriblers about the Town upon
me at once, that have persecuted, and treated me ten times worse, than the
Author of the Vox populi has treated Tobits Dog; and yet I'gad Mr. Hains,
seemingly I took no more notice of the affront, than a Fanatic would do of some
half a score alterations in the Liturgy; and was pleased publicly to say here
in Will's Coffee-House, that it was below the Honor of Mr. Bays, to answer
these little Pamphleteers, as much, as it is below the Reputation of a
Gentleman, to send a Challenge to a Surly Beef-Eater that turned him out of the
Presence Chamber at White Hall.


Hains. That was politickly done, let me tell you, Mr. Bays. For had you
condescended to answer one, you had lain under an obligation of answering the
whole herd. And therefore to pretend an insensibility, or neglect of them on this
occasion, was as cunning a fetch, as it was of Mr. Horner in the Country-Wife,
to publish his disability as to love affairs, when he designed to free himself
from the importunities of his old cast Mistresses.


Bays. But all this while, Mr. Hains, you forget to tell me how the story of my
Conversion relished abroad.


Hains. Why to me, that was acquainted with thy Character, and the fickleness
of thy Constitution, it passed for no Miracle I can assure thee. I use to judge
of other people by my self, and let a Dramatist, little Bays, write for any
Religion, as much he pleases, I am confident he no more minds to advance it,
than any of the honest drinking Members of the House thought to confound Claret
by passing the Twelve-penny Act. For a Poet is a true Swisse, that never
troubles his head with the merits of the cause, for which he is engaged.


Bays. That might be your single opinion, Mr. Hains, I confess. But what said
the rest of mankind to my Conversion?


Hains. I am afraid I shall make thee a little vain, if I divulge it. You are
to know the Pope and Cardinals rejoiced exceedingly at the news. The Queen of
Sweden (that had a particular kindness always for Poets) to testify her zeal
upon that occasion, gave a fine entertainment at her Palace; at which the
greatest masters of Music in the City assisted; nay so general was the joy for
your Conversion, that I durst almost have sworn, the Congregation de propaganda
fide, would have ordered a solemn procession about the Town, to Complement
Heaven upon that score.


Bays. Dear Mr. Hains how shall I be able to make thee any suitable returns for
so great an obligation?


Hains. Now (said they) the Converts in England will come faster upon our
hands, than we know how to provide for 'em. Heresy is utterly demolisht for
this age, that is certain. We have already got Mr. Bays the Poet-Laureat on our
side, and he by his example will soon prevail upon the rest of his profession
to turn Catholics; and when we have got the Poets to defend our Cause, the
whole Nation must come in of course. For the People must of necessity judge
there is something very convincing, and extra ordinary in that Religion, which
the Poets so resolutely maintain, as when we see a Man from a lewd Rake-hell,
turn Saint on the sudden, we are apt to ascribe it to little less than a
Revelation: So they concluded that by this means the whole Nation would be
brought in a short time to declare.


Bays. Well I must needs say, that if it had not been for this unlucky
Revolution, matters would have infallibly succeeded, as these Virtuoso's did
imagine.


Hains. For your farther comfort Mr. Bays, your Book was carried with a great
deal of Triumph to the Vatican, where it is shown to all strangers along with
King Harry's Letter to Ann Bolein, and his treatise against Luther. Besides, it
was the common discourse of the Town, a little before I left the place, that
the Pope designed to employ a Celebrated Workman to Carve a Hind and Panther in
Marble; and, in order to preserve the memory of their Immortal Conference, to
place their Statues on each side the two famous Horses in Monte Cavallo.


Bays. This mighty honor that you tell me, has been done to my works, has
thrown me into such a transport of Joy, that I fancy it would be convenient to
take a Dose of Diascordium before I go to bed, to prevent a Fever, and all
that; pray give me your advice Mr. Hains.


Hains. What I am going about to tell you, will save you the expense of your
Diascordium, and all that. Indeed, the more curious inquisitive Persons at
Rome, that had found out your Character, and manner of Conversation; that had
informed themselves of the Author of the Religio Laici, and the Spanish Friar,
were of opinion, that for all your pretensions to be a Convert, you deserved
only to be honestly damned for your pains; for I must tell you, Mr. Bays, the
good natured Church of Rome, is as little inclined to forgive a man that has
once affronted her, as a Lady of the Town that grudges to have the least mite
of Conjugal Benevolence bestowed elsewhere, is to pardon her poor Husband, that
she has found trespassing with one of her Maids in the Garret. And now I have
been so free as to acquaint thee with what that part of the World as I resided
in, thought of thy Conversion; prithee tell me what they said of mine here in
England.


Bays. Why, In Faith Mr. Hains, you and I have had the worst luck of any two
Converts in the Universe. We could get no body breathing to believe one
syllable of our Conversion; as for your self, though a Missionary from Heaven
had come on purpose to attest the sincerity of your change, it had never
passed: They remembered you palm'd a Count upon the French King formerly in your
younger days, and so they concluded that from the same principle of mirth and
diversion, you were resolved to palm a Convert upon the Pope and Cardinals in
your Old Age. But letting alone such a foolish disquisition, prithee proceed in
the History of your Conversion.


Hains. You are to understand then, Mr. Bays, that in coming from Algiers
(where I had the honor to Dance before threescore and sive Turkish Women at a
Renegadoes Wedding) to Malta, we were becalmed at Sea for the space of a Week
and upwards; during which time, whether it happened through the excessive heat
of the Season, or the Iniquity of my Youth, or both, I was troubled with a
mighty tumor in my left Arm, which the next Night after threw me into a
violent Calenture.


Bays. Poor Rogue, I pity thy condition with all my heart.


Hains. After some outward and inward Medicines applied to no purpose, at last
the Surgeon and Chaplain of the Ship -- no, I beg your pardon, I should have
said the Chaplain and Surgeon of the Ship --


Bays. I don't like that Conjunction, Mr. Hains, it is a foreboding augury, let
me tell you. A Chaplain and a Surgeon to a sick man, it is like the Conjunction
of a hard Jury, and a worse Judge, to a Prisoner at the Bar.


Hains. They came into my Cabin, and in a very mournful tone told me, We'd
advise you, Mr. Hains, to make up your Accounts with this World as soon as you
can, you cannot expect to live four and twenty hours longer in this at the
farthest, therefore we counsel you to think of Eternity, and prepare your self
for another Station.


Bays. That word Prepare your self for another Station, when you had no mind to
quit your present Post, was, I don't question, full as mortifying a Summons to
thee, my Noble Comedian, as it would be to a young unsighting Tradesman of the
New-raised Regiment of Horse, to leave his pretty Employment and pretty Wise at
home, and be sent to starve at his own cost and charges in Ireland.


Hains. Nay, I must confess, I received the News with no very great alacrity of
Spirit, for I had leisure enough to reflect on all my Juvenile Frolicks and
Excursions, and hoped my Stars would be so civil to me, as to allow me a longer
time to Adjust my Accounts. As my good Fortune ordered the matter, there
happened to be a certain Calabrian Gentleman in the Ship, who was going to pay
his Devoir to the Grand Master of Malta, that was his Cousin German.


Bays. Now thou revivest me, dear Rogue; In Faith, I was going to give thee over
for lost, and then I am sure, all the Veneres Cupidinesque all the pretty soft
Graces of the Theater had departed along with thee.


Hains. His Name, which I shall never forget, was Signor Pietro Leandro, the
sweetest, most obliging Gentleman that I had ever the Honor to converse with;
he coming to give me a visit in this extremity, in the first place asked me
what Religion I was of?


Bays. And that, I am afraid, was as difficult a question for thee to resolve,
as it would be to a modern Latitudinarian or Alteration-man, to answer, what
Church he is most inclined to, the Established or the Fanatic.


Hains. Sir (said I) for your comfort, you will find me of what Religion you
please; I am at your service, recommend me to what Persuasion you think
convenient. My soul's, as to that affair, a clean sheet of Paper, a mere Tabula
Rasa, therefore, Sir, you may impress any Characters in the world upon it;
whether Christian, or Mahumetan, Jew, or Pagan, it is all a case to your poor
distressed servant.


Bays. And what said your Noble Calabrian to all this, I prithee?


Hains. He shook his Head, and seemed as much surpized at the Confession I made
him, as the Ordinary of Newgate is at an old Sabbath breaker's History of his
Debaucheries; at last, he asked me what Profession I was of, and in what
Religion my Parents had Educated me? To this I replied that in my present
Character I was Secretary to the English Ambassador who was bound for
Constantinople, that I had served the Stage in Quality of a Player, and
Prologue-maker some twenty years* That if I belonged to any Religion, it was to
the Reformation, but to what branch of it, I no more knew, than a new comer to
London, Mr. Bays, knows what Ward, or Aldermans Jurisdisction he lives under.


Bays. I shall certainly dye with laughing at this pleasant passage; but pray
continue the discourse.


Hains. That I had the Charity to believe, my Father took care to get me
Baptized when I was an Infant, (the only time when he was capable of managing
me) but that by reason of my continual business in the World, I never had time
to consult the Parish Register for better information. That I could have said
the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the ten Commandments by heart about forty years
ago, and that, thanks to my Almanac, I had most of the Names of the Saints,
and the Apostles still very fresh in my memory.


Bays. Pray proceed.


Hains. At this my Gentleman put on a sweeter Countenance than before, and
smiling told me, Sir, there are still hopes of your recovery, if you can but
put your self into a sober posture of Contemplation for an hour or two, and
heartily believe in St. Paul.


Bays. What answer did you give him, Mr. Hains?


Hains. I told him I could heartily believe in St. Paul, or any other Saint in
the Calendar, that would undertake to cure me. Why then (says he) I have a
certain Medicinal earth in my Trunk, that goes by the Name of St. Paul's Earth,
we call it in Italy, La terra di Santo Paolo, and it grows in a remarkable
Grotto in Malta. You have no more left you to do upon this occasion, but only
to apply it to the tumor in your arm, and afterward to believe in St. Paul's
merits as heartily as you can.


Bays. I am as impatient to hear the sequel of thy story, as a Country Lady at
the Playhouse, is to know what Fortune a rich Heiress, that was married in the
first Act, will meet with in the Fifth.


Hains. Signor (said I) leave me alone to that. I warrant you I Will believe as
thoroughly, as firmly, as implicitly, and as substantially, as any person in
Christendom. Never question the extent of my Faith Signot, said I, for upon an
extraordinary affair, I can make it travel as far as an old dreaming Monk, or
an old penitent Magdalen. Upon this he fetches me some of this Miraculous
Earth, then bids me apply it to the place abovementioned, and then without
fail to follow the other prescription; for without that, says he, it will not
signify a brass farthing.


Bays. So now, I can imagine thee, my Noble Count, raising thy self upon thy
Pillow, with thy eyes lifted up, and a great deal of Devotion in that ungodly
Countenance, applying this sanctified Earth to thy unsanctified Arm.


Hains. At parting, cries the Gentleman, I don't question to see you whole and
lusty again, within these two or three days at farthest, and then I may take
occasion to discourse you more particularly about the principles of the
Christian Religion, and settle you, if possible, in the Romish Persuasion* but
above all, (and then he shut the door upon me) don't forget to recommend your
self to the merits, and intercession, of you know who.


Bays. Well, I must needs say that for the Italian Gentlemen, they are as
desirous to make a Convert to their Church, as --


Hains. As an Algerine is to make a Captive, or a Rook a good easy Cully. They
never think they have entertained a stranger heartily, unless they can
intoxicate him with their superstition into the bargain, as your Country
Gentlemen never think they have made a man welcome in their Houses, unless they
send him home Dead-drunk. It Is their Interest, Mr. Bays, that carries them on
to this charitable performance; for the converting of one single Heretic will
give them credit at the Confessional for a whole years running on tick in
Gaming* Swearing and Whoring.


Bays. Nay, now you begin to be Satirical, Mr. Hains, I must desire you to quit
this digression, and pursue your story.


Hains. When the Gentleman had left me, I made use of his earth according to
his prescription, but how to advance that unactive, feeble, phlegmatic thing
within me, my Faith, that, Mr. Bays, that was the severest mortificaton. For my
own part, I had never made use on it before, but only to believe a Plot in a
Play, an Assignation at Night, the Honesty of my Wife, the Credulity of a Cit,
or the Promises of a Courtier. Well, for all I could do, (and I played more
tricks with it I am sure, than a Fortuneteller does with a raw foolish Girl
about a stolen Silver-Spoon) I could not prevail with it to comply with my
desires, till my distemper began to abate somewhat, and then as my pain ebbed
out, my Faith flowed in; so that by break of day, I had very liittle pain about
me, but a swinging deal of Faith.


Bays. This is certainly the strangest story, I ever met with in my life, and
richly deserves to find a place in the next Edition of Clark's Mirror, Beard's
Theater, or Wanly's Wonders of Man.


Hains. Just as the Gentleman promised, within two days I was so perfectly
recovered, that I fancied my self in a condition to perform feats of activity
before the best Assembly in France, or Italy. I met him one Morning very early
on the Deck; Signor (says he) I see your body is in plight good enough, there
needs no more questions about that; but pray inform me, in what condition do
you find your Faith? Very brave, and lusty, answered I, and in a fit tune to
digest all the amazing stories in the Universe.


Bays. Stranger and stranger still, I profess.


Hains. Why then, continued he, you and I must talk about some serious points
of Religion, that very nearly concern you; I must nick you, Dear Friend of
mine, in the Critical Minute, otherwise I shall be in danger of losing you. No,
by no means, answered I, never attacque me fasting while you live, I made a
solemn promise to my Relations in England, never to meddle with Religion, till
my Appetite was well gorged. After dinner you may discourse me as long as you
please.


Bays. Well, thou art a person, Mr. Hains, of the most singular* peculiar, and
most uncommon constitution of Body in the whole world, I believe.


Hains. After we had dined, he follows me into my Cabin: Signior Giussope (says
he) (for by this time he had learnt my name out) I am come to lay hold on your
promise. Imprimis, What is your opinion of the Pope's Infallibility? The Lord
knows, said I, I have but a very indifferent opinion of it, and yet I cannot
help it for the heart of me, for if I could but once arrive to be master of so
much grace, as to be persuaded in that point, I Would just believe as the Pope
believes, and all the business would be over.


Bays. If I had had the management of thee, Mr. Hains, I had as soon persuaded
thee to swallow that Article, and twenty more of the same bulk, as a Covent
Garden Beau makes a straggling Citizens Daughter in the Park believe she is
handsome, and only made for enjoyment; or a Poet by a little glittering
Eloquence in a Dedication, makes any Noble Lord about the Court, believe he is
witty, and valiant, and every thing besides.


Hains. When he saw the Infallibility was too gross a Pill for me to swallow,
he accosts me with another doctrine of his Church; that was ten times worse, I
mean Transubstantiation: He then inquired of me whether I believed a Corporal,
or a Virtual Presence in the Eucharist? I told him, that the Stage having
employed all my thoughts, I understood nothing of those things that he
mentioned. Then he fell upon the Invocation of Saints, and the great benefit of
Images, and began very seriously to explain 'em to me. All this while I minded
him no more, than Fanatic Parson does a Discourse of Charity, or Forty one; a
Courtier a Learned Harangue about Fathers and Councils, or (as you say) a Poet
minds truth in the Dedicatory Epistle.


Bays. This was very rude and uncivil, I protest to you, Mr. Hains, to make
such unhandsom returns to the Gentleman, that only designed the saving of your
Precious Soul.


Hains. Seeing that this method did not meet with that success as he expected;
Signor (cries he) you were utterly spoiled in the building, therefore I must
even carry you to the Dock, take you to pieces, and refit you again, for at
present you are a very unserviceable leaky vessel, scarce fit for an Algerine
to sail in. I must man you with some thirty Catholic Tenets, that shall
preserve you from being boarded by any Infidel or Protestant Privateers. I must
give you the Churches Infallible Compass to steer your course by, when you have
no Scripture Moonlight, or Starlight to direct you. Above all, I must furnish
you with a new Rudder of Faith, for your old one has been all battered to
pieces in the Playhouse; with a good substantial Anchor of Hope, with the
Sails of Contemplation, the Pump of Confession, and Pitch you and Tar you all
over with the Italian Doctrines of Ignorance, and Obedience.


Bays. Very courteous and civil I gad. But why, Mr. Hains, did you give the
Gentleman all this pains and trouble?


Hains. Only to make my self a little mirth and diversion: For thus, I
remember, I once kept a City Merchant, that had a Lac'd-Band which reached from
shoulder to shoulder, two hours by the Clock, in one of the Coffee-houses about
the Exchange, to explain the meaning of Chevaux de frize in a Gazette; and I
shall never forget, he told me they were Horses bred in Frize-land, that were
Bullet-proof. At another time I kept a Grocer a full quarter of an hour in the
street, to tell me which was the nearest way from Fleet street to the
Sun-Tavern in Peccadille, whether down the Strand, and so by Charing Cross, or
through Lincolns-Inn-Fields and Covent Garden, tho the poor fellow told me his
Spouse sent him out for a Midwife, and for all I know, I made him lose an Heir
Apparent to a dozen pound of Raisins, as many Silver-Spoons, Stow's Survey of
the City, and Speed's Chronicle.


Bays. Well, I see you must have your frolicks, Mr. Hains, but pray what was
the result of this affair between you.


Hains. I made very small, insensible advances into Popery, Little Bays, though
the Gentleman took as much pains every day to expound it to me, as a kind
Keeper takes to instruct a Young Country Girl of his own breeding up, in
Aretine's Postures; or a New Author takes to teach a Dull Heavy Player the
right accent of all his Witty Passages in his first Comedy: He was a week, at
least, before he could make me comprehend one Article and half of his Religion;
and I dare swear, had the Ship, we were in, moved no faster than I did, we had
continued in the Mediterranean to this very moment.


Bays. I shall never forgive thee for this inexcusable stupidity, Mr. Hains,
thou art as restiff an animal as a tired Carriers Horse, or a superannuated
Matron of threescore and three.


Hains. At last, says my friend Leandro, being I suppose by this time fully
convinced what a difficult Province he had undertaken; Signor Giusippe, you and
I take Articles in the Catholic Religion much after the same rate as the
Spaniards regain their Towns in the French Acquisitions. I am Dog-weary of this
slavish employment already, for I Would sooner engage to teach a Poet the
Mathematics, or the profound mystery of keeping ready money always in his
pocket; to teach a nimble fluttering Monsiour the art of thinking, a Seaman
the rules of civility, a Dutchman sobriety, an Irishman good manners and
discretion, an Italian a cure for jealousy, than to be bound to instruct you
piecemeal in all the Doctrines of Holy Church.


Bays. Did he turn you over* then for lost, Mr. Hains, when he gave you this
severe Reprimand?


Hains. No, you shall hear: I have only one thing more to trust to, (continues
he) and if that fails, then farewell for ever. When we come ashore at Malta, I
design to carry you to St. Paul's Grotto, where he sheltered himself some time,
after he was shipwrackt upon that Island. Unless my expectations mightily
deceive me, when I have got you there, and advanced two or three convincing
arguments upon you, I shall see you become a good trusty believing Catholic by
wholesale.


Bays. Well, I am glad with all my heart, to see your Gentleman has his surest
Cards still to play, for to say the truth, I began to despair of the Game.


Hains. As soon as we landed, my pious well-meaning Friend, before he went to
pay his complements to the Grand-master, or look after any of his concerns,
carries me along with him to this celebrated Grotto. This was the place, said
he, (and I remember it faced the Seashore) which St. Paul honored with his
presence immediately after his Shipwreck.


Bays. -- Hanc Tharsi magnus Alumnus
Speluneam subiit, haec illum regia cepit.
Aude Hospes contemnere opes, and te quoque dignum
Finge Deo --
I hope you can forgive me this sudden rapture, Mr. Hains, for I am all over
possessed with ecstasie, and admiration.


Hains. That Immortal Converter of the Gentiles, added he, during the short
residence he made here, impressed that miraculous virtue on the earth of this
Cave, that it cures all manner of Tumors, and Inflammations. You your self by
comfortable experience have found the efficacy of it, suffer your self
therefore Amigo meo carissimo, to be conquered by so irresistible an argument,
and don't disdain to increase the Triumphs of this victorious Missionaire.


Bays. Thou had been a mere unpardonable Infidel if this had not prevailed
upon thee. And what, did not St. Paul's earth convert thee at last?


Hains. I was going to say, Sir I am afraid if St. Paul's Earth will bring me
over to the Roman Church, that his Epistles will draw me out of it again. But
the Gentleman reassuming his discourse; tho, says he, a hundred thousand
Cartloads are every year carried out of this Cave to be distributed about in
Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, Poland, and other Catholic Countries
(for out of the precincts of the Church this Earth has no manner of operation)
yet the place is neither larger, nor wider than it was sixteen Centuries ago. I
looked round about me, and saw, to my great astonishment, it was one of the
least and lowest Grottos that I had ever seen in my life. A Box in a Tavern is
capable of holding a greater number of people; half a dozen brawny, overgrown,
drinking Dutch Divines would cram it up. So then I blushed, hung down my head,
gave the Gentleman my hand, and told him I was his most humble servant --


Bays. Tuque dum procedis, Io Triumph,
Non semel dicemus, Io Triumph
Civitas omnis, dabimusque divis
Thura benignis.

Hains. For your farther satisfaction, says he, there are a thousand worthy
Persons in the Island, men of Honor and Virtue, than can attest the truth of
what I have communicated to you. In short, it is too palpable and notorious a
thing to be an imposture, you your self will see a hundred evidences of it
before you leave the place; and can you think then, my Illustrious Signor, that
the Religion of this Country (which I can assure you is only Catholic) is
displeasing to Heaven, since it is daily countenanced by so continued, so
palpable, so manifest a Miracle. The Terra Sigillata that comes from Stalimene,
is not to be named the same month with this; it has converted more Infidels,
and Heretics to the Church, than all the Fathers of the Society since the days
of St. Ignatius, and by methods more gentle, more peaceable, and suited to the
Spirit of Christianity.


Bays. That I must needs own. But I wonder in my heart, that we never heard or
read of this Miraculous Earth in England before. It had been worth K. James's
while, I am sure, to have sent all his unbelieving Peers to this Island to be
transformed here into true Mussulmen. This same business, Mr. Hains, sticks a
little with me I confess.


Hains. Why, Mr. Bays, could thou read over, and translate, and consequently
believe the History of St. Xavier (for otherwise why did thou print it?) and
can thou with any face startle at my single Miracle? Oh thou Uncircumsised,
Infidel Play-wright. This it is to swallow the Legend of Garagantua, and boggle
at poor Tom Thumb. Thou servest thy faith just as a Merchant in Town serves a
declining Tradesman, give it credit at first for a hundred pound, and
afterward wont trust if for a single farthing.


Bays. Don't be angry, honest Mr. Hains, lay aside your passion, and I promise
you upon my word, I Will be guilty no more of such a trespass.


Hains. Well, said I, to the Gentleman, I heartily beg your pardon for the
trouble I have given you, and render you ten thousand thanks for the double
cure you have wrought upon an unworthy, graceless Foreigner. I now believe
Church, and Councils; Canons, and Decrees; Pope, and Tradition, and every thing
in the world besides. My future acknowledgments shall testify the sincerity of
my heart. Signor, answered he, no more of this. Your frank confession has
abundantly recompensed me for the pains I have taken. Then he informed me, into
how charitable, and good natured a Church I had fled for sanctuary; acquainted
me with what latitude, what elbow-room, what liberty of conscience she allowed
to poor sinners, at what easy Christian rates she offered absolution, that tho
she obliged her Converts to part with a few foolish senses, yet she was never
so unmerciful or Un-Lady-like to contradict the sweet dictates of Flesh and
Blood, with a great many more Arcanas of the same importance; so that when he
left me all alone in the Grotto, to pass an hour or two by my self in Prayer
and Meditation, I fell a weeping, and crying as hard as I could drive:


Bays. Nay, I think you would make me weep too, Mr. Hains, with this pathetic,
moving Narration, but that I have no moisture left me in my old decaying
Tenement to part with. Dear Signor Leandro, I shall never forget thee. But
pray, Noble Comedian, tell me what occasioned you to weep so plentifully.


Hains. Not the old story of Alexander's sorrow, because I had no more worlds
of Religion, no more terra incognitas to conquer, but a sad melancholy story
of a Sage, and venerable Hermit.


Bays. For Charity, replied the Matron, tell,
What sad mischance the Hermit sage befell:



Hains. Nay, no mischance, replied the savage Dame,
But too much vigor, and to fierce a flame,
And love too strong, and something else without a name.
To make short work of my tale. This Hermit, I am discoursing of, had very
honestly, and according to the letter lived up to his vow of Chastity, till he
was near threescore years of age: Knew no more for what noble ends a woman was
created, than the Young ignorant Persian Prince in the Play; so you may imagine
he had in this time amassed together a vast prodigious stock of Love, which
like ill-managed hay that had not cocking and spreading enough, broke out at
last into a flame, and threw him into a very violent burning Feavor.


Bays. And no more than what he deserved, like an old penurious nigardly hunks
as he was, to keep his Talent about him for so long a time useless, and
unemployed.


Hains. The Physicians being sent for to prescribe what medicines they thought
most convenient and suitable for their Patient, after they had acquainted
themselves with all the circumstances of his indisposition, they came to his
bed side, and told him, there was only one way in the world for him to save his
life, but that they questioned, whether a Gentleman of his nice squeamish
Conscience would submit to follow the prescription.


Bays. Show me that man, Mr. Hains, that will not sacrifice all the vows and
considerations in the world, rather than sacrifice the beloved principle of
self-preservation, and I Will give you leave to make me your bond-slave.


Hains. Sir, said they, you are a man of a sanguine jolly complexion, and ought
to have consulted the interest of your own body so far, as to have drained it
upon occasion, when you found nature overcharged with superfluous humors. To
be plain with you, Sir, you have foolishly made a vow of chastity, and what is
unpardonable in a person of your vigor, you have as foolishly observed it.
There Is nothing in the Universe can save you but a woman, take one into your
bed, and manage her as you see fitting; you will need no no directions in the
case, only follow the impulse of nature, and you may live as long as a
Patriarch.


Bays. Well, commend me to such honest Doctors as these, while you live, I Will
maintain it, rhey were in the right.


Hains. The poor Gentleman considered a while with himself what he had best do.
If he followed the Doctors advice he trespassed upon his oath; and if he
declined it, he must certainly die. At last the principle of self-preservation,
as you very well observe, prevailed upon him; so he sent for a fresh juicy Girl
of fifteen to pass away the night with him. What they did together we cannot
tell, for both the Greek and Latin Authors leave us in the dark as to that
point. But it is agreed on all hands, the Nymph carried something about her that
was both a Sudorific, and an Opiate; for she did first of all put the pious
Hermit into a gentle sweat, and afterward cast him into a gentler slumber.


Bays. IN gad, Mr. Hains, it happened just as I imagined.


Hains. The next morning the Physicians came to see how matters succeeded with
their Patient, and found him weeping very plentifully on his Pillow. They
enquired of him then how he found himself, and whether the malignity of his
distemper was abated or no; Gentlemen, says he, I took your counsel, and must
needs own the prescription was very natural and easy; it has perfectly
recovered my health, only I cannot choose but weep to think what a stupid,
senseless blockhead I was, to deny my self all along so sweet a satisfaction as
I enjoyed last night, and that I never had the grace to experiment the pleasure
before now, when I am not in a capacity of enjoying it much longer.


Bays. Nay, I confess the peevish old fool had occasion enough to bemoan his
condition, but I don't understand, Mr. Hains, why the remembrance of his
miscarriage should set you a weeping.


Hains. This it is to tell a story to a man, that is not capable of making an
application. If I must then be forced to make out every thing to you, I wept
because I turned Roman Catholic no sooner.


Bays. Thanks to you for your Comment however, Mr. Hains, for I am as much in
the dark now as I was before.


Hains. To condescend then to the weakness of your apprehension, you must know,
I have broke many an honest assignation in my time, Mr. Bays, purely out of a
principle of conscience (would you believe it?) and because I looked upon that
same business, you know what I mean, to be a very crying sin. The truth on it
is, I have had my failings, and backslidings now and then, as well as others
before me; but then my Conscience certainly stared me in the face for it next
morning, and sometimes put me into such a fright, that I could not recover my
self in a day or two. Now the Church of Rome, Mr. Bays, utterly stifles such
uncivil mortifying scruples as these, makes it at most but a venial sin, and if
you go to the Confessional (where it is as great a pleasure for a man of a
fruitful imagination to rehearse the scene, as it was almost to act it,)
there is some Ecclesiastical weapon-salve always to be had, that will make you
whole in a moment. Now it was this consideration, Mr. Bays, viz. that I was so
unfortunate as to be proselyted to so kind a Church in my old age, when I was
not in a condition to use her favors long, that made me consider of the poor
Hermit: And both these considerations together made me weep so heartily, as I
have told you.


Bays. Oh fie, Mr. Hains! who would expect to hear such a light unbecoming
passage drop from a person of your years. I Will take care to give you such a
temptation no more; now prithee what did thou do at Malta after thy
conversion?


Hains. To show my self a true obedient Son of the Church, and that I
understood the privileges of my place, I immediately entered into a pious
intreague with the Grand-Master's Mistress, as I have already acquainted you.


Bays. And did thou lie with her at last, Noble Comedian? where I pray, and
how often?


Hains. Oh! you would take care to give me such temptation no more. Thank you, Mr.
Bays, for that IN faith; I don't use to tell tales out of School -- Shortly
after this, our Ambassador dying, Sir William S -- ms by name, I lost the
long-expected opportunity of seeing Constantinople, that I had so earnestly
desired.


Bays Prithee what great advantages could you propose to your self, Mr. Hains,
by going thither?


Hains. I had read among some of my Authors, that a celebrated Musician and
Poet of Thrace, his name was Orpheus, formerly danced his savage countrymen
into good Manners, and Religion. Now I was in hopes of doing much the same
feats as my Thracian predecessor did; that is, of dancing the Grand Signor and
his Divan out of their old brutality and nonsense, into the Christian
persuasion. Or, if that device failed, I desired to mutter some exceptions
against the Alcoran amongst the women of my acquaintance there, and at the same
time to make some new plausible Glosses and Comments upon their Law, which
would have certainly raised a Schism in their Churches at long run.


Bays. That would have done very well, I confess, for I know, Mr. Hains, you
love mischief with all your heart. But where did you steer your course after
this unlucky disappointment.


Hains. I took the first opportunity was offered me, to ship my self for Italy.
The first Port we touched at, was Leghorn, where I desired to be set ashore.
From thence I took a journey to Florence, to renew my acquaintance with the
Great Duke, whom I had the happiness to know formerly in England. He received
me with that address and magnificence, which is peculiar to the Italian
Princes, made me Operator (as I may so say it) in the English tongue to his
Son, allowed me a Coach and six, and to maintain all this grandeur, besides his
private largesses, assigned me fifty Crowns a month duly out of his treasury.


Bays. Well, thou art a fortunate fellow, that is certain. At the same time, Mr.
Hains, was I a drudging at controversy here in England, and writing for the
Cause; yet none of these blessings lighted upon me.


Hains. Some time after this, I begged leave of the Duke to go and visit the
Limina Apostolorum at Rome, and satisfy my self with the curiosities of that
ancient City. He granted my request, and sent me thither with all my
abovementioned splendour, and gallantry, with abundance of recommendations to
Cardinals, Princes, and most of the eminent, considerable persons in and about
the Town.


Bays. If you were not my friend, Mr. Hains, I could envy you for all this
happiness.


Hains. It happened just at my arrival to Rome, that a certain English Peer,
who is now in durance, changed his Religion, and designed the week following to
make a solemn abjuration of it in the Pope's Chapel. Hearing of my conversion,
he desired me to bear him company in the Ceremony, and assured me, he would take it
for a particular favor. I soon consented, because I had not as yet renounced
my former Heresy in public. So on the day appointed, my Lord having a large
Wax Taper in his hand, stuck all over with Diamonds in honor of the Virgin
Mary, knocked at the Chapel door for admittance, which was readily granted.
After him comes Mr. Joseph Hains, the Comedian, with little devotion in his
looks, and a less Farthing Candle in his hand, of about some twenty four to the
pound, and nothing near so thick as an ordinary Tobacco-pipe.


Bays. How, Mr. Hains! Did you design to affront 'em then in their own quarters?


Hains. Pray Sir listen. I knocked at the Chapel door, but the fellow judging
the merits of my Piety by the merits of my Candle, as it is generally the way in
Italy, refused to let me in. Then I rapped at the door again, and as loud I'gad
as a blustering Seamans Widow at the Navy-Office, or a bilked Client at a
sleepy Lawyer's Chamber at the Temple. At last, through the intercession of my
Noble Companion, who told em plainly, he would abjure nothing without me, they
condescended to admit me into the Chapel, but first demanded, why I brought
along with me so small a Candle.


Bays. I expect to hear what answer you could make 'em.


Hains. Says one of them, who seemed to be the principal man amongst 'em,
ex*Candela tua judicaberis, and quoted St. Cyprian for the saying; for a
Candle, continued he, is an infallible testimony of a man's devotion, the
whiteness of the color shows the purity of the heart, as the bigness of the
light shows the bigness of the illumination within, and therefore a great deal
of devotion can no more find its way without a great Candle, than a great Ship
can sail without a great Mast. He had run on, I believe, in a speech an hour
long about the excellency and virtue of great Candles, but that I interrupted
him, and said, Sir, all this I acknwledge to be true. I designed you no affront
or disrespect; what I have done, proceeds only from a principle of humility,
and a true sense of my own meanness, that the exiguity (if I may so call it, my
most reverend Father) of the Oblation might bear a just proportion to the
exiguity of the Offerer.


Bays. That excuse, I suppose, atton'd for you Mr. Hains.


Hains. At this he relented somewhat; and so we proceeded to the business in
hand, where we abjured Lutheranism, and Calvinism, and Zuinglianism, and every
Isme, in the World, as I know of, except Chrism and Paganism. But I remember,
the good natured Priest, that railled me so severely about my
Farthing-Offering, made me abjure small Candles into the bargain, as well as
Heresy: For, says he, we have a proverb at Rome, that a little Faith, and a
little Candle are always tallies one to another.


Bays. But prithee, Mr. Hains, (for I know you to be a sagacious discreet
person) give me your opinion of Rome; how do you like the Ceremonies and
Customs of it? did not the Religion of the place strike a wonderful awe and
terror into thee?


Hains. To say the truth, Mr. Bays, I like the Women, the Painting, the Music,
and the Company one meets there, well enough; and the Religion too, provided
you give it another name, call it Acting, or showing, or rehearsing, or
playing; and not Religion.


Bays. What mean you by this Mr. Hains?


Hains. I find, Poet Squob, I must take the same Method with you, as your
Country Parsons do with a dull heavy Parishioner, and help the weakness of your
apprehension with a simile. At an Inn in a small Village in Italy I asked my
Landlord, whether they had a Barber in the Town. Ay Sir, says he, we have got a
Carpenter. A Carpenter? answered I, what do you mean? I have no great occasion
at present to have my Head chopp'd off, my Beard will serve the turn. Sir, cries
the Innkeeper, he follows the calling of a Barber, but was originally a
Carpenter. In short, (as our learned Priest has distinguished upon him) by
profession he is a Carpenter, but a Barber by vocation.


Bays. Very well, and did you send for him?


Hains. The fellow came, and began to fall briskly about his work, but put me
to so much pain, that I was forced to desire him to forbear. Stop Friend, let
me ask you one civil question before you proceed any further. Do you call this
Flaying or Shaving? If you call it Flaying it is pretty tolerable. But if you
call it Shaving, why then, my Friend, it is the Devil all over. Even so Little
Bays.


Bays. Even so, Little Count. --


Hains. If you call the Religion of Rome acting, or showing, or rehearsing, or
any thing of that nature, it is well enough: But if you call it Religion, Mr.
Bays, I don't know what to say to it. But you know my Talent lies another way,
the greatest Correspondence I kept there, was amongst the Ladies, and I must
needs own they are the most Courteous, Affable, Condescending Creatures in the
whole World.


Bays. IN faith, Dear Rogue, we were told here in England, that you had an
Amor with the Queen of Sweden. Come, we are amongst our selves, and you may
confess the truth without any danger; did thou ever pass a Night or so with
her Majesty, Mr. Hains.


Hains. Oh strange, Mr. Bays! I thought you had not forgot the old saying De
mortuis nil nisi Bonum. Indeed there passed a kind of a civil commerce between
her Majesty and my self. I have some forty Billets doux of her own handwriting
still by me at home, besides a Gold Medal, and two or three other small Tokens
of her kindness, which I would not part with for all the World. But I wonder
Mr. Bays, that a Man of your Character and Gravity would put such an uncivil
question to your Friend: Nay they reported here in Town, that I lay with the
late Pope, and half the Cardinals, but neither I nor you, Mr. Bays, can stop
the Peoples Mouths if they have a mind to talk. They say it is their
Birthright, and property, and they will not part with it.


Bays. I have experienced that truth in my time, as well as your self Mr.
Hains, and I could give you several melancholy instances of it, if I pleased.
But leaving the Censorious world to it self, if you have any diverting story to
impart to your humble servant, prithee communicate it.


Hains. Ay, with all my Heart, Mr. Bays, and I Will choose you out one; that shall
serve to acquaint you once for all, how obliging the Females, in that Sunny
part of the Globe generally are. One afternoon, as I was walking from my
Lodging, to pay a visit to the Ambassador, I chanced to see a very pretty
Woman in Booksellers Shop. Having no extraordinary business upon my hands at
that time, I thought it not amiss to trifle away an hour or two in civil
conversation with her.


Bays. Very good.


Hains. So I stepped into the Shop, sending my company away before me, amongst
whom was a certain young Gentleman that I suppose you may know, for he has writ
a very pretty Latin Copy of Verses upon Arlington Gardens; and to color the
matter, asked her; Madam, pray have you got Signor Palladio's Book of
Architecture, it is a thick Quarto, Printed at Bologna.


Bays. Well, for the contrivance, and good management of a design, thou have
not thy fellow; but pray go on.


Hains. Sir, said she, my husband is not in town, he is gone as far as Frescati
to take a little country air. Madam, said I again, I have no manner of business
with your husband, I know him not; but pray Madam have you got Signor
Palladio's Book in your shop that I inquired for. Sir, says she, upon my word
he is dangerously overgone with a consumption, and all the Doctors in Town
despair of his recovery.


Bays. This Lady, Mr Hains, as far as I can conjecture, had a mind to play at
cross purposes with you.


Hains. No, no, she had a mind to play at something else, as you will perceive by
and by, but that is your mistake now, as well as it was mine. I made bold to
enquire for the Book once more of her Ladyship, and she told me she had it in
the shop, then pointed with her hand to the place where it was, and bad me
reach it down.


Bays. Nay, now I cannot imagine where the business will end for the heart of
me.


Hains. To save my self the trouble, seeing a boy in the shop, I spoke to him
to take it down for me. When presently the Lady pulling her snuff box out of
her pocket, Pietro, says she, go carry my snuff box to Signor Orsino's (and he
lived about a mile off on the other side the water) and desire him to fill it
with the best snuff he has. When the Boy was gone --


Bays. Ay, when the Boy was gone, Mr. Hains, what followed then?


Hains. Prithee don't be too hasty, Mr. Bays. Sir, says she, this Signor Orsino
sells the best Snuff in Rome, without disparagement to any one else. All the
Grandees, and persons of good condition about the Town buy of him, and I fancy
Sir, you as well as all other well-bred ingenious Gentlemen, are a great
admirer of Snuff.


Bays. But what became of your Book all this while?


Hains. After her little chat about Snuff was over, I asked her again for the
Book. Sir, says she, you may reach it down, if you please to give your self
that trouble. Then I inquired the price of it, and she told me, that her
Husband about a Week before he went into the Country, had at her request (for
she did not pretend to understand the mystery of her trade) written down the
lowest price of every Book in the wast leaf before the Title Page. I told her,
'twas just three Crowns, and tendered her the Money on the Counter.


Bays. Well, prithee dispatch your story, for it begins to be tedious.


Hains. She gave me my Money back again, and taking my by the hand, Sir, says
she, the Book is at your service; it is our fashion here in Rome to present a
stranger with a trifle of this nature, to engage him to be a Customer to us. I
thanked the Lady very heartily, and told her I was going to the English
Embassadour's, and so could not conveniently carry the Book away with me at
that time, only desired her to lay it up safely for me, till I should call for
it as I came that way again.


Bays. So, Mr. Hains.


Hains. Lay it up for you? cries the Lady; come Sir, you shall see how carefully
I Will dispose of it. With that she pulls me by the hand after her, runs up
stairs into her Bedchamber, and lays the Book directly under her Pillow.


Bays. Now IN gad the Plot begins to thicken, with a witness.


Hains. With no witness you should have said Mr. Bays. I then laid the Lady's
Head upon the Pillow; and when I had so done, I ran down the stairs as hard as
ever I could drive.


Bays. No, no, you did not Mr. Hains, you are a man of too much good breeding I
am sure, to leave a fair Lady in the lurch; you and she, I don't question
between you, laid a foundation for something upon your famous Book of
Architecture. But my noble Comedian, what said she to you at parting?


Hains. Thou art my singular good Friend, Dear Squob, and I can deny thee
nothing. Signor Giuseppe, says she, (for you may imagine by this time we grew
pretty intimate! you Tramontani are the most indocible, stupid, unthinking,
undivining animals in the whole World. A Lady takes as much pains to make you
comprehend her meaning, as a Creditor, when he tells you a lamentable story of
his Wife, and five Children, to make you understand he wants a little of your
Money; and tho we make the matter never so obvious, yet you stand gaping and
staring, as if we were discoursing to you in Arabic all the while. In fine,
I Would rather undertake the Penance of making a mere dos'd Philosopher
understand his own nonsense, than one of your Phlegmatic Gentlemen beyond the
Hills understand a Ladies virtuous thoughts at first sight.


Bays. Nay, the reproach was just and pertinent enough in all conscience; for a
man of Gallantry, like your true well-bred Spaniel ought to fall upon the Game
with a wink or a nod, without giving his Master the trouble of crying out to
him. But under favor, Mr. Hains, these noble frolicks of yours I am afraid
made fine work at the Confessional.


Hains. Troth, Mr. Bays, I never understood the great virtue or necessity of
that Pagan Institution, unless it were, that the Priests (a pox take them)
should know where the greatest Fornication and Adultery in the Kingdom was
stirring, and who were the ablest dealers. But this way of proceeding as I take
it; utterly discourages Trade, and ruins the growth of those noble
Manufactures. As for my self, I bless my Stars, I took wiser methods in that
case, than the rest of Mankind generally do, and instead of making it a
punishment to my self, so contrived the matter, as to make it ten times a
greater plague to my Confessor.


Bays. Prithee tell me how, honest Mr. Hains.


Hains. Why, sometimes I would, go you to the Confessional, and pretending a
great deal of simplicity, banter the old Gentleman with such a story as this:
Reverend Father, I had a horrible dream last Night about the Cham of Tartary,
and the great Mogul. What was it, Son, cries he? I dreamt that those two
puissant Monarchs laid their Heads together to ruin and undermine the
Christian Religion, and that in order thereunto, they designed to send a huge
overgrown two-handed Elephant to Rome, under a pretense of showing his Tricks
at a Fair, but that the real design was to corrupt Mr. Schelstrat the Pope's
Library Keeper, to put the Vatican on his back, some dark night or other, and
so to bilk his Lodgings, march away with all the Books and Registers in the
Library, and leave us in everlasting confusions. Therefore, dear Sir, I would
desire you of all loves to go immediately to the Consistory, and acquaint them
with my dream, that they may take Mr. Schelstrat into Custody, and to prevent
such a Tragical, Unchristian design from taking effect, place a continual Guard
of Soldiers about the Vatican.


Bays. This was the right way indeed, to torment your spiritual Director, but
did you always serve him thus?


Hains. No, dear Squob, for I shifted the Scene every month at least. At
another time I would think of all the lewd, dismal, wicked things in the world,
and discharge them into his bosom. I would tell him that such a Night I lay
with such a Princess, the next with such a Countess, the third with such a
Noblemans Lady or Daughter; then name the time, the place, the posture, and
every circumstance. As for example, sometimes we did it on a Bed, sometimes
under a Haycock, sometimes on a Couch, and sometimes on a Chair, with the back
turned to the Wall, and all the while I trembled like a repeating Schoolboy on
a Friday, or a new Member at his first haranguing about the Liberty of the
Subject, in the House; till the poor Priest at the bare recital of these
Romantic adventures, looked as pale as a Hypocondriac believer of Phantoms,
with reading a story or two out of the Sadducismus Triumphatus, or a frolicksom
set of Porters in a dark Cellar, by the melancholy light of burnt Brandy.


Bays. Thou art an Original in thy kind, upon my word, Mr. Hains.


Hains. After I have amused him enough with this kind of Ribaldry, to close up
all, Sir, says I, there still lies upon my Conscience something which I have
not yet discovered to you, but is of so sinful, and tremendous and transcendant
a nature, that I dare scarce utter it, as wicked as I am. Now the blundering
Confessor expects to hear of a Nun ravished on an Altar, a Pix plundered of the
Wafer, or some such dreadful passage as that. But, Sir, says I, to undeceive
him, last Wednesday I stole a consecrated Bell from one of St. Anthony's Pigs,
and coined it into Copper Farthings. Such a day, Sir, I pinned Foxes Tail on a
Monks Cowl, or for want of a better convenience, I pist into the
Holy-water-Pot, or untruss'd on Consecrated Ground. Sunday was a fortnight,
Sir, between the hours of four and five, as I was walking through such an Ally,
I passed by an Old Civil Gentlewoman, sitting in her Elbow-Chair by the door,
and very devoutly reading The Spiritual Carduus posset for a sinners Belly-ake,
and I like a graceless rascal as I was, stole away her Spectacles from her
venerable Red Nose, and have since converted 'em to the profane use of lighting
my Tobacco by the Sunshine.


Bays. Ha! Ha! Ha! honest Mr. Hains, I shall most infallibly spoil my self with
laughing at these pleasant conceits. But did you never acquaint your
Ecclesiastical Dragoman with any of your true intreagues, your true Mistresses
names.


Hains. No, have a care of that, Dear Squob, ever whilst you live, I don't love
to have my game beat up by a stranger, or to be disturbed in my own quarters.
Trust a Priest with your Mistresses name! Trust a Parliamentman with a design
against Magna-Charta, or the Ribbon-Weavers with an invention to promote the
Woollen Manufacture, trust your Estate with a Lawyer, or your good name with a
dealer in Lampoons.


Bays. But, my Noble Comedian, how came you to escape a good round swinging
Penance now and then for your frolics; methinks if I had the management of
thee, I should soon make thee weary of these extravagancies.


Hains. Why I heartily thank 'em, out of their abundant zeal and charity
sometimes they prescribe me a hundred Pater Nosters a day, that go down just
like so many hundred ounces of chopped Hay with me, and no better. I am too old
In Faith now, to say a hundred Pater Nosters in a day for any Priest in
Christendom; tho if a man submitted to the performance, the punishment were not
very great, for the trouble lies, like in your making of Rhymes, Mr. Bays, more
in the fingers, than the head.


Bays. Nay, now I lay aside all hopes of ever taming you.


Hains. Sometimes they advise me, Mr. Bays, to subdue and mortify my wicked
body with a Discipline, but as wicked as it is, I see no reason why my Body
should suffer for the transgression of my Soul. Sometimes they recommend
fasting to me for a very wholesome thing, but alas! fasting never agreed with my
constitution. Once indeed, and never but once, I was sent on a Pilgrimage
barefoot to Loretto, but such a penance as that, is a mere pastime, and
nothing else, to a man that knows how to sanctify an Affliction.


Bays. Sanctify an Affliction! What mean you by that, Mr. Hains?


Hains. Why, to make the best of a bad market, to view only the comfortable
side of a thing, and pass it off with a jest, and a fit of laughter. And thus I
remember, I relieved my Tailor at Rome, when he was ready to sink under the
weight of a certain heavy misfortune. He came to my Lodgings one morning, and
in a very doleful tone told me he was undone. In the name of theft, and petty
Larceny, said I to him, what is the matter? Sir, said he, some three nights ago
being got in my stilts, and all that. Your stilts you Rogue, and all that,
leave your canting, and tell me what you mean. An't please you, Sir, cries the
Tailor, having got drunk, I took up with a common Wench in the streets, and
have met with a Clap. Is that all, you Son of a Bodkin and Thimble you, to make
all this noise and pother about? Down upon your Marrow-bones, you Rascal, say
your prayers, and bless Providence for your good luck, for now you will piss
Needles for nothing.


Bays. And did the fellow then take this drollery of yours in good part?


Hains. Take it in good part, little Bays? Why he fell a grinning immediately
upon it, and looked fifty per Cent. better, than when he first came into the
room. Nay, he was so far pleased with the quibble, that he asked my advice very
soberly, whether he had best cure himself, or let his distemper run upon him.
For, Sir, said he, very prudently in the case, after I have once cured my self,
Sir, the jest will be quite spoiled.


Bays. But prithee tell me, Mr. Hains, what remedies you used to make your
Loretto-Pilgrimage easy, and diverting to you.


Hains. Provided you will never steal 'em from me, I will. Sometimes, Mr. Bays,
when I overtook a Covey of young silly Country Girls upon the road, I set up
for a Fortune Tellers, and talked of the Planets, and Twelve Houses, and
pretended I was a person of great skill and dexterity in that mysterious
Science. Presently all of 'em were mighty inquisitive to know their fortunes.
Dear Conjurer, cries one, for God's sake tell me what kind of a Husband am I to
have? Why, says I, staring her full in the face, and squeezing her by the hand,
he has red hair, and his name is Belshazzer. Dear Conjurer, says another, can
you tell me when my jealous Mother-in-law will go the way of all flesh? It Is
impossible, answered I, for Errapater himself, if he were alive, to resolve
such a question as this, unless he knew the party; besides to satisfy you once
for all, I never meddle with such matters; the Stars that I have to deal with,
have nothing at all to do with Churchyards or Burials. Marriages, you know,
are all made in Heaven, and a man of Art may as plainly read 'em there, as his
A, B, C. If you please to consult me in that affair, I am at your service.


Bays. Very pretty I protest.


Hains. I had no sooner spoke the words, but a pretty blushing Damosel plucked
me by the sleeve, and told me she had something to cummunicate, but did not
care to let her Companions hear it. When they were at some distance, worthy
Sir, says she, I have two Suitors of the same Age and fortune, that daily press
me to marry, and I don't know which of them to choose for the heart of me;
sometimes I love one best, and the next hour I love the other best. Could you
advise me, Dear Conjurer, what to do in this perplexity.


Bays. And what answer did the Seven Planets return to this profound question.


Hains. Sweet heart, said I, this is a very nice business, but however, I Will
put you in a certain way, how to make your choice to the best advantage. You
must rise every morning precisely at four, and go to your window in your Smock;
then you must bow toward the East twelve times exactly, and no more;
afterward turn to the West, and bow six times. This you must do for the space
of fifteen days without fail; during which time you are not to speak one
syllable to either of your Lovers. You must likewise all this while wash your
hands and face four times a day, and dress and undress your self as often.


Bays. I wonder, how thou could banter a poor innocent creature so?


Hains. When the time is expired, place a Candle just in the middle of your Bed
chamber, and that exactly about two in the morning; then take your Lovers names
written in two several pieces of paper, and standing with your face toward the
Chimny, throw 'em over your left shoulder: Afterward prostrate your self upon
the ground, and repeat twenty Ave Mary's: Him, whose name lights next the
Candle you must marry, but be sure you tie him fast the Sunday following;
you will have a dozen Children by him, that I can tell you for your comfort, and
one of 'em will live to be a Cardinal.


Bays. But what other diversions did you meet upon the way, Noble Count?


Hains. Sometimes it was my fortune to meet a sullen herd of Religious
Coxcombs, that would be wrangling as heartily about the priority of their
Countrymen in the Almanac, as two young sober Sparks of each University, use to
dispute about the merits of the Theater, and Kings College-Chappel. I remember,
I once encountered a Millanese and a Frenchman very zealously engaged in such a
dispute. One stood up for St. Carlo, the other vindicated St. Francis de Sales.
When they were pretty well warmed with the Controversy, and some angry words
had passed between them.


Bays. And that was no small satisfaction to a person of thy temper, Mr. Hains.


Hains. I took my Milanese aside, and told him, may the Indignation of St.
Carlo light heavily upon thee, if thou do not revenge his quarrel. Then
wheeling about to the dapper Frenchman, I whispered him in the Ear, Stand up
for St. Francis whatever you do, don't see him affronted, he will remember you
for it another day. With that the Noble Champions, without any more ceremony,
fell to fisticuffs; and battered and tore one another Countenances very
furiously.


Bays. To thy great comfort, no question, on it,


Hains. When they had spilt blood enough in all conscience about so meritorious
a quarrel, I interposed between 'em, as in duty bound, and said to them, Come,
Gentlemen, you have done enough for your two Friends, they will reward you for it
it without question in the next world; let me have the honor to reconcile you
now, and at the next Tavern you shall shake hands over a bottle of Wine and be
Friends. And thus, Mr. Bays, I had the good fortune to engage some two and
fifty pair of Pious Combatants, in my Pilgrimage to Loretto.


Bays. Nay, as you ordered matters, Mr. Hains, the Pilgrimage carried but very
little Penance with it.


Hains. One remarkable passage happened in my way thither, which I cannot choose
but relate to you, it is so very comical and diverting. Going through a certain
Country Village, between the hours of ten and eleven in the morning, I step
into the Church, as they were just going to act the Decollation of the Baptist.


Bays. How happened that, prithee?


Hains. You must know it was St. John's day, and the sober devout people of the
Parish, had built a Stage of Deal Boards in the Body of the Church, for the
better convenience of representing the Tragedy. It was my good luck to come in,
just as they were beginning the show. There was an ill-looked surly Butcher
they had pitched upon to act Herod's part, he had a gilt Past-board Crown upon
his Head, that glittered finely by the Candlelight; and as soon as he had
seated himself in an old venerable Wicker-chair, that served him for his
Throne, the Fiddles struck up, and the Damosel began to shake her Heels.


Bays. With the help of a little imagination, My Noble Comedian, thou could
fancy thy self then in a Booth at Smith-field, or Sturbridge Fair.


Hains. After the Dance was over, King Herod with a great deal of Majesty came
to the Damosel, and in the following Rhymes (which the Curate of the Parish
composed upon that occasion, and I have since translated) thus complemented
her; Well have thou danced Illustrious Maid,
I like thy graceful motion;
Ask what thou will, and by my Soul
It Is all at thy devotion.


Then the Young Girl went, and whispered her Mother Herodias in the ear. After
they had concerted the matter between 'em, she fell down upon her Marrow-bones,
and pointing at an old grave Farmer that represented the Baptist, she thus
delivered her self. If Sir, you speak your real sense,
And don't your Handmaid flatter,
I humbly beg upon my knees,
The Butcher looked about him as sternly as one of his White-Chappel Brethren,
or as one of Elkanah's passionate blustering Heroes; and taking a turn or two
about the Stage, to vent his Royal choler, made this answer. Fair cruel Maid
recall your wish,
Or let me break you of it,
I Would rather abdicate my Crown,
Than sacrifice my Prophet.
The Young Girl continued still in her Petition, according to her Mothers
advice, who sometimes winked, sometimes held up her hand, and sometimes nodded
at her. If thus, Dread Sir, you break your vows,
The Ladies will forswear you;
Or should they still your favors court,
Faith, I Will never dance before you.
That reflection touched the Butcher to the Quick, you may suppose; so he bit
his Thumbs, and paused a while; but recollecting himself at last, and being
informed what the Casuists use to say in those matters, he made this defense,
For swearing is a weak pretense,
O never, never speak it:
A wicked Oath, like Sixpence cracked
Keep not, but rather break it.


Not to be tedious in my story, Mr. Bays, when the Butcher, or King Herod, call
him which you please, fonnd that the Damosel was inflexible, he was forced to
consent to his decollation; at pronouncing of which sentence there were more
weeping eyes in the Church, than there were at the first acting of Mr. Lee's
Protestant Play, The Massacre of Paris. But however, to make the Baptist
amends, these civil people suffered his representative, the honest Farmer, to
dye with all the punctilio's and decency of a good Christian; so he went very
demurely to a fat tun-bellied Priest that stood in a corner of the Stage, and
confessed his sins to him.


Bays. That was ridiculous enough I must own, but prithee how* ended the Farce?


Hains. What followed was ten times worse, for the two Soldiers that had
executed him in Effigy, ran up and down the Church, raving and crying like
madmen; at last they threw themselves down at the Confessional, with looks
full of sorrow and contrition; aggravating the cruelty of that barbarous
murder, and humbly requested their Spiritual Guide to assign 'em some
remarkable penance for the expiation of their horrid guilt. So the Priest even
took 'em at their words, ordered 'em to go barefoot to Loretto, and I had the
honor of their company thither all the rest of the way.


Bays. Well, and what observable passages did you see at Loretto?


Hains. Why, I saw a Million of pious, Lunatic Fools there, of all Ages, Sexes,
and Countries, and if begging of Idiots were the fashion of Italy, I had made
my fortune for ever. There I saw the Celebrated Cell, that they say has
traveled so many Leagues in the Air; and the famous Madona of St. Luke, who
has Pictured the Virgin like a Black-Moor. At the Annunciata in Florence they
show you a Picture of her drawn by an Angel, but it is mere vile daubing like
this at Loretto; so for my part, Mr. Bays, I am as much prejudiced against any
Painting that is said to be done by an Angel or an Evangelist, as I am against a
Book that is said to be written by a person of Quality in the Title Page. After
I had stared about me for some two or three days, and viewed all the rarities
of the place; with half a dozen honest Female Pilgrims in my company* I set
forward for Florence, and on the way thought of a certain famous story in Sir
Henry Blunt's Travels.


Bays. What was that Mr. Hains?


Hains. He tells you, when he was at Constantinople, he saw a Turkish Priest
sell one of his believing Chapmen the merits of two years living in a Hermitage
for a Bushel of Rice, and as much English Cloth, as would serve to make a
Ianizaries Coat. Nay, would you believe it Mr. Bays? the honest Mohammedan
Theologue threw a Pilgrimage to Meccha into the bargain. This was fair play for
you now, Poet Squob, was it not? And if the Catholic Priests would but use the
same civility toward their customers, it would prevent all this beating of the
Hoof to Loretto, and save as much Leather of Pilgrims Toes in a year, as would
serve to bind both the Polyglott, and the Councils.


Bays. Dear Comedian, let me conjure thee to make none of these vile
reflections, for thou art as full of 'em as a new Author is of his Similies, or
an Irishman of his Inniskilling Miracles. But if you please pursue the History
of your Travels.


Hains. After I had glutted my self with Florence* I humbly requested the Great
Duke to give me leave to come for England, not at all questioning to meet with
considerable preferment there, partly for the merits of my conversion, and
partly for the Letters of Commendation, which I brought along with me from
Princes, and Dukes, and Cardinals, and Abbots, and the Devil and all of good
quality. But Alas! Mr. Bays, I found my self exceedingly mistaken; I could not
prevail with one single creature at Court to believe a Syllable of my
Conversion, and passed as unregarded every where, as a broken Projector, a
fallen Statesman, or a begging Scholar.


Bays. Nay, you, and I Mr. Hains, may shake hands as for this particular; I
have writ for the Church, and Translated for the Church, and flattered for the
Church, and Libelled for the Church, nay I have owned my self in Print a Rogue,
a graceless Rogue for the Church; and yet, Mr. Hains, the Church never
considered me.


Hains. When I came into any company at Court; Mr. Hains says one, how do you
like the Plays, and Opera's in Italy? Mr. Hains, says another what think you of
their Harlequin and Scaramouchi? But not a word of, Mr. Hains, how do you like
their Sermons, and Religious exercises, or Mr. Hains what think you of the
Pope, and Cardinals.


Bays. At the same time, that I did all these considerable services for the
Church, the other party that I deserted, were continually upon my bones. They
baited my Hind and Panther with a City Mouse and a Country Mouse, and were so
malicious to my noble Beasts, as to surprise 'em napping, and so the two Mice
got the victory. Another nameless Scribbler dated my Conversion in a
Brandyshop, and hired two unmerciful Bullies of the Town, Mr. Crites and Mr.
Eugenius, to toss me in a Blanket from Greenwich to London, and afterward from
St. James's Park to Wills Coffee-house.


Hains. But this was not all: cries one, Mr. Hains, when will you send Cardinal
Howard the four Half-Crowns you borrowed of him; cries another, Mr. Hains, when
do you think of returning the Pope the Riding-Coat and Tobacco-box he lent you.
Fie for shame, Mr. Hains, cries a third, that you would pawn the Queen of
Sweden's Guitarr at a Bordello; and run away with that little English you had
been teaching the Prince of Tuscany two years? In short, there was never a
Prince, or Duke, or Lord in Italy, but they said, I plundered him of a Watch, a
Snuff box, or a Tooth-picker.


Bays. That was very severe indeed, Brother Hains.


Hains. What vexed me most was, that the very Cits put their affronts upon me:
Just after the revolution, when there were strict orders issued out to search
the houses of Papists, or reputed Papists; do you mind me, brother Bays? I met
the Cunstable with his guard of Myrmidons about him in the street, some two or
three doors from my own house: Good morrow, Mr. Cunstable, said I, what mighty
business are you going upon this morning? I am going to search the Roman
Catholics houses for Arms, answered he. I am very glad In Faith then I met you
so luckily, said I, for you shall go immediately with me, and search my house.
Search your House, Mr. Hains? For what I prithee? Why don't you know, said I,
that I am a Papist, Mr. Constable? Pray, Mr. Hains, said he, let me go about my
business, and don't disturb me. Why I have seen the Pope man, and lived these
two years in Italy. No matter for that, Mr. Hains, I know you well enough. I
have dined a hundred times with Cardinal Howard, and at the Jesuits College. I
cannot help it, Mr. Hains, but pray don't be troublesome. Why don't you take me
for a Papist then, Mr. Constable? Lord, Mr. Hains, why will you banter one so,
and make me lose time here. At last, Mr. Bays, this uncivil, unmannerly,
unbelieving beast of a Constable, gave me a bottle of Wine at the Tavern to
trouble him no more about this business.


Bays. My own case, I'gad, Mr Hains.


Hains. Lord! thought I with my self, what a degenerate, profligate, scandalous
Age do we live in, that I cannot pass for a Papist, or at least for a reputed
Papist?


Bays. I have the very same complaint to make, if you knew all brother Hains;
nay, the Rabble would not do me that Christian favor as to break my Windows.


Hains. I then resolved to go to an honest Justice of my acquaintance, that
lives at the other end of the Town --


Bays. What* to get a Warrant brother Hains for that Infidel of a Con(...).


Hains. No, Mr. Bays, to discourse the point with him soberly, and know what
advice he could give me upon the matter. When I had opened my case to him, and
--


Bays. Told him, I suppose, what a base trick the Constable served you.


Hains. The Devil take the Constable for me, how he runs in thy head. Really,
says he, Mr. Hains, your case is extremely mortifying and sad; it is, as I take
it, a very lamentable afflicting case. Should you abjure all Religion, Mr.
Hains, why then you would have the same reputation in the World still, as you
have at present; now to revenge your self upon the World, you must be of one
Religion, or other, that is certain.


Bays. Very well.


Hains. Considering the present circumstances of affairs, says he, I am of
opinion the Protestant Religion will serve you the best of any, and considering
you are a Poet, Mr. Hains, I shall only make use of two arguments to reduce you
to it: The first is Interest, which a Poet ought always principally to mind;
now the Protestant Religion, Mr. Hains, will qualify you again for the
Playhouse, or for the Guards, or for any other employment about the City. The
second is the Fashion, which a Poet likewise ought to observe as religiously,
as he does his Interest. These two points, Mr. Hains, (for I wont urge any more
upon you) I shall leave you to consider, while I am taking a turn or two in the
Garden, and then expect your answer.


Bays. And prithee what was it, Mr. Hains?


Hains. When the Justice came into his Parlour, I told him, Sir, I have
carefully and deliberately considered your two Arguments, and I find by my
pulse, that one of them would have served the turn. If you will please now to
give me the Oaths, you will oblige me for ever. He did so, and within a fortnight
after I testified my Re-conversion in a Prologue publicly on the Theater.


Bays. Oh thou pusillanimous, abject, little creature! Thou second part of
Renegado Sclater, how I despise and laugh at thee? You see I keep up to my
principles still; so farewell my re-converted Comedian.


Hains. Nay, brother Bays, don't be so hasty. I don't question but to reduce
you with the Justice's two Arguments before we go. First of all, set the fear
of Interest before your eyes, you have been as true to that principle, I am
sure, as a City Usurer to his wicked principle of not lending.


Bays. No matter for that, Sir, I have sacrificed that principle long ago.


Hains. Secondly, consider the Fashion, Mr. Bays, which they say you have
dutifully followed in all the turnings, and windings of the Government, from
your Panegyric upon Oliver Cromwell, down to your Panegyric upon the Prince
of Wales.


Bays. I am too far stricken in years to follow the foolish fashions.


Hains. If this wont do, Mr. Bays, consider your family.


Bays. That Is nothing to you, Sir, my Family may shift for themselves.


Hains. Come, I know what sticks with thee, Poet Squob, thou art afraid of
turning again, lest the Censorious World should laugh at thee for it; twill be
but two or three days wonder at farthest. A Lampoon, a Ballad, a Dialogue, or
so, and what is that, thou art inured to those things, Mr. Bays.


Bays. No, Sir, you lose your labor.


Hains. It Is but leaving Will's Coffee-house for two or three days, and then
saying, that Mr. Baxter's Winding Sheet of Popery has opened thy eyesight.
Besides, who knows but some noble Peer or other, may restore thee to thy Poet
Laureat, and Historiographer Royal's place again, upon thy re-conversion, and
you need fear no drubbing in this case; consider of that, Mr. Bays.


Bays. You are resolved, I see, to torment and plague me worse than you did the
Constable.


Hains. Besides, all the World knows, thou have ten times more merit and title
to the place, than the present Usurper. Then write a Panegyric, which thou
can do as fast as Hops upon black and green Gowns, and the Clergy, all the
World ever will forgive thee. Burn thy Hind and Panther, and then the Religio
Laici, and the Spanish Friar, will come in play again. But if King James ever
come in, I Will give thee a Note under my Hand and Seal to return to the Roman
Church; nay, rather than fail, I Will bear thee Company my self.


Bays. Will you let me go, Sir, I shall be in a passion anon --


Hains. But what will you do for your sustenance, man? How'll you spend your
time?


Bays. What Is that to you? perhaps I Will write Tragedies for the diversion of
the Town, Political Essays for the diversion of Statesmen, Amorous discourses
for the diversion of the Ladies, a Treatise of Criticism for the diversion of
young Authors, a Treatise of Old Age for the Consolation of Gray Hairs, and --


Hains. A Treatise of Patience for the consolation of the Iacobites. Nay, Mr.
Bays, if I cannot Convert thee from Popery, I Will at least Convert thee from the
plague of Writing. You are to understand, Poet Squob --


Bays. Don't understand, or Squob me, Mr. Hains; I shall --


Hains. Nay, I have you fast, you shall not go In Faith -- That at the Palace of
the Farnese at Rome, there is a celebrated piece of Caracchio's, wherein there is
Pictured the Pope and Emperor, seated in their Thrones. And first comes a
Counselor with this Label in his mouth, I advise you two, a Courtier, I
statter your three. Then a Husbandman, I feed you four. Then a Lawyer, I rob
you five. Then a Soldier, I fight for you six. And lastly, comes a Physician
with his, I kill all you seven.


Bays. Will thou never have done, thou everlasting plague, thou --


Hains. Even so, Mr. Bays, we Gentlemen Authors write for the Gentlemen
Printers* The Gentlemen Printers Print for the Gentlemen Booksellers: The
Gentlemen Booksellers sell to the Gentlemen Readers. But at last come the
Christmas Pies, the Tarts, the Trunks, the Banboxes, the Paper Kites, the
Coffee-houses, and Grocers Shops and immediately confirm what the Gentlemen
Readers bought, the Gentlemen Booksellers Sold, the Gentlemen Printers Printed,
and the Gentlemen Authors wrote. -- Now I Will let you go, Mr. Bays, but chew the
Cud a while upon this melancholy observation, and write if you can.


FINIS.

