AN Apologeticall Relation, Of the particular sufferings of the faithful
M^nisters and professors of the Church of Scotland, since August. 1660.

Wherein several questions, useful for the time, are discussed: The King's
prero^gative over Parliaments and people soberly enquired into: The lawfulnes
of defensive war cleared. The supreme Magistrates power in Church matters
examined, Mr Stilling fleet's, notion concerning the divine right of forms of
Church Government, considered. The author of the seasonable case answered,
other particulars, such as the hearing of the Curats, appearing before the high
commission court, etc. canvassed.

Together with the rise reign and ruin of the former (...) lats in Scotland.
Being.

A brieff account from History, of the Government of the Church of Scotland,
from the beginning, and of the many troubles which Prelates have created to her,
first and last. For satisfaction of strangers and encouragement of present (...)

By a well wisher to the good old cause.

JER. 50: 34. Their Redeemer is strong. The Lord of hosts is his (...) shall
thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, (...) quiet the
inhabitants of Babylon.

MIC. 7: 9, 10. I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sumed
(...) him, until he plead my cause, and execute Judgment for me, ^e (...)
bring me f^rth to light, and I shall behold his righteousness: then she^ that
(...) mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her, which said unto me
(...) is the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall behold her, now shall she be (...)
down as the mire of the streets.

ISA. 51: 22, 23. Thus says the Lord thy God that pleads the cause of his
people, Behold I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, (...) the
dregs of the cup of my fury, thou shall no more drink it again. But I ^ll put
it into the hand of them who afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, (...)
down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the ground, (...)
^reas to them that went over.



Printed in the Year. 1665*

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader.
This is a time wherein little or nothing is heard from the Churches of Christ
all the world over, but lamentation and woe^ partly by reason of grievous
afflictions. and sore persecution (which is none of the worst conditions) and
partly by reason of woeful and shameful defection, and falling from former
zeal and integrity, occasioned either by the temptations which usually attend
sharp trials of affliction (whereby the weakness of many, and perverseness of
heart in more, is discovered) Or, without any such force of external
temptation, from an inward decay of life and love, and wearying of God and his
ways (the Worst condition that a Church can be in) which is now the
Epidemicall plague of this age. Hence it is that the Lord seems to be angry
with all, and ready to reject some of his Churches, which to him are as a
generation of his wrath. Have not his people set up their abominations, in the
house which is called by his name to pollute it? And may it not be feared that
the curse shall devour the earth, and they that dwell therein shall be made
desolate, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and
broken the everlasting Covenant? There appears now hanging over the head of
the poor little flock of Christ, a black and dreadful cloud threatening no
less then utter ruin, and overthrow, or at least speaking a loud alarm for
awaking the secure and sle^ping Bride. It is most sad to behold, how little the
Churches of Christ in every place, are affected with this imminent stroke,
ready to light on all: and to see some of them quiet and at rest, singing a
requiem to themselves, as if (though dispensations from the Lord, do speak the
contrary to all who will but open their eyes) their mountain stood so strong,
as never to be moved. This deadness and deep security, when all things speak
an approaching storm (as it does evidence a great Judgment and spiritual
plague from God, upon the Spirits of people; so it) dothpresage no less then
remediless ^uine, if God, in the riches of his mercy, prevent it not. What a
dreadful night of confusion and astonishment must be at hand, when there is
such blackness without, And such deadness and prodigious security within? Are
not the enemies of the Church as Gebal, Ammen, Amalek, The Philistines and
those of ^yre, Assure, and the Children of Lot (who are early and late at their
master's work) devising and plotting the ruin and destruction of the interest
and Kingdom of Christ? Are they not all combined together, and acted with the
same Spirit of Antichrist, for this very end and purpose, to help forward, as
with one shoulder, and to raise up his fallen interest, and heal his wound?
And are they not setting themselves to thrust King Jesus from his throne, to
put the crown from his head, and the scepter out of his hand, and so to prey
upon, and devour his little flock, that, if it were possible, they should be no
more a nation, nor their name remembered any more? And are they not about the
swallowing up of the protestant interest, as in a moment? And what is the
Church of Christ doing, all this while? Does she stir up her self to call upon
her head and husband, or to awake the watch man of Isreal, who neither
slumbereth nor sleeps? Is she upon her watchtower, looking out and guarding
against the approaching enemy, or observing his motions? Ah not so! She is fast
a sleep, while the enemy is within the walls. And which is more sad and
lamentable, with her own hands, she has helped to make the breach in the wall,
at which the enemy has entered, and now has fair advantage given him, to
accomplish his bloody design against the protestant cause and interest. (So
little has she gained, by her sinful compliance with the opinions and
practices of Antichristian men, whether through base fear, or carnal
prudence) even the cutting of it off, And the bringing of his people back
again unto Babylon. Who knows, but (though the Lord's enemies shall at last
be trodden under, as straw for the dunghill, and he shall spread forth his hands
in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreads forth his hands to swim,
bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands, lay low in the
dust, and bring to the ground, even the high fortress of their wall, and so
make all his enemies know that there is a King in Zion who shall and must
reign until all his foes be made his footstool) the only wise God, who
knows how to turn every thing to the best, may suffer the adversaries to
prosper in their device and design, and so give up many of the people called
by his name, to the sword of the enemy, that others may be alarmed and awaked
from their sleep, and put to their prayers, even to calling upon God with
their, whole heart and not fainedly? O that they were wise, and would speedily
prevent this deadly blow by repentance, and by serious considering how they
have fallen from their first love, and have forgotten their first works! O
that they would think of returning to the most high with fasting weeping and
mourning, renting their hearts and not their garments, of turning unto the Lord
their God who is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great Kindness
and repents him of the evil! However his people are called to mind that
word, Isa. 26: 20: 22. Come my people enter thou into thy chamber, and shut thy
doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a little moment until the
indignation be over past; for behold the Lord comes out of his place, to
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The earth also shall
disclose her blo^d, and shall no more cover her slain.

In these following sheets, there is some account given thee, of the sad and
deplorable condition of the Church of Christ in Scotland. It is wonderful to
see how variously Satan does assault the Churches of God, some one way, some
another: That crasty and cunning adversary, does suite his baits and snares to
the several complexions of people and Churches, against which he opposes
himself: Some have the trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings: others meet
with bonds and imprisonment, and others with trial of some other Kind;
Against some, Satan does raise cruel and bloody persecutions, others he
endeavors to draw away from their stedfastness and zeal, by ensnareing
allurements: a third sort he invadeth with all his troops and forces at once:
And thus is the lately glorious Church of Scotland tried this day. Upon the one
hand he raises up against her, men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth,
who make sharp their tounges like a Serpent, and under whose lips is the
poison of adders. These have vented and do vent most bitter slanders and
reproaches against her, and the way of reformation, which the hand of God
wrought in her: On the other hand, he has raised within her, a most cruel
persecution by a popish prelaticall and malignant party, setting them on with
rage, against all who desire to keep themselves unspotted, and free of the
contagions of this evil time, forceing some by cruel and sore persecution, and
ensnareing others, that are more simple, deceiving and drawing them into their
not; and thereby causing many to comply with them in their wicked ways, and to
run with them unto the same excess of sin and wickedness. Yet hithertill (for
which, the name of the Lord is alone to be Magnified) the designs and devices
of these Matchiavellian Ahitophels, and bloody persecuters have not taken such
effect, as they either wished or expected. It is true, many (Alas! too too
many) have been carried away with the stream, and willingly walked after the
commandment to the great dishonor of God, amazement of nations about,
rejoicing of the heart of the ungodly, and to the great stumbling and grief, of
the truly tender and godly in that, land, so as the defection of that Church
may be matter of astonishment to the present and after generations: Yet it is
her mercy that there are not a few in her, whom conscience, and Christian
tenderness in their walk, has exposed to sad sufferings who therow grace have
resolved to keep their garments clean; and to prefer the peace of a good
conscience, to all the treasures of Egypt, holding faith and a good conscience,
of which many make shipwreck, and in the Lord their master's strength, to hold
fast their integrity, and to maintain their ground, though bonds and
afflictions should abide them: The justification and defense of such, is the
intended scope of this following treatise: Which how well managed is left to
thy discretion to Judge.

It is like, such a worthy and noble cause may suffer prejudice through the
weakness of him who here does appear in its defense, wherefore it is wished
that some more able pen be engadged in this work, for clearing to the world
the present sad case of that Church, And vindicating her from aspersions and
calumnies, which her adversaries labor to fasten upon her. To speak in the
justification of such a mother, would well become the most eminent of her
Children; It would be so far from being below them, and a disparagement, that
they might justly account it their glory, to lay out themselves in the out most
of their strength and parts, for the defense of such a cause, when so few do
avow, and openly declare their owning of, and adherence to it: But until the
Lord shall be pleased to stir up and set on work some more able, and to prompt
them with a spirit of zeal and courage for such an undertaking, thou must rest
satisfied with this poor essay, for the time. Only thou may give charity to
the author, that it was not his intention to wrong, in the least, so glorious
a cause; But seeing none else did undertake or appear in it (for any thing
known to him) He desired, in a few words (that something (though it should
prove little better then nothing) might be said in and for it) to make it known
how worthy it were the thoughts and pains of a more able head and hand* to
deal in.

Many, It is like, will be the exceptions taken at this piece, and more then can
now either be thought upon or obviated, such as are most obvious, we shall
endeavor to remove, by briefly touching and answering them.

Some may think it strange, that a piece of this nature, intended, as appears
from its strain, for satisfaction of Churches abroad, comes not forth in a
latine-dresse. It is true, it was intended at first, and so molded and drawn
up, as it might be published to the world in latin, for the satisfying of
strangers and Churches abroad* But upon second thoughts, When the case of the
suffering people in that Church and Kingdom was considered; It was thought
expedient, that it should first be published in English; That such as had
hithertil valiantly resisted, to the loss of their means and liberty, might
be strengthened and confirmed in their resolution. And the more encouraged to
endure afflictions when they should see that they did suffer for righteousness
sake, and that they were called thereto of God: and that others might be
quickened to fol low their footsteps who had so cheerfully gone before them in
the way. Having hereby their* doubts cleared, scruples removed, and their
judgments convinced in the point of duty: and this was found even necessary
at such a time, when their temptations did abound, their faintings were like to
grow; and when such as were able to give advice in difficult cases, and to
encourage the weak, were thrust away. So the consulting of their present
necessity did hasten it forth in this dress: Besides, that many both in
England, and Ireland, may receive information and edification hereby, of which
they should have been deprived, if it had been published in latin. Afterward,
if it be thought necessary and expedient, this or some other, may be published
to the world in Latin, with less prejudice to the present sufferers.

Next, some may think that several questions here handled, might have been
forborne, especially such as touch upon the civil Magistrate his power and
prerogative, seeing in all probability he shall be the more enraged thereby. It
is true, Higher powers will not take well such free and round dealing: But what
^medy is there? Amicus Plato, Amicus (...), sed (...) ^mica v^ritas: and it had
been a just ground of offense, If to please the higher powers, truth had been
betrayed, when necessity did call for witnessing unto it: The interest of
Christ is much more to be valued, Then the pretended and imaginary interests of
the highest powers on earth. The work of God ought to be justified, who ever be
offended therewith; And when many of the Lords worthy and precious ones, have
adventured, and laid down their lives, in the carrying on of such a work (unto
which they were called of God) can it give just offense to any, to hear it now
pleaded for, because it is malig^ed and blasphemed, yea such an essay as this
in defense and justification thereof at such a time, should in reason be
accounted the more seasonable and necessary. If there be any unbeseeming
expressions, or savouring of passion, these shall willingly be disowned
provideing that the cause suffer no prejudice thereby; knowing that the wrath
of man works not the righteousness of God; And that no railing accusation, or
speaking evil of dignities (which is condemned in the word) ought to be
approved. Yea the reader shall find upon narrow search, considering the matter,
that much more plainness and sharpness might have been used in such a
dispute; And that as much inoffensivenes^ has been studied, as might be,
without hurt to the cause. And that purposely many particulars, which might
have been mentioned, have been passed by: And that no particulars have been
pitched upon, but such as are still upon record in their printed Acts, or were
publicly acted and concluded in their public meetings: And as to these
consequences drawn from their Acts and actings, which appear dangerous and
destructive to the throne, let such as have laid the foundation in the premises
see to that, ex veris nilnisi verum: Who give twice two, cannot be justly
offended with any who shall thence conclude that they give four; and whether
the Consequences be clear and undeniable or not, the reader now has it before
him to judge: As to the Kings supremacy in Church matters, no truly reformed
divine, can justly take any exception against that which is here spoken upon
that head. The privileges of the crown and scepter of christ should be highly
valued, and earnestly contended for, by all, who call and account themselves
Christians; and a discourse or debate on that subject cannot but be accounted
neces^y at this time, when the powers of the earth (as would appear) have
combined together to rob Christ of his crown and to share his privileges
amongst themselves, to the great scandal of the Gospel, and prejudice of the
Kingdom and interest of Christ in souls, and through the world.

Further, it is like, some would have wished, that the historical part
contained in the first and second sections, had been much more large. Such may
know that brevity was studied as much as could be, all alongs, yea so much,
that, it may be feared, the reader shall think it the more unpleasant in
reading: and that the scope, and intendment of that part of the tractare, was
only to give a hint of the many and various troubles, which prelates from the
beginning had created unto that Church, and by what steps and ways she was
brought under their yoke: so that a large history could not be expected: It is
true, such a work as that would be both most seasonable and useful in this
juncture of time; And it were to be wished; that such as have the History
penned by the learned and industrious Mr Calderw^od; would think upon the most
ready and effectual way for publishing it, that the world may have a full
clear and satisfactory view of the many tossings, which that poor Church has
endured, and the many wrestlings which she had with a popish, prelaticall and
malignant party from the beginning: Meanwhile Mr Knox, and Mr Pe^ree their
Histories, Vind^ciae Epistolae Philadelphi Printed with altar damascenum Mr
Spang's Historia motuum etc. the Nullity of perth assembly* the course of
conformity, and such other printed pieces, together with the Printed Acts of
general assemblies since the year 1638. will give some light to such as peruse
the same.

Many no doubt will think it strange, that there is no mention made, here, of
the sufferings of that worthy and renowned instrument of the work of
reformation, the zealous and faithful Lord Waris^oun. As to this, the reader
may know, that this was occasioned only, through the want of a full
information of his case, and of the grounds on which the Parl. did go, in
taking away his life, and condemning him to death as some notorious
malefactor, to be hanged; and his head fixed on the port of Edinburgh near to
the head of worthy and famous Mr Guthry, who speaks when dead. This know that
after the King's return to England, And after the imprisonment of the truly
noble Marquis of Argyle in the Tower of London, he sent orders to Scotland, to
cause apprehend him, and some others; but he, receiveing intelligence hereof,
did withdraw, and by the good hand of God was secretly conveyed out of the
Kingdom, upon which, the Parliament when assembled did declare him fugitive,
So that he was necessitated still to withdraw, knowing, that for the good
service he had done to Christ, evil was determined against him, if he should
fall into their hands; which afterward came to pasle. It is certain also, that
while he was abroad at Hamburgh, and visited with sore sickness, one Dr Bates
(one of the King's Physicians, worthy to be cast unto the bates, rather then to
live amongst Christians) Intending to kill him (contrary to his faith and
office) did prescribe unto him poison for Physic, and then caused draw from
this Melancholy-Patient, sixty unces of blood, whereby (though the Lord did
wonderfully preserve his life) he was brought near the gates of death, and made
in a manner no man, Having lost his memory, so that he could not remember what
he had done or said a quarter of an hour before: In which condition he
continued till his dying day: but all this did not satisfy his cruel and
bloodthirsting enemies, he was sought after carefully, and at length given up,
and apprehended at Rowan in France, and sent to England; where he did continue
a prisoner in the Tower of London until the last session of Parl. in* Scotland
Anno 1663. Where, even when he was not able to speak in his own defense (being
to the conviction of his adversaries no man, far, and much different from that
Lord Waris^oun, who sometime could not only have been a member, but a
president of any judicatory in Europe, and have spoken for the cause and
interest of Christ before Kings, to the stopping of the mouths of gainsayers He
was triumphed over, particularly by the Archprelat Sharp, who then with the
black crew of his false brotherhood did sit in Parliament, as constituting the
third Estate. And was condemned to die in the manner abovementioned; So that,
that Parliament which was consecrated with the blood of two Noble witnesses in
the entry, was shut up and closed with the blood and death of this worthy
witness. But (which is to be remembered with admiration) behold, this half
dead man, when the day of his death came, had a wonderful reviving, and was,
beyond the expectation of all, graciously visited, and mightyly assisted of God
(hearing the many prayers of his people put up in his behalf) So as he gave a
noble testimony to that honorable cause and work (In carrying on of which, he
had been honored of God to be a worthy instrument, from the beginning) And
Christ triumphed in him, over all his enemies, that watched for his halting, as
the reader may see, by his speech and carriage on the scaffold, set down in
Print: But he may have, hereafter, more full satisfaction, both concerning him,
the Noble Marquis of Argile and famous Mr Guthry, when the world shall see
their Processes, and their defenses in Print, or when these following sheets
shall be reprinted (if that shall be thought expedient and necessary, not only
for these now mentioned particulars; but also for further explaineing,
confirming and vindicating of any, or all of the rest of the purposes here
spoken to) after fuller information had in those particulars. Till then let the
reader rest satisfied, with the hints that are given here, and in the following
sheets, of the case and carriage of those worthies, and pardone what is spoken,
short and unsuitable to their worth.

As to those who have appeared before the High commission court, (induced
thereto by the evil counsel of some others, or the not through and narrow
examination of the complex-case, as circumstantiated, or being otherwise
circumvented) And are now suffering upon some other account, wherein they found
more clearness and satisfaction: And as to others also, who have not fully seen
the evil of some things, which in the following debate are clearly
demonstrated to be sinful, and yet as to other particulars are endeavoring to
keep their former integrity, and to guaird against compliance: Let none of
those think that any thing, here, is said intentionally to put them to shame,
or to proclaim, before the world, their weakness and defection, or to make glad
the heart of the wicked; for if there had been any other way for vindicating
such as do suffer upon the account of these particulars, and for preventing
the fall of others into the same snare; this way had never been made choice of;
and therefore seeing nothing is said upon any sinful or sinister design,
these brethren and Christians, will take this smiting as a Kindness, and these
reproofs as an excellent oil that will not break the head, They will not take
in evil part, the discovery here made; They are of another spirit, then to be
embittered, at such free and full ^iping up of the evils of the course which
many in this hou^e of darkness do follow: Yea it cannot but be hoped and
certainly expected, that such as truly fear the Lord, will bless his name,
with all their heart, for such things made known to them, that in time they may
repent of the same, and see cause of wondering at his goodness, and mercy in
not leaving them to themselves, in other particulars of trial, notwithstanding
of their sailing of duty, in that their begun trial: And who knows but
serious mourning and repenting before the Lord, for fainting so far, would open
a door for a great in-come of joy and consolation to the sweetning of the
bitterness of suffering, and to the strengthening and bearing up of their souls
under their mighty pressures: So then the design both Operantis and Operis
being good, let no tender Christian be displeased with the way of the
pros^cution of these particulars, or think that there is too much sharpness
used, and that the consequences are drawn too strait; For if in the Particulars
themselves, truth be maintained (as may be supposed, will be granted) the
arguments made use of, can give no just offense, especially such as are drawn
from the Covenants which now are trampled upon by this sinful and backslyding
Generation, upon which many (otherwise not ill minded) think not much,
especially now, when it is reckoned a crime once to name them as standing in
force and obligeing the lands: And when the Spirit of these who carry on with
violence this woeful course of defection, are so enraged at the same, that
they cannot endure to hear a Covenant so much as named, though it were even
the Covenant of grace. This, however incrediblei^ may seem to be, and will
hardly be received by a Christian ear is a well known truth. Now at such a
time to put people in mind of their engagements unto God, and to discover how
such and such practices are contrary to their Covenant obligations and vows,
cannot justly be condemned, but approved of all who desire to stand fast in
this hour of temptation.

It is beyond all question, the Particulars here asserted shall meet with much
contradiction from men of corrupt minds, whose principles will lead them to
oppose what here is spoken in vindication of truth, and of the honest sufferers
of Christ: And upon that account it may be expected that the same honor shall
be done to this, which has been done to other more worthy pieces, viz. that it
shall be committed to the fire, there to receive a quick dispatch and answer,
which will be so far from lessening the credit of the book, that it will
render it much more desirable, and confirm the weak concerning the truth of
the Particulars here spoken to, and of the unanswerableness of the arguments
here made use of; and so the authors expectations shall be fully answered. But
if they shall do it the justice, to commit it to examiners one or mo^, who
with sobriety and moderation, shall publish their exceptions to the contrary,
and shall examine these papers by the word of God, right reason, and the
fundamental and municipall laws of Scotland; the particulars here spoken to*
shall be revindicated, The Lord granting life, strength and liberty, from all
their exceptions. Only let not such as undertake this task, improve the
advantage of authority (now on their side) so far, as to do nothing but rail
at random, and stuff their reply with unbeseeming (to say no worse) And
Unchristian expressions, and outcries of treason, treason; for in that case, it
will be thought expedient not to answer such in their folly. A good cause is a
mighty second to a weak man. And so being persuaded that the cause is noble and
just, much owned and honored of God; There is the greater ground of hope that
God will help such as shall undertake the defense thereof: and the cavils of
men (who may be looked upon as (...) in most of these particulars) are the
less to be feared.

But Christian reader, what entertainment so ever it shall have with these, who
have out lived their zeal and integrity, and have shamefully declined in the
day of trial, And have betrayed the cause and interest of Christ, and
therefore shall look upon themselves as not a little concerned herein, and
pinched hereby, being unwilling to have their evils ripped up, and laid open to
the view of the world; Let it have a Christian entert^inment with thee: and
though it come late to thy hands (through the injury of the times) let it not
be the less welcome: If the Lord shall be pleased to bless it, it may be of
use for thy strengthening in this growing storm, upon several accounts and
grounds, whereof I hint but a few.

1. By what is said here, thou may see that the cause thou suffer for, is
the good old cause: That same Spirit which acted the Prelates and other enemies
of the Church of Scotland from the beginning, is now raging in her present
enemies: The same design is and has been endeavored and driven on, all a
longs. How various so ever the pretexts and colors have been under which they
have sought to cover themselves, the covering has proved too narrow for them;
first prelacy and then popery was intend first and last. It is the same cause,
in the defense of which, Christ's worthies of old did act and suffer, so long as
they could stand, and in the defense whereof, they were not afraid to bear
the displeasure of King and court, and to hazard life and liberty, and all
which wa^ dear unto them: If then the same Spirit does act and work in the
enemies of the Church now, which did act and work in their predecessors of
old, pray thou that the same Spirit of God, may act thee and all the faithful
of the land, which did appear in the worthy and valiant Champions of old,
whether thou be called to act or suffer for his sake.

2. Thou may know from what is here related, that the cause for which thou
art now suffering, was brought very low before these times, And that the
adversaries thereof have often got up to a great height, yet the good cause
has got above them: And how Acts of Parliament, one after another, and all the
devices of the adversary, to seal the grave, And to make it sure, could not
keep this cause of Christ from a glorious resurrection; Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth (might the Church of Scotland then have said) many a
time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet have they not prevailed against
me. The plowers plowed upon my back, and made long their furrows, The Lord is
righteous, he has cut asunder the coards of the wicked. And shall it not yet
hold true, that all they who hate Zion shall be confounded and turned back, and
be made as the grass upon the house topes, which withers be fore it be grown
up? There is no cause of despondency of spirit, or of giving over the cause as
lost: there is hope in Israel concerning this matter, his people may still hope
and trust in his name, who has wrought salvation of old. He who did put that
wicked party to shame and confusion of face, in former times, and made the name
of Prelates to stink, and their posterity to be as cursed vagabonds wandering up
and down, bearing the marks of god's displeasure, still lives and reigns,
and does no more approve of the Ungodly of this generation, Nor of their more
then barbarous carriage, who have labored to out strip their predecessors in
perfidious treachery; Then he did them, who of old did set themselves against
the Lord and his Christ, yea much less: It is true, the men of this generation
think they have pins for stopping of such holes, which their predecessors
could not stop; but he who sits in the heavens does laugh at them, and has
them in derision; He sees that their day is coming. It is easy with him, to
cause the sword which they have drawn to slay such as are of upright
conversation, enter into their own hearts; and to break the bows which they
have bent to cast down the poor and needy; Our God lives, and reigns and
shall reign, let Kings of clay rage as they will. Therefore cast not away your
confidence which has a great recompense of reward, for ye have need of
patience that after ye have done the will of God ye may rece^ve the promise;
For yet a little while and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

3. Thou mayestsee, that this cause and work, against which the wicked have
conspired and set themselves, has been signally owned and approved of by the
Lord, for which he has fought, (...) his right hand done valiantly, and
whereby he has got himself a name among the nations: And who knows what God
will yet do for his great name, which, in this day of rebuke and blasphemy, is
greatly reproached? Has he begun and will he not finish his work? It is true,
the provocations of his people do keep them long in the wilderness; yet he who
has frequently wrought for his names sake, that it should not be blasphemed
amongst the heathen, will still be tender of the same, and since, at this day,
there is much blasphemy belched forth, by persons of all ranks against the
great and glorious works of God, as much if not more, then at any time or in
any age, wherein has been less light; The people of God need not be
hopeless, much less conclude, That God who is jealous of his own glory, and
will not give it to another, will suffer it now to be given to the devil, on
whom his work is fathered: But rather will certanely be avenged on those
prodigiously and unparallelably impious and sacrilegious persons. How dreadful
a thing is it, to say that Christ casts out devils, by Beelzebub the prince
of devils!

4. Thou may see clearly, that the cause, for which thou do now suffer is
the cause of Christ: His enemies would pull the crown from off his head, and the
scepter out of his hand, and by this means, make him no King in and over his
Church, and consequently no mediator; For as mediator, he is a King in and
over his Kingdom, that is his Church, in which he dwells, and over which he
rules with his scepter of righteousness. They will not have his Kingdom, a
free Kingdom, and consequently they will not have him a free King. They will
not allow to him, the liberty of appoynting or instituteing his own officers,
or to rule his Kingdom by his own laws, courts ordinances, and censures; Nor
will they suffer Church-administrations, to be performed in his name and
authority, as, in reason, they ought to be, if he be King and head of his
Church. He must have no more liberty to exerce his jurisdiction, by the
Ministry of his inferior officers, within their dominions and territories,
then seems good in their eyes. The discipline of his house, must be exerced
only in so far as they think good to permit: And thus it is undeny able that
they look on Christ as an evil neighbor, and as no good friend to Caesar: They
think his Kingdom is of this world, and therefore it must have no place within
any of their Kingdoms and territories. Thus thou see, that, in end, the
controversy comes to this. Whether Christ, or man shall reign in the Church,
as head and supreme Governor thereof: And whether the interest of Christ or of
man shall be preferred: And to prefer the interest of a man unto the interest
of Christ, has heretofore been accounted malignancy of the deepest dye. But
what shall become of this controversy, and how shall it end? Are they, or
shall they be able to put our Lord from his throne, and out of his possession?
No; he is set upon the holy hill Zion by a mighty hand, and his inheritance
among the heathen is given to him, by a surer deed of gift, then that he should
be so easily put from it: He has a rod of iron that will dash in pieces, as a
potters vessel; all his enemies, be they never so great, and mighty; He is too
strong a party for all the potentats and mighty ones of the earth: and
therefore, this which is the grand controversy of those times, shall and must
be decided, in favors of those who stand upon Christ's side, and maintain his
right: he is a strong captain, and will run through all the hosts of his
adversaries: Christ's sufferers then, may rejoice; what ever affliction they
are or can be put to endure, for this cause, which is a cause that does highly
concern Christ the royal prerogatives of his crown and Kingdom, and his
glory, as he is the only head of ^his Church; seeing they may certanely expect
the victory ^re all be done; And seeing (as famous and worthy Mr (...) in the
preface to his Aaron^ rode blossoming shows) (...) and (...) Christ is (...)
King, and has a Kingdom and (...) in his Church distinct from the Kingdoms of
the world, (...) civil Governme^, (...) this commendation and (...) ^oue all
^hen (...) that Christ himself suffered (...) the (...), and seale^ it with his
blood, For it may be (...) from the (...) of his passion, that this was the
only p^nt of (...) was (...), And avouched by (...), (...) Joh. 18: 33, 36, 37.
and Luke 23: 3. was most aggravated prosecuted, and driven home by the jews,
Luke 23: 2. Joh. 19: v. 12, 15. Was prevalent with Pilat, as the cause
condemning him to die Joh. 19: 12, 13. And was mentioned also in the
superscription upon his cross, Joh, 19, 19. And although in reference to God,
and in respect of satisfaction made to divine justice for our sins, his death
was (...) a price of redemption; yet in reference to men who did persecute,
accuse, and condemn him, his death was (...), a martyr's testimony, sealing
such a truth; Thus he. Christ is a good second, and will not suffer any who
contend for his crown, throne, scepter, privileges, and roy all prerogatives of
his Kingdom, to be put to the worse: If he plead for any cause, we may be
sure, he will plead for his own. Let not then his constant and valient
sufferers fear; for greater is he who is with, and for them, then they who are
against them: Christ alone is more then match and party against all Kings,
princes, potentats, Parliaments, popes, prelates, Kingdoms, and armies; Yea and
all the Posse of devils and men: Therefore they may be assured that he and his
cause shall be victorious; For he must reign until all his enemies be made
his foot stool.

5. Thou may see, That the truth for which thou do suffer, is a truth
which is after godliness, tending to the promoveing of piety, and of the power
of godliness: Whileas the contrary cause and course leads to all prophanity
and debauchery, as experience does this day evidently and undenyably prove: and
this is no small ground of comfort; for the way which is not of, and for God,
cannot stand: You may pray against your adversaries, as really wicked, driveing
on a design of wickedness, which is evidently demonstrated by their acts and
actings: Their enmity against, and opposition unto godly, faithful, Zealous,
and able conscientious Ministers of the Gospel, and unto Christian meetings
and exercises; As also their pressing of Godly conscientious persons, unto
perjury and blasphemy, which is the height of wickedness; do put the matter
beyond all doubt: And is not this enough to make thy soull loath and stand a
loos from these ways; And to bless God for his preserving thy soull from
their counsels and courses, and so from partaking of their judgments, which do
certainly make haste; For God is of purer eyes then to look upon iniquity;
Therefore he will not always look on these that deal treacherously, and hold
his peace when the wicked devoureth the man, that is more righteous then he:
The Lord has ordained them for judgment, and the mighty God has established
them for correction: when Ag^silaus did hear that Tissaph^rnes a captain of
Persia had broken his Covenant which he had made with him, and was raiseing an
army to come against him, he was very glade, and said se magnam hab^re gratiam
Tissapherni, quod perjurio suo, and deos and homines sibs infensos reddidisset,
adversae vero parti propitios; He thanked him heartily that by his perjury, he
had made both God and man angry at himself and favorable to him and his cause:
and may not his people be persuaded that God i^, this day, displeased with the
Covenant breakers, who are not satisfied with their own treacherous dealing and
perfidiousnesse; but will have all others entangled in the same guilt?

6. Thou may see that Action, which is now so much branded with the vile and
contemptible names of treachery and rebellion, I mean, Scotlands defending of
it self against its bloody enemies, cleared from all these imputations, and
foul calumnies: changes of times make many Changes in peoples judgment; and
at this time, it may be feared that many have Changed their opinion, because
they see the watter running in another channel, then it did formerly, and are
now ready to condemn these noble worthies and valient champions who j^oparded
their lives unto the death, in the high places of the field, and have shed
their blood in that cause; (which is a more grievous guilt then many do now
apprehend.) But here thou see how little cause there is for condemning that
Action; Yea what necessity there was laid upon Sco^l. to stand to their
defense, as they would not have betrayed the cause and interest of Christ,
which they were sworn to maintain according to their place and power, their
lives, lands, possessions liberties as scottish men and as Christians, into the
hands of their implacable enemies. Were these valient worthies now living, who
are gone off the stage with honor and credit, and heating and seeing what
they might now hear and see, how would they stand astonished at this
degenerated generation, that so easily quite with that, which they did lose
their blood and lives to purchase and obtain; Yea and to see or hear the self
same persons, who but twelve or Sixteen years ago were jeoparding their lives
with them, for the same cause, either condemning that practice, or carrying
themselves so indifferently now, as if these matters appeared but t^islles, and
not worth the contending for. Whosoever they be who now seem to be ashamed of
that cause, and of themselves in contributeing their help for the promoveing of
the same; It may be thought, that it was not conscience that moved them
thereunto, but some other ends, otherwise, their judgments would not so soon
alter, seeing there is no other argument now seen, but the wind changed from
south to North, which dispensation uses not to work much upon consciences,
what ever it may do upon other principles. If the former generations had been
of such a cowardish disposition how had Scotland been delivered? If they had
walked upon no other principles, but such as would have changed, when the
storm did begin to blow upon their faces, where had the land been ere now?
And if there be no other spirits in Scotland, this day, where, may it be
imagined, shall that Church be found, ere long?

7. Thou may hereby be more enabled to disput against prelacy, then possibly
thou was, having now seen how and what way it was brought in into the Church
formerly, and how it is ushered in, to day: And when it is established by
force, over the Churches belly, how it proves the bane of all Church order,
piety and edification: And this is a strong argument to prevail with such as
have the root of the matter in them, and enough to make them question such a
way, as no way of Christ's. To say, that the abuse of the power by such as are
in possession of it, will not plead much against the power it self, will be of
^o fore in this case, where the jus of the power, cannot pretend heigher then
to be humanum; And if its admirers should allege that it is founded upon a jus
divinum; These necessary consequences, as so many propria quarto medo, will
sufficiently ground an improbation; Scotland never saw prelates without such a
long train of hellish consequences discovering to any judicious eye, their
rise to be from below; And if the prelates now in place, had thought it of their
concernment, they might have cut off that long tail, but it seems, if they
had done so, they would have lost somewhat that they thought essential to
themselves, and therefore, as if they had thought all the abuse whereof their
predecessors were guilty, was their too much lenity and forbearing to
persecute the godly and banish piety; They have made the poor Church feel that
their little finger is heavier then the loins of their forefathers: And so the
argument of the vulgar, is confirmed with a witness, and become more
unanswerable then ever.

8. Thou may likewise have arguments put into thy mouth, whereby to defend
thine own practices, in standing to thy former principles, and stope the mouth
of thine adversaries: before thou was willing to suffer for Christ and his
interest, though thou could not disput much for him and his truth, and that was
a great evidence of love: And now thou may get some help in disputing for
the truth, by the arguments set down in the following sheets; And the few
arguments which thou will find there, may bring others to thy mind, and thus
thou may be helped to meet thine adversary, without fear.

9. But if these adversaries be of such a disposition, as to take advantage of
thy speaking or argueing for truth, to bring thee into trouble, and therefore
in prudence thou will think it best to keep silence: Thou mavest here by be
confirmed, in thine own mind, of the unlawfulness of such courses, as the
current of the times would draw thee unto, as it does others; and how unjustly
thou art persecuted for refuseing to comply with such sinful ways: And
further, because it is like, the malice of Satan and his instruments, will not
rest here, but they will still be deviseing new ways to lay snares for the
consciences of such as walk uprightly; by what is said to the particulars
handled in the following sheets, thou may be helped to judge of new emergent
questions, which thou may be exercised with, afterward, and so to know, how
thou ought to carry thy self in reference to these new trials.

10. Thou may have some ground of hope, That the Lord's end in suffering
this sudden and sad Change, to continue so long, is but to ju^ge more fully his
Church, from the much dross and corruption which otherwise, in all
probability, had never been purged away; It is possible that these bypast years
of prosperity (her most afflicted condition, being a prosperous state, when
compared with her present condition) have done the Church of Sco^l more harm
(by reason of corruption within) then many years of sad adversity shall do. The
former prelates had a time, before they came to their height, and all those many
years wherein h^y were on the riseing hand, and after they came to the
possession of their full power, the Lord was trying and purging his Church; And
at length, when his time came, who waits that he may be gracious, and loses
not a fit opportunity of doing good to his Church and people, he brought the
Church of Scotland out of the furnace, and laid her stones with fair colors,
and her foundations with Saphites; So that the years 1638, and 1639, were as
glorious years as any which she has seen, since: And these prelates (though
they have made great haste, in their rise, yet) must have some time to do that
work, in which the Lord is employing them as his lixes: one day discovers
more now, then, a year, formerly could have done; One prelat (blessed be the
Lord who is master of work) does more, then many purging committees could do:
Why then should we weary? We know not what the Lord is about to do, but when we
consider what were his dispensations, in former times, unto that Church, we may
now hope, that he will bring the Church of Scotland out of the furnace, as
fair and beautiful as ever, if not more; So that these who saw the foundation
of the old temple laid, An. 1638. etc. Shall not have cause to weep when they
see her foundations laid of new, and the Lord reviveing the stones out of the
rubbish which are burnt; If his people were humbled, and did not stand in the
way of their own mercies, who can tell what the Lord would do, and how shoon,
he would appear for his oppressed people and interest, and declare that he
has chosen Ziou, and has desired it for his habitation, and then clothe her
priests with salvation, and cause her saints to shout aloud for joy? The popish
prelaticall and malignant faction have been losers when they thought themselves
gainers, and all their victoryes have proven hurtful to their own cause; And
who can tell but this day, which they think they have gained; and the victory,
whereof they think themselves so firmly and certanely possessed, as that they
shall never lose it again, may prove the most fatal day that ever they saw,
and a victory tending to the everlasting ruin of their cause and interest.

11. Thou may see these Covenants, against which, in this degenerate age,
reproach cannot sufficiently be poured forth, vindicated; And the lands,
obliged and Covenanted lands before the Lord, what ever course has been taken
by higher powers to loose the obligation. This Gordian Knot will not be gotten
so easily loosed, as some would imagine: People may think to close their eyes,
and then reason themselves out of the obligation ofa Covenant and oath taken
before the Lord, and so cast themselves at liberty; But that will only wreeth
the heavy yoke ofGods curse straiter about their neck. It is no small matter of
admiration to hear how basely many men do speak of these holy bonds, and sacred
Covenants. But let men (who take pleasure in venting the venom that is within)
say what they will, Scotland has no cause to be ashamed of these Covenants. It
was a sweet day when the national Covenant, which had been long buried in
oblivion, was raised out of the dust, and renewed: And it may be, Scotland
shall have as sweet a day, when both that Covenant and the solemn league and
Covenant, which now lies buried under a heep of the ashes of contempt and
reproach, shall be raised up, and renewed with great acclamation of joy. It is
true, this seems not to be very probable now; but Scotlands covenanted God
lives, and his arm is not shortened. There was not very great probability of
renewing the national Covenant some few years before, when the prelates were
tyrannizing at pleasure, and no man durst so much as complain of any injury
they did; It is easy with God to put Spirit and courage in people, make them
stand upon their feet, and become an exceeding great army, who were before but
dry bones, yea very dry bones: and howbeit now that league and Cov. be looked
upon as a device contrived purposely to overturne the throne; Yet (as it has
already proven so again) it may prove, as sure a pillar for the throne, as
any; and as effectual a mean to preserve the same from being overturned, as
any other. But (Christian reader) by what thou will see in the following
sheets, thou May easily perceive, that it is both a sinful and dangerous
thing to break Covenant, and a sin which heathens have scarred at And therefore
remember thy Covenants and vows made unto the most high, let not the speeches
nor carriage of others, who think they cannot exceed, in casting out the venom
of their heart, against these Covenants, lessen thine estimation of them, but
rather increase the same; And the more thou hear others cry down these
Covenants as null, keep thy self under, their tie, so much the more carefully:
Make conscience of studying these Covenants, and the duties unto which, thou
stand bound before the Lord, by virtue thereof: It is true, thou art no^ now
in a capacity to Act, for the carrying on of the end^ of those Covenants, as
some time thou have been, yet keep thy Spirit still under the impression of
their obligeing force, and when thou cannot by acting promove the ends of the
Covenant, thou may do it, by constancy in patient suffering for adhereing
to that cause and Covenant: See what thou art obliged unto by virtue of these
Covenants, and let never these duties be forgotten, but as the Lord offers
occasion, let it appear, that thou art under the impression of the oath of God;
thus shall thou have peace and joy, when shame shall cover the faces of all
Covenant breakers.

12. Thou may see, how this yoke of prelacy, wreethed, in former times,
about the necks of the inhabitants of Scotland, did prove so intolerably
grievous, that they were made to groan under it; and how they became restless
until they shook it off: And experience, this day, does prove how necessaryly
it is attended with grievous oppression and soul affliction. It has been
found, and is seen, this day, how prelates have trampled, and do trample upon
the nobility gent^ie and burgesses of the Land: The land formerly has found,
and to day, does find, what the weight of a Saint Andrew's cross and of the
prelate's r^het is; And that their little finger is heavier then the loins of
Ministers, whatever grudge and outcry there was, against the discipline of the
Church. It is true, they proclaim liberty, and give way to all vice and
iniquity, and are leaders into these wicked ways themselves, and are paterns
and patrons unto the people, whom they encourage by their evil example, to
follow them in their trade of wickedness: and it is like, this is the only
thing which makes that Goyernment desirable unto many, who love not to be
curbed in their licentious and wicked courses, but desire to have the bridle
laid upon their necks, and liberty to follow the swinge of their own
corruptions and beastly lusts; Yet it may be, that many are, ere now, wearying
of them: Yea, who knows, but before this time, many of the nobles, and others
of the land, who did earnestly pant after a change of Church Government,
wishing the day, wherein prelates might be re-established in their power, and
faithful Ministers oppressed and put to the door, that so they might enjoy
full and free liberty to commit sin with greadinesse, do begin to be think
themselves, and to be sensible of their folly, when they see how Prelates trade
upon their necks, not careing what disrespect they put upon them, or how basely
they use them, when they see that they have acted below themselves and below
men, when they made shipwreck of their consciences, and sold their souls to
promove their ambitious designs, and to help them to ascend unto the tope of
their intended grandour: no doubt many are thinking with themselves, that they
have run too fast, when they see that all the thanks that they are like to
have, from those who excel in ingratitude, is to be trod upon as mire of the
streets. It is a bad reward (but the just and righteous hand of God may be seen
in it) to inslave the persons and bodies of such, who have voluntarily i^slaved
their souls to set them on high. O that the nobles and gentry of the land,
would, at length, resent this indignity, and observe the hand of God punishing
them with a whipe of their own making, when they see how undervalueingly these
men look upon them, and account them no better then their slaves and
underlings; And would acknowledge God's equity and justice in this
dispensation, and at length see and mourn for their sin, which is so
legibly, as with capital characters, written upon their judgment! May it not
come to pass, that these Zelots for prelacy, shall weary of this yoke, and
wish as earnestly for the day, wherein they may be delivered from this bondage,
as ever they did long for the day, wherein they might have their necks brought
from under the sweet and gentle yoke of Christ? May not the peers and body of
the Land come at length to supplicate his majesty, to loose this yoke from off
their necks, when their Scottish (some time generous) spirits, shall not be
able any longer to endure such unsufferable slavery: This is not impossible,
nay nor improbable: Though it were to be wished, That they might Act that way,
upon some other principles, principles of piety and godly tenderness; That,
seeing their injury done to Christ, in shaking off his government and laws,
willingly following after the commandments of men, and mourning therefore,
they might lament after the Lord, and seek him with the whole heart, and
engadge themselves in a Covenant with the Lord, to be for him to the utmost of
their power, and bring the land back again to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, that he may have mercy upon them and heal their backslideings, and
build up the walls of his Church, and make her a praise in the earth.

But whether the Nobles and other inhabitants of the Land, shall think of these
indignities and seek for a remedy, or couch under the burden, as ashamed once
to desire to have the yoke shaken off, which they themselves, with so great
delight and deligence, have fastened about their necks, with their own hand^:
Yet it does well become the godly of the land, to be sensible of the great and
grievous wrongs, which are done unto Christ, to his Church, and work; and to
cry out continually and complean of these oppressions unto the Lord, who will
hear the cry of the oppressed, and will be a refuge for them, and judge them
that the man of the earth may no more oppress, when now he sees that she is
oppressed without cause: and to watch carefully that the continuance of the
trial and oppression, wear not out the sense of these encroachments, and
intolerable pressures lying upon the Church, and upon the consciences of the
Lord's people: And that no deadness seize upon them, but that still the memory
of the good old cause be fresh with them, pressing them daily to renew their
earnest supplications; and to wrestle seriously with God, that he would be
pleased in his own good time to break the yoke of the oppressor, and according
to his promise Isa. 49: 25, 26. Take away the captives from the mighty, and
deliver the prey from the terrible, and contend with them that contend with,
his Church, save his children, and feed those that oppress them with their own
flesh, and make them drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine; That all
flesh may kn^w that ^e the Lord is their savior, and their redeemer, the
mighty one of Jacob. He has said that for the oppression of the poor and for
the sighing of the needy, he will arise, and set him in saifty from him who
pusseth as him, The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a
furnace of earth purified seven times. Therefore his people are called to wait
upon the Lord. The vision may yet be for an appointed time, but at the end, it
will speak and not lie, though it tarry, they must wait for it, because it will
surely come, and will not ta^ry. His people are called now to mind duty, and
to look what the time, the opportunity, and the dispensation under which they
are, at present, calls for; It is not good for them to be slacking their
diligence, but rather they should wax strong in the Lord and in the power of
his might. It is not good for them to faint and sit up now, as overcome with
impatience, and hopeless despondency of spirit; but patience should have its
perfect work. Be steadfast, therefore (dearly beloved) unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; Forasmuch as you know your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Now to him that is of power to stablish you, to God only
wise, be glory for ever, through Jesus Christ,

AMEN.
AD LECTOREM.
SVb pedibus Luna^, Mulier, nunc calcat; amicta
Sole; caput stellae, ceu diadema, tegunt.
Conspicitur medio ut signum admirabile coelo;
Fixa velut medio, petra decora, Salo.
Saepius incerto varia est ut Cynthia vultu,
Part sui Semper, totaque Saepe latet.
Fulgida Iusliti e nuper quae sole, tenebris
Mox velut infernis tecta, sepulta jacet.
Firma licet Pe^ maneant fundamina, quassis
Moenibus and (...), contremit ipsa domus.
Sidera lapsa polo, capiti diadema revulsum
Sponsaque Tulverea squallida sorde sedet.
Quisquis es haec toto qui non spectaveris orb,
Exhibet hic scenam, Scotia moesta tibi.
Scotia quam varios casus sit passa; procellis
Quassa quibus, quantis, te docet ille liber:
Prasulis hic mitrae pondus. Regisque tiarae.
Penditur, and Christi jura, bilance pari.
Invadit Christi regnum cum principe praesul,
Arrogat hic Regi, quod rogat ipse Sibi.
Praesulis est Scotis relegandum nomen averno,
Prora quibus praesul, puppis and una mali est.
Hic videas vicibus ternis quas infula strages
Ediderit; praesul, Cerberus iste triceps.
Pontisicum primus fuit impetus; iste retusus
Evasit virgo, quae fuit ante lupa.
Vistamen huic facta est vulpina fraud secunda,
Restiterat zelo plebs, proceresque pio.
Tertius horrisici est nunc impetus ille Leonis.
Cernitur hic vulpes qui fuit ante Lupus:
Bestia bis cecidit, bis cornua fracta revinxit.
Tertia certa feram and vasta ruina manet.
Courteous reader, ere thou read, amend these Errata as follows.
Page 4. l. 18. followers, page 6. l. 24. Scotos, p. 8. l. 9. ridiculous, ib.
l. 34. be. p. 10. l. 34. he. p. 14. l. 6. first r. fifth. p. 16. l. 34: effect.
p. 22. l. 30. dederent. p. 24. l. 30. effectual. p. 29. l. 36. of. p. 37. l.
22. this realm p. 42. l. 19. worthies, r. worthy nobles. p. 45. l. 36. of, r.
for p. 59. l. 14. be, r: the. p. 64. l. 29. cheerfully. p. 67. l. 31.
overcomes. page 73. lin. 5. specious, ibid. lin. 29. effects. page 78. lin.
20. there, r. their p. 80. l. 12. gentlemen, ib. l. 20. perceive. p. 85. l. 30.
understood p, 88. l. 22. and 271. l. 26. this, r: his. p. 91. l. 23. and 132.
l. 11. were, r. where. p. 109. l 13. scripture. p. 110. l. 21. and 202. l. 33.
notion. p. 125. l, 21, together. p. 135. l. 33. decrees, r. doors. p. 137. l.
30. Sect. 22. p. 145. l. 25. r. 1572, p, 159. l. 31. they* r. them. p. 176. l.
27. belonging. p. 183. l. 5. essential. p. 186. l. 17, one r. once. p. 187. l.
28. guiltless (...). 191. l. 11. (...). p. 193. l. 22. taking. p. 207. l, 28.
prohibition, ib l. 32. pastors. p. 224. l. 9. length. p. 225. l. 1. be
believed. p. 239. l. 20. yielded. p. 248. l. 4. pastor. p. 260. l. 5. is, r.
as. ib. l. 16. ever, r. over. p. 280. l. 31. wrestle. p. 289. l. 26. known. p.
293. l. 21. civis. p. 305, l. 5. ^all, r. call. ib. l. 6. omce, r. come. p.
312. l 26. further. p. 322. l. 31. though. p. 331. l. 32. should. p. 349. l.
18. which. p. 350. l. 19. and I will p. 351. l. pe^lt. how the Carthaginians.
p. 362. l. 16. they r. their acts. p. 364. l. 25. it is, r. its. p. 366. l 3.
his, r. this. ib. l. 8. twice here r. her. p. 372. l. 34. way, r. may. p. 373.
l. 30. his, r. is. p. 382. l. 9. his r. this p. 383 l. ^3. made, r. make. p.
385. l. 8. the, r. he. p. 386. l. 22. country. p. 387. l. 22. and ib. l. 35
worldly. p. 404. l. 9. no, r. on. page 419. (...). 10. ever, over.

P. 126. l. 2. close the other parenthesis after, Agust 22. p. 304. l. 6. in
^ome copies, r. and may be most free, Page 329. l. 21. and 330. l. 8. and 324.
l. 25. and 353. l. 10. dele lib. 5.

Others of lesser moment through a letter wanting, or redundant, or one for
(...), or through a comma, colon, or the like misplaced, or wanting, thou
may correct a^ thoureadest.

An* Apologeticall Relation, Of the particular sufferings of faithful
Ministers and Professors of the Church of Scotland, since Agust 1660.
IT has been the common lot of all the afflicted and persecuted people of God,
in all ages to meet with sad and bitter reproaches, as a constant concomitant
of their other sufferings: Satan thinking it for his advantage to add
affliction to the afflicted, and to use his outmost endeavor to break them with
one sad exercice, at the back of, or together with another, is not satisfied
with stirring up sore persecution against them, but endeavors likways to load
them with such reproaches and calumnies, as are able to break the heart of
ingenuous and single hearted persons. And for this cause, the Lords people in
all ages have been put to entreat that he would clear and vindicat them, and
their actions from such foul aspersions, and make their innocence break forth
as the noonday; and would direct them unto such ways and means, as might tend
through his blessing, to their rational vindication before the world. Hence
have proceeded the many Apologies and defenses, which have been used of
purpose, to clear to the world the true ground and cause of their sufferings,
and to discover how groundless and unjust those reproaches and calumnies were,
which men, whose hearts were full of wickedness, and tongues dipped in gall, had
vented for this end alone, to render both them, and their just and righteous
cause, odious to strangers.

And at this time there may be just cause to fear that the malice of that old
enemy is not asleep, and that he is leaving no mean un-essayed to make the
suffering Church of Scotland and her cause odious, in the eyes of foreign
protestant Churches, to the end she may not only miss and be disappointed of
that Christian sympathy and fellow feeling which is expected of all the true
members of Christ's body, but also (which is far worse) be condemned, and
through her sides, the cause and truth of God (which ought to be more pre^ious
to Christians then any thing else) be put to suffer, and by this means the
great works of God, whereby he (convincingly even to enemies) did testify his
approbation of the work of Reformation, begun, and carried on there, these years
bygone, be called in question, and fathered upon the Devil, which would be the
hieght of iniquity, being (or at least bordering upon) that unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost, charged upon the Pharisees, Math. 12.

But notwithstanding of all this travail which this old enemy and his
indefatigable under-agents are or have been at, according to their custom, to
get the prejudices against that Church, which they have labored to beget in
the minds of strangers, fomented, and so deeply rooted, as that there'shall be
no place ^or her, or any in her name, to publish to the world any Apology or
defense, or a justification of her cause and ground of present suffering; It is
expected that Christian Churches abroad, have reserved one ear open to Christ
and his suffering followers and that a true representation of the present case
and condition of that suffering Church, shall be heartily welcomed by them,
whose ears have been hithertill filled with the clamorous outcry^s of men who
make no conscience of oaths, let be of words, and who have learned exactly that
lesson Ca^umniare audacter, semper aliquid h^rebit, Heap up many slanders and
vent them with boldness and audacity, and something will slick.

Though there be no ground for any to think that nighbour protestant Churches
have so far drunken in prejudices against that Church, or rec^eived such an
impression from the misreports and misrepresentations which her malicious
adversaries have made, as that an attempt of this nature shall seem altogether
useless: Yet this is certain that the most lively demonstration and
representation of the present case and condition of that Church, that can be
fallen upon, shall not hold forth unto strangers and forraigners such convincing
light, and evidence of all matters there, as a few days being ear and
ey-witnesses to all her present calamities, compared with the days of old, when
the glory of the Lord appeared in the midst of her, would do. And therefore,
though as to such who are indeed strangers unto the great things which the Lord
has wonderfully begun, and carried on, in that Church, small success can be
expected, to follow such an interprise; yet as to others whether Churches or
persons (of whom it cannot be, but that there is a great number, who have both
heard, and wondered at the works of the righthand of the most High there, and
have received much soul-refreshment from the report, wishing and earnestly
supplicating for the like unto themselves, and longing for the day; wherein they
might see the Lords arm streached out with the like Reformation and salvation
unto other Churches about) this undertaking will have its own use and
advantage. And, without all question, silence at such a time as this, might do
much both to sadden the heart, and to stumble such as would be glad to hear of
the stedfastness of the faithful followers of Christ in that land, for if
there were none to open a mouth for her now, nor any to plead her cause, it
might be thought that all had so far changed with the times, as to condemn
their own former proceedings, and to intertaine strange and unbeseeming
thoughts of the wonderful works of the righthand of the most High, wrought
among them: and so become ashamed of their cause, and durst not adventure to
speak in their own justification.

Therefore being consident of the good acceptance, which this undertaking shall
meet with from compassionate and Christianly affected churches and people
about, and persuaded that God, whose interest and Cause this is, will, in his
own good time, arise and plead the same, and vindicate his work from all the
aspersions, and calumnies of men, by a reviving thereof in the midst of the
years, and a best irring of himself for the carrying on of the same, until the
copstone be put on, and thereby give such ane unanswerable Apology as shall be
sufficient to stop the mouths of all adversaries, and to confirm his
followers, and comfort the saddened hearts of his sufferers; This present piece
of work was the more cheerfully undertaken, to the end (beside what use the
present suffering members, of that church might make hereof for their own
satisfaction encouragement and strengthening in the Lord) that such of the
nighbour churches about whose ears have been filled with the slanderous
reports, to the vexing of their souls, raised by the adversaries of that
church, and carried on by all the art of hell to the strengthening and
confirming of their ill cause, may be undeceived, and rightly informed touching
the truestate of affairs in that church.

And to this end, it will be sufficient in the first place, to give a short and
clear Historical relation of the troubles, which the former Prelates, which
were in that church, did creat unto her, both in their rising, and when they
did come unto their hieght, and of the wonderful manner of the Lords bringing
them down and casting them out of that land and church, with shame and
disgrace: And then to give some vieu of the present state of that church, by
mentioning some particulars, which are the grounds of the present sufferings of
the people of God there, and clearing the equity and justice of their cause,
who have choysed affliction, rathen then sin, and when by this means it shall
be seen, from what an exellent and desirable state that church is now fallen,
as in a moment, and into what a condition of woe and lamentation, she is now
plunged, all who are Christianly affected with the afflictions of Joseph, may
be moved to compassionat her case, and to sympathize with her, and if they can
do no more, be stirred up to mind that bleeding, swooning and almost expiring
church of Scotland at the throne of grace.

SECTION I.
Showing how the church of Scotland was long governed without Prelates, and
after what manner they did arise to their height there, without the Churches
consent.

IT is not unknown, that according to the testimony of Origin and Tertullian
the Scots did embrace the faith amongst the first, and probably (as Buchan:
shows) they received it from some of John's disciples, who fled by reason of
the persecution, caused by that bloody Domitian: so that about the year 203.
which was the 4 year of King Donald the first, Christian Religion was publicly
professed, the King himself, his Queen, and diverse of the Nobles being
solemnly baptized, after which he purposed to root out Heathenisme out of the
Kingdom, but was hindered by wars with the emperor Severus.

There after about the year 277 King Cratilinth intended a Reformation, but was
much hindered by the heathenish Priests, (called Druides from their sacrificing
in groves under oaks, as some suppose) who by their subtyle insinuations and
power, had much influence upon the people; yet the Lord did second the
intentions of this good King, and sent several worthy men both ministers and
private Christians, from the South parts of Britan, where the Nynth and Tenth
Persecution under Aurelius and Disclesian did rage, and these for their single
and retired life, were called Culdees, quasicultores Dei more probably, then
because of their living in Cells; and this work continowed till about the year
360 and then did meet with a great interruption, by reason of civil wars,
whereby the land was wasted, and all the Scots banished until about the year
420 when Fergus the second came into Scotland, whose son Ewen sent for the
exiled Culdees, and gave them great encouragement, and they did set themselves
to their work. And this continowed until about the year 452, when Palladius
being sent into Britain by Pope Celestin, came into Scotland, who by his
subtle insinuation^ did gain so much upon the simple people, as that in a
short time, he moved them to consent unto a change of the government of the
church, into Prelacy, and himself became the Arch prelate: But before this
Palladius came; Scotland never saw a Prelate, if our ancient Historiographers
be to be believed, such as Balcus in his History of the Britons, etc. cent.
14. cap 6. saying [Ante palladium Scoti etc. before Palladius came, the Scots
had their Bishops and ministers, by the ministry of the word of God, chosen by
the suffrage of the people, after the custom of those of Asia, but those
things did not please the Romans. Beda in his History of England Lib. 1. who
says [Palladiu^ ad Scotos etc. i. e. Palladius was sent unto the Scots, who
believed in Christ, by Celestin the Pope of Rome, as their first Bishop]
Prosper in his Chron, ad An. 436 saying [Ad Scotos etc. i e. unto the Scots
then believing in Christ, Palladius is ordained by Pope Celestin, and sent
thither the first Bishop] John Fordon in his Scottish Chronic. lib. 3. c. 8.
saying [Ante Palladis adventum etc. i. e* before the coming of Palladius, the
Scots had for teachers of the faith, and ministers of the Sacraments,
presbiters only or Monks, following the customs of the primitive church]
Johannes Major speaking of the same Palladius who says [per sacerdotes and
monaches etc. i. e. the Scots were instructed in the Christian faith, by
Priests and Monks without any Bishop] and Buchanan who says [nam ad id usque
tempus etc. i. e. to that very time [speaking of Palladius coming, into
Scotland and changing the government) the churches were ruled by monks without
Bishops.

It is true Spotiswood, in his late History, would make the world believe that
in the days of the Culdees there was no government in the Church of Scotland
but Prelaticall; because Boethius says that [those priests or Culdees, were
wont, for their better government, to elect some out of their number, by
common suffrage, to be chief and principal among them, without whose
knowledge, and consent nothing was done in any matter of importance, and that
the person so elected, was called Scotorum Episcopus] and farther, as if his
bare dissenting from Buchan: would be enongh to blast the reputation and weaken
the credit of that Renowned Historian, he says p. 7. of his History [what
warrant he (i. e. Buchan:) had to write so, I know not, except he did build
upon that which Johannes Major says. But from the instruction of the Scots in
the faith, to conclude that the Church after it was gathered, had no other for
me of government, will not stand with reason, for be it as they speak, that by
the travelle of some pions monks the Scots were first converted unto Christ it
cannot be said, that the Church was ruled by monks, seeing, long after those
times, it was not permitted to monks to meddle with the matters of the Church,
nor were they reckoned among the Clergy] thus he. To which it is easily
answered. 1. That the sole word of a late Historian, and of an Excommunicated
forsworn Prelate speaking in his own cause will have less weight with every
rational man, then the Testimony of so many famous and eminent
Historyographers, known through the world. 2. All the Prelat's, logic will not
conclude from these words of Boethius that there was Episcopal government
among the Culdees, if Boethius himself may be heard, whom all are bound to
believe better then this Prelate, who reasons according to his skill for he
lib. 7. c. 28. says [erat Palladius primus omnium etc. i. e. Palladius was
the first of all who did bear holy Magistracy among the Scots, being made
Bishop by the great Pope] thus he affirms clearly, that Palladius was the
first, who had Episcopal Power, or exercised a Magistraticall domineering
power in Church matters. 3. Could Buchanan, a man many stages beyond the
Arch-prelate, know no reason or ground for what he said but what this
Archprelat could perceave who had no will to open his Eyes? 4. As this
Archprelat does wrong his own credit as an Historian, when without warrant he
contradicts so many famous Historians; so does he discover much weakness in
reasoning; for to say that the monks did not govern the Church before Palladius
landed in Scotland, because after Palladius came, they were putt out of all
account and got not liberty to do so, is such a ridiculous consequence, as can
hardly be paralleled; as if one should reason now, and say the Church of
Scotland was not governed by Ministers before the year 1661. because after
Bishops got all the power into their hands, the Ministers had no power of
government in the Church. Much more might be said here against the reasoning
of this late Historian, were it sit to insist upon every such frivolous
argument of his.

So then, from these forocited Historians, and from Baronius in his Annal: it
appears that the Church of Scotland was several hundereths of years without
a domineering Prelate, and after this time that this Palladius came, she was
still in a decaying condition, through the increase of popery, which at length
did overspread the whole land, in which Romish darkness she did ly until about
the year 1494.

About which time the Lord began to visit that poor Church with his salvation
and to cause some light of the Gospel to break up in several places of the
land: but no sooner did the light appear, but as soon did those Antichristian
Prelates and vassals of the Pope begin to rage, and to raise persecution against
the young professors of the truth, and followers of the lamb, and so with fire*
and faggot they sought to destroy all who prosessed the true Religion, until
about the year 1550. when, notwithstanding of all this rage and cruelty of the
Beast, and his followers, the knowledge of the truth did spread through the
land, and a farther work of Reformation, began to he carried on, by worthies
whom the Lord raised up, such as famous Mr Knox and others, who were singularly
owned of God in that work. Though Mr Spotiswood, according to his usual manner
of mistaking the works of God, and of venting his enmity to piety and purity,
is pleased in the 60. page of his history to say that this Reformation was
violent and disorderly. And albert at that time the Queen was endeavoring, by
all means possible, to keep up the Idolatry of Rome, and to suppress the
Reformed Religion; so powerfully did the Lord, in his goodness, assist these
worthves, that in the year 1560. there was a large Confession of Faith drawn up
at the command of the Parliament which did conveen that year, in which
Confession all the Popish errors were renounced, and after, it was exhibited
to the Parliament and there read, and when it was read, the Prelates who were
there present had not one word to speak against it, which when the Earl of
Marshall did perceave he said [Seing the Bishops (who by their learning can,
and for the zeal they should have to the truth, would gain say, if they knew
any things repugnant) say nothing against the said Confession, I cannot but
think that it is the very truth of God] Thus this Confession was openly avowed
and professed by this Parliament, as is clear by the act. 6. parl. 1. King Ja.
6. Au. 1567. and act. 86. par. 6. An. 1579. where these words are found in both
acts [and decerns and declairs that all and sundry who either gainesayeth the
word of the Evangell received and approved, as the heads of the Confession of
faith professed in parliament of before in the year of God 1560.] At this
Parliament there are several acts made against popery, as against the Mass,
and against the Popes authority and jurisdiction: for such as were for the
Reformation, or the Congregation (as they were then called) did supplicate that
they would condemn the Antichristian doctrine, and would restore the
Discipline of the ancient Church, and discharge the popes jurisdiction, and
accordingly as was said, there is an act made [ordaining that the Bishop of
Rome, called the Pope, have no jurisdiction nor authority within the Realm in
any time coming and that no Bishop or other prelate of the Realm use any
jurisdiction in time coming by the said Bishop of Romes authority under the
pain, etc.] which was afterward ratified by several acts in the days of King
James.

And thus by act of Parliament the Reformed Religion is established, the church
government by Prelates is virtually discharged; because Prelates then had no
power but what they had from Rome, and when the current is cut off at the head,
it must needs cease in the streams. But this will be the more clear if we
consider how the Reformers were dealing for the establishment of Discipline,
together with the Doctrine, knowing that the doctrine would not be long kept
pure, if the Popish discipline and government were still retained, and upon
this, the great council gives a charge dated April 29, 1560. requiring and
commanding them in the name of the Eternal God, and as they would answer in
his presence, to committ to writing, and in a book deliver their judgments
touching the Reformation of Religion which heretofore in this Realm [as in
others] has been utterly corrupted. According unto which charge* the first
Book of Discipline, as it was called, (in which book the government of the
church by Prelates is overturned, church Sessions are established, the way of
Election and trial of Ministers, contrary to the Episcopal way, is appointed,
and several other things, tending to the right governing of the church, are
determined) is drawn up and presented to the conncell May 20. 1560. Whereupon
there is an act of council to this effect [We who have subscribed these
presents, having advised with the Articles therein specified, as is above
mentioned, from the beginning of this book, think the same good and conform to
God^ word in all points, conform to the notes and additions here to eeked: and
promise to set the samme forward to the uttermost of our Power, providing that
the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates and Beneficed men, who else have
adjoined them to us, bruik the revenues of their benefices, during their life
times, they sustaining and upholding the Ministry and ministers, as herein is
specified for the preaching of the word, and administrating of the Sacraments]
and this act is subscribed by twenty six Noblemen, and among the rest by Mr.
Gordon, who was Bishop of Galloway, and by the Dean of Murray. Spottswood in
his History is so convinced that this book was directly against the Prelates,
that he says page 174. [it was framed by John Knox partly in imitation of the
Reformed Churches of Germany, and partly of that which he had seen at Geneva]
nather of which Churches did favor Prelates.

It is true the late Historian the Archprelate would make the world believe
that the Superintendents, which are spoken of in that Book of Discipline, were
nothing else but Bishops. But his fondo mistake in this, will appear to any who
will but consider these particulars 1. What the thoughts were which this
Archprelate had of this book which treats of those Superintendents: as. 1.
That it was framed by John Knox, and famous Knox first nor last was never a
friend to prelates or prelacy. 2. he says that it was done in imitation of
reformed Churches such as Geneva and those of Germany, and these Churches knew
no prelates. 3. He says [it was no better nor a dream and so could never take
effect,] but had it been an establishing of Prelacy, it had been no dream in
his account, and he would have said, that it had taken effect. 4. He willed and
wished that John Knox had retained the old Policy, and so this book contained
a policy distinct from the old policy, and a Policy which was not the same
with Prelacy. 2. What the thoughts were which such as were for the Reformed
Religion, had of it: Now they looked on it, as the Discipline of the ancient
Church, and therefore after it was drawn up, they did supplicate the Parliament
for the restoration of the Discipline of the ancient Church, and for the
discharging of the Popes usurpation and of all that Discipline, which did flow
there from, as being inconsistent with the Discipline of the ancient Church,
and with the Discipline contained in that book. But 3. It cannot enter into the
heart of any rational man to think that these Reformers were so inconsiderate,
as^ to set up Prelates with the one hand, when they were doing what lay in
their power to pull them down with the other. It was not popish Prelates alone,
which they were laboring to turn out of the Church of Christ, for, when some
of those who had been popish Prelates before, had relinquished Popery, and
embraced the Reformed Religion, and had subscribed unto the book of Discipline,
as Mr Gordoun in Galloway, yet they would not suffer such to exerce the power
of superintendents. Mr Gordoun with all his moyen could not obtain that power,
so that Spotiswood when he says in his Latin Pamphlet called (Refutatio
libelli de Regimine Ecclesiae Scoticanae, page 4. and also in the Epistle
Dedicatorie that [the former Bishops who joined with the Reformers kept still
their full power and jurisdiction] bewrays his impudence and falsehood. His
words in his Epistle are these. [Et prasulibus pristi^s, modo ^idei orthodoxa
non restitissent, nec adempt^ dignitas, nec imminuta fuisset jurisdictio, quod
ita liquet, ut hoc vel in^iciari sit n^gare Solemn in ipsa meridie lucere] and
in the book he says [quotquot autem a puriore cultu non ab^orrebant, ^is j^
utendi, fruendi Episcopatuum fructibus and privilegiis omnibus, jurisdictio
etiam, quam ante usurpabant, quat^nus Religionis incolum^t as pateretur,
continuata.] This is the height of impudency, thus to avow palpable untrueths;
and that the faithfulness of this Historian may for ever after be suspected,
let it be observed, that in his History which he wrote in English, and which
every one might have more easily understood, and so discovered his falsehood, he
durst say no more but that these Bishops enjoyed the rents of their benefices.
See page 175. Moreover 4. The book of Discipline it self gives the clear
ground of their appointing of these Superintendents, in these words, [We
consider that if the Ministers, whom God has ^ndued with his singular graces
among us, should be appointed to several places, there to make their
continual residence, that then the greatest part of the Realm should be
destitute of all doctrine, which should not only be the occasion of great
murmr, but also be dangerous to the salvation of many, and therefore we have
thought it expedient at this time -- by this means the simple and ignorant, who
perchance have never heard of Jesus truly preached, shall com to some
knowledge, and many that are dead in superstition, and ignorance shall attain
to some feeling of godliness, by the which they shall be provoked to seek
farther knowledge of God, and his true Religion and worship -- and therefore we
desire nothing more earnestly, then that Christ Jesus be once universally
preached throughout the Realm: etc.] From whence it appears that these
Superintendents were only chosen for that present exigent, when there were so
few learned and able Ministers, and so many places of the country destitute of
Ministers; so that the harvest was great, and the laborers very few:
Superstition and popery was remaining in many places of the country, and
people were in hazard to continow therein, having either no Minister to clear
the truth to them, or such only who were ready to harden them in their
superstitious courses. and therefore there was a necessity, at that time, while
the Church was but in si^ri that some of the most able of the Ministry, should
be appointed, to travel through such and such places of the country, to
preach the Gospel, and to see to the planting of faithful and able Ministers,
according to the rules set down in the book of Discipline. But 5. so cautious
were the Reformers, that they would not acknowledge those to be Bishops, either
in name, or thing, for as their work was extraordinary, so they gave them an
extraordinary name: They would not suffer any who had been Bishops before in
time of popery, to enjoy the place and power of a Superintendent, least the
power and place might be abused, and at length degenerate unto the old power of
Prelates; but even in those bounds, where such lived, did appoint others to
Superintend, as Mr Pont in Galloway. They would not divide the bounds of those
Superintendents according to the Prelates Dioceses, but after another manner.
They divided the land into ten parts, having respect to the edification and
advantage of the poor people. These Superintendents were chosen by the consent
of the whole bounds, which they were to visit. They were not consecrated, but
only set apart to that work by preaching and prayer, as is to be seen in the
order prefixed to the old Psalme-books. They were tried and examined by the
Ministers of these bounds. They had other Ministers conjunct with them, when
they ordained any. Nather had they sole power of Excommunication, for Reformed
Churches had power by the Book of Discipline to excommunicate the contumacious:
and the tractate of Excommunication prefixed to some old Psalme-books shows
that they might do it without the advyce of the Superintendent. They were
subject to the censure of the Ministers and Elders of the Province, who might
depose them in some cases. Their maine work was preaching, for they were to
preach at the least thrice every week. They had their own particular flocks
beside, with which they stayed always, save when they were visiting the bounds
committed unt^ them. They might not try any Minister their alone, but we^
commanded to have the nearest reformed Church, and oth^ learned men conjunct,
by an act of the fourth National Assembly An. 1562. They might not transport a
Minister without the consent of the Synod, as is elear by act fourth of the f^
National Assembly 1562. They might not discuss any important question their
alone, as is clear by act first of the ninth National Synod, An. 1564. All
were at liberty to appeal from them to the National Synod, as is clear by act
fifth Assembly sixth. They were to be subject to the Assembly, as is clear by
the fourth Assembly an. 1562. They never did Moderate in General Assemblies,
unless they had been chosen by votes. Who can be so foolish then, as to
believe Mr. Spotiswood? saying in his H^story page 258. that [the power of
Superintendents was Episcopal, for they did elect and ordain Ministers, they
did praeside in Synod^, and direct all Church censures, nather was any
excommunication pronunced without their warrant] seeing the public acts of the
National Assemblies are of more credit then this prelate, who knew as little
what it was to be a faithful Historian, as he knew what it was to be an
accurate Logician. Beside that An. 1562 at the National Assembly, there were
some Ministers chosen to assist the five Superintendents (for no more could be
gotten settled for want of maintenance) and had equal power with them, and were
commanded to give account of their diligence unto every National Synod, and
there to lay down their office: And Mr. Spotiswood has not the face to say
that these Commissioners had Episcopal power, and yet their power was equal
with the power of Superintendents.

When thus the Church had shaken off (so far as lay in her power) the yoke of
Prelacy, she begins to exerce that power which Christ had given to her, and
that same year 1560. there is a National Assembly kept, which did make
several Canons concerning the ordering the affairs of the church, and yearly
there after once or oftener prore nata* according to, and by virtue of her
intrinsic power, she did keep her Courts, notwithstanding that in the mean
time the Queen and the court were but small friends to the Protestant cause.

Anno 1564 the National Assembly did send some Commissioners to the Queen to
desire among other things [that ^o Bishopric etc. having more Churches then
one annexed there unto should be disponed in time coming to any one man, but
that the Churches thereof being dissolved should be provided to several
persons, so as every man having charge, may serve at his own Church, according
to his vocation.]

Anno 1566 at the eleventh National Assembly the second Helvetian Consession
of Faith was presented, and approven in all points (except in the particular
concerning festival days) by which Confession prelacy is accounted ane humane
devyce, and no ordinance of Christ.

But Satan, envying the fair beginnings of this Infant Church, stirred up some
of the Statesmen against her, who, having possession of Church rents, and
Prelates Benefices, and fearing to lose the same, did therefore devyse a way for
establishing themselves in the possession of those Church rents, by getting in
some Tulchan Bishops, (as they were called) who might have the name of the
whole Benefice, but rest contented with a small part to themselves, leaving the
rest in the hands of these Nobles, and accordingly the Earl of Morton stirred
up the Earl of Mar then Viceroy, to convocate an Assembly at Leith, by the
means of the Superintendent of Angus: who when they did meet Jan. 12. 1571 did
nominate six of their number to meet with six appointed by the council, and
these twelve did condescend to several things tending to the setting up of
Prelates. And according to these resolutions the Earl of Morton gets one Mr.
Douglas made Bishop of Saintandrews. Mr. Boyd of Glasgow, Mr. Paton of Dunkel,
and Mr. Grahame of Dumblaine.

This was a very sad stroke, but God did not leave that poor church in that
case, for within two months thereafter A national Assembly did meet who
finding that these resolutions gave such offense, did appoint some of their
number to examine the same: but the acts of this Assembly were there after
taken out of the Registers. And in August. 1572. at the National Assembly
there was a Protestation made against these inuovations, (...) [that whatever
condescension should be yielded unto, should be only for the Interim, till a
more perfect order might be obtained] So at the Assembly in Aug. 1573. it was
decreed that [Bishops should have no more power then the superintendents, had]
Mr Paton of Dunkell is accused for taking more, and Mr Gordon of Galloway is
condemned. And in the nixt Assembly it is concluded that every Bishop should be
subject to the Assembly, and should conferr no Benefice without the advyce of
three Ministers. Spotiswood the false Historian thought, that, because of his
silence, the world should never have gotten notice of this, which these
Assemblies did, of purpose to heme in the power of these prelates, whom the
Court was setting up, with such violence, at such a time, when they could do no
more.

At length the day breaks up clearer, and about the year 1575. the Lord
stirs up his servants, and puts spirit and courage in them, so that in
the Assembly it was debated whether these new Bishops, Superintendents, and
Commissioners were a honor or a burden to the Church. Mr John Dury protested
that they should do nothing in prejudice of what he, and many other brethren
had to object against their office. Mr James La^son did second this, and moved
the debate touching the lawfulness of the office it self. Mr Andro Melvin
affirmed, [that none ought to be officebearers in the Church, whose titles were
not found in the Book of God, and for the title of Bishop, albeit the same was
found in scripture, yet was it not to be taken in the sense, that the common
sort did conceive, there being no superiority allowed by Christ amongst
Ministers, he being the only Lord of his Church, and all the same servants, in
the same degree, having the like power] These beginnings, the Lord was pleased
so to second with his blessing, that when it was moved by the Regent, whether
they would Stand unto the Policy aggreed upon at Leith, or setle some other
form of government: It was resolved that a constant form of Church policy
should be set down, and for this ^ffect, they nominate twenty of their number
to meet at several times, and places, for the drawing the Model thereof. And
accordingly after some pains the second Book of Discipline is finished, and
Anno 1577. at the General Assembly. Sess. 13. approven in all points, except
that touching Deacons; which was referred to farther debate but Anno 1578. that
head with the rest was approven by the unanimous consent of all, though
Spotiswood will not let the world know so much.

When this Second Book of discipline is thus appoven, by the National
Assembly, after prayer and fasting they appoint some of their number to
exhibit it to his Maj. to the end he might add his approbation thereunto: Unto
whom the King (being then about 13. years of age) did promise [that he would be
a proctor unto the Church] and caused some of his Counselors conferr with
those Ministers upon that business, (the heads of which conference were once
insert in the Registers of the Assembly, but Anno 1584. when the Court had
power of the Registers, those leaves were taken a way, and seen no more, as
shall be cleared hereafter) and again Anno 1579. the King wrote unto the
National Assembly desiring [a farther consultation upon the heads, on which
his Commissioners and their delegats did not accord the last year, to the end
that when all the particulars are fully aggreed upon, they might be approven in
the ensueing Parliament] and in the mean time the Assemblies are going on,
prohibiting any more bishops to be chosen, and ordaining such as were chosen, to
submit themselves to the determination of the General Assembly, under the
pain of Excommunication, and accordingly some then, and all of them afterward,
did submit. So Anno 1580. they ordained that all who were called bishops should
dimit simpliciter, because that office had no warrant in the word, and they
ordained Provincial Synods to call before them such bishops, as lived in their
bounds, and ordain them to give obedience to this act. His Majesty's
Commissioners who were present at this Assembly of Dundy did concur with this
Assembly, in appointing some of their number to consult about the Model of the
Presbiteries.

In this same year in the month of March (for as yet the new year did not
begin until the 25. of march) is the National Covenant solemnly taken by the
King, his Council, and Court, and afterward by the inhabitants of the
Kingdom, in which covenant prelacy, under the name of Romish Hierarchy was
abjured, as shall be cleared in due time, and the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church was sworn to be defended.

Anno 1581. in Aprile at Glasgow the General Assembly did insert the book of
Discipline in their Registers, and did show how the act touching Bishops made
at Dundee, Anno 1580. did condemn the estate of Bishops as they were then in
Scotland. Unto this Assembly his Maj: Commissioner, William (...) of Caprintoun
presented the Confession of faith subscribed by the King and his household, as
also a plot of the presbiteries to be erected, mentioning their meeting places,
and appoynting the several parishes, which should belong to such and such
presbiteries with a letter to the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the country for
their concurrence for the erection of presbiteries, and dissolution of
Prelacies, and in his Maj: name he promised that his Maj: would set forward the
policy, until it were established by Parliament, and thus presbyteries began to
be erected throughout the Kingdom.

This was a sweet sunshine, but it was followed with a very sad shower for
when Amate Stuart of Aubignee, afterward Duke of Lennox, obtains by the death
of the Earl of Mortoun, who was executed, and the banishment of the Earl of
Angus, the superiority of Glasgow, and other things, to secure the same to him
and his posterity, he aggreeth with Mr. Robert Montgomery Minister at Sterlin,
to accept of the bishopric, and to dispone to him all which belonged to that
bishopric, for the yearly payment of one thousand pound Scots, and some
horse-corne, and poultry, which when the Church hears, he is summoned before
the Assembly at St. Andrews, and commanded to leave the bishopric, under the
pain of Excommunication, and the Presbitery of Sterlin is appointed to take
notice of his carriage in doctrine and discipline, for they had found him guilty
in 14 or 15 points; but he went on, and notwithstanding the presbitery had
suspended him from the exercise of the Ministry, he procured an order unto the
presbytery of Glasgow, to receive him as their Bishop, under the pain of
banishment, and with a company of armed soldiers entered the Church, and pulled
Mr. David Weems out of the pulpit, and being summoned to compear before the
Synod of Lothian, the King causes summond all the Synod to compear before him
at Sterlin the 12 of Aprile. Mr. Pont and some others compeared in name of the
rest, and protested [that albeit they had compeared to testify their obedience
to his Mat. yet they did not acknowledge him or his council judges in that
matter, which was an Ecclesiastic cause, and that nothing done at that time
should prejudge the liberties of the Church] But the Council rejected the
protestation, and discharged them to proceed any further. And shortly
thereafter, when the General Assembly is examining his process, the King
sends a letter to them, discharging them to proceed any further, and when
they went on notwithstanding, they are charged by a Messenger of arms to
desist under the pain of Rebellion, but they thinking it better to obey God,
then man. ordained Mr. Montgomerie to compeer before them the next day, who
compeered not, only a Proctor in his name appealed unto the King. The Assembly
did reject the appellation, and proceed to examine the libell given in against
him, and finding him guilty of many heinous crimes, they ordain him to be
deposed and excommunicated, but ere the sentence be pronounced, they appoint
some of their number, to aquaint his Maj. with their whole procedure: And ere
long Mr. Montgomery submits, passes from his appellation, acknowledges his
faults, and professes repentance, with such solemn obtestations, as affected
the whole Assembly. Upon this the sentence is delayed, and the presbitery of
Glasgow is appointed to advertise the provincial Synod of Lothian (who were
ordained to excommunicate him) in case he relapsed: And as they feared, so he
returned to his vomit, and with violence intended to enter the pulpit, and when
the presbitery, according to the appointment of the General Assembly, were
beginning a process against him, the Lord of Minto provost of the Town,
presented a warrant from his Maj. to stay the process. and when they were
going on, he pulls forth Mr. John Howeson minister at Cambuslang Moderator,
and imprisoned him in the Tolbooth. But for all this Mr. Montgomery is
excommunicated by Mr. John Davidson, and the same was intimated in all the
Churches. The council declares the sentence null, against this the Ministers
of Edinburgh give open testimonies in their preaching, and for this cause they
are commanded to remove out of the Town, within the space of twenty four
hours. At this time there was an Assembly sitting at Edinburgh who send some
of their number with a supplication to his Majesty wherein they show, [That
indeed he was the Head of the Commonwealth, but only a member of the Church,
and as a ch^f member he should have the chief care thereof, but now it was not
so, th^r decrees are res^inded, they are forced by his servants, Ministers are
draw^e out of pulpits; that he was playing the pope, and usurping both the
swords] and when they come and present it unto the Council the Earl of Arran
cries out, if there were any that durst subscribe the same where upon Mr.
Andro Melvin answers, we dare and taking a pen out of the clerks hand,
says to his brethren who were commissionated with him, comeforward, and so he
and they did subscribe the same.

This storm is not yet blown over, for the next year 1583. Mr. Andro Melvin
is summoned before the Council, for saying in his preaching, [That ministers
should present to princes the example of their predecessors, as Daniel did
the exemple of Nebuchadn^zar to Belteshar: But now if any should hold forth
what evil King James the third got by a company of flatterers, it would be
presently said that he had gone from his text, and must be accused of
treasone.] But when he compeareth, he declineth their judgment, aff^ming that
what was spoken in pulpit ought first to be tried by the presbytery, and that
they could not in prima instantia meddle therewith: But they proceed, and though
they could get nothing proven, for his declining, he is commanded to the Castle
of Edinburgh, and then to Blackness, but being advertised of his danger by his
friends he retireth unto Berwick.

Ann^ 1584. the storm grows to a height, for in May there is a parliament
suddenly, conveened which discharges all Church judicatories, gives the King
power over all causes civil and ecclesiastic, and discharges all declining of
the King and his Council in any matter, civil or ecclesiastic, under the pain
of treason, and also all Ministers to meddle in sermons with the affairs of his
Highness and his Estate, see act 129, 130, 131, and 134. of the 8. parl. of
King James sixth, when Mr David Lindsay Minister at Leith was sent by his
br^thren to intreat^the King to pa^e no act in prejudice of the Church, he is
committed to Blackness and there detained prisoner 47. weeks. And Mrs Andro
Polwart, Patrick Galloway, and James Carmichel, are denounced rebels, and are
forced to flee into England: So are the Ministers of Edinburgh forced to
retire, leaving an Apology behind them. But for all this when the acts of this
Parliament were publishing, Mr Robert Pont protested, taking Instruments, that
the Church should not be obliged to yield obedience thereunto, and being
denounced rebel he fleth into England. Now is Mr Montgomery established Bishop
of Glasgow, and one Mr Adamson (as naughty and vicious as any) is settled in St
Andrews, and no sooner get they up their head, but as soon they execute their
tyranny, and rage against the rest of the Ministry, compelling them to promise
obedience to them, as their ordinaries, under the pain of banishment,
confinement, imprisonement, deposition, and sequestration of their stipends:
Whereupon many, in this day of trial, did faint and subscribe, thinking it a
sufficient salvo to add (according to the Word of God) but afterward mourned
for it. Now none durst pray for the Ministers who had fled, under the pain of
treason, so dark a day was this.

But near the end of the next year, there is a change as Court, and the
Ministers return, a Parliament is called at Lithgow, but nothing is done in
favors o^ the Church. At length 1586. the King was desirous to have some
settling in the Church, and appoints a Conference in February at Haly^od
house, where some articles were drawn up, and referred to the General
Assembly. As 1. That the Bishop should have a care of one flock. 2. That some
Ministers should be added to him, without whose counsel he should do nothing.
3. His doctrine should be examined by the meeting. 4. His power should be of
Order and not of Jurisdiction. 5. Beside his own Church, he might have the
inspection of more. when the Assembly meets in May, they could not assent to
all these articles, yet at length, seeing they could not have all which they
desired, they accord to this, that both Bishops, and Commissioners should be
subject to the trial of the General Assembly, and that, where they did
reside, they should moderate provincial Synods and Presbyteries, and in the
mean time the order of the Presbyteries was set down, and they proceed to
examine the process of Mr Adamson, who had declined the provincial Synod of St
Andrews, and he submits. And the next year Anno 1587. Mr Montgomery resigned
his place, and so was absolved from the sentence of Excommunication by the
Assembly.

When the Parliament does conveen this year Anno 1587. there are some Prelates
who would sit there in name of the Church: but when the Church perceived this,
Mrs David Lindsay and Robert Pont were sent to desire, that they might be
removed as having no authority from the Church, and the most of them no
function in it at all. The prelates finding themselves now in a staggering
condition, thought it was their best to ingratiate themselves in his Majesty's
favor, and thereby secure themselves in their places, and therefore
condiscended unto the Act of Annexation of all the Temporalites of benefices
unto the Crown, which was a dilapidating of the Church rents. It is true
Spotiswood puts another face upon this business in his History, but the man
could change with the times, and speak another thing in his English History,
then he durst speak in his Latin refutation, for there he says: [In summa
Ecclesiasticorum persidia, proximis Comit^is Anno 1587. transacta, and decreto
ordinum actibus intervenientibus insinuata. Nam Episcopi durissima quaeque a
fratr^bus passi, non aliud perfugium ha^bant, quam ut A^licorum libid^i se
deder^nt,] he says, The Bishops were so hard put to it, that they had no
other refuge, but thus to satisfy the Court, and give away their revenues to
their lusts.

Anno 1590. The General Assembly does abrogate the power of Commissioners,
and devolveth the work on Presbyt^ries.

Anno 1591. The Recantation of Mr Patrick Adamson is presented unto the
Assembly, where, among other things, he confessed he had e^red, in thinking,
the government of the Church was like other civil governements, and in
laboring to have the Church in matters Ecclesiastic, subject to the Kings
laws: And with all he confesses that the Earl of Arran had a mind to have
burnt the Registers of the Assembly Anno 1584. and that at Falkland before they
were delivered to his Maj. a Bishop and Mr Henry Hammilton took out some
leaves, which spoke against the Government by Bishops, and that he had
consented thereunto.

Anno 1592. in May the General Assembly does meet, and resolves on some
propo^itions to be presented to the ensuing Parliament. As 1. That the Acts of
Parliament made Anno 1584. against the discipline, liberty, and authority of
the Church, be annulled. 2. That the Discipline of the Church be ra^isied. 3.
That the Act of Annexation be repealed, and 4. That the Abbots, P^iors, and
other Prelates, bearing the titles of Churchmen, and giving voice in Parl. in
name of the Church without her consent, be discharged to vote any more. When
the parliament conveeneth in June. The liberties of the Church are ratified,
and all her Courts, General, provincial, and presbiteriall Assemblies, and
Church Session^: and the Ju^sdiction and Discipline thero [^s declared to be
just, good, and godly in it self, in all time coming, not ^anding of whatsoever
s^atutes, acts, canons, ^vilier municip^ll laws made in the contrare] All acts
fomerly made for establishing the Popes authority, are abolished. It is
likeways declared that the 129. act Anno 1584. anent the Kings Supremacy, and
against declining of the King and his Council in Church matters [shall be no
ways prejud^iall, nor der^gate any thing, to the previledge that God has
given to the s^rituall office-bearers in the k^k, concerning heads of Religion,
matters of heresy, Excommunication collation, or deprivation of Ministers, or
any such like (...) ^all censures, specially grounded, and having warrant of
the word of God] Item they abrogate and annull that act of parl. 1584. which
did [grant Commission to Bishops, and other Judges constitute i^
Ecclesiasticaell causes, to receive his Highness presentations to benefices, to
give collation there upon, and to put order to all causes Ecclesiasticall] And
they ordain [that all presentations to Benefices be directed to the particular
Presbiteries in all time coming, with full power to give Collation thereupon,
and to putt order to all matters and causes Ecclesiastical within their bounds,
according to the Discipline of the Kirk.

Thus did the Lord carry on his work unto this period, notwithstanding of much
opposition which was made thereunto by men of corrupt principles, wicked lives,
and who loved not to part with the Church rents, the sweet morsel which they
desired always to enjoy: and now is the Church there become a shineing Church,
being reformed both in Doctrine and in Discipline now is she become a pleasant
vineyaird well dressed, and hedged about, and defended from the wild boars of
the forest. King James himself was convinced of this, when he gave this reason
to an English divine why that Church was not troubled with heresy viz [because
if it spring up in a parish, there is an Eldership there to take notice of it,
and suppress it; if it be too strong for the^ the psesbitery is ready to crush
it; if the presbitery cannot provide against the obstinate heshall find more
witty he ads in the Synod; if he be not convinced there, the General Assembly
will not spare him] yea seldom or never did any error trouble all those
Courts, for usually it was crushed by presbiteries, except what some Bishops
did maintain. And thus that Church was indeed as an army with banners, and
terrible to the adversaries of the truth. Then were there endeavors to have a
through work of Reformation carried on; the iniquities of the land were
searched out, corruptions in Ministers, and other ranks of people were taken
notice of, effectual courses were laid down for preventing such abuses in time
coming. Public Fasts were indicted and kept whole eight days together. And
thus [the Lord created upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her
Assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shineing of a flaming fire by
night, for upon all the glory was a defence], Isai. 4. 5.

But this fair Summer Suneshine did not long last. The infinitely wise God saw
it sit to bring that Church unto a wilderness again, and to cause her meet
with a dark, dreadful, and long lasting winter night. Satan stirs up
Papists upon the one hand, who saw that if this hedge, of discipline were kept
up, they could not enjoy the liberty and peace they desired; and profane
politicians and Courteours upon the other hand, who saw that by this Discipline
their licentiousnes would be curbed, to bestirre themselves against this
established discipline: And accordingly they use their power with the King, and
at length prevail to get him to oppose the discipline, and to prosecute that
design piece and piece till at length Prelates were established in all their
power, as the following discourse will clearly evince.

When Anno 1596. the Popish Lords who had conspired with Spain against the
country, and had been upon that acount banished viz: Huntly Arrol and Angus
were called home, the Church saw Religion in danger, and ordained that
particular flocks should be advertised hereof, and indicted a Fast, and
appointed that some out of each Presbitery should concur with the Presbitery
of Edinburgh in considering of the most expedient way for securing, of
Religion: and now because the Church would not consent unto the Kings calling
home those popish Lords, he is stirred up by his popish Courteours against the
Church, and incroacheth daily more and more upon her liberties. For Mr D. Black
minister at St Andr. is cited before the Council for some alleged expressions
in his sermon. The ministry, seeing that the spiritual Government of the
house of God was intended to be quite subverted, thought it best that he give
in a Declinatour and there in show [that though he was able to defend all that
he spoke; yet seeing his answering to that accusation before them might import a
prejudice to the liberties of the Church, and be taken for an acknowledgement
of his Maj: jurisdiction in matters merely spiritual; he was constrained to
decline that Judicatorie. 1. because the Lord Jesus had given to him his word
for a Rule, and so he could not fall under any civil law, but in so far as he
should be found, after trial, to have passed from his Instructions, which
trial belongs only to the prophets. 2. The liberty of the Church and
Discipline presently exercised was confirmed by diverse acts of Parliament,:
and the office-bearers were now in peaceable Possession thereof] And this he
did, and a Copy hereof was sent through the Presbiteries, to see if they would
own the same, and in testimony of their cheerful and hearty owning thereof,
it was subscribed by three or four hundereth Ministers. This displeased the
King so, that he by open proclamation commanded the Commissioners of the Church
to depart out of Edinburgh within twenty fowr hours, under the pain of
rebellion: but notwithstanding of this, they resolve to stay, and to see that
the Church privileges should not be wronged, and send some of their number to
speak to his M^j. unto whom he answered, that if Mr. Black would pass from
his Declinature, or if they would declare that the Declinature was not a
general, but only a particular one, used in Mr. Blacks case alone, as being a
cause of slander, and pertaining to the judgment of the Church, he would pass
from the pursuit of Mr. Black, But, after consultation, the Comissioners
resolved to adhere unto the Declinature, unless his Maj. would pass from the
process, and remitt the same unto the Church Judicatory, and would make an act
of Council, declareing that no minister should be charged for his preaching,
etc. Whereupon the King charged the Commissioners of new to depart, and caused
cite Mr. Black unto the last of November, and withal discharges all Barons,
Gentlemen and others to meet with ministers in their Church assemblies; without
his license. When the day of Mr Blacks compearance comes, the Commissioners
present a supplication, desiring them to remitt the question unto the Judge
competent, but the Council goes on, and therefore they protest that the
process in hand, and whatsoever followed thereupon should not prejudge the
liberty of the Church, in matters of Doctrine. Afterward the King sends unto
the Commissioners, showing he would be content with Mr. Blacks simple
declaration of the truth. But worthy Mr. Bruce answered [That if the matter did
touch Mr Black alone, they were content: but the liberty of Christ's Kingdom
had received such a wound by the Proclamations published the last Satterday,
and that day by the usurpation of the Council; that if Mr Blacks life, and the
life of twenty others had been taken, it had not grieved the hearts of the
godly so much -- and that either these things behoved to be retreated, or they
would oppose so long as they had breath.] Then the King condiscended to publish
by a Declaration, that he would not diminish any lawful power or liberty,
which they or their Assemblies had, either by the Word of God, or laws of the
land, and that the proclamation discharging Barons and others to meet with
ministers was only meaned, of their meeting in arms, and that the
Interloqu^tor of the Council should not be used against Mr Black or any other
minister, until a lawful General Assembly, providing that Mr Black would
declare in his presence the truth of the points libelled before some ministers.
But afternoon the Kings mind was found changed, and because Mr Black would not
acknowledge an offense, he is condemned by the Council, and his punishment is
remitted to the King, and till his pleasure were known, he is confined. Then
there is a bond devised to be subscribed by all the ministers, under the pain
of the lose of their stipends. The tenor whereof follows.

We the Pastors, and ministers of Gods word undersubscribing humbly
acknowledging our duty to God, and obedience to the King our Souveraigne Lord,
whom for conscience cause, we ought to obey; Confess that his Grace is
sovereign Judge to us, and each one of us in all causes of sedition, and
treason, and other criminal and civil matters, and to all our speeches, which
may import the said crimes. albeit uttered by any of us publicly in the
pulpits (which God forbid) or in any other place, and that the said pulpits,
nor any other place whatsoever, has not that privilege and immunity to be
occasion or pretense to any of us, of declining of his Maj? judgment, in any
of the said civil or criminal causes, intended against us, in any time
coming: but rather that our offense is the greater, incase (which God forbid)
any of us commit such crimes, in the said pulpits, before the people where the
word of Gods truth and salvation should be preached by us to our flocks. In
witness whereof, and of the humble acknowledgement of our duty in the premises,
we have subscribed these presents with our hands, and are content that the
famine be registrat in the books of secret Council in futuram rei memoriam.

But faithful ministers refused upon all hazards to subscribe the same, seeing
that it was a crossing of their Declinatour, contrary to the acts of the
General Assembly, and to the acts of Parliament, made in favors of the
Church; yea and to the word of God, because by this bond they should have
acknowledged the King to be both supreme and only Judge over ministers in all
causes, and so to have power of Judging; and deposing them, yea and of judging
and trying their preaching, if it be but colored with treason and sedition;
and of schism in the Church which is sedition: and seeing thereby they should
be bound up from faithful dealing in the name of the Lord; and because they
saw it was devysed of purpose as a snare to their consciences.

After this Anno 1596. the king drives on his design, and indicteth an
Assembly at perth, and forms 55 problemes, by which the Discipline of the
Church, formerly established, was questioned, to be there debated (these
problems with the following History at more length are to be seen in the
History penned by Reverend and laborious Mr Petry, and therefore a short
relation shall suffice here) and being persuaded by his Courtiours, that he
should never gain his purpose, till first he took some course to break the
Union of the Church, he prevails with Mr Patrik Galloway and Mr James
Nicolson, who had been chief, a little before, in advising Mr Black to decline,
and causes Sr Patrick Murray deal with the ministers of the North to subscribe
the bond, and to choose such and such persons to the meeting at Perth: and when
the time of meeting comes, these Commissioners from the North were seen going
in companies to the king, and Mr Nicolson was with the king till midnight.
They were for all this; two days in debating whether they were a lawful
General Assembly; but honest men protested against it. The meeting at length
condiscendeth to these particulars. 1. That no minister should reprove his
majesty's laws, acts, or ordinances, until such time, as first he had, by
advyce of Presbitery, Synod, or Assembly, complained or sought remedy of the
same. 2. That none should be named in pulpit, except the fault were notour by
the persons being fugitive, convicted by ane Assise, Excommunicated,
contumacious after citation or lawful admonition: and none should be vively
described, except by public vices always damnable, 3. That there should be no
summary Excommunication, until the next General assembly. 4. That there
should be no meetings among ministers, except in Church judicatories: and
afterward they appoint fourteen of their number to reason upon the rest of the
questions.

The next year Anno 1597. there is another Assembly at Dundee which being
corrupted, does grant 1. That Ministers in their exercises at Presbyteries
should make no application of doctrine. 2. That Presbyteries should meddle with
nothing, but what, without all question, is Ecclesiastical. 3. That summare
Excommunication be suspended, and 4. That Presbyteries should desist upon his
Majesty's desire. Also at the kings desire they choose fourteen of their
number, giving power to them, or any seven of them to advise with his Maj.
about a way of settling stipends unto ministers, to provide ministers to eminent
places of the Country, to present petitions and grievances of the Church to
his Maj. and to give his Maj. advice in matters serving for the good of the
Church. These pretexts seemed plausible to many, but the event will show what
was really intended: For ere long these Commissioners, as they were called,
incroach upon the power of Presbyteries, and Synods, and whether the Presbytery
of Saint Andrews would or not, did put both Mr Wallace and Mr Black from the
Church of Saint Andrews, and put in one Mr George Gladstons, and then at their
own hand, they did supplicat the Parliament, which conveened in December. That
ministers, as representing the Church, the third Estate of the Kingdom, might
have liberty to vote in Parliament (an evil, under which the Church had been
groaning, before, of a long time) The parllament, thinking (but without ground)
that the ministers would never take upon them the titles of the former Prelates,
passed this Act.

That such ministers as his Maj: should be pleased to provide to the place,
title, and dignity of a Bishop, Abbot, or other prelate, should have that
liberty: and as concerning their office in the spiritual policy of the Church,
it was remitted to be advised by his Maj: and aggreed upon with the General
Assembly; and that without prejudice of the spiritual Jurisdiction and
Discipline of the Church, permitted to General Assemblies, Synods,
Presbiteries, and Sessions, and established by Law. Then they move the King to
call an Assembly at Dundee before the time appointed, to the end they might get
their own deed approven; where, after much work, and after many threatenings
to some, and promises to others, made by the King himself who was there
present, and had commanded Mr Melvin and Mr Iohnston Professors of Theology in
St. Andrews forth of the town, under the pain of banishment, their deed is
approven. But zealous and faithful Mr Davidson arose and protested in his own
name, and in name of all the ministers of Scotland who would adhere to his
protestation, against that Assembly, and the two last preceding Assemblies, as
null, and not lawful, and when he removed several of the ministers followed
him, and subscribed the same. The meeting went on, and renewed the former
Commission unto twenty Commissioners, whereof nine should be a quorum, among
whom was Mrs James Nicolson, George Gladstones, David Lindsay, Alexander
Lindsay, Andro Knox, Gavin Hamilton, and Alexander Douglas, (whom the king by
any means would have named) who were all bishops afterward. Thereafter there
were several meetings, as one at Falkland July 29. 1598. where were some
debates about this matter. and some cautions condiscended on, limiting these
Parliamentary Ministers, To propone nothing without express warrant from the
Church. To be accomptable to the General Assembly, and subject to their
Presbitery and Synod. To usurp no power of Jurisdiction or Ordination, but
every way else to carry themselves as other ministers, and the like; and to all
these, and other points necessary they were bound to swear and subscribe. But
how little regard was had to these Cautions, sworn, and subscribed, may be seen
by what Spotiswood says in his History page 453. viz [That it was neither the
Kings intention, nor the minds of the wiser sort, to have these Cautions stand
in force, but to have matters peaceably ended, and the Reformation of the
policy made without any noise, they gave way to these conceits] So was there
another Meeting at Halyrood house in November 1599. but in all these meetings
the honest party could prevail nothing, the king did so violently carry on his
purpose.

Anno 1600. There is a General Assembly at Montrose, where the matter is
again debated, but no answer made to the arguments of the honest party, only
the Kings authority is made use of, as an answer to all: And so at length, what
by menaces, what by flatterings made by the king himself, who was there
present, the former resolutions are concluded, only they allow of the Cautions
condiscended on at Falckland, and will have these Parliamentary Ministers to
give an account yearly unto the General Assembly, and lay down their
Commission. But these Commissioners, or Parliamentary ministers, being mounted
up so high, thought it below them to stand to any promise, or condition, having
never resolved so to do, as we have heard out of Spotiswood, who in his latin
pamphlet called Refutatio libelli, etc. says also the same [Conditiones quod
attinet, quas foede violatas clamitat, in nonnullas, utpote aequas and jujlas
facile assensum, aliae pro tempore magis, quo contentiosis, omnis rixands ansa
praeriperetur, quam animo in perpetuum observandi, acceptae.] that there were
some of these Cautions which they never intended to keep, only they did accept
of them, that more peaceably they might be put in possession of that which they
were gapeing for. Thus it is undeniable that these men arose to Prelacy by open
and avowed perjury, as their successors of late have done.

Anno 1601, and 1602. The Assemblies follow forth his Maj. design, for there
was a complaint given in by the Synod of ^ife against these Parliamentary
ministers, as breaking all bounds and cautions, but they are not heard. That
assembly 1602. do indict their next meeting at Aberdeen in July 1604. but the
Parliamentary ministers, fearing that they should be called to an account, move
the king to prorogue the same, unto July 2, An. 1605. yet the Commissioners
from St Andrews presbitery viz Mrs James Melvin, William Erskin, and William
Murray went to Aberdeen the day appointed, and presented their Commissions,
taking Instruments in the hands of two public Notars, before some ministers of
the town, and others. When the next diet, Anno 1605. was approaching, they
move the King to prorogue again the Assembly unto an indefinit time, and
therefore from London he sends to the Commissioners to stay the meeting of
the Assembly, until he gave advertisement, whereupon they write to several
Presbiteries in the South pairts, adviseing them not to choose Commissioners to
meet at Aberdeen the fifth day of July, (of purpose to deceive them concerning
the day, which was the second, and not the fifth: that so, such as would meet
the second day, being so few, might easily be moved to dissolve, before the
rest came, who would intend only to keep the fifth day) But the honest party,
perceiving how their liberties were now in danger, did resolve to meet at
Aberdeen, and accordingly there comes from parts neerby some against the
second of July, unto whom Lawreston his Maj. Commissioner presented a letter
from the Council, and desired an answer. They replied, that they behooved
first to constitute themselves, and after he had withdrawn, they choosed a
moderator and Clerk, and then read the letter, wherein there were two things
desired, first that they would dissolve the meeting, and next that they would
appoint no other day, until his Maj. were advertised. As to the first they
answered that they were ready to dissolve the meeting, there being so few
present. To the next they answered that if Lawreston as his Maj. Commissioner
would name a day, they would aggree thereto, if not, they behooved to preserve
their liberty, and so, seeing Lawreston refused, they appointed the next
Assembly to be at Aberdeen the last Tuysday of Sept. and advertised
Presbiteries thereof. When Lawreston sees this, he protests against them as
no lawful General Assembly, and gives his reasons, which were answered, and
they protest to the contrary, and thereupon by a messenger of arms he charge
them to depairt under the pain of treason, and because, as he alleged; he had
discharged them, the night before, by open proclamation at the market Cross to
conveen under the pain of treason, he causes denounce them rebels. Whereupon
in Septr. Mr Welsh and Mr Forbes were imprisoned by the Council in
Blackenesse, and in Octr. others were incarcerat. In the mean time, there is a
Declaration dated at Hampton Court Septr 26. indicting an Assembly at Dundy the
last Tuysday of July next. Now the imprisoned ministers petitioned that the
trial of that General Assembly might be referred to the indicted assembly at
Dundee, but are not heard. And therefore, when they are sisted before the
Council Octr 24. seeing that certainly the Assembly would be condemned, they
give in this Declinature following [please your Lo: The approbation or
disallowance of a General assembly has been, and should be a matter
spiritual, and always cognosced and judged by the Church, as Judges Competent
within this Realm, and seeing we are called before your Lo: to hear and see it
found and declared, that we have contemptuously, and seditiously conveened, and
assembled our selves in a General assembly at Aberdeen, the first Tuysday, of
July last, and the said assembly to be declared unlawful, as an more length is
contained in the summonds, executed against us. We in consideration of the
premises, and other reasons to be given in by us, have just cause to decline
your Lo. judgment, as no ways competent in the Cause above specified- and by
these presents we simpliciter decline the same, seeing we are most willing to
submit our selves unto the trial of a Ge nerall Assembly which is only the
Judge competent.] When the King hears of this Declinature, he lent down
directions to the Council to proceed against them according to the laws, and
sent down the Earl of Dumbar for that effect. Whereupon six of them viz Mrs
John Forbes, John Welsh, Andrew Duncan, John Sharp, Robert Dury, and Alexander
Strachan, are endited of high treason upon the act of Parliament. 1584. and
sisted before an Assise at Lithgow and what by illegal procedures, and
threatenings, with fair promises, used by the Earl of Dumber unto the
Assisers, some of whom were his own near kinssolk, and particularly by
assurances that the king would not take their life, they are declared guilty
of treason by nine of the fifteen Assisers, and so sent back to their prisons.
Then does the king send for Mrs Andro Melvin, James Melvin, James Balfour,
William Watson, William Scot, John Carmichel and Adam Colt, and detaineth them
long at London, seeking to entangle them with questions and at length Mr Andro
Melvin, is imprisoned in the Tower, till the Duke of Bulloigne three years
thereafter procures liberty to him to go with him Mr James Melvin, dies at
Berwick, and the rest are confined to several places, of the country. While
these ministers are at London, the king signifies his mind, that the six
condemned ministers should be banished out of his Dominions, and the other
eight should be consined as follows. Viz; Mr Farm in Bute, Mr Monro in
K^ntire, Mr Youngson in Arran, Mr Irvine in Orkney: Mr William Forbes in
Yetland, Mr Gray in Caitnesse, Mr English in Southerland, and Mr Rosse in Jews.

In this same year Anno 1606. there is a parliament conveened in July, which
acknowledges his Maj. sovereign authority, princely power, royal
prerogative, and privilege of the Crown over all Estates, persons, and
causes, and promises to maintain the same with their lives, lands and goods,
and restores the bishops to their ancient, and accustomed honor, dignities
Prerogatives, Previleges, livings, lands, teinds, rents thirds, and estates,
and rescindeth the act of annexation. Unto this Parliament the Commissioners
from Synods and presbiteries gave in a protestation, desiring them to keep
within their due bounds, and reserve unto the Lord that glory, which he will
communicate neither to man nor angel viz: to prescribe from his holy mountain
a lively pattern, according to which his own tabernacle should be framed, and
that they would not bring into the kirk of God, the Ordinance of man, which
has been found the ground of much evil, and of that Antichristian Hierarchy.
That they would not build Jericho again, contrare to their oath and
subscription, nor suffer that Estate of Bishops to arise, which they offered to
prove to be against the word of God, the ancient Fathers, and Canons of the
Church, the modern most learned, and godly Divines, the Doctrine and
Constitution of the Church of Scotland, the laws of the Realm, the well and
honor of the kings Maj. the peace and quyetness of the realm and the well of
all and every one of the subjects, and then. In the name of the Church in
general, and of their presbyteries, and in their own name and of all other
pastors, for discharging of their duty and consciences, they did protest
against bishopry and bishops, and against the Erection, Confirmation, or
Ratification thereof, requireing the famine to be Registrated. This
protestation was subscribed by many ministers, and among others by Mr Adam
Banatine, Mr John Abernethy, and Mr William Couper, who afterward became
bishops themselves.

When prelates are thus advanced to their civil dignities, there are ways
essayed for advancing them in their spiritual power: and this same year there
is an assembly indicted at Lithgow the 10 of December; but only some
presbyteries, in whom the king confided most, were advertised hereof, and the
business was carried so closely that the moderator of the last assembly knew
nothing of it. Here, after some debate, the overture propounded by his Maj. in
his letter, viz: that there should be constant moderators in presbyteries
chosen, and that where the bishops did reside, they should moderate, both in
Synods and presbyteries, is concluded, and some cautions added, but to no
purpose for there was a clause annexed, which did cast all loose, viz that if,
either upon his Maj. advyce and proposition to the assembly, or upon their own
supplication, the General assembly were moved to grant a relaxation of any of
the Caveats, that then their promise should make no derogation to their
liberty. Synods and presbyteries refused to own this Act, but at length were
charged to obey under the pain of treason.

Anno 1608. There was another Assembly at Lithgow July 26. but did no good,
thereafter there were some conferences at Falkland and Sterlin, but to no
purpose, the intended business was still carried on.

Anno 1610. Juny 6. There is a meeting at Glasgow, unto which resorteth all the
constant Maderators, who had their hundredth pounds per annum, and they bring
with them other two ministers, such as they liked, and whom the king desired by
his letters. The king had three Commissioners there. The Earl of Dumber was
sent thither with a strong guard to affright the ministers, so as several
ministers; coming out of the west with a purpose to protest were forced to
return back again. There was also money brought thither to hire votes. Mr
Spotiswood says it was to pay the constant Moderators their due. But Mr
Lawder in Coberspath was no moderator, and yet he came to the Earl and
complained that though he travailed furdest, and had least to live upon, and
though his vote was as good as the best; yet he was neglected, to whom the
Earl replied, that he was too late in coming, and asking his purse-master what
was left, he finds there was nothing but seventeen Shillings Sterlin to give
him: Come (says Mr Lawder) let me have it, it will help to bear my charges
homeward: And the Non-liquets got nothing. At this corrupt meeting it is
concluded 1. That the indiction of all General Assemblies belonged to the
king, by the prerogative of his Crown, and without his license all such
meetings were unlawful. 2. That Synods should be moderated by the Prelates, or
some appointed by them. 3. No excommunication or absolution without the Bishops
approbation, and direction, who is answerable to God and to his Maj. for his
proceedings 4. All presentations must be directed to the Prelates. 5. That he
with some associated, should silence and depose ministers 6 That every
minister, at his entry, should swear obedience to his Maj. and to his ordinary
as it was ordained Anno 1571. 7. If any minister absente himself from the
Bishops visitation, he shall be suspended, and if he amend not, deposed. 8.
That the exercises (or quondam presbyteries) should be moderated by the
bishops, or whom they will appoint. And 9. That no minister speak against any
of the foresaid acts in public, nor dispute about the equality or inequality
of ministers.

This year also was the High Commission instituted, and proclaimed by a Herald
giving power to the Archbishops to depose, excommunicat, imprison, fine and
confine, for causes Ecclesiastic, whether in Doctrine, or manners, whether in
Noblemen, ministers, or common people.

When the meeting at Glasgow is dissolved, Mr Spotiswood of Glasgow, Mr Lamb of
Brichen, and Mr Hamilton of Galloway, go to London and there are consecrated
the 21 of October. and when they return, they consecrate the rest, and then all
of them domineer over the people, and over the faithful ministers.

Anno 1612. a Parliament conveened, which ratified all the acts of that meeting
at Glasgow, and inserted in their Registers the oath which every minister, at
his admission was to swear thus, I A, B. admitted to the Kirk of D. testify and
declare in my conscience, that the right excellent, right High, and mighty
Prince, James the sixth, by the grace of God King of Scotland, etc. is the
only lawful supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in matters Spiritual
and Ecclesiastic, as in things temporal, and that no foreign Prince, State,
nor Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within Realm. And
therefore I utterly renunce and forsake all foreign Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiorities, and authorities, and promise that from this forth, I shall and
will bear faith and true allaidgeance to his Highness, his aires, and lawful
successors: And to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences, and authority, granted and belonging to his
Highness his aires and lawful successors, or united and annexed to his
Royal Crown. And further, I acknowledge and confess to have and to hold the
said Church, and possession of the same, under God, of his Maj. and his Crown
Royal of this Realm. And for the said possessions I do homage presently to
his Highness in your presence, and to his Majesty, his aires, and lawful
successors shall be true. So help me God. And also I A, B. now admitted to the
Church of C. promises and swears to E. F. Bishop of that Dioecy obedience,
and to his successors in all things lawful. So help me God.

Anno 1616. There was a meeting of the ministers at Aberdeen, appointing that a
book of Common Prayer be made, and that children should be confirmed by the
bishops or visitors in their name.

But the year before this, the former commission, for the High commission was
renewed, and instead of the two Courts in the two Provinces of Saint Andrews
and Glasgow, there is one appointed, consisting of 55 or 56. one of the
Archbishops is sine quo non, and he and other five may do all; Such as refuse
to compeer are sisted by force, by the Sherifs, and other magistrates. They
meddle with blasphemy, heresy, schism, error, Idolatry, simony, lotry,
absence from the Liturgy on holy Days, perjury, incest, adultery, fornication,
rapes, clandestine marriages, stricking of clergy men, speaking against their
meetings. They have power to excommunicat, silence, depose, sine, imprison, and
confine as long as they please, and the Secret Council must pursue the
contumacious as rebels.

Anno 1617. A Parliament conveeneth, at which the King himself is present, and
makes an act [That whatsoever his Maj. should determine in the external
government of the Church with the advyce of the archbishops, Bishops, and a
competent number of the ministry, should have the strength of a law] when the
honest ministry hear of this, and see thereby a door opened for bringing in all
the English-popish Ceremonies, they give in a Protestation against the same,
which when the king hears he causes the Clerk pass by that act, when he was
to read all the rest. And now the king is violent for the Ceremonies, and
chideth the Archbishops for not receiving the five articles, as he commanded
the former year: and they promise to do it, if he would indict a General
assembly. And upon Mr Galleway's undertaking the king indicteth a meeting at St
Andrews Nov. 25. 1617. At this assembly no more could be gotten yielded to, but
private Communion, and that ministers should give the Elements in the Lords
supper out of their own hands to each Communicant. But all this did not satisfy
his Maj. and therefore he wrote sharp letters, to the Archbishops and
commanded them to preach on Christ-masse day, and to celebrat the Lord's supper
with all the solemnities.

Anno 1618 there is another meeting called at Perth August. 25 unto which the
king sent seven Noblemen, and fifteen Barons, and Gentlemen, Spotiswood took
upon him to moderate, and read the kings minacing letter, and named a Committee
for the articls, nothing regarding the liberty of the assembly, to gratify the
king. The honest party offered reasons both for a delay, and against the
Ceremonies, but all in vain: Spotiswood told them that he would send all the
names of such as refused, unto the King, and asked the votes of many who had no
Commission, and so obtained what the desired, for all accorded unto the five
articles viz: kneeling at the Communion, private Communion, private Baptism,
observation of Holy days, and Confirmation of children, except one Nobleman,
one Doctor. 45. ministers. But when the honest party looked back to the many
informalities at this meeting. 1. No lawful premunition, but only 20 days,
by which means many were absent. 2. No liberty to choose a moderator. 3. No
free disputing or voteing, but members overawed, 4. The assembly prelimited by
the votes of the articles. 5. Such as wanted Commissions did vote, and others
who had Commissions, were not suffered to vote etc. they looked upon it as no
lawful General assembly, and published their reasons in print.

After the dissolving of this meeting; Spotiswood, to make all sure; ratifieth
all these things in the High Commission, and though he and others had said,
that if they would give way to the passing of the act to humore his Maj. no man
should be compelled to obey, yet now by the power of their High Commission,
they force many to obey, under the pain of deposition, imprisonement, and
confinement, and so they rage without all law.

But at length Anno 1621. there is a parliament conveened, unto which the
Honest ministers give in a supplication for safe liberty to enjoy the true
Religion, as Reformed in Doctrine, Saoraments, and discipline, and openly
professed, sworn, and practiced, by Prince, Pastor, and people of all ranks,
without Innovations: and that they would not suffer the faithful honest
ministers to be smitten, and the stocks to be committed to wolves: and blind
guides. But July 24. they were all discharged forth of the town by open
proclamation: The presenter of the petition Mr Andrew Duncane minister ar Crail
was incarcerated. When the ministers remove conform to the proclamation, they
leave in write behind them strong reasons why the Parliament should not ratify
the acts of the pretented assembly at Perth, and show both the nullity of the
assembly in point of formality, and the illegality of any such Ratification, as
being against several acts of Parliament, his Maj. proclamation published and
printed, and the National Covenant, and upon several other grounds. As also
they leave a most Christian and faithful admonition to the well affected
Nobility, Barons, and burgeses members of Parliament, unto constancy and
faithfulness. Yea moreover in case all this should not prevail, they leave a
Protestation in write: but the minister who had it to present got not access,
and so was forced to affix Copies thereof upon public places of the town.

But notwithstanding of all this, there is a fixed resolution to have these
articles ratified, which made some honest members with draw: several
informalities are used, contrary to the usual freedom of Parliament, much
pains taken to gain some, and after the report was made to go, that the
Parliament would not rise for several days to come, which made several
members the more secure; Saturday the 4 of August. was pitched upon, as the
fittest time, for closeing of the business, and all the articles are put
together, and the question stated Aggree or Disaggree, and what by one way and
another the acts are ratified. But observable it was how the Lord did give his
Protestation against this ratification from heaven (though Spotiswood
blasphemously paralleleth it unto the Lords showing of himself at the giving of
the Law) for at the very instant when the kings Commissioner arose to touch
this act with the Scepter, there came in at the windows a great lightening,
and after that another greater, and then a third most terrible: Immediately
there followed an extraordinary darkness astonishing all. The lightenings were
seconded with three terrible claps of thunder, and then their came an
extradinary great shower of hail, and after all this such a terrible shower of
rain, that made the streets to run like rivers, by which means the parliament
was constrained to stay within doors, an howr and an half, and went home
thereafter without their robes.

Upon the 20 of August, when these acts were published at the Cross, the
minister, who was entrusted with the Protestation, affixed a copy thereof upon
the Church door, and another upon the Cross, and a third upon the Palace gate
of Haliroodhouse, and took Instruments in these words [Here in the name of the
brethren of the ministry, professing the Religion, as it has been practiced in
our Church, since the Reformation of the same, I protest against all these
things, that have been concluded, in prejudice of our privileges, since the
first Reformation thereof, and adhere to my former Protestation made and fixed
on the Tolbooth door, and other places, and to all the Protestations made in
favors of the Church, in the time of the preceding Parliaments] And God from
heaven did declare his dissent, for dureing the time of the reading of these
acts there was nothing but thunder, fire, lightenings, and rain. And
thereafter the Lord made the whole country feel the weight of his anger, for
the corns did rott through excessive raines: waters became so great that they
sweeped away in several places corns, cattle, houses, plenishing, people and
all. The great bridge of Perth where these acts were first concluded was taken
away, and never repaired to this day, yea and the whole town almost drowned,
many of the Sea-townes which favored the Articles, received great damage by
Sea. And there followed three years dearth and famine, and Epidemick diseases,
whereof many died. Thus did the Lord plead from heaven his controversy, and
testify his displeasure against those courses.

But notwithstanding of all this, the Prelates, having now all power in their
hands, prosecute their work, and tyrannize over all ranks, so as the
inhabitants were more affrayed of crossing their commands, then the commands of
the king himself, for they banished out of their bounds such gentlemen as they
pleased, imprisoned what magistrates they thought fit, upon any light occasion,
were it but the hearing of their own old minister, after he had been silenced
by the bishop, or the not sisting of one, though their own father, before their
tyrannical Court.

Now is there a black cloud over the Church for many years, piety is daily
decaying, formality, and profanity increasing, the godly are mourning and
lamenting, and the wicked rejoyceing. But the Prelates have not yet ended their
purpose.

For Anno 1633. when King Charles was present at a Parliament, there is an Act
carried through (but not without some opposition made thereunto by some of the
Nobles) granting power to his Maj. to command what habits he pleases for all
men in office, whether in Church or State, and that as a privilege annexed to
the Crown, and by this means a door was opened to bring in the Surplice, the
Corner cap, and other trash. These worthies being traduced by the Prelates, as
contemners of authority, and sowers of sedition in Church and State, procure
the kings displeasure by their freedom; For the king did not only chide them
openly, but with his own hand he wrote down their names, as disloyal subjects;
which made these Nobles think of drawing up a supplication, which being drawn
up by William Haig his Maj. solicitour, was committed to the trust of the Earl
of Rothes and Lord Loudoun to present it as they found convenience, but they
perceiving that it would not be well accepted resolved to keep it up: But at
length some way or other a copy thereof comes to the Bishops hands, and they
deliver it unto the king, and withal complain of those Noblemen, as standing
in the way of his subjects yielding cheerful obedience: And upon their
importunat requeests, there is a Commission granted to certain persons, as a
committee to proceed against the Authors and abettors of that supplication, as
guilty of sedition and treason. Whereupon William Haig flees, and all his
goods are confiscat. Some Noblemen are questioned, and the Lord Balmerino who
had the supplication in his custody, is imprisoned and at length condemned to
die, but obtains pardon.

Now the prelates do reign, there being none who durst peep, or move a wing
against them. The Achprelate of Saint Andrews was Chancellor, other eight of
the prelates were in great places, being either Lords of the privy Council, or
Lords of the Exchequer: and being thus lifted up in power and honor, they are
puffed up with pride, and what durst they not attempt now (think they)
Therefore they proceed to do more wickedness, and draw up a book of Canons,
which was printed, and approven by the Kings Maj. and all were commanded to
obey the Bishops in all points. By this book that which remained of
presbyterian government is taken away. Parochial Sessions, and Classical
Presbyteries are accounted Conventicles; Ruleing Elders and Deacons are cast
out of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical causes are brought only to the
Pelats tribunal. So were they about the drawing up of a Liturgy, and a Book of
Ordination, against which, before ever they were printed, or seen, all were
discharged to speak under the pain of Excommunication. And at length, the book
of Common Prayer is published and imposed on the Church by the kings command,
as the only form of public divine worship. Every Parish is commanded to have
two at least of these books, under the pain of horning and being punished as
rebels: And a strict command comes forth, enjoining the same to be used from
Pasch and forward Anno 1637. But some of the Prelates as of Rose and Dumblaine,
did anticipate the day, and made use of it in their Cathedralls, Others of the
Prelates propone the matter to their Synods: but the Ministers replied that such
a change should not be made without a National Assembly; but it was answered
that they were the Representatives of the Church: However some prelates gave
Ministers liberty to advise until. October. but through the furious importunity
of some a letter is procured from his Maj. commanding the useing of the Liturgy
with all expedition in the Churches of Edinburgh: The Ministers being called to
see what they would do, such as refused are presently suspended.

SECTION II.
The way how the Lord brought down these Prelates and the History continued.

IT was sad and lamentable to see what a face the Church of Scotland had now:
No hedge of Discipline to keep the vineyaird from foxes, and wild boars, all
the Discipline which was, was tyranny over consciences, and over men's persons,
and estates, profanitie was not curbed, but encouraged, Prelates themselves
being chief in all those crying abominations, as will be cleared ere long: yea
that poor Church was now posteing fast to Rome. The Prelates and their
underlings, beside the points of Arminianisme (which were accounted special
pieces of their qualification) did avow openly several points of Popery; so
that it was taught publicly in the chief City. That the Pope was not
Antichrist. And thus all things were growing worse; the worship corrupted and
like to be corrupted more, and the minds of people were filled with fears,
that God would depairt, and leave that Church altogether; so thattheir case
looked most deplorable, and desperate like. But asoftentimes the Church and
people of God have found him, who was the hope ofIsrael, and the Savior
thereof in times of trouble, a ready help in time of need, so did the poor
Church of Scotland find it now by experience, that when the storm was sorest,
it was nearest an end, and that this was as the dark hour before the dawning
of the day: for now the Lord awaketh as one after wine, and looks through the
cloud with Compassion on a long tossed, and sorely afflicted Church, which had
groaned under oppression of cruel taskmasters, till they could do no more,
and shows that his hand was not shortened, that it could not save, but that
he was the hearer of prayer, and that now his appointed time was come, to take
vengeance on his adversaries, even the vengeance of his Temple: And as
ordinariely the Lords great works appear to carnal reason to be despicable at
the beginning; so the Lord began this great change and alteration of affairs
in that poor Church, in a way that seemed not to promise much, yet such a way
it was as the hand of God was to be seen in it, and seen carrying of it on
wonderfully as shall appear.

In obedience to his Maj. last letter, which commanded the reading of the
liturgy in all haste, the Bishop of Edinburgh, the first sabbath day
thereafter resolved to do it, and when he begins, there arises a tumult
among the people, begun by some women, which increased so as that the prelate,
when he came out of the Church, did hardly escape, and in the rest of the
Churches of Edinburgh the reading was stopped: Immediately after dinner the
Secret Counsel did meet, and resolve to search out the authors of this tumult,
and commanded the use of the service book, and all to speak reverently of the
Bishops; but, notwithstanding of this, the people rage more then ever, against
the Prelates, and after the afternoons sermon they set upon the Prelate with
stones, and forced him to flee.

About this time, in other pairts of the Kingdom the ministers and honest
people, who were urged, and could not give obedience, resolved to follow a more
regular way, and to supplicat the Council, and to give in a note of the
errors contained in these books, which accordingly they did: so from several
pairts of the Kingdom, there came Ministers and professors with
supplications, sheweing how erro^ons both the liturgy and the other books were,
and how dangerous a thing it was, to bring in Innovations in a Church, how the
Reformed Churches of Austria were undone by the violent obtiusion of a liturgy;
how in the time of Charles the Great, the Church was miserably rent, some
adhering to the Ambrosian Li^gy others choosing the Roman of Oregorian
Liturgy; how dangerous it was to change the Worship, and bring in a worse; and
how the King four years before, at his Coronation, did solemly swear that he
would alter nothing in the Kingdom of Scotland, without the free consent and
advice of those having Interest. Unto these Supplications the Council at first
gave a favorable answer, and told that it was not their mind; to press the
public use of these books, and that they had forbidden the Bishops to press
the use of these books any more, and that they had signified their mind to his
Maj, and were expecting a return. The petitioners likewise sent their
supplications to his Maj. with the Duke of Lennox, who was then returning to
London, and withal did wreastle with God by prayer and fa^ing that he would
incline the Kings heart to hearken unto their just desires, and would frustrate
the endeavors of their adversaries. But when the express comes from his Maj.
all the answer they get, is, an Edict published Octobr 18. commanding them to
go out of the town of Edinburgh within few hours, under the pain of
Rebellion. When the Petitioners see this, the next day, they resolve to act all
together jointly, that his Maj. might know it was not a few Puritanes (as the
impure Prelates were pleased to nickname them) but a great mulitude of his Maj.
most loyal subjects of all ranks, who were dissatisfied: And they draw up a
complaint against the prelates, and desire liberty of the Council to pursue
them legally, as being the only authors of the Book of Canons, and liturgy,
which contain the seeds of Superstition and Idolatry, and as being guilty of
many other crimes, and that under the highest perrill: And withal they show
the Council that they could not leave the town, until they saw some course
taken for delivering the land from the present and imminent dangers. When the
Council saw that the number of the Petitioners was great, and daily
increasing, fearing the worst, they desired the petitoners would choose some of
their number as their Commissioners, to prosecute their business, that the
multitude might depairt, and this was yielded unto. But ere long the Council
is discharged by an Express from his Maj. to meddle any more in that matter:
Whereupon the Supplicants are necessitated to draw up a Protestation, declaring
that if any tumult arose, through their prosecution of the Cause, the Council
only might be blamed, as refusing justice. When the Counsel hears of this,
they resolve to hear the desire of the Commissioners, and advise the Bishops to
withdraw themselves. When the Commissioners compeer, they show their Intention
was to prosecute their business against the Prelates, whom they would prove
guilty of grievous crimes, under the highest perrill, and therefore desired the
prelates might be excluded, it not being fit that parties should be judges, The
Council, because of the forementioned Express, might do nothing: Only they
write to his Maj. who thereafter sends for the Earl of Traquair; but he, for
fear of the Prelates did misrepresent the Cause of the Supplicants, and returned
with a Proclamation from his Maj. which he caused publish at Sterlin (where the
Council was sitting) in Febr. 1638, In which Proclamation the King owned the
books which the petitioners did supplicat against, and condemned the meetings
of the Supplicants, as conspiracies contrary to the laws of the Land: Against
this the petitioners prepared a Protestation, a copy whereof was affixed at the
Cross of Sterlin, and herein protested against these Books, as full of
errors, as Innovations; against their refusing to receive libells against the
Prelates; against the High Commission Court obtruded on Scotland contrary to the
fundamental laws of the land, without any Municipall law: That prelate should
not be judges in their own cause: And that all their own meetings were lawful:
And that they could not forbear with a good conscience, unless they should
wrong the Glory of God, the honor of his Maj. and the liberties of kirk and
Kingdom. And because they were commanded to depart forth of the town of
Sterlin, they go together toward Edenburg, and there after serious thoughts
they find the maine procureing cause of all these calamities, to be the
violation of the National Covenant, and therefore unanimously they resolve to
renew that Covenant, and accordingly they draw it up, with some explicatory
additions, and confirmations out of the acts of Parliament, and bind
themselves [to adhere unto, and defend the true Religion, and (forbear^g the
practice of all novations already introduced in the matters of the worship of
God, or approbation of the corruptions of the public government of the Kirk,
or civil places and power of Kirkmen, till they be tried and allowed in free
Assemblies and in Parliaments) to labor by all means lawful to to recover
the purity and liberty of the Gospel, as it was established, and professed
before the foresaid Innovations] and promise and swear to contino^ in the
profession and obedience of the foresaid Religon, ^resist all contrary errors
and corruptions, and that they had no intention to attempt any thing, that
might turn to the dishonor of God, or to the diminution of the Kings
greatness and authority, and to defend themselves mutually in the same cause,
etc. When the Covenant is thus drawn up it was subscribed by all present, and
copies thereof were sent to such as were absent, and being read in the Churches
was heartily embraced and sworn, and subscribed with tears, and great joy.
Great was this day of the Lords power, for much willingness and cheerfulness
was among the people; so as in a short time few in all the land did refuse,
except some Papists, some aspiring Courteours, who had no will to displease the
King, some who were addicted unto the English rites and Ceremonies, and some
few Ministers who had sworn the oath at their entry which was mentioned Anno
1612. Yea such willingness was among the nobles and others, that they had their
own copies of the Covenant, subscribed by others of the Nobles, Barons, and
ministry laid up in their Charter chists, where possibly many of them are at
this day.

When matters are at this pass, the Prelates do animate his Maj. to a war: and
the Covenanters desireing his Maj. might be rightly informed wrote unto the
Duke of Lennox, marquis of Hamilton, and the Earl of Morton, to know if his
Maj. would accept of a supplication, and sent one unto them to be presented by
them, but the king would not look upon it, at length he is moved to send the
marquis of Hamilton down toward Scotland, to labor by all means to setle
peace; But in the mean time, there is a ship sent from London with Ammunition;
unto the Castle of Edinburgh which because not usual, was taken notic of; and
the Covenanters, fearing the worst resolved to watch the Castle, that none of
it should be taken in. When Hamilton comes down, the Covenanters petition for
a free General Assembly, and a lawful Parliament. He replyeth, that he was
not able to grant either, unless they would render back their subscribed
Covenant, but this they could not do, without open perjury: So that he
resolves to return, but first July 4 he published a Declaration, against
which, contrary to their resolution (for they were made to believe it was some
other thing then indeed it was) they drew up a Protestation, and hearing that
the Council had approved of the said proclamation, they prepare a
supplication, but the Council did not suffer the Act to be recorded, but did
tear it in Pieces, and thereafter Hamilton, and the most part of the Council
declared solemnly that the act of the Council was no approbation of the same,
but a warrant to the Clerk to cause publish it.

When the Marquis of Hamilton was going back to London again, he promises to
procure a warrant from his Maj. for a General assembly before the 22 of Septr,
otherways they should have free liberty to appoint one themselves: And when,
according to his promise, he returns again, he brings a proclamation with
him, tacitly condemning all the proceedings of the Covenanters, and marring
the freedom of an Assembly; and therefore the Covenanters were constrained to
make use of a Protestation against it, Sept 22. On the same day also did the
Council publish his Maj. Indictment of an Assembly to be holden at Glasgow
Nov. 21. and of a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh the 15 of May thereafter
Anno 1639. As also a new engine is used for disappointing the Covenanters in
their explicatory addition viz. The Council at the Kings command subscribe the
National Covenant, and the bond for his Maj. preservation, and appoint
Commissioners to see it done through the Kingdom, but withal there is a
clause added viz. [We subscribe the Confession of faith, of, and according to
the date and tenor, Anno 1580. and 1590. and as it was then professed within,
this Kingdome] supposing (but by a gross mistake) that at that time Prelacy,
and Ceremonies were then professed: But the Prelates, fearing this would not
abide the trial desired the Council to sign a writing, obligeing themselves
to defend Episcopacy, S^o show that Episcopacy is not abjured by the Covenant,
b^ (...) de^e was not granted.

At the day appointed the Assembly at Glasgow is opened up, notwithstanding of
some indirect means used by the Prelates to hinder it. The Prelates being
summoned, compeer not, but decline the Judicatory. Within some days the
Marquis of Hamilton being the Kings Commissioner offers to dissolve the
Assembly, and charge them to depart, and so removes himself: but though this
was very astonishing, yet they did resolve to hold the Court of Christ, and in
so doing (...) obey God ^ather then man: and then did take into consideration
the grounds of the Declinature, which may be seen atlength in printed papers,
and in Mr Spangs Historia Motu^, etc. Upon the 29 of Nov. his Maj. Commissioner
published a Proclamation commanding their dissolution, against which there is a
Protestation drawn up, answering what was allaidged in the Proclamation.

The assembly do proceed, and, after some search, find that all these Meetings
of ministers which had brought in these Innovations that had troubled the
Church so much, were no lawful General Assemblies, by sundry reasons
confirmed by the Registers of the Assembly, by the books of presbiteries, by
the Kings Maj. own letters, and by the testimony of diverse old Reverend
ministers verifying the same i^ the face of the Assembly; and so declared that
these meetings at Lithgow 1606 and 1608, at Glasgow 1610, at Aberdeen 1616, at
St Andrews 1617, and at Perth 1608. were from the beginning unfree, unlawful,
and null Assemblies. The reasons are more fully to be seen in the printed
Records of the Assembly. Likewise they condemn the book of Comm^n prayer,
because de^ysed and brought in by the pretended P^ts, without direction from
the Church; and press^d on Ministers without warrant from the Church; because
(...) contained a Popish frame, and form of divine service, many Popish
errors, and ceremonies, the seeds of manifold and gross Superstition and
Idolatry, and so repugnant to the Doctrine, Discipline, and order of the
Church, to the Confession of faith, constitutions of General Assemblies, and
acts of Parliament establishing the true Religion. So do they condemn the book
of Canons, as devised by prelates (without warrant and direction from the
General Assembly) to establish^ ^nicall power in their own persons over the
worshipe of God, men's consciences, liberties, and goods, and to overthrow the
whole Discipline and government of the Church by Gene^ll and provincial
Assemblies, by pre^biteries, and Sessions, and (...) contrary to the Confess^
of faith, the established go^nement, the Book of Discipline, and the acts and
Constitu^ons of the Church. So they condemn the Book of Consc ^tion and
Ordination, as being in^ced without wa^ civil or Ecclesiastic, establi^hing
off^es in God^ house without warrant of hi^ word, as (...) to the Discipline,
and Constitutions, of the Church, and as impeding the entry of fit and ^orthy
men to the ministry, and the discharge of their duty ^er their entry. They
condemn the High Comm^ as ^cted without the conseur of Church or State, as
subverting the ordinary Church Iudicatories, as arbitra^y and not regulated ^y
laws civil or Ecclesiastic, as giving to Church men the power of both swords,
and to persons merely civil the power of the Keys, and so as unlawful in it
self, and prejudicial to the ^ties of Christ's Church and Kingdom, and the
Kings honor in ^taining the established laws and Iudicato^ies of the Church.
^o do they show and declare that the five Articles or ceremonies ^cluded at
Perth (of which mention was made before) were ^jured by the Not. Covenant, as
may be seen at length in their. 17. Act. As also they declare (act 16.) That
Episcopacy ^s abjured by the Confession of faith or National Covenant Anno
1580. which shall be more fully cleared afterward. So ^ving examined and
discussed the several processes given in a^inst the pretended prelates, They
depose and Excommunica^ Mrs Spot^swood of St Andrews, Lindsay of Glasgow, ^dsay
o^ ^enburgh, Sidserfe, of Galloway, Maxwell of Rosse, and (...) of Brichen, for
breach of the Cautions aggreed on in the Assembly 1600. for receiving
Consecration to the office of Episcopacy, pressing the Church with Innovations.
Particularly Mr Spotiswood for open and ordinary profanation of the sabbath,
drinking over late in taverns, venting atrocious slanders, interlining and
changeing the Acts of the Assembly at Aberdeen, facrilege, Simonie, and
conniving at Heterodoxies. Mr Linsday of Glasgow for oppressing of the
Consciences of the Ministers in his Dioecy, extorting money from some
ministers, withholding stipends from others, oppressing his Vassals, and
forceing Probationers to swear some idle and vain oaths, which he had
invented. Mr Lindsay of Edinburgh for admitting none to the ministry but such
as would first take upon them the order of Deacons, for bowing at the Altar,
useing the Rotchet and other Masse-cloths in time of divine service,
consecrating Temples, useing the Rite of Elevation at the Celebration of the
Lords Supper, conniving at Heterodoxies, and maintaining the Ubiquity of
Christ's body. Mr Sideserf of Galloway for open and ordinary prophaneing of the
Lords day, exercing tyranny in his Dioecy, conversing with Excommunicated
papists, and defending all the Arminlan and many popish opinions. Mr Maxwell
for kneeling before the Altar, wearing popish garments, playing at Cards and
Dice on the Lords day even when the Sacrament had been given, oppressing his
vassalls, keeping friday fasts, and defending all Arminian, and many of the
most gross Popish opinions. Mr Whitefoord for such flagitious crimes, as were
notour to all. So do they depose and Excommunicate. Mr Ballantine of Aberdeen,
and VVedderburne of Dumblane for the general crimes, and particularly Mr
Ballantine for Simony, for suspending Ministers, because they kept a fast on
the Lords day dedicating a Chapel, freeing Papists suspected of Incest from
Church censures, and turning such an Apostate after he had appeared once so
zealous for the truth. Mr VVedderburne for concurring with Mr Maxwell in
drawing up the book of Canons, swearing, profancing the Lords day, and
commending Arminianisme, and many points of Popery. So do they depose Mr
Lindsay of Dunkell and Mr Abernethy of Cathnes, Mr Guthry of Murray, Mr Grahame
of Orknay, Mr Fairly of Argile, and Mr Campbell of the Isles, as for the
general crimes common to all, so in particular Mr Lindsay for Simony, Mr
Abernethy for Simonie, Mr Guthry for being the first who did put on the
Surplice in Edinburgh Anno 1633. and professing he would be yet more vile to
please the King. Mr Grahame for profancing the Lords day, sacrilege, conniving
at adultery. Mr Fairly for oppressing Intrants with new oaths, profancing the
Lords day, and defending the Arminian opinions.

Thus are those enemies to Church and State, after they had oppressed, and
tyrannized over that poor Church for a long time, wonderfully brought under her
feet. So let all thine Enemies perish o Lord.

And now being filled with rage they all (except some few who had acknowledged
their wrong) run to Court, and stir up his Maj. to make war against Scotland,
and accordingly war is concluded both by Sea and Land, free tradeing is taken
away, the Scottish nobility at court are made to abjure the National Covenant,
and the Assembly at Glasgow. The English Nobility with all their forces are
commanded to meet the king at York April 10. 1639.

When the Covenanters see this preparation, they emit (...) Declaration showing
[that Religion was their only work, Conscience their only Motive, and
Reformation their Scope, that they intended no harm to his Maj. nor did they
intend to invade England (whatever their malicious enemies did say to the
contrary) and that all this was brought about by the means of some proud,
perverse, and Popishly affected Prelates.] But this Declaration was suppressed
in England, so that they might not know the true State of affairs; and there is
a contrary Declaration emitted, stileing the Covenanters seditious rebels, and
the like, which was read in all the Churches of England. Withal, the
Covenanters learn that the Earl of Huntly is made governor of the north,
that they are all declared Rebels in England; that Berwick and Carlisle
frontier cities were strongly garrisoned, that the Earl of Arundale is made
General, that the King was to Rendevouz, at York, That Huntly had already four
or five thousand in arms, That Aberdeen was fortifying it self to take in the
Kings navy, That the Papists in the South were ready to rise with the Marquis
of Douglas, and Lord Harris, and that the Deputy of Irland intended to Hand
some men in the west: And therefore after fasting and prayer, they resolved
(being in a sort the whole body of the Land, the Nobility, Gentry, Burgesses,
Commons, and Magistrates of all sorts in City and country) to put themselves in
a posture of defense, and to strengthen themselves against Invasion, the best
way they could, and to suppress the enemies within their own bosom: Wherein;
the Lord blessed them so* as their enemies both in the North and South were
compesced, and with all they did emit a Declaration vindicating themselves and
their actions from all the aspersions of their enemies, and answering, his Maj.
Declaration read in the Churches of England, that they might undeceive those of
England.

May 1639. The Kings Navy comes to Scotland with some thousands of men and
much provision. The Covenanters send a supplication to his Maj. but in vain,
for nothing is intended but fire and sword. The King approaches their borders
with an army, and the two armies are near to join in battle. But God was
pleased to prevent the shedding of blood, by moving the King to a Pacification,
wherein the King promises and declares that all causes Ecclesiastical should
be determined by Church Assemblies, and that there should be a General
Assembly every year once, and that civil matters should be determined by
Parliaments, That there should be an Assembly held at Edinburgh the 12. of
August next, and a Parliament thereafter to ratify the Acts of the Assembly
Whereupon the Scottish forces are disbanded, the Castles are surrendered, and now
the whole land looks for nothing but peace.

The Assembly is opened up August, 1639. and the Earl of Traquair is present
as his Maj. Commissioner, all these things which were before concluded in the
assembly of Glasgow, are established, his Maj. Commissioner assenting. The
Covenant was approved in all its heads and clauses, and was subscribed both by
Traquair his Maj. Commissioner, and by the Privy Council, and according to a
petition of the assembly unto the Secret Council, there is an act of Council
ordaining all in all time comeing to subscribe the Covenant, according to the
General assemblies declaration, dated August* 30 1639.

Now, according to the Pacification, it was expected that these acts should
have had the civil Sanction of the parliament which was to sit down the next
day after the assembly was dissolved viz: August: 31. But before any thing was
done by the Parliament to this effect, it is commanded to dissolve December. 18.
under the pain of treason, and so the Parliament is prorogued unto the 2 of
Jun. 1640. The Parliament, for peace, resolve to obey, but because they had
never been adjourned nor dissolved formerly without their own consent, and lest
this might be a preparative for times to come, they resolved to emitt a
Declaration for their exoneration, and caused insert it in the Registers ad
futuram rei memoriam. And withal they send some of their number unto his Maj.
with grievances, and appoint others to attend his Maj. answer at Edinburgh, and
then they dissolve having first published an Infirmation to the Estates of
England, concerning the present state of affairs. But these Commissioners,
after they had endeavored to give his Maj. satisfaction in all points,
according to their Instructions at several times, from the 20 of Febr. unto
the 23 of March. 1640. were detained, and afterward the Lord Loudoun is put
into the Toure of London and other three are put under a restrant, contrary to
the Law of Nations. A new war is intended, The Castle of Edinburgh is
fortified with a hundredth strangers more and much Ammunition. The Commissioners
of the Parliament seeing this, and hearing of an army leavyed in England under
the conduct of the Earl of Northumberland, and how the Deputy of Irland with
the Nobles there in Parliament had offered a great sum of money, and what
stir the prelates of England were making at Court, and what offers they were
making to carry on this new war, which they so far owned as to call it Ballum
Episcopale; they resolve to put the land into a new posture of defense, and
emit a Declaration for satisfaction of their friends in England, which was so
satisfactory, as that many of the lower House of Parliament then sitting,
declared that they saw no cause of a war against Scotland, and therefore would
grant no subsidy. But this parliament is dissolved, Scottish ships are
intercepted, their goods taken away, and the Seamen imprisoned, and miserably
handled, all Seaports closed up with Frigots, the Kings army advances both by
sea and land, the Castle of Edinburgh oppresses the town, and kills many
with shote. Now at the time appointed, Jun. 11. the parliament conveeneth, and
leavieth an army for a new Expedition in defense of the land, and clears the
equity of the same in a Declaration showing. 1 how they were necessitated
thereunto, being not able to live without traffic, and justice, and to
mantaine an army on the borders. 2. That the war was only Defensive, the King
being stirred up by their adversaries to break the Articles of Pacification,
to imprison their Commissioners, to call Parliaments in England and Irland for
subsidies for the war, to take their ships, and imprison their seamen, and to
give Commission to the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh to kill all he
could: when they resolved only to defend themselves, to seek a firm and sure
peace, and then to lay down arms after security had for their Religion and
liberties. 3. That they were called by the same divine Providence, by which
they had been directed hitherto. 4. That they looked upon none as their enemies
but a Canterburian Faction made up of Atheists, Papists, Arminians, and
Prelates, the seducers of the King. 5. That their end was not to wrong his Maj.
nor to enrich themselves; but Gods glory, the firm peace of both nations, the
true honor of the King, and that the enemies of both Kingdoms might be
punished. So do they emit another paper for the satisfaction of the good people
of England clearing their true Intentions: And so do advance with their Army in
to England, and take New Castle, and before they would advance toward York,
where the maine body of the Kings Army did lie, they supplicat his maj. at
length to consider their greevances; and particularly to ratify the last
Parliament, that the Scott in England and Irland might be set at liberty, and
not forced to take unlawful oaths that the Incendiaries might be punished
according to justice, the Scottish ships restored, and every thing removed
which hinders free commerce, and tradeing between the two Nations. Many of
the English Nobility and the City of London petition for a Parliament, and they
and others advise his Maj. to desist from the war. At length the King is moved
to thoughts of peace, and chooses eight English Earls and eight Lords to meet
with such as Scotland should make choice of, to conclude all matters of
difference. This Conference did begin at Rippon, and was concluded at
Westminster, the substance of which shall be mentioned presently, when it shall
be shown how these Acts were all ratified and approved by the King himself, and
his Parliament of Scotland Anno 1641.

When the Parliament in Jun. Anno 1640, had conveened at the time appointed at
the last Session, all the Acts of the former Assembly 1639. are ratifyed by
their 4. Act. They also ratify the Covenant, and the Act of Council
beformentioned thereanent, and do insert the said Covenant with the assemblies
explication in their Registers. And rescinde all Acts and Statutes made in
favors of the prelates, as Act. 23. Anno 1597. anent their voice in Parliament,
Act 2. Anno 1606. anent their restitution, the act 8. Anno 1607. anent the
Chapter of St Andrews, act 6. 1609. anent their Commissariates, the 1 Act 1612.
ratifying the acts of the pretended assembly at Glasgow 1610. the 1. and 2.
Acts Anno 1617. anent the Election of Bishops, and restitution of Chapters, the
1. act 1621. ratifying the Articles of the pretended assembly at Perth 1618.
and all others whatsoever made in their favors, and prejudicial to the
spiritual nature, jurisdiction, and Discipline and privileges of the Kirk, or
of the General, provincial, presbyteriall assemblies, or kirk Sessions, and
after the enacting of many other profitable laws, they adjourne the Parliament
unto the 19. of November. next, and then unto the 14. of January 1641. and then
unto the 13. of April following, and then unto the 25. of May, and then unto
the 15. of July, at which time the King himself was present: And in this
Session of Parliament the Articles of the Treaty are ratifyed, enacted, and
ordained to have in all time comeing the fullforce and strength of a true and
persect security, and Act of Parliament, and the King for himself and his
successors promised in verbo principis never to come in the contrary of that
Statute and Sanction or any thing there in contained. By this Treaty these
Articles were concluded, 1. That for as much as the Kings Maj. did call and
conveen a Parliament to beholden at Edinburgh the 2. of Inn. 1640. wherein
certain acts were made and aggreed upon, which acts hi^ Maj. (for the peace
and good of his kingdom) is pleased to publish in his own name, with consent
of the Estates, and therefore commands that the said acts bearing date the 11.
of Iuny 1640, be published with the acts to be made in the next Session of the
same Parliament, and that all the said acts have in all time coming the
strength of laws. 2. That the Castle of Edinburgh and other strengths of the
kingdom should according to their first foundation, with the advice of the
Estates of parliament, be furnished and used for the kingdom. 3. That all
Scottish men within England and Irland shall be free from censure for
subscribing the Covenant, and shall be no more pressed with oaths and
subscriptions unwarranted by their laws, and contrary to their National oath
and Covenant approved by his Maj. 4. That all his Maj. Courts of Justice shall
be free and open to all men, and parliaments of the respective kingdoms may try
and judge Incendiaries, and that he will employ none in his service without
consent of parliament. 5. That their ships and goods and all damage shall be
restored. 6. That the sum of three hundredth thousand pound sterline should be
given to them for their losses. 7. That all Declarations, proclamations, acts,
books, libells, and pamphlets that have been made and published against the
loyalty and dutiefulness of his Maj. subjects of Scotland should be recalled,
suppressed, and forbidden in England and Irland, and that their loyalty shall
be made known in all the parish Churches of his Maj. Dominions. 8. That the
garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle be removed. As also there is an act of
pacification and oblivion aggreed upon out of which the Scottish prelates are
excepted, as also Traquair, Sr Robert Spotiswood, Sr John Hay, and Mr Walter
Balcanquell who were cited and pursued as Incendiaries. In which act his
Majesty declares that the ensueing Parliament of Scotland shall have full and
free power, as the nature of a free parliament of that kingdom does import, to
ratify and confirm the Treaty.

Thus at length were these officers which Christ had never appointed, cast out
of Gods house, (where they had formerly caused so much desolation, and laid the
vineyaird of the Lord waste as a wilderness) both by Church and State; The King
and all ranks of People consenting thereunto; For which God, who is wonderful
in Counsel and excellent in working ought to be acknowledged, and for ever
exalted: Seeing he raised up such as were brought low, and brought down these
who had set their nests on high, whose ways had been always grievous, and who
said in their hearts, they should never be moved, God has forgotten, he hides
his face, he will never see it, Now God arose, and lifted up his hand, and did
not forget the humble, he did behold mischief and spite to require it, and did
break the arm of the wicked: The memory of which should be still fresh with,
and refreshing unto all the people of God, and ground of hope, that he who did
then make the names of these Prelates to ^ot, and to stink in the no^rils both
of Church and State, can and will again pursue his controversy against these
who now dare be so bold, as to attempt what they have attempted, after that the
Lord has put such notes of disgrace and infamy upon their predecessors.

While the Parliament of England is sitting there are several complaints given
in against the Earl of Strafford Deputy of Irland, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and both being sound guilty of points of High Treason are condemned
to die. Several Courts of Judicatory are abridged in their power, the High
Commission Court is taken away, and the Starchamber Court, and the co^ive power
of Prelates, and their Courts. The Prelates are ejected from the House of Peers,
Bills are presented to his Maj. for the punishment of the scandalous Clergy, for
the abolition of Episcopacy, and the calling of an Assembly. At length there is
a civil war begun between the King and the Parliament, occasioned through his
Maj. withdrawing from his Houses of Parliament North toward Hull. The war is
continued. In the mean time the Parliament calls together an Assembly of
Divines to consult about matters of Religion, and Church-governement, and so
carry on the begun work of Reformation. And Anno 1643. They appoint John Earl
of Rutland, Sir William Armin Baronet, and Sir Henry Vane Junior Knights,
Thomas Hatcher, and Henry Darley Esquires, with Mr Stephen Marshall and Mr
Philip Nigh members of the Assembly of Divines their Commissioners, to repear
unto the kingdom and States of Scotland, and to the General assembly there,
and their Commissioners, to propone and consult with them in all occasions
which may further the so much desired work of Reformation in ecclesiastical
matters, and a nearer conjunction betwixt both Churches. Accordingly, these
Commissioners came, and presented their propositions, and a Declaration of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament unto the General assembly Aug. 10. 1643. So is
there a letter sent from some brethren of the ministry in the Church of England
subscribed by very many hands, showing how low that poor Church was now
brought, being ready to be swallowed up by Satan and his Instruments, that the
Protestant Religion was in great hazard, and desiring very affectionately their
aid and help. August. 15. those Commissioners present some propositions to
the Assembly, which they had a little before, August. 12. presented unto the
honorable Convention of Estates, desiring that, because the Popish Prelaticall
faction is still pursueing their design of corrupting and altering the
Religion, through the whole Island, the two Nations might be strictly united for
their mutual defense against the Papists, and Prelaticall Faction, and their
adherents in both Kingdoms, and not to lay down arms till those their
implacable enemies be disarmed, and subjected to the authority and justice of
Parliament in both Kingdoms respectively. And that the two Kingdoms might be
brought into a near conjunction into one form of Church government, one
Directory for worship, one Catechism, etc. and the foundation laid of the
utter extirpation of Popery and Prelacy out of both Kingdoms. The most
effectual and ready means whereunto, is now conceived to be. That both Nations
enter into a strict Union and League according to the desire of both Houses of
Parliament, and that for prosecuting the Ends of that Union against the
Papists, Prelaticall faction, and Malignants now in arms in the kingdom of
England, their brethren of Scotland would raise a considerable force of horse
and foot for their aid and assistance.

For which Ends there are Committees appointed by the convention of Estates,
and the Genesis assembly, to meet with the commissioners of the parliament of
England by whom the form of the League and Covenant is aggreed unto and
resolved upon. Which draught Aug. 17. 1643. was approven by the Genesis assembly.
[With all their hearts and with the beginnings of the feelings of that joy,
which they did find in so great measure, upon the renovation of the National
Covenant of the Kirk and kingdom, as the most powerful mean, by the blessing
of God, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion with perfect
peace in his Maj. Dominions, and propagating the same to other nations, and for
establishing his Maj. throne to all ages and generations, and recommended unto
the Right Honorable convention of Estates, that being examined and approved by
them, it may be sent with all diligence to the Kingdom of England, that being
received and approved there, the same may be with public humiliation and all
Religious and answerable solemnity sworn and subscribed by all true professors
of the Reformed Religion, and all his Maj. good subjects in both Kingdoms.
Thereafter on the same day it was approvedby the Convention of estates, and
then sent unto the kingdom of England where after mature deliberation it was
approved by the learned assembly of Divines and by Both Howses of Parliament,
and by them in their solemn assemblies after sermon, solemnly sworn and
subscribed, and by Ordinance of Parliament sworn and suhscribed in all the
parishes of the Kingdom, and a copy thereof appointed to be affixed in every
parish Church, and also a fair Copy thereof with all the names of the members
of Parliament, who subscribed the same, is ordained to be affixed at the end of
the great Hall of Westminster. When thus it was sworn and subscribed in
England The Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly, October. 11. 1643. ordained the
same to be, with public Humiliation, and all Religious solemnities received,
sworn and subscribed by all ministers and professors within the Kirk, and for
this effect it is ordained [That the League and Covenant be forthwith printed,
and that the printed copies bound with some clean sheets of paper be sent unto
the ministry, and that every minister upon the first Lords day after the same
shall come to his hands, read and explain it, and by Exhortation prepare the
people to the swearing and subscribing thereof solemnly the Lords day next
immediately following] and ordain [that presbiteries proceed with the
censures, of the church against all such as shall refuse or shift to swear and
subscribe the same; And the Commissioners think it very convenient for good
example, and the better encouragement of others that it be solemnly sworn and
subscribed by themselves now present before the Congregation in the East kirk
upon friday next the 13 of this instant, after sermon and exhortation to be
made by Mr Robert Douglas Moderator, and that the Commissioners of the
Convention of estates now in town, and the Commissioners from the Parliament
of England, and Divines of that kingdom here present, be earnestly desired to
join with them in this solemn and Religion action.] Upon the 12 of October. the
Commissioners of the convention of Estates did also ordain the same to be
sworn and subscribed, under the pain of being punished as enemies to
Religion, his Maj. honor, and peace of the kingdoms, and to have, their goods
and ^ents confiscate, etc. and also ordain all Sheriffs, Stuarts and others
his Maj. magistrates in Brugh and land, and Committies in the several shires
to be assisting to ministers and presbiteries in procuriing real obedience
hereunto. Which deed of the Commission of the Church was ratified, and approved
by the Genesis assembly, Jun. 28. 1645. So is the deed of the convention of
estates, and their commissioners approved and ratified by act of Parl. July 15.
1644. where the League and Covenant is insert in the Registers.

Thus the kingdoms, of [Scotland and England after other means, of
Supplication, remonstrance, Protestation, and sufferings, to the end they might
preserve themselves and their Religion from utter ruin and destruction,
according to the commendable practices of these Kingdoms in former times, and
the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature deliberation resolved
and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, wherein
all did subscribe, and with hands lifted up to the most High God did swear, as
they should answer at that great day to God the searcher of all hearts. That
sincerly, really, and constantly they should endeavor in their several places
and callings. 1. To preserve the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland,
in Doctrine, worship, Discipline, and Government, and to Reform England and
Ireland, according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches, and to bring the three kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, form of Church government,
Directory for worship, and Catechizing. 2. To endeavor the extirpation of
popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness. 3. To
preserve the Rights and privileges of the Parliaments, liberties of the
Kingdoms and the Kings Maj. person and authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms, 4. To discover
all such as have been or shall be incendiaries, Malignants, or evil
Instruments, hindering the Resermation of Religion, dividing the king from his
people, and the kingdoms one from another, or making any f^on or parties among
the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
trial and condign punishment. 5. To endeavor that these kingdoms may remain
conjoined in a firm place and union to all posterity. 6. To assist such as
enter into this Covenant, and not to suffer themselves any manner of way to be
divided, or to make defection, or to give themselves to a detestable
indifferency, and neutrality in this cause, but shall continue ^in, against all
opposition, and promote the same according to their power against all sets and
impedimentes whatsoever.

When these hands did thus enter in Covenant with the great God of heaven and
earth, many of soul was converted (which was as the finite of this noble
Marriage) when they saw the wonderful works of the Lords right hand, whereby
he openly and ^nyably owned that Covenant, and such as entered into (...). Then
did these Churches flourish, and begin to have a beautiful countenance, and to
be admired abroad by strangers, who stood astonished at the report of what they
did hear daily of the Lords owneing and fighting for that Covenant, and
seconding the Covenanters in carrying on the Ends of the same. But at length,
after the Lord had by many signs and wonders testified his displeasure
against, and broken the whole strength and force of the Popish, Prelaticall and
Malignant faction, and wrought deliverances in all the three kingdoms, for the
people that engadged in Covenant with him; It seemed good in his eyes, who does
all things according to the counsel of his own will, to suffer another enemy
to arise, to trouble his Church, and to try his people, viz. the Sectarian
party, who grew to such an hieght in the English Army, that they overruled the
Parliament of England, putting away the House of Peers, they modelled the House
of Commons as they thought good, and erected a New Court, which they called an
High Court of Justice, before which they did Impannel the King, and at length
did violently take away his life Januar. 30. 1649. against which deed the
Commissioners both from the Church and State of Scotland did protest, and were
therefore hardly used at London.

When the report of this comes to the ears of the Parliament of Scotland
which was then sitting. They upon the 5. of Febr. 1649. considering that for as
much as the kings Maj. who lately reigned was contrary to the dissent and
protestation of this kingdom, now removed by a violent death; and that by the
Lords blessing there was left a righteous heir and lawful successor, Charles
Prince of Scotland and Wales and now king of Great britane france and Irland,
did unanimously and cheerfully in recognisance, and acknowledgement of his just
right, title, and succession to the Crown, proclaim and declare to all the
world that he was king of great britan, etc. their Sovereign Lord and king at
the market Cross of Edinburgh with all usual Solemnities in like cases
ordaining the same to be done in like manner in all the brughs Royal.
Immediately there are Commissioners sent over to his Maj. while at the Hague in
Holland, and when these returned without satisfaction, there are again the
next year 1650, Commissioners sent to him; while at Breda. At length he
promised to publish and testify by solemn oath his approbation of the
National Covenant of Scotland, and of the solemn league and Covenant. And
accordingly before he came a shore in Scotland, being in Shipboard at the mouth
of Spey. on the Lords day the 23. of Jun, 1650, in presence of the
Commissioners of the kingdom and Church of Scotland, and several others both
Scots and English, after Sermon, the National Covenant, and the solemn league
and Covenant being read by the minister that preached, He standing and lifting
up his right hand swore the same, in the words following, which had been
determined by the Parliament, and by the Commissioners of the General assembly
of the Church of Scotland, in their Instructions to their Commissioners, and
subjoyned to Both the Covenants.

I Charles king of Great Britain, France and Irland do assure and declare by
my solemn oath in the presence of the Almighty God; the searcher of hearts, my
allowance and approbation of the National Covenant, and of the solemn league
and Covenant above written, and faithfully oblidge my self to prosecute the Ends
thereof in my station and calling, and that I for my self and successors shall
consent and aggree to all acts of Parliament enjoining the National Covenant
and solemn league and Covenant, and fully establishing presbiteriall
government, the Directory of Worship, confession of faith, and Catechismes in
the kingdom of Scotland, as they are approven by the General assembly of this
kirk, and Parliamet of this Kingdom. And that I shall give my royal assent
to the acts of Parliament enjoining the same in the rest of my Dominons. And
that I shall observe these in my own practice and family, and shall never make
opposition to any of these, on endeavor any change thereof.

And immediately subscribed the same. And thereafter August 16. 1650. he
emitteth a Declaration from Dumfermeling wherein he expresses much of his
affection to the Covenan^ and Covenanters, and declares that he has not
sworn and subscribed these Covenants and entered into the oath of God with his
people, upon any sinister intention, and crooked design for attaining his own
ends, but so far as humane weakness will permit, in the truth and sincerity of
his heart, and that he is firmly resolved in the Lords strength to adhere
there to, and to prosecute the ends thereof, etc. In order to which he does in
the first place profess and declare that he will have no friends, but the
friends of the Covenant: And therefore as he does now detest and abhor all
popery, Superstition and Idolatry, together with prelacy, and all errors,
heresy and schism, and profaneness, and resolves not to tolerate, much less
allow any of these in any part of his Maj. Dominions, but to oppose himself
thereto, and to endeavor the extirpation thereof to the outmost of his power:
So does he as a Christian exhort, and as a King require, all such of his
subjects who have stood in opposition to the Solemn League and Covenant, and
work of Reformation, upon a pretense of kingly Interest, or any other pretext
whatsoever, to lay down their enmity against the cause and people of God, and
to cease to prefer the Interest of man to the Interest of God, which has been
one of these things which has occasioned many troubles, and calamities in
these kingdoms, and being insisted in, will be so far from establishing of the
Kings Throne, that it will prove an Idol of jealousy, to provoke unto wrath
him who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords -- The king shall always esteem
them best servants, and most loyal subjects who serve him and seek his
greatness in a right line of subordination unto God, giving unto God the things
that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and resolves not
to love or countenance any, who have so little conscience and piety, as to
follow his Interests with a prejudice to the Gospel, and kingdom of Jesus
Christ; which he looks not upon as a duty, but as flattery, and as driving
self designs under a pretense of mantaining royal authority and greatness --
he resolves to live and die with his loyal subjects in prosecution of the
ends of the Covenant -- He does esteem the service of those who first engadged
in the Covenant, and have since that time faithfully followed the ends thereof,
to be duty to God, and loyalty to him.

So Jan. 1. 1651. on the day of his coronation, the National covenant and the
Solemn league and covenant being read unto him he swore them in this following
oath, which he took in behalf of himself and his successors, kneeling and
holding up his right hand (which oath with both covenants he afterward did
subscribe) I Charles, King of Great Britane, France, and Irland, do assure and
declare by my solemn oath in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of
hearts, my allowance and approbation of the National Covenant, and of the
Solemn League and Covenant above writ^h; And faithfully obleidge my self to
prosecute the ends thereof in my station and calling; And that I for my self
and Successors shall consent and aggree to all Acts of Parliament enjoining
the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, and fully
establishing Presbyteriall Government, the Directory of worship, Consession of
Faith, and Catechismes, in the kingdom of Scotland, as they are approven by
the General Assemblies of this kirk, and Parliament of this kingdom: And that
I shall give my royal assent to Acts and Ordinances of Parliament passed or to
be passed enjoining the same in my other Dominions. And that I shall observe
these in mine own practice and family, and shall never make opposition to any
of those, or endeavor any change thereof.

Thus had the Church of Scotland all the security imaginable from a Prince,
that Prelates should never have footing again within that kingdom, and that
the begun work of Reformation should be still carried on through the other
Dominions.

But when Scotland out of conscience to their covenant had sent for the king,
the Sectarian party in July 1650 approach their borders with an Army,
thereafter overcome them in battle, shedeth much of their blood, leads many
both commanders and souldeours away captives, and keeps them in bondage full
ten years. Under which oppression they lay groaning, wishing for a day of
delivery.

At length after ten years exile the Lord returned their prince without stroke
of sword, and settled him upon his throne, which occasioned great acclamations
of joy through the whole land, seeing that now the yoke of the oppressor was
brocken, and the Lord had restored to them in a wonderful and unexpected manner
their law full judges and governors. Now were people filled with hops of good
and desirable days both for Church and State. But alace how suddenly are all
their hopes turned into fears, and their joy into mourning, how are their faces
filled with confusion, because of the sad disappointment which now they did
meet with? Their yoke begins now to be wreathed more straightly about their
necks then ever, their bondage and oppression in conscience grows, they see
with their eyes the glorious work of Reformation which had been wonderfully
carried on by the mighty power of the most High, and cemented with the blood of
his Saints (who spared not their lives in the defense and maintenance of that
cause both against malignants and Sectaries) razed to the very foundation, and
the carved work thereof brocken down with axes and hammers at once, and all
things growing daily worse and worse. Some particulars where of (though the
calling to mind, and making mention of such sad and doolfull things will
occasion fresh sorrow and grief to the people of God) as the purpose in hand
will suffer, shall be mentioned in the following Sections.

SECTION III.
The grounds of the sufferings, of such as were incarcerated by the Committy of
Estates the 23 Day of Agust 1660. discovered.

AFter God had broken the yoke of the oppressors, and had restored their own
governous, it might have been expected, that justice should have flowed down as
a river; and when the commit of Estates which had been nominated Anno 1651.
Were commanded by his Maj. to sit and order the affairs of the Kingdom until
the ensueing Parliament should meet, every one might have been in expectation
of some good following their government. But alas their little finger becomes
heavier then the loins of the former oppressors: A little taste of which there
is given on the very first day of their sitting down; for upon the 23. Day of
August. 1660. While there were some faithful and Zealous servants of Christ,
to the number of Ten Ministers, with one Gentleman, met in a private house
(where they resolved to meet that they might give the less offense) for the
drawing up of a supplication unto his Maj. wherein after their congratulating
his Maj. return, they in all humility, press and exhort him, in the fear of
the Lord, to mind his oaths unto, and covenants with God: a very necessary and
seasonable work. The committee of Estates sent thither some of their number to
apprehend those persons, and to take them to the castle of Edinburgh, where
they abode for the space of some weeks, and were afterward (except Mr Guthry)
confined to their chambers in the town, for some considerable time. This was a
terrible alarm unto the hearts of the godly, presaging sad and doolfull days
to follow, when at the very first, there is so much cruelty, exerced against
these faithful and zealous servants of Christ, who were evidenceing their love
and respect unto their Prince, in mindeing him of his vows which he had made
unto the most high, and of his duty which he did owe unto God, who had so
wonderfully delivered him: for which no colorable pretense could be allaidged
save one of those; Either that their meeting was not warranted by the laws of
the land, or that they were about a sinful work. The first could not be
allaidged with any color of law, because there was no standing law then in
force against such meetings; for whatever law there was of that nature before,
was made null and void by posterior acts of Parliament, which posterior acts
were not as yet resci^ded: and further what great wrong was it, for so many
ministers to meet together, in a private chamber for such an end, when as many
and more profane persons, will be suffered to meet daily, to drink and
debauch; and what could these worthies have suspected now, seeing the like
liberty was enjoyed while the land was under the feet of oppressors? might not
they in reason have expected as good quarters, at the hands of their own
governoursas they got from stangers and enemies; But it is like the work they
were about gave offense, it is true, they were pleased to brande it with the
names of treason and sedition, but whether it was so or not the reader will be
better able to judge, when he has pondered and considered the true copy of
their supplication which is here following.

Most gracious and dreed sovereign.
We your Maj. most humble subjects, considering the duty which, as Christians,
we owe to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is king of kings and Lord of Lords, and
which as subjects, we owe unto your Maj. as our native and lawful king under
him: We do hold ourselves bound to tender unto your Maj. this most humble
address and supplication. How hateful the actings of the late usurped powers,
in offering violence to the Parl. of Engl, in their unchristian and barbarous
murdering of your royal father, in their insolent changeing of the ancient
civil government of the kingdom of Engl. and by armed violence unjustly
secluding your Maj. there from, In their most unjust invadeing of the kingdom
of Scotland and inthralling of the same in subjection to themselves: and beyond
all, their impious incroaching on the kingdom of (Jesus Christ) and the
liberties thereof: and in promoteing and establishing a vast tolleration in
things religious, throughout those nations, unto the perverting of the precious
truths of the Gospel and defaceing of the ordinances of (Jesus Christ) and
opening a wide door to all sorts of evil, heresy, schism, imprety and
profaneness. How abominable these things were to us the Lord who searches
the heart, and tries the re^es does know, against which we gave many public
testimonies before the world, to witness our abhorrence thereof. And the same
Lord knows that as we did earnestly pray for, and breath after his appearing,
to witness against those, so (saveing that Christian pity and compassion we
owe to the persons of men, though our very enemies) we rejoice in his putting
down of them, that did set up themselves, and in staineing the pride of their
glory, and in breaking the yoke of their power from off the neck of these
Kingdoms. We hold our selves also bound thankfully to acknowledge, the Lord's
signal preserving of your Maj. person in the midst of many fold dangers and
designs threatening the same, these years past: And that after long Exile from
your own house and people, he has been pleased to bring you back to the same:
And when the foundations of the ancient civil government were overthrown,
again to make way for repaireing of the ruins, building up the breaches
thereof: and for establishing the same on right and sure foundations, in your
Maj. person and family; and to do those things when they were so little
expected, in so quiet and peaceable a way, and without the effusion of
Christian blood, and imbroyling the Kingdoms, in the misery and calamities, of
a new war. And as we adore the wonderful and wise hand of God, and bless his
name, who has done these things, so it is not only our practice for the
present: but our sincere resolution, for the time to come, to pou^ forth the
fervent desires and supplication of our soull unto the most high by whom kings
reign, for the preservation, and saiftie of your Maj. person, and for the
multiplication of his spirit and increase of it upon you: that you may employ
your power to his praise, and the comfort of his people; and for the
Establishing of your just power and greatness; and in subordination to him to
be faithful and loyal, rendering all the duties of honor and subjection and
obedience to your Maj. that are due from humble and loving subjects, unto their
native and lawful prince and sovereign. And we desire to be persuaded, and
with confidence to promise to ourselves, that your Maj. will accept of those
our professions, as proceeding from loyal and honest hearts, and allow us the
protection and countenance and encouragement in our station and callings, that
may be expected from a gracious king: And considering the great happiness that
arises both to kirk and state, and all the members thereof, by the mutual
good understanding, betuixt the supreme Magistrate, and the faithful of the
land; when it pleases divine providence so to dispose; and the many calamities
and miseries that in the holy justice, and just indignation of God, do attend
the separating or violating of these only sure foundations of states and (...)
kingdoms. We are bold in the integrity of our hearts, and in the zeal of the
glory of the Lord, and of the good of his church, and of your Maj. honor and
happiness: and from the sense of manifold and great obligations that be upon
us, before the Lord, so to do; and particularly that of the Covenant. That what
lets, we are not able of our selves, to suppress and overcome, we shall reveal
and make known, that they may be prevented and remedied. Humbly to present
unto your Maj. and make known the great danger, that threateneth religion, and
the work of reformation, in the churches of God, in these kingdoms, from the
desires and endeavor; of the remanent of the popish prelaticall and malignant
party therein, which is beginning to lift up the head, and not only to render
hateful, but to bear down many of your Maj. good subjects, who have been
employed as instruments in the work, and have kept within the bounds of their
duty, in promoveing and preserving the same, so far as humane frailty would
permit; but also to overthrow that blessed work it self and to reintroduce
prelacy and the ceremonies, and the service book, and all these corruptions
which were formerly cast out, as inconsistent with that pure and spotelesse
rule of church government, discipline and divine worshipe delivered to us in
the word of God, as a yoke of bondage that neither we nor our fathers were able
to bear: and though we know that that Spirit will not want its specious
pretenses, and plausible insinuations for compassing these ends, yet, as there
cannot readily be greater disservice to the church of God, to these Kingdoms,
and to your Maj. honor and happiness, then actings of that nature, so we
cannot without horror of Spirit and astonishment of heart, think upon what
dreadful guiltiness King, Princes, Ministers and People, shall be involved
into, and what fearful wrath shall attend them from the face of an angry and
jealous God, if after all the light that he has made to shine in these
kingdoms from his blessed word, for discovery of the error and Impiety of
these things, and after his hand has been lifted up so high, for casting out
of the same; and after solemn vows and engadgments taken upon themselves
before God, angels and men, against them; if they should again lick up the
vomit thereof. God forbid that we should either hear or see such heart
astonishing bitter things which would turn the mirth of the Lords people into
mourning; and their songs into most sad lamentations. Neither are we less
apprehensive of the endeavors of the spirit of error that possesses
Sectaries in these Nations. which as it did at first promove a vast tolleration
in things religious; and afterward did proceed to the frameing of mischief
into a law, so we doubt not, but it will still be active unto the promoving and
procuring of the same, under the specious pretext of liberty to tender
consciences; the effects whereof have in a few years past been so dreadful,
that we cannot think of the continuing thereof but with much trembling and
fear. Therefore knowing that to Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates,
appertains the purgation and preservation of religion, and that nothing can
contribute more unto the preserving and promoveing of religion, and the work of
reformation, then that all places of power and trust, be filled with men of a
blameless and christian conversation, approven integrity, and known affection
to the cause of God, We, your Maj. most humble supplicants and subjects, with
bowed knees, and bended affections, humbly supplicat your Maj. that you would
employ your royal power unto the preservation of the reformed religion, in the
church of Scotland in doctrine worship, discipline and government, and for the
reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England and Irland, in doctrine
worshipe, discipline and government; and to the carrying on of the work of
uniformity of religion, in the church of God, in the three Kingdoms, in one
confession of faith, form of church government, directory of worshipe and
catechis^ing: and to the extirpation of popery prelacy, superstition, heresy,
schism, profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine, and the
power of Godliness: And that all places of trust, under your Majest, may be
filled with such as have taken, the Covenant, and are of approven integrity,
and known affection to the cause of God. If in a matter that so much concerns
the honor of God, the good of his Church, and your Maj. honor and happiness,
we be jealous with a godly jealousy, we know your Maj. wisdom and lenity to be
such, as will easily pardon: And the sense of our duty to God, and to your Maj.
and the fear of those kingdoms transgressions, by building up again, the
things that were destroyed, constrains us to be petitioners against the same,
and earnestly to entreat that any beginnings of stumbling which already have
been given in those things, especially in the matter of Prelacy and ceremonies,
and the Servicebook, in your Majesty chapel and family, and other places of
your Dominions may be removed and taken away; And that there may be no further
proceeding in these things, which grieve the Spirit of God, and give offense to
your Maj. good subjects, who are engadged with you in the same Covenant and
work of reformation. And that your Maj. for establishing the hearts and
strengthening the hands of these who are faithful in the work of the Lord, and
for quashing the hopes and endeavors of adversaries, would be pleased to give
public signification, of your approbation of the Covenant; And of your purpose
to adhere unto the same, and to carry on the work of God in these Kingdoms
according thereunto; and that your Maj. eyes may be upon the faithful of the
land that they may dwell with you. We hope your Maj. will not take offense,
(...) we be the Lord's remembrancers to you; That you were pleased a little
before your coming to this kingdom, and afterward at the time of your
coronation, to assure and declare, by your solemn Oath, under your hand and
seal, in the presence o^ Almighty God The searcher of hearts, your allowance
and approbation of the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant,
faithfully obligeing your self to prosecute the ends thereof, in your station,
and calling; and that your Maj. for your self and Successors should consent
and agree to all acts of Parl. enjoining the national Cov: and Solemn League
and Cov. fully establishing Presbyteriall Gov: directory for Worship,
confession of faith and Cathecismes in the Kingdom of Scotland, as they are
approven by the Genesis Assemblies of this kirk. And Parliaments of this Kingdom;
And that your Maj. should give your Royal assent to acts and ordinances of
Parl. past or to be past enjoining the same in your Maj. Dominions; and that
you should observe these in your practice and family and should never make
opposition to any of those; Nor endeavor any change thereof. And we desire to
be persuaded that no length of time has made your Maj. forget. Or weakened in
your Maj. heart the sense of the obligation of the great and solemn Oath of
God in the Covenants; Yea that the afflictions where with God has exercised
your Maj. these years past, the great and wonderful deliverance, that of late
he has granted unto you, has fixed deeper Impressions upon your heart and
spirit; and that among all the kings of the earth, Reformation of Religion
shall have no greater friend then your Maj: Yea that as ye are more excellent
then the kings of the Earth, in regaird of the purity of profession and solemn
engadgments unto God, And long exercisednesse with manifold afflictions; and in
the Lord's setting you over these Kingdoms which are not only through grace,
the first fruits of the gentiles, But also are, among all we know in the
World, the most eminent for the power and purity of the Gospel: So shall your
Maj. in your Princely Station and dignity, excel them in the zeal of God and
for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: And that by how much more your Maj. by the
constitution, and good hand of the Almighty, is lifted up above the sphere of
your subjects; by so much more shall your motion be more vigorous and active,
unto the carrying about by the influence of your royal Head, and by your
example, all the Orbs of inferior powers and persons, in these kingdoms, in
subordination to God and your Maj. in the practice of godliness and virtue. It
is the desire of our soul that your Maj. may be like unto David a man according
to Gods own heart: Like unto Solomon, of an understanding heart, to judge the
Lord's people, and to discern betwixt good and bad: Like unto Iehosaphat,
whose heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord: Like unto Hezekiah, eminent
for godliness and integrity: Like unto Josiah, who was of a tender heart and
did humble himself before God, when he heard his word against Jerusalem, and
the inhabitants of Judah, and not only made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk
after the Lord, and keep his commandments, with all his heart, and with all
his soul to perform the Covenant, but also caused all that were in Jerusalem
and Benjamin to stand to it; and took away the abomination out of all the
countries that pertained to all the children of Israel; and made all that were
present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. So shall your
Maj. inherit the honor and blessing of these kings upon the earth and their
happiness in heaven; So shall your Maj. person be preserved, and your
government established over these kingdoms. Which is the unfeigned desire, and
fervent supplication of your Maj. most humble and loyal subjects.

Now the Reader having considered this humble address and supplication may
judge if there was any thing therein either treasonable or seditious reflecting
on his Maj. and on the government of the kingdom of England, or the
constitution of the present Committy of Estates, or any thing tending to the
raiseing of new tumults and re-kindleing a civil war among his Maj. good
subjects as their enemies were pleased to give it out, o^ which did deserve
imprisonement; yea whether it was not their duty and the duty of all the
Ministers of Scotland, to be thus faithful in giving timeous warning and
faithful exhortation unto their Prince, that they might have prevented, as
much as lay in them, the sad defection, which was then feared, and indeed
followed thereafter. Nether let any say, that such things might well be
gathered from their other letters; for they had nothing beside that letter,
save some scrols of a letter and some instructions to one of their number, for
no other purpose, then for the communicating of the supplication unto the
Ministers of their judgment in several Presbyteries within the Synod of
Glasgow, and for desiring their approbation thereof and concurrence therein.
This is one sad dispensation. But it is only the beginning of sorrow, and of
much woe following.

SECTION IIII.
The suffering of the Noble Marquise of Argile who was executed the 27 Day of
May 1661. examined by law.

WHile the Parliament is in hand with reverend Mr Guthri^ who had been a
prisoner since the 23 day of August. 1660 (of whom mention shall be made in the
next section) They have also the worthy and renowned Marguese of Argile among
their hands; who, though he had a maine hand in bringing home the king and
closeing the second treaty at Breda yet, while he is going up to London after
the kings late return from exile, to congratulat his Maj. return, is made
prisoner in the Tour of London and thereafter is sent down to Scotland, and
indicted of heigh treason, before the Parl. and at length is beheaded and his
head is stuck up upon the tolbooth of Edinburgh. Questionless strangers will
think it behoved to be some great matter, for which the life of such an eminent
and famous nobleman, who had been so renowned at home and abroad, for his
faithfulness and constancy in carrying on the work and cause of God, was
taken) But the very truth is, what ever was petended, the true cause was, that
which made him so famous; even his zeal and activity for the work of God in his
generation; for what ever else they had to lay to his charge, if he had either
opposed the work of God, or done as little for it, as many other, of the Nobles,
his life would not have been taken now, more then the life of others, it is
true other things were sought to color this bussinesse, and failing one,
another, and failing that, a third, but in end there is a comprehensive general
set down as the ground of the sentence, to this purpose. That he had been an
enemy to the king and his interest these 23 years or more by past, which in
effect is as much as to say; he had been an active friend for the interest of
Christ. But because generals cannot well be proved they condescended on
several particular actings of his in carrying on, in his place and station,
the work of reformation, and when all these failed, they fix upon his
compliance with the Englishes (after they had subdued the land in battle, and
forced the king out of his dominions, had garrisoned the whole land, and used
it almost as a conquest) by sitting in their parliament when chosen by some
shire, and when the rest of the shires of the land had sent their commissioners
thither. This his compliance with them, at that time, by sitting in their
judicatories, and there concurring with his advice and counsel for the good of
the land, that was now under their feet, is the only particular ground upon
which his sentence is founded, and the particular special cause pretended for
which he was condemned to lose his head as a traitor, and to have his head put
up on the top of the tolbooth as an eminent traitor. A sentence which question
less, at first veiu, may make all men of understanding astonished, and to
wonder, how ever it could have entered into the mind of the parliament of
Scotland, to sentence unto death, such a peer of the land, such an useful
member of the Kingdom, and an ornament; upon such a ground and for such a
cause. But if these four particulars be considered the matter will yet appear
more wonderful.

1. The matter of compliance with the Englishes at that time, was so far from
being accounted treasonable that several of the lawyers (among whom was one Sr
John Fletcher who was now advanced to be his Maj. advocat, and did accuse this
worthy Nobleman of treason) did swear and subscribe an oath to be faithful
unto the government, as it was then established without King and house of
Lords. Now if there had been treason really in this deed, either by the civil
law, or by the municipall laws of the land, would not the lawyers have
perceived it whose daily work and study the laws are?

2. If this had been the deed of this nobleman alone, the matter had been less
to have been wondered at, but it being such a deed whereof few of the nobles of
Scotland were altogether free: yea whereof many of the members of Parliament
his judges were guilty, the matter is beyond a parallel. It is hard to make
secios criminis sit as judges and condemn the accused: reason would require
that the table should be purged. Is it not strange for a Parliament to condemn
one for such a fault for which many of their own members might with as much
justice and equity be condemned? and is it not strange how they being by their
own confession traitors in the heighest degree, could fit, and judge others?
It is true it will be replied. That his Maj. might pardon whom he pleased, But
then it will abundantly appear that not this, But something else was the cause
of this worthy nobleman's death. Whatever may be said in point of law, yet it
will be a disput in point of conscience. If kings may pardon such crimes as do
deserve death by the law of God, or if such crimes which kings may pardon, of
their own accord, and according to their own good pleasure, do before the Lord,
deserve death.

3. If the Parliament had thought this particular worthy to bear so much
stresse, why would they have spent so much of their time in searching for other
grounds to go upon (...) and why did they not make use of this at the first?
but it is like this had never once been mentioned if they had been able to
fasten treason upon any other of his actions; and this makes it so much the
more to be wondered at, that they would condemn such a noble man for such a
particular which they would never once have named, if they could have done
their intended work, otherwise.

4. Is it not strange that of all the complyers of Scotland there was not one,
except this nobleman, impannelled upon this account, let be, put to death; yea
is it not strange that those noble Men were never once questioned who being
desired by General Monck when he was entering England with his army to
rancounter Lambert, did abjure king Charles and his interest; and this Nobleman
must die; Yea is it not yet more strange that one William Purves, who by
complying had occasioned almost ruin to many noblemen, brughs and gentlem^n,
should have been absolved by act of Parliament (as might be cleared if there
were a table of the unprinted acts set down after their acts, as is done
always, in other Parliaments) and yet this nobleman must be sentenced to
death, for complying for the good of the country.

But to speak unto the bussinesse in poynr of law let these four or five
Particular quaere's be considered and then any shall be able to perceive the
iniquity of this sentence.

1. By what act of Parliament is such a deed as this, condemned as treasonable?
By what municipall law, can any member of the Kingdom be challenged, upon the
account of treason, for treating with a conqueror for life and liberty, and
for sitting in his counsels, for the good of the country, after that he with
the rest of the body of the land, had foughten in the defense of King, and
country till no more could be done, after the whole land had been overcome at
several battles, and wholly overrun; and had acted nothing, for the advantage
of the enemy and disadvantage of the king and country before the victory
obtained; but in all points had carried as became a loyal subject contributing
all the help by arms and counsel, which was required: what act of parliament
declares such a deed as this treasonable, and such a subject to deserve death
as a traitor?

2. Was there ever such a Practique in Scotland since ever there was a king in
it? Several times was the kingdom of Scotland overrun by the kingdom of
England particularly in the days of Baliol, and at that time King Edward
caused the Nobles of Scotland swear all aidgeance unto him. But when Bruce came
to be King was there any of the Nobles questioned for treason upon that
account? And seeing there can no instance be produced out of the History of
Scotland since ever it was a Kingdom, that any subject, noble Man, or other,
was accused of high treason, for such a cause, surely this noble Man's case was
unparalleled.

3. Is not this strange considering what the principle of Royallists is? They
say that [Conquest gives a just tittle to a crown] So says D. Fern,
A^nisaeus, and Maxwell in his Sacro Sancta Regum Majestas, Cap. 17. And by this
principle Cromwell was the lawful supreme Governor of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and had just tittle and right to the Crown thereof, having now
conquered the same; and if this principle of theirs be true (which is much
questioned by their opposites) no compliance with him, could by any law in the
World, be treason against any Prince whatsomever, for obedience unto, and
concurrence with, a lawful supreme Magistrate can be treason against no man
living: How then could this noble Man be challenged upon the account of treason
for compliance? Let all the Royalists answer this, without contradicting
themselves, if they can.

4. Is there any lawyer who can produce such a definition of treason against a
Prince, or a supreme Magistrate, out of the civil law, as will condemn the deed
of this worthy noble Man, and make compliance with a conqueror for the good
and saifty of the country after all means of defense are broken and lost, an
act of treason? And since the civil law can condemn no such deed as
treasonable, the sentence given out against his noble Man, must be without all
warrant of law.

5. Are there not many countries, Kingdoms and cities that have been overrun
by their enemies, and have had their own lawful Governors put from them; and
so have been forced, to live under the feet of strangers; and has it not been
usual for them to comply with such as had the present power in their hand for
their own saifty, and the good of the place? And was it ever yet heard that
such were accused and condemned of ^reason against their own lawful Governors,
thrust from them sore against their wills, for any such compliance? And is it
not wonderful that this eminent noble Man should become a preparative unto all
the World?

So then, to put a close to this, let an appeal be made to all Governors of
Commonwealths, Statesmen, Lawyers, Casuists, Politicians, Canonists and
Quodlib^tists, yea and Royalists, if they will speak consonantly to their own
principles and their answer and interloquutour be had in point of law unto this
question. Whether or not, when a land is overcome in battle, once, again, a
third time, and a fourth time, so a^ they are forced to lie under the feet of
the conqueror, and expect his mercy, their own supreme Magistrate is forced to
flee away, for his life, without all hope of returning; and so they left
without all government but what they have from the conqueror; and when it might
have been expected that he would have ruled them, and disposed of them [jure
conquestus, as conquered] according to his own pleasure, yet he did admit such
as they thought sit to choice, to sit in his supreme Council for giving their
advice for regulating the affairs of that Kingdom, and common wealth, which is
now conquered and subdued; Can it be treason in any, when chosen by the
country, to sit in these Counsels, and advise what they think best for the
good of the country? Or can they, or any of them, be challenged, or accused,
and condemned, as guilty of heigh treason, when providence brings back the
prince after ten years absence, for acting so under the conqueror, for the
good of the land, to prevent its utter ruin, and destruction? And if the
answer shall (as certainly it will) be negative, then it is beyond all question
that the sentence and execution of this worthy noble Man, upon this sole
account, shall be matter of astonishment to all that hear of it and know the
cause thereof.

Thus a great prince falls, and within five days thereafter, a great prophet
falls as shall be shown in the next section.

SECTION V.
The grounds of the suffering of Mr James Guthry Minister at Sterlin, who was
executed the first Day of June 1661. examined.

AFter the parliament is assembled. Mr James Guthry, minister at Sterlin, who
was one of those ministers who were incarcerated for the cause above mentioned,
Sect. 3. and who after some weeks imprisonement in the castle of Edinburgh was
carried thence and imprisoned in Dundee from thence is sent for, by the
parliament and impannalled before them being accused of high treason. He was a
man who had been honored of God to be zealous, and singularly faithful, in
carrying on the work of reformation, and had carried himself straightly under
all changes and revolutions: and because he had been such an eminent one he
must live no longer; for he is condemned to die, and most basely handled as if
he had been a notorious thief o^ malefactor, he is hanged, and afterward his
head is stuck up upon one of the ports of the city of Edinbrugh where it
abides unto this day, preaching the shameful defection of these who dealt
thus with him, and calling to all who go out and in at the gate of the city to
remember their covenant with God for which he died a martyr. But it is like
many will think it behoved to be some great crime for which this eminent
servant of the Lord, was thus handled, but what if it be no such crime? yea
what if it was a duty, for which he was thus put to suffer? Reader, thou shall
hear ir, and then thou may judge. Some ten years before, he was challenged
by the King and his council for a doctrinall thesis which he had maintained
and spoken to, in sermon, and because he found them, incompetent judges in
matters purely ecclesiastical, such as is the examination, and censureing of
doctrinall points primo instanti he did decline them upon that account: This is
his crime, and for this he is condemned as guilty of high treason, and this
will be the more wonderful, if thou consider, how as thou have heard, many
worthy and precious servants of christ, did decline the King, and his council
in the days of King James, such as Mr Baleanqual, Mr Melvin, Mr Blake, Mr
Welsh, Mr Forbes and others as incompetent judges in causes merely
ecclesiasticke; and yet there was never one of them put to death. It is true
there was an act of Parliament, Anno 1584. dischargeing such declinatures under
the pain of treason: but the very next year, An^o 1585. King James himself did
emit a declaration showing that he for his pairt should never, and that his
posterity ought never, to cite summond, or apprehend any paster for matters of
doctrine. in religion, salvation, heresies, or true interpretation of
scripture, but avoucheth it to be a matter merely ecclesiastical, and
altogether impertinent to his calling: Which though not equivalent to an Act of
parliament; yet whether it may not be a supersede as to an Act, and a ground of
exemption to the subject, from the rigor thereof till the law be revived by a
posteriour act, which was never yet done, lawyers may judge. But which is more
there is an Act of Parl. Anno 1592. declareing that that former Act shall no
ways be prejudicial, nor derogat any thing to the privilege, that God has
given to the spiritual office bearers of the church, concerning heads of
religion, matters of heresy, excommunication, collation or deprivation of
ministers, or any such like essential censures, specially grounded and have
and warrant of the word of God. And which is more considerable. The parliament
1648. did disclaim any such power of judging in church matters, and took it
for an unjust challenge and charge, to say, that they took an antecedent
judgment in matters of religion, for in their letter to the presbyteries of
Scotland being their Act 16. May 11. 1648. they have these words [Neither can
it be with any truth or justice in any sort alleidged that we have in the least
measure wronged or violated, the true privileges or liberties of the church, or
any way taken upon us, the determination or decision, of any matters of faith,
or church discipline though we be unjustly charged with taking an antecedent
judgment in matters of religion.] By which every one may see that the
parliament did look upon themselves as an incompetent judge in matters of
faith or religion Primo instanti, or antecedently unto the decision and
determination of the church. And now let lawyers judge, whether, when the
parliament the supreme judicature of that land does declare themselves,
incompetent judges, in matters of religion; The Privy Council (which is a
judicature inferior to the parliament by the fundamental laws of that land,
having its original power and antiquity from the Kings Maj. and the estates of
parliament, and so is subordinat there to, and ought to be countable to, and
censureable by them, according to the 12 Act of Parl. 2. King James 4. See for
this Act 27. Parl 2. of King Charl I. 1640.) may become judges thereof and
whether, seeing by confession of Parliament they can be no less incompetent
judges, then the parliament it self, it can be truly treasonable to decline
them. Though it were granted that that Act of Parliament 1584. were no way
weakened by the other Act 1592. which yet is expressly explicatory thereof;
yet it could no ways be treasonable in him to decline the council as an
incompetent judge to him, in that case; because the Act 1584. is to be
understod in such cases only in which they are propper judges But it will be
replied that the Act makes them judges competent to all persons spiritual or
temp^rall, in all matters, wherein they or any of them shall be apprehended
summoned or charged. Answ. True, the act speaks so, in the general, and yet it
is well known, that notwithstanding thereof, any of his majesty's subjects
might decline them when cited for causes, the cognition whereof did popperly
belong to another distinct judicature such as the court of exchequer or the
Lords of the Session: so that this all is to be restricted to such causes as do
belong to them. And under it, causes purely ecclesiastike cannot be understood
because of that which the Parliament, Anno 1648. said; Parliaments know best
what causes belong to their cognition; and what does not belong to a
Parliament, will never belong to the Privy Council. If it be replied again
that the meaning of the Parliament 1584. was to give the council power in
church matters, because this act was devised of purpose to hinder ministers to
protest against the King and his counsel, as they had done before Ans. that is
true. But that will say nothing now when the Parliament 1648. has declined to
be judges in such matters; and Parliaments can best expound their own laws and
acts, and can best explain the extent of their own power, and consequently can
best declare what causes these are, of which, the Privy Council, is competent
judge, and what not; and when they declare that themselves are not competent
judges in matters of doctrine and religion, they do more then sufficiently
declare that the Privy Council is not a competent judge in those matters. But
for all this, this worthy man must die, and he dies a martyr for the truth,
against the Erastian abomination.

SECTION VI.
The sufferings of some other Ministers related.

AMong other acts of the Committy of Estates there was a proclamation, which
they caused be read, at all the church doors of the Kingdom upon the Lord's
day; in which they discharged ministers to speak or preach any thing against
them, or their proceedings: and this was to command them to handle the word of
the Lord deceitfully, to become false prophets, and to preach smooth things and
to prophecy deceits: whereby the malicious and ill affected people who did not
love their ministers were encouraged to give in delations of such and such
things as they thought good to allaidge against them as uttered in their
sermones and bring in any profane persons they pleased for witnesses. By
which means, some (though many were in no hazard thinking it commendable
prudence to be silent at such a time) were brought to trouble both by the
Commit of Estates and by the Parliament, being imprisoned or confined and
other ways hardly used though little of what was allaidged, could be proved
against them. More over there was one minister, who after the Parliament had
annulled the covenant, and passed many other acts against the work of
reformation, thought himself bound in conscience to give faithful and free
warning, and to show the greatness of the sin of backslideing and defection
from the cause and truth of God; and to protest publicly in a Ministerial way
for his own exoneration, after the example of Samuel at the commandment of God,
against the course of defection carried on, and all acts made, in prejudice of
the covenanted work of reformation: for which cause he was summoned before the
Parliament and at length condemned of treason and sedition only upon that
acount, and thereafter was banished out of all his Maj. dominions. And if any
say that ministers should have been silent and not meddled with state affairs
let the answers which famous doct. Voet: gives in his Politia Eccles. page
982. 983. etc. be considered, which are these. 1. It is the duty of Ministers
to give faithful warning unto people, Ezekiel. 3: 17, 22. 2. This was not to
meddle with the polity, but with the abuse of it by men in power. 3. Rulers no
less then others must be touched when they provoke God to wrath by their
carriage, 1 These. 5: 11. Iam. 5: 20. 1 Samuel 15: 14. Isa. 58. 1. 4. Then they
should never speak to a hundred places of scripture, which do speak so
directly against Magistrates abuseing their power. See what he says further to
this purpose there: in answering therest of the objections, and how he clears
it from Act. 7: 51. Hos. 2: 1. Dan. 3. and 6. Act. 4. and 5. and 6. Hos. 4. 15.
Iud. v. 23.

About this same time there is another minister banished indicta causa for
while he was going toward Irland upon some particular occasion he was brought
back By the command of the committee of Estates and committed to prisone until
the meeting of Parliament, and then receives summones of treason, to which
when he had desired some time to answer, he is sent back to prisone, and when
he expects to be called upon to give in his defenses, he was sentenced with
banishment out of his Maj. dominions.

And which is more to be wondered at. Neither these two ministers nor any other
who were afterward banished, as shall be shown, could ever to this day, get an
extract of their sentence, which no judicature in the world could ever have
refuised in equity and justice: yea because the power of the Parliament and
Council of Scotland could reach no further then their own bounds, and so could
banish none any further then out of Scotland; they devise another way and draw
up a bond where in the subscriber binds himself under the pain of death, to
remove out of all his Maj. dominions betwixt and such a day and not to return
without license under the pain of death, and this bond, they caused the
banished ministers subcribe, before witnesses; which they were all necessitated
to do to save themselves from worse. Judge reader if this was not both cruel
and unreasonable.

SECTION VII.
Concerning their sufferings who refuised to observe the Anniversary Day.

AMong other Acts of the first Session of Parliament, there is one for a
solemn anniversary thankesgiving, wherein they statute and ordain [That in
all time coming the twenty ninth day of May (which was the day of ^his Maj.
birth and restoration to his government) be set a pairt as a holy Day unto the
Lord, and that in all the Churches of the Kingdom, it be employed in public
prayers, preaching, thankesgiving, and praises to God, for so transcendent
mercies, and that all trade, merchandise work, handy-labour, and other ordinary
employments be forborne, and the remaineing part of the day spent in such
lawful divertishments, as are suiteable to so solemn an occasion.] Unto which
Act, many of the ministry did give obedience out of fear; But others could not
in conscience yield thereunto: not only because, it is not in the power of any
under heaven to appoint anniversary holy Days, the Creator alone having
reserved that power into his own hand, to consecrate any portion of time he
pleases, and make it holy; So as holy duties must attend it, as holy duties
and acts of worship, attend the Sabboth-day, the only holy Day which is now
warranted, by the Word of God. It is true the Church may, when God, by his
providence is calling to mourning, to fasting, or to thankesgiving, set some
time a pairt for these duties of praying, or rejoiceing, but then the time does
attend the duties called for, and the duties do not attend the time, as they
do the Lord's Day. But also because of the grounds and reasons of the
solemnizeing of that Day; which are contained in the narrative of the act, unto
which no man who had not made shipewrak of faith and of a good conscience could
consent, as every one may see, who will but ponder the Act, a part whereof (to
give but a taste of the whole) follows [The ^states of Parliament of the
Kingdom of Scotland, taking to their c^sideration, the sad condition, slaverie
and bondage, this ancient Kingdom has groaned under, durcing these twenty
three years troubles, in which under the specious pretenses of reformation, a
public rebellion, has been by the treachery of some, and mispersuasion of
others, violently carried on, against sacred authority, to the ruin and
destruction, so far as was possible, of Religion, the Kings Maj. and his Royal
Government, the la^es, liberties, and property of the people, and all the
public and private interests of the Kingdom; So that Religion it self -- has
been prostitute for the warrant of all these treasonable invasions made upon
the Royal Authority; And disloyal limitations put upon the alleagiance of the
subjects, etc.] By which and what follows, it may be obvious to all who read
and consider the said Act. That none could so much as preach on that day or
give any countenance to such a work, unless they would condemn all which had
been done for twenty three years space, in carrying on of the work of
Reformation, as being the height of treachery and rebellion, designedly and
purposely carried on, under the specious pretexts of Reformation; And what
faithful Minister durst adventure on that, to condemn King and Parliaments
Church, and State, and themselves too as treatours and rebels, unworthy to
live any longer? Can any expect that Ministers, before they be convinced of a
fault should be so rash and unadvised, as to go to pulpites, with ropes about
their necks, and declare, before all, that they had been so long (and possibly
all their days, as to some young men) living a life of rebellion, against the
lawful Magistrate, carrying on a course of ^rebellion, to the ruin of
Religion, King, and Kingdom? And can it be expected in reason, that such as
refused to countenance that day should be condemned by any who shall but
seriously consider, what are the consequences of such a compliance? Neither let
any say that it was out of disrespect to his Maj. that any Minister did refuise
to countenance the work of that day; For all of them did willingly keep a day
of solemn thankesgiving, at his coming home; And Presbyteries, and Synods did
cheerfully appoint days for that effect. That which the famous and learned
Voetius observes concerning such days in his Polit. Page ult. viz. That it
may come to pass that the time when such an anniversary day should be kept
may be a time when God calls for fasting, and mourning, then such may look
for that woe: Isa. 22: 12, 13. As rojoyce when they should mourn: is
considerable: and whether it was a fit season then to rejoice, or not, let the
Reader judge when he considers that upon the Monday before that anniversary
day, the famous Marquis of Argile was executed and upon the Saturday
thereafter. Faithful Mr Guthry was put to death. And that also which he says
against Ministers keeping a sinful fast, Page 993. Holds good here; for
Ministers were clear that this was against the common cause of God. And
therefore many who could not satisfy themselves with some fine distinctions and
evasions to reconcile themselves unto the public laws, resolved with the
primitive Christians to hazard their reputation of loyalty (as Stillingslcet
shows in his Origines Sacra, Page 321.) rather then to countenance such
impiety.

SECTION VIII.
The grounds why Ministers did resuise to go to the Prelates Courts, cleared.

A Little after his Maj. return he was pleased to write unto the Presbytery of
Edinburgh, (who were to communicate it unto the rest of Presbyteries of the
Kingdom) a gracious letter, (as it was called) wherein he promised to own and
to countenance the government of the Church as it was established by law,
whereby many took him to mean Presbyterian government; But others feared a
design to overturne Presbyterian government and to introduce Prelacy (as
afterward it came to pass) and when the Parliament did rescinde all acts, and
statutes made in favors of Presbyterian government and did devolve the power
of settling the government of the Church upon his Maj. they did by their, Act.
16. allow the present administration by Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods for
a time. But at length Mr IamesSharpe (a man who had formerly been entrusted by
several of the Ministry and confided in, as one who would prove most faithful
unto the Presbyterian interest but now had betrayed his most intimat brethren,
and laid down a course for overturning his mother Church and thereby declared
that he was a most unnatural child of that Church) and other three Ministers
with him went up to London w^ first being made and ordained Deacons, and after
that Presbyters, they are consecrated Bishops, upon the -- day of -- 1661. and
with all there is a proclamation from his Maj. of the date at Whitehall the 6
of September, Anno 1661. declareing, His Royal pleasure to be for restoreing
of the government the Church by Archbishops and Bishops as it was exercised in
the year 1637. and that he had nominated and presented persons to the several
Bishoprics of the Kingdom of Scotland of whom some have been lately
consecrated and invested with the same dignities, Church power and authority
which was formely competent to the Archbishops and Bishops in the Reigns of
his Royal grand Father and Father of blessed memory, and that the allowance of
Presbyteriall government is now of itself void and expired, as being only for a
time, etc. And so the jurisdiction and exercise of Church government should be
ordered in there spective Synods Presbyteries and Sessions by the appointment
and authority of the Archbishops and Bishops according to their privilege and
practice. In obedience to which proclamation. The Privy Council, Ian. 9. 1662.
did make public intimation thereof and discharge all ecclesiastical meetings
in Synods presbyteries and sessions, until they be authorized and ordered by
the Archbishops and Bishops upon their entry unto the government of their
respective seas which is to be done speedily. Whereupon at the time of the
meeting of the provincial Synods, noblemen and others were sent to raise them
by force.

But thereafter when these four return from London, and consecrat the rest,
there were acts made in the second, session of Parliament viz. Anno 1662.
redintegrating them to the exercise of their episcopal function, and to all
their privileges, dignities, jurisdictions, and possessions due and formerly
belonging thereunto: as also there is an act ordaincing all ministers to
repair unto the diocesian assembly and concur in all the acts of Church
discipline as they should be thereunto required by the Archbishops, or Bishop of
the diocese, under the pain of being suspended from their office and benifice
till the next diocesian meeting, for the first fault, and if they amended not,
to be deprived, and the Church to be declared vacand. But notwithstanding of
this act, all such ministers as resolved to keep a good conscience, did forbear
to go unto these meetings, or unto the other meetings, which they call
exercises, in which meetings, the prelate, and such as he named, did not only
preside, but ruled as they pleased; Not only because the privileges of the
judicatories were encroached upon, and wronged by the Prelate, presideing at
his own hand, without the consent of the rest, contrary to the constant
practice of that Church, and because a constituent member of these judicatures
viz the ruleing elder was excluded, contrare to the principles of presbyterian
government, the practice of that Church from the beginning, the practice of all
other reformed churches, and of the primitive Church, and contrary to the
judgment of many eminent divines both there, and abroad, who have clearly made
it to appear out of the scriptures that Christ has instituted such officers.
(and these should have more weight, then those three mentioned by the author of
the Seasonable case page 11. as of another judgment.) But also because these
meetings now differ from the meetings and judicatories which the Church had
before, not only in name (they being now called do^sian meetings, and not
Synods and Presbiteries) but also in thing. The former judicatories are razed,
and overturned, and these new meetings are erected upon a new Basis the Kings
power and perogative to setle what form of Church government he thinks best;
and they are now authorized and ordered by the prelates: and so they are pieces
and parts of the prelaticall government, and therefore they are distinct from
what they were before: So that no minister that made conscience of his covenant
and vow for presbyterian government and against prelaticall could with peace and
freedom, keep or countenance these meetings.

It is replied by the prelates procurator, the new casuist in his pamphlet
called the seasonable case etc. page 12. That the meetings now and before are
of the same constitution, nothing altered, nor any more holding of Bishops now
when the Kings Maj. has taken off the restraint which for a time, he putt on,
then if he had not at all restrained them. But this is no satisfactory answer
his meet deny all will not avail much with indifferent men of understanding,
for the difference is clear: because 1. formerly, Church judicatories had power
within themselves to nominat, and appoint their own moderator, now it is not so
2. Formerly, Church judicatories, and Church power, did flow from the Lord
Jesus Christ immediately, as being the only head of his Church, now they flow
from another fountain: viz the King as the fountain of all Church power, and
therefore is the government called his majesty's government ecclesiastical in
the Act of council July 10. 1663. and the prelates in the discharge of their
office are said to do service to his Maj. in the Church in the act of council
Ian. 9. 1662. 3. Formerly, Church judicatories did meddle with every scandal,
now they must meddle with no more then the prelat pleases. 4. Formerly,
presbyters had power to voice and to determine by their decisive suffrage, now
they are but the prelates counselors, of whose counsel and advice he makes
what use he thinks fit. 5. Formerly, there was none in those judicatories
who had a negative voice, now the Bishop has it, and the rest are but cyphres.
6. Formerly, in these judicatories there were ruleing elders: but now that
constituent member is not admitted, which particular alone will sufficiently
evidence that the face and frame of the judicature is altered. And since it is
so; any man of understanding may easily perceive, such a difference as makes
those meetings now to depend upon the King: and upon the prelat, who has a
negative voice in them, and whose dioecesian meetings they are, being now
modelled conform to the number of prelates, whileas before in some dioecies
there were three provincial Synods. Moreover the passage which was cited
before out of the Proclamation, Ian. 15. 1662. clears this abundantly; for
there it is said expressly, that the administration of the Church in the way it
had been, (that is the administration of presbyterian government) is
inconsistent with that which is now established, or Episcopal government; and
the council is better to be believed then this man who speaks without
ground. again why did King and Council discharge those meetings, but because
they were making way for the settling of Episcopacie? and finally why is the
jurisdiction and exercise of Church discipline, which was allowed for a time,
set in opposition, [to the jurisdiction and exercise of Church Government
ordered in the respective synods, presbyteries and sessions, by the appointment
and authority of the Archbishops, and Bishops thereof, according to their known
privilege and practice conform thereto.] If not to clear this difference.

He objecteth page 8. and says [That the supreme Magistrate has undowbted
power to convocat synods, when he sees it needful -- and no protestant
minister would refuise to come, at his command; nor is there any rank or degree
of subjects, that can without the stain of sinful disobedience, refuise to
meet upon his Maj. command, and ministers cannot plead exemption from the
common duties of subjects] It is answered. 1. It is true ministers are subjects
no less then others; and are obliged in conscience to subject themselves Unto
the civil Magistrate, in the Lord, no less then others; But. 2. Neither
ministers nor others are bound at the Magistrat's command to sin against God,
it being always better to obey God then man and here in obeying this command,
Ministers, should have hainonsly sinned against God, for. 1. They should have
thereby acknowledged, upon the matter, that the Magistrates power, in Church
matters, is such, as that, he may appoint what form of Government he will,
which no presbyterian, in conscience, could yield to, without wronging of
Christ, the head and King of his Church; as shall in due time be made further to
appear. 2. They should have thereby testified, and acknouledged their
approbation of Episcopal Government, contrary to their oath and subscription,
for this was pressed as a badge of conformity, and sign of subjection unto
Episcopal Government; as the Proclamation of the Privy Council before
mentioned does abundantly clear, and these meetings are mere episcopal
meetings as is shown. 3. Ans^as to the ground of the objection viz. That the
Magistrate has power to convocate synods; It would require a longer time then
can be now allowed to discuss the same, and to try, how, and in what cases, it
willhold good. But this is certane that the judgment of the Church of Scotland
as to this particular, as may be seen in the Act of Assembly Anno 1647.
approving the confession of faith, and prefixed thereunto) is that in Churches
constituted (such as the Church of Scotland was) the Magistrates authority is
not sufficient to call a Synod without any other call, that is, without
delegation from their Churches, and that (...) is free, to Ministers, to
Assemble together synodically as well, prorenata, as at the ordinary times,
upon delegaetion from the Churches by their intrinsecall power received from
Christ, as often as it is necessary, in case the Magistrate deny his consent]
But be it granted (as in some cases it may.) Yet it will not follow that
therefore Ministers were bound in conscience to have countenanced those
meetings; and that for these reasons* 1. Because, these were no extraordinary
Synods called by his Maj. prore nata. Nor. 2. Were they any of the former
Synods, used while presbyterian Government was in force. But. 3. They were new
meetings, upon new principles, having their rise from a new spring, and
fountain, and constituted otherwise in a new form, and so, they were no
meetings consonant unto the principles of presbyterian Government, but wholly
dissonant, and meetings complying with, and flowing from, Episcopal power and
jurisdiction, and ordered by prelaticall authority and appointment. 3.
Countenanceing of these meetings, upon the matter, would have been an assenting
and consenting unto, the pulling down of presbyterian Government, which they
were sworn to maintain. 4. Yea it would have been a fearful matter of offense
and stumbling unto the godly and truly tender; and a hardening of others, who
had complied; and withal a dangerous casting of themselves into temptation, as
experience does abundantly prove daily: and therefore this command could not be
obeyed; for no command of a Magistrate can warrant any to sin, by doing that
which is, in it self, sinful yea or what is a real ground of offense unto
others (provideing the matter be not absolutely necessary, antecedently, unto
the command of the Magistrate.)

But he adds [Is this rational that where two commands of the Magistrate are
joined, the one undowbtedly lawful, the other dowbted of; that subjects should
disobey the Magistrate in that which is clearly lawful, because ^ey have a
dowbt or unclearnesse anent obeying him in the other command -- had they come
to the place it would protanto have showed their respect unto authority] Ans.
It is a great question if this man speak rationally here: does he think that
the civil Magistrate did intend two commands in that one? he may as well say
that he did intend twenty: will he so metaphisically anatomize the commands of
counsels and Parliaments, as to render them ridiculous? would he have had
ministers sporting and jesting in such a serious matter, with the supreme
Magistrate? if the Ministers had come't to town and seen what of the cloak it
was, and then returned home, would this casuist have cleared them either
protanto or prototo. Nay, he would without all doubt, have exaggerated that
crime, as the height of contempt, and as an open preaching and proclameing of
their contempt unto the world. But in such a sad declineing time the faithful
ministers of Christ had some other thing to think upon, then thus to sport
themselves, and mock authority by halveing orquartering the commands and
injunctions thereof, and therefore would neither get on horse back, nor come
half the way, not to the place appointed, because they might not in conscience
concur with the prelat there, in that dioecesian meeting, which was the only
thing commanded, and their coming to the town, was no more commanded, (save as
subservient thereunto) then their riseing out of their Bed that morning, or
their taking horse, etc.

In the 3 place he adds [What ground could they have for separation, from the
Synod? is it the want of liberty to choose a moderator or is it that he who
presideth is a Bishop, and claims more power then they can allow-as of a
negative voice; or is it the want of unpreaching elders in the meeting?] It is
Ans; Neither any of these alone, nor all of them together, are the full and
complete ground; but this. That it is a meeting called together by the civil
Magistrate, assumeing to himself, power to cast down the established government
of the Church, and the primitive government, and to settle what kind of
government he thinks fit, as best complying with his own and his subjects
humors, and who accordingly has razed to the fundation presbyterian
government, unto which, both he and all the lands were sworn: and is setting
up prelatical government, against which he and all the lands have sworn, of
which, these three particulars mentioned, are so many evidences: And that they
are so, cannot be denied; for. 1. Whatever truth be in this assertion. That
ecclesiasticke judicatories have a divine warrant for chooseing their own
moderator. This is clear and undeniable, that while presbyteriall government
was in its integrity and vigor, the assemblies of the Church national,
provincial and presbyteriall, had this privilege to elect their own moderator,
and when ever prelates began to rise and get entrance in that Church, this
incroachment among other she did suffer at their hands, for they knew that
Invasio perpetuae dictaturae would be via ad Imperium. Constant moderators
would usher the way for domineering prelates (as was shown Sect. 1.) And
therefore this is a clear evidence of the change of the government from
presbyteriall to prelaticall. further though that which Zepperus says viz
Presides ecclesiastici, etc. that is the moderators or presidents of the
ancient counsels were some time named by the emperor be true; yet it will be
a mere non sequitur to conclude thence, as this author does viz That it is
lawful for the Christian Magistrate, upon whom the external ordering of all
the judicatories in his dominions depends, to nominat out of a meeting of
ministers, conveened by him, one of the number, to order the actions of the
meeting, and by his authority to control the unruly, not only as being a
concludeing of a general from a particular; but as being a putting into the
conclusion, what is not in the premises, and a mixing of heterogeneous things
together. What he means by this external ordering of judicatories who can
tell? unless it be all that power which ordinarily is exerced by a moderator;
and will he say that the Magistrate ought to choose all the moderators? Has the
supreme Magistrate any more interest in those meetings, or has he so much, as
he has in civil meetings? and does he appoint all the mouths of these
meetings? But have not Church judicatories within themselves, power for their
own external ordering? who then ordered the Synod at Jerusalem? Act. 15. To
say the Magistrate was not then Christian and therefore it did not belong unto
him, is enough to prove that it does not belong to him as a Magistrate. But
there is enough said to this here, which is but barely asserted by him without
proof: And. 2. As to the next what ever be asserted concerning that which Mr
Baxter and Mr Vines (as he reports of them) say, viz. [That for peace,
presbyters may suspend the exercise of there just authority, and resolve to
give to one person of their number a negative voice.] (though many more divines
with greater reason think, that seeing God has given them no power whereof they
may denude themselves when they think fit, and suspend the exercise of at the
node of any other, It cannot be lawful for them to give that negative voice
unto any) yet this is undeniable. that there never was any such thing claimed
by, nor granted to any, all the time that that Church enjoyed presbyterian
government and it is as undeniable, that so soon as prelates got up, unto
their chaires they challenged that negative voice to themselves, as their due,
and took it whether presbyters would or not; and so have the prelates done to
day; and therefore this concession of these eminent men were it never so true,
as it is denied by many, is nothing to the point; for by this one particular,
it is as clear as the noonday that the government is altered from presbyterian
to Episcopal, and therefore though it be true that the personal fault of
another cannot be a good ground for brethrens withdrawing from their duty; yet
when by their concurrence to consult alone (when by God's law they have equal
authority with any that sits there) they shall consent unto that change of
government, it becomes sin and not duty: for now all presbyterian government
is overturned, they see prelates set up as before; so that if they concur they
cannot avoid sin. To say (as he does a little before, page 8. (that it might
be permitted to them if they intrested for it, to ease their consciences, by
signifying their scruples, so be, they would do it with that inossensive
modesty, humility and respect unto the supreme authority, and to the laws of
the land is to please the simple (that believe every thing) with a fair word,
for it behoved to be done with such in-offensive modesty, and humility, as no
body should either hear or know of it, otherwise, they might be sure it would
be accounted disrespect unto the supreme authority, and to the laws of the
land and they might expect presently to be attached and processed. Lastly as to
the 3 particular, whether the opinion of Mr Vines Mr Baxter and Blondell (if he
speak truth) in denying the divine right of ruleing elders, be assented unto;
or rather the contrary opinion, which is owned by so many Churches and
professors, and particularly by the Church of Scotland, from the beginning; yet
this is clear that that Church had still such officers, so long as she was
governed Communi consilio presbyteroruns: by presbyteries, and no sooner did
prelates usurp the place, but they shouldered these officers to the door: and
therefore this is another palpable evidence that the nature of these meetings
is changed, from presbyterian to Episcopal, so that to concur, by meeting
with the prelates at their dioecesian meetings, must be an approving of prelacy,
and this cannot be done without perjurie.

But he objecteth page 12. Thus [Our worthy ancestors choosed rather to
c^curie with such meetings then to desert them] Ans: The case then, and now
differs far; for then these judicatories were standing when the prelates were
brought in upon them, and Ministers were then bound to keep possession of their
rights, so long as they could; and by meeting in the judicatories (there being
no restraint laid upon them by law from speaking their mind freely and
protesting as they saw occasion, as is now when such actings are declared
treasonable and seditious) they were in a capacity to do something for
vindicating of Church privileges at least for exonering their own consciences;
Yea and for curbing, in a great part, the prelates power: Whence it was that
neither the Prelates, nor the Estate did ever command Ministers to attend those
meetings, but rather wished, with all their heart, that they had forborne to
come; but now presbyterian government is quite overturned, all presbyterian
assemblies are discharged, under the highest pain; and after prelates are
advanced, and never till then, there comes forth a new order for new meetings
upon new principles, meetings otherwise constituted then formerly; in a word,
such meetings, as did but serve to approve of and confirm prelates in their
place and power, and therefore all were commanded by the Estate to concur with
the prelates in their meetings under a penalty. So that it is but a mere
falsehood, to say [that the meetings then and now are of the same constitution,
nothing altered;] for, then they were hedges standing in the prelates way,
though much weakened, by reason of the civil power opposeing; but now they are
props to support and strengthen the hands of the prelates, as being wholly ruled
and guided by them.

By what is said, it is hoped, that tender Christians will see that there was
no small ground of scrupleing at these meeting and that they will be loath,
rashly to condemn such, as feared to transgress in the least, and resolved
rather to suffer then to sin; seeing it is now beyond controversy that their
concurring in those meetings, had been upon the matter a consenting unto, and
an approving of prelaticall government, upon which account alone, the faithful
servants of Christ did refuise to concur.

SECTION IX.
The reasons why Ministers refuised to seek presentations and collations,
cleared and defended.

THus the Lord was pleased to keep his servants out of this snare, which the
prelates had caused plet for their consciences; but there are others and
stronger following. The Parl. in their second session An. 1662, made an act
ordaineing, all Ministers who had entered to the cure of any parish within
brugh or land in or since the year of God 1649. to have no right unto, nor
uplist the rents of their respective benefices, modified stipends, manse or
gleib for this instant year 1662. nor for any year following, unless they
should obtain a presentation from the lawful patro^ and have collation from
the Bishop of the dioecy where he lives before the 20 of Sepr. next. for
understanding of this, It would be considered. That before the year 1649. the
Church was groaning under that sore oppression of laick patrons, having power
to present Ministers unto benefices; and then the Parliament was pleased to
discharge all presentations of Kirks and patronages whether belonging to the
King, or to any laick patron, upon good and weighty grounds as the narrative of
their 39 act March 9. 1649. shows in these words [The Estates of parliament
being sensible of the great obligation, that lies upon them, by the national
Covenant, and by the solemn league and covenant, and by many deliverances and
mercies from God, and by the late solemn engadgment unto ties. To preserve the
doctrine and maintain and vindicate the liberties of the Kirk of Scotland, and
to advance the work of reformation therein to the utmost of their power: and
considering that patronages and presentations of Kirks, is an evil and bondage
under which the Lords people, and Ministers of this land, have long groaned,
and that it has no warrant in God's word, but is founded only on the
commonlaw, and is a custom popish, and brought into the Kirk in time of
ignorance and superstition, and that the same is contrary to the second book of
discipline; in which upon solid and good ground, it is reckoned among abuses
that are desired to be reformed, and unto several acts of the general
assembly: and that it is prejudicial to the liberty of the people, and
planting of Kirks, and unto the free calling and entering of Ministers unto
their charge.] And after this Ministers entered by the call of the people of
whom they were to have charge. Now this Parliament will have this piece of
reformation undone, and the Church brought back unto her old state of bondage,
and so will have Ministers to seek for these presentations, and thereafter, to
go to the Bishop for his license and approbation to officiat and exerce the
Ministerial function.

But the faithful and zealous servants of Christ had not freedom nor liberty
to do either of these, and therefore resolved to suffer, rather then to sin.

They had not freedom to go to seek a presentation, for these reasons.

1. Because, they saw no warrant for such a way of entering into the Ministry
allowed of Christ, or his apostles, nor practiced many hundereds of years
thereafter, and therefore toapprove of such a way had been a sin.

2. The Church had been long groaning under that oppression, and bondage, and
was desireous to be rid thereof, at the very beginning, but could never obtain
it until. An 1649 Now if they had obeyed this act. and submitted unto this
oppression, they had consented unto the spoileing of the Church of her
privileges, and had condemned that worthy and renowned Parliament, who were
graciously moved of God, to take off this Yoke off her neck.

3. They should, in so far, have consented unto the defection now carried on;
for this was a piece thereof. The restoreing of the Church unto her rights and
privileges, was a part of the work of reformation yea and no small part
thereof, and when this privilege is taken away, the work of reformation is in
so far overturned; and therefore such as would have sought presentations,
should have made defection themselves, and have consented unto, and approved of
the Parliament in carrying on the work of defection, in so far.

4. By the 36 act of the first Session of this Parliament. It is ordained that
the person to be presented shall in presence of the patron, or his attorney,
and of the sheriff of the shire. Stewart of the Stewartry, or heretable baily,
or commissar of the bounds of it be in the country, and of the Magistrates of
the brughs within the brugh before the granting, and their accepting of the
presentation, Take and subscribe the oath of alleagiance otherwise his
presentation is null and void of it self. Now as shall be shown hereafter, no
man could with a saife conscience, take that oath as it was tendered by this
Parliament.

5. They should have thereby condemned the manner of Elections by the people,
and consequently themselves, as being hitherto intruders because entering into
the Ministry, without a lawful call, viz without the presentation of the
patron.

But it will be objected. That all the ministers of Scotland who entered before
the year 1649. should by this means, be condemned as intruders, entering
without a lawful call. Ans: Though patronages cannot but be condemned, as
sinful, tending to ruin the Church, and to defraude her of much advantage
(beside the spoiling and robeing her of her privileges and liberties, which are
purchased to her, by the blood of Christ) because, the patron (who sometime,
may be a profane person, and a persecuter) either has not understanding, to
discern the spirits, or will not make choice of the best and most able
minister: Yet such as entered that way, before the year 1649. cannot altogether
be condemned, partly because then the evil of it, was not so fully seen and
perceived; partly because that evil had not been reformed, and there was no
other way of entry practiced, o^ practicable by law; and so though they might
groan under that burden; yet they could no^ get it helped; and so their fault
was less then the fault of such would be, who have now seen this evil
reformed and have seen (or at least might have seen) the evil of it, and have
been called orderly and duly conform to the way of Election set down in the
new testament, for imitation; how great should the guilt of such be, if they
should now again lick up that vo^ite, and submit unto that yoke? More may be
said, for the justifying of those who submit unto a yoke, under which they were
borne, and from which neither they, nor their forefathers were delivered, then
of those who have been delivered and yet consent again to go under the yoke,
and thereby do, betray the precious interests of Christ's Church, and with the
rown hands, wreeth that yoke about the neck of the Church under which she had
been groaning many a year before.

It will be objected again. That they have already the consent of the people,
being called by them before; and so the Churches liberties are preserved, and
their entry is valid enough. Ans. It is true, they have had the call of the
people; but that will not make their compliance with this course of defection,
the less sinful; but rather the more; for by their taking presentations now,
they do upon the matter declare that they were not duly called before; and so
they condemn the way of entry by election, as not lawful, and say that the
way of entry by presentations from patrons, is the only lawful way: for the
patrons presentation is not cumulative unto, but privative and destructive of
the peoples liberty of free election; because where patrons do present, the
peoples suffrages are never asked; and where people have power to elect,
patrons have no place to present: so that the one destroys the other; and
therefore if any who have been called by the people and freely chosen should
now take presentations, it would import that in their judgment, they were never
duly called till now, and this were to annull their former election which they
had from the people.

Next (which was to them of greater moment) they could not with freedom of
conscience, go to the prelate and seek collation, for these reasone^.

1. Because there is no war^and in all the word of God for any such thing, no
command for it, no precedent, or example of it, and Christian Ministers must
walk by the ^ule of the word: now the scripture shows no difference betwixt
a call and a mission, but both are one Romans 1: 1. Luke 6: 13. Act. 15: 25. and
their ministry being a work, 1 These. 5: 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5: 17. 1 Cor. 3: 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. 2 C^r. 6: 1. and they called workmen, Mat. 9: 37, 38. stewards, 1
Cor. 4: 1. Wachmen, Ezekiel. 3: 2. Isa. 52: 8. Shep^erds, Ephesians. 4: 11. Overs^ers
and the like, (...). 1: 5, 7. Act. 20: 28. Heb. 13: 17. Act. 15: 22. their very
c^ll conferreth the power and lays an express obligation on them to perform
the work, otherwise by their call and ordination they should only receive a
disposition for the work. See much more to this purpose in Voetij desperata
causa papatus against jansen: the papist lib. 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 17.

2. By this means, they should have condemned themselves, as not being lawful
ministers before, or at least not such ministers, as might lawfully exerce the
office of a minister.

3. They should in effect, have annulled the ordination which they had by the
imposition of the hands of the presbytery; because by their deed they should
have said, that not withstanding of that ordination, they had no power, to
exercise the office. and thus,

4. They should have mocked this ordinance of Jesus Christ, of solemn setting
apart one for the work of the ministry, by saying in effect that it is but a
mere blind; for notwithstanding that one be solemnly ordained by the
presbytery, according to the primitive pattern; yet the person ordained must
have his recourse unto another, in a superior order, for liberty to put in
exercise what he has gotten in potentia or in Actu signato, the like whereof
cannot be shown in all the scriptures: where read we that ever any who was
ordained by a presbytery, might not exerce the office without a new license
from some other? to what end serves ordination if it be not for seting of one
apart for the work? That office or power is a cyphre and altogether useless
which cannot be exercised, and is not like an office or power granted by Jesus
Christ.

5. By this means, they should fully acknowledge the power and authority of
prelates over presbyters, and so subscribe unto their jurisdiction and
acknowledge them to be lawful officers of Christ's house, and upon that
account, submit unto them, which were point blancke co^ary to their vow and
Covenant.

It is objected against this by the author of the seasonable case page 15. That
thereverend persons instructed by law, to call for that promise from
ministers, do not search into men's apprehensions concerning the grounds of
their power: all they seek of them, is obedience to them, in things lawful and
honest, as being presently in power, being by law ordinary overseers of the
ministry in their duties, and chief ordainers of them who enter into the
ministry, Ans. There is enough here to deter any from this bussinesse for.
1. There is no warrant in the word to own them as chief ordainers; there are
no chief and inferior ordainers mentioned in the word; this then must be a
fiction and a humane invention, which no minister must acknowledge; for all
must go to the law, and to the testimony 2. nor is there any such power known
to appertain to any man, to be an overseer of the ministry. It is true the
spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets; but there is no warrant for
a Bishop over Bishops, or for such an officer as is to oversee the ministers:
No officers must be owned in Christ's house but such as are of Christ's own
appointment. 3. And any other law cannot be owned in those matters. Though the
law of the land should give to any such a power, subjects are not for that,
obliged to acknowledge and approve of them, as such: The municipall laws of a
land will not warrant any new office or officer in Christ's house. It
appertains alone to Christ as King and head of his own house and Church to
institute his officers: And it is a fearful incroaching upon the privileges of
the crown of Christ, for any state or potentate to take upon them to appoint
such offices and officers, as Christ has not appointed. Therefore whether
those persons (reverend or irreverend all is one) that are so entrusted by
law, to call for such promises and engadgments, do search into men's
apprehensions, concerning the grounds of their power, or not; yet the very
promiseing of obedience in things lawful (for in things unlawful, obedience
must not be promised to any lawful power under heaven) is an acknowledgment of
the lawfulness of their power, and of subjection as due unto them, and an
owneing of them as lawful officers, lawfully installed and authorized, and
because this could not be done, therefore neither could the other be done.

He replyeth. 1. It is not obedience under a reduplication, and as formally
obedience, they call for, If it be obedience material they are satisfied Ans.
And what more does the most lawful power under heaven ask do they search into
the principles of men's doing such and such acts? do they examine the
reduplications under which they act? But. 2. Whether they call for it under
that reduplication or not, It is real obedience they call for, and. 3. The
promiseing of obedience, under whatsoever reduplication has in its bosom, an
acknowledging of the lawfulness of the authority calling for such obedience.

He replyeth. 2. Suppose it were so, that obedience as formally obedience were
required; yet it were hard to say, it could not be promised, or that it could
not be acknowledged that they have any la^full authority, for looking upon them
as the Kings Maj. commissioners in causes ecclesiasticke, for regulating the
external order of the Church in their several bounds, and empowered by the
law of the land, so to do, the strickest presbyterians will not find ground to
disowne their office in that consideration Ans. Then. 1. Prelates are nothing
else but the Magistrates commissioners, and have no power or authority jure
divino by any warrant of Gods law, more then any other of the Magistrat's
commissioners. 2. whence had the prelates, in the first three hundred years (if
so be there was any such, as this author is bold enough to affirm but fails
in his undertaking to prove it) their commission? had they it from Nero, and
the rest of the persecuting heathenish Emperors? and if they had no commission
from them, whence had they their power? or by what commission did they act? or
how could they be Bishops without such a commission? How will this advocat
extricate himself out of these difficulties and evite a contradiction? But. 3.
If they be the Magistrat's commissioners in causes ecclesiasticke their power
must reach no further then the Magistrates power does, in Church causes, viz the
(...) or his external order. If he streach it no surder. How then comes it to
pass that they meddle with more then what concerns the (...) or will h^ say
that all the causes which prelates as prelates meddle with, are but such
ecclesiasticke causes As are for the regulating the external order of the
Church? Then he must say that their chief power in ordination, their chief (if
not, only) power in jurisdiction, flows from the Magistrate, and by virtue of
his commission they act in that sphaere and capacity: and if he say so he
speaks plainly, but without any ground in the word: for then Magistrates
might ordain alone, at least have a chief hand in ordaineing with others; for
what they may commissionate others to do in their name, they may do themselves:
But how or what way shall we see this proved? Where will he show any example of
any Magistrate, as such, ordaineing or deposeing Ministers, censureing or
excommunicating Offenders, since the World began? What a wild notion must this
be then? And if this be the Basis which is so rotten let any judge what the
superstructure must be. It were tedious here to lanch forth, into this debate
concerning the Magistrates power in Church matters: But sure, it was never the
doctrine of the Church of Scotland, no^ of any reformed Church, that what power
the Prelates challenge to themselves as such, did primarily belong unto, and
reside in the hand of the civil Magistrate, and might be derived by commission
from him, unto them: And this must be granted as a truth, if it be once said
that prelates Act in Church matters, by virtue of a commission from the supreme
Magistrate: for a commission is distinct from a command, the supreme Magistrate
may command ministers to preach and baptize and do what himself cannot do, and
for the doing whereof ministers borrow no power from him: but he cannot
propperly give them any commission for that effect: The giving of a commission
imports the conveyance of a power, for effectuating that which is to be done
by the commissioner, and that the person granting the commission might himself
do that which he commissionateth others to do. See this consequence fully
cleared by famous Voctius Polit: Eccles. page 146. arg. 12. But now if there
were no more to hinder any from acknowledging such a power in the prelates this
is sufficient, that it is granted they have all that power over presbyters by
being his Maj. commissioners, and that they have all that power derived from
him; and consequently, that they have no such power at all: because he from
whom they derive that power by a commission has no such power himself: The
confession of faith of the Church of Scotland acknowledges no such power in
the civil Magistrate. The scripture^, by which all are to regulat their actions
in the Church of God, gives warrant for no such power. No reformed divine
(except Arminians and Erastians) does acknowledge any such power; nor any
confession of faith of any of the reformed Churches. Behold then Reader and see
what monsters the Prelates are, swollen up to that bigness, with mere wind and
phancies; and observe by what art they ascend, They make the supreme Magistrate
believe that all the power belongs unto him to the end, he may devolve it
back again over on them by a commission, and so authorize them: according to
that. Tu facis hunc dominum te facit ille deum. Thus you see they derive their
power a non-habente potestatem. from such as have it not to give: therefore
their commission is simpliciter null, and cannot be acknowledged by any
faithful minister or Christian: Nor can their power be submitted unto. And
hence also it is clear what reason these honest Ministers had to refuise, this
acknowlegment, and not to take the canonical oath: which was so contradictory
unto the oath of the Covenant.

But he replyeth [That there is no contradiction betwixt the covenant and that
canonical oath, or promise of obedience to the prelate because Timorcus (who
is tender in the matter of oaths) maintains that the ministers who of old
took the canonical oath, did not swear the contradictory there to when they
took the covenant wh^nce it will follow necessaryly, that they who have taken
the Covenant do not contradict that oath, if they should take the oath of
canonical obedience] Ans. Though this canonical oath should not contradict the
second article of the league and Covenant, yet there is good cause why it
should be refuised, as has been shown, and further what warrant is there for
any to require such an oath? Oaths must be warranted by the law of God, and
there must be a law for imposeing, and so for taking of the oath. It is true
Magistrates may impose an oath upon their subjects, and so upon ministers, as
well as others, in things not sinful; and when necessity calls for it; but
that the Magistrate may give unto any of his subjects such a power as he has
not himself, and empower that subject to impose an oath upon others, to
acknowledge him to be lawfully so empowered, and to obey him as one lawfully so
empowered, will not be so easily granted without proof, which will not be seen
in haste, it being so contrary to the word of God. But 2. The taking of this
oath, and promiseing obedience unto them, is point blancke contrary unto the
league and Covenant, sworn and subscribed. And that because by the covenant
they are sworn to endeavor, in their places and callings the extirpation of
such Church officers as Bishops and Archbishops, and this is inconsistent with
any owneing or acknowledging of them, under that notion; and if any should
promise obedience to them as Archbishops, or Bishops is it imaginable how that
withal they should not own and acknowledge them? what more owneing and
acknowledging can they desire, then submission and a promise of obedience in
all things lawful. 2. And he has a fancy (I shall not say a judgment)
strongly prepossessed with prejudice at truth, who can say, with this author
that [it will be hard to find out a contradiction there, either in terms or
by necessary consequence] for a stronger contradiction is hardly imaginable
then betwixt an edeavour to extirpat such or such governors; and a humble
submission unto, and acknowledgment of their power, with a promise of faithful
obedience there unto: for he who is bound to endeavor to extirpat them, must
never own them as lawful officers lawfully empowered, he must never submit
unto them nor promise obedience unto them; for a promise of obedience, is a
promise of owneing of them, as lawful officers. and so a promise of defending
them in their place and power, in a lawful manner: and this is diametrically
opposite unto an endeavor to extirpat them. 3. As for Timorcus whom he looks
on as favoring his conceit, it will be found after try all, that
notwithstanding of that which he grants, yet he is of an opinion contrary to
this author, as any may see, who will take a vieu of his answer unto that part
of the objection (which he is about to answer in cap. 7.) which concerns the
oath of canonical obedience. The objection is this. The league and covenant is
contradictory to other oaths sworn before, such as the oath of canonical
obedience, and therefore is void ipso facto. To which he answers. 1. Thus
suppose (and his supposall is an assertion if he speak to the point) That upon
mature deliberation the Ministers that subscribed that oath, find that it was
an unlawful oath, as obliging them to the acknowledgment of such a power in
the Church, as is by no means allowed, in the word of God, they are in such a
case only obliged to be humbled for their rash subscription, and taking of
that oath, and their second oath will hold valid against them] this is his
first answer: And. 2. He says [suppose that the oath of canonical obedience,
was imposed without authority of Parliament and the Parliament, as soon, as
they took notice of it, declared their dissent to it, and to all oaths imposed
without their authority, certanely this should go farrwith them who make the
like plea against us, as to the obligation of the covenant.] This is his next
answer, by which you may see; he looks upon that oath of canonical
obedience, as peccant both in matter and form, and that therefore it has no
force to annull the oath of the covenant, which were to no purpose if he looked
not on that oath, as contradictory to the covenant. But then 3 he answers [We
will for once suppose the oath materially good and lawful, as to the efficient
cause, yet certainly the oath is irritated and made void by the Parliaments
taking away of the matter thereof] Here he gives, but grants not, that the
oath of canonical obedience was lawful, and yet he asserteth that
notwithstanding thereof, the covenant might have been sworn and stood to,
because the former oath was null, so soon ever as the matter of it was taken
away by authority, and that says that the matter of that oath standing viz
prelay, and prelates not taken away by authority, the swearing of obedience unto
them is inconsistent with swearing to endeavor to extirpate them. It is true
he adds these words. Nor do we understand how any person, by (...) promise or
oath to be obedient in things lawful and honest, to this or that government,
does oblige himself whatever evil he sees in such a governor, either through
want of just title, or male administration of his trust never to endeavor to
free himself from that servitude. But thence it will not necessarily follow,
that they who have sworn the covenant should not contradict the same if they
should now take the oath of canonical obedience. Because, the oath to
endeavor to extirpat, includes a not giving obedience unto them, as a
general includes a particular, so that he who has sworn to endeavor their
extirpation, has sworn withal never to obey them as lawful governors: And
so there is a contradiction betwixt the canonical oath, and the covenant. The
Covenant binds up such as have taken it, from the canonical oath, though the
canonical oath could not bind up their hands from the covenant, partly
because it was sinful upon the matter, and unlawful as to the power
imposeing: and partly because though it had been lawful both as to matter and
efficient cause yet the matter being taken away, the act about that object did
cease. So says Timorcus. But whether it be so, or otherwise, it is all one
now to the purpose in hand; for the covenant being now taken, any such oath
which had been un lawful before becomes much more un lawful now; and
carries a contradiction to the covenant in its front.

Thus thou see what cause the precious and worthy servants of Christ had to
refuise obedience unto that act what ever suffering might follow thereupon, and
indeed sore were the sufferings which did follow, for on the first of October.
there is an act of council at Glasgow, prohibiting and dischargeing all these
ministers who had contraveened the foresaid act of parliament to exerce any
part of the function of the ministry at their respective churches in time
comeing, which are hereby declared to be vacand, and that none of their
parishoners, who are liable in any part of their stipends make payment to them
of this instant crop and year 1662. or in time comeing, as having no right
thereto, and that they do not acknowledge them for their lawful pastors in
repaireing to their sermones, under the pain of being punished as frequenters
of private conventicles and meetings; and commanding and chargeing the said
Ministers to remove themselves, and their families out of their parishes
betuixt and the first day of November. thereafter, and not to reside within the
bounds of their respective presbyteries] This was very sad, threatening no
less then ruin to Ministers and their poor families, to be put from their
houses in the midst of winter; to seek new places of abode not having the
small stipend which was due to them, allowed, for to transport their families
with all, or to provide themselves in necessaries. But yet they resolved to
cast themselves on Gods providence, trusting in his word accounting it better
to suffer affliction with the people of God, and to enjoy peace of conscience;
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and accordingly did remove
themselves: By which means there were some hundereds of parishes left
destitute and the shepherds were scattered up and down the land, seeking a
sheltering place for themselves. It was a sad and lamentable sight to see the
sad farewell betwixt the loving pastor and his beloved floke, and the tears,
the cries, and the bitter groans that were there: Now were the breasts pulled
from the mouths of the young infants, the table was drawn, and the people
were made to wander up and down the mountains seeking the word of the Lord,
and could not find it, they had silent Sabbaths and empty pulpites, some
country sides were hereby laid utterly desolate: And what could these
faithful Ministers do in this case, but sigh, and groan to God seeing they
could not in conscience yield obedience unto these commands: and therefore they
resolved to be subject for conscience sake, and to submit unto the punishment
of banishment out of the bounds of the presbytery where they lived (which was
afterward made more sad, for they were commanded to remove Twenty miles from
their own parish Church, Six miles from a a cathedral, and three or four
miles from a brugh) Now judge o reader whether this cruelty would not have more
beseemed Turks, and how little cause there was for all this severity and rigor
to Ministers, who had been endeavoring with some measure of faithfulness On
their part, and fruitfulness through the Lor'ds blessing on their labors, to
enlarge the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to build up poor souls in their most
holy faith, because they would not give obedience unto such Acts as were but
snares for the conscience; and to which, obedience could not be yielded,
without sin.

SECTION X.
The oath of Alleagiance explained as to its civil part, and some reasons
Against the taking thereof, even upon that account, adduced. The act rescissory
and his Maj. prerogative canvassed.

AFter that there were some other Ministers, whom the forementioned Acts did
not reach, removed out of some of the chief cities Brevi manu, without any
process; There are some ways devised how more of these might be removed with
some color or pretext, and therefore some Six or Seven were called before the
Parliament at their second session, and because they refused to take the oath
which was tendered, they were sentenced with banishment by act of Parliament,
and ordained to remove off the Kingdom so soon as his Maj. commissioner should
signify his mind the reanent. But this sentence was not put in execution
possibly because they saw an inconsistencie betuixt this deed, and an Act which
they had made the former year in their first session, By which all such as
refuised to take that oath, were to be incapable of any public trust, and to
be looked upon as persons disaffected to his Maj, authority and government,
and this was all. But in December. 1662. The privy council called some other
Ministers before them and tendered the oath unto them and because of their
refuiseing of the same, they banished them out of all his Maj. dominions and
then gave them a bond to subscribe, wherein they did bind themselves to remove
out of all his Maj. dominions within a month, and not to return under the
pain of death, otherwise they would commit them to close imprisonment, and
there keep them until they had occasion, to send them elsewhere. Whereupon
these Ministers saw a necessity of subscribeing that bond of banishment; Though
it was very hard to bind themselves to remove within so short a time, and that
in the midst of winter. But strange it is, that when the King himself, by his
oath at his coronation is bound to rule the land, by the laws, and
constitutions received therein This his council (which by the fundamental
laws of the land (as appears by the 12 Act of the 2 parliam. of King James
4. whereby they are first established) is to give his highness a true and
essauld counsel in all matters concerning his Maj. and his realnie, and to be
responsall and accusable to the King and his estates of their counsel, and so
is a judicatory subordinat unto the Parliament and accountable to and censur
able by them) would banish such as the laws of the land, did not account
worthy of banishment: and whether they would do right if they should punish
with death such a fault as by the Established laws of the land deserved only
to be punished by a fine or a sum of money, let lawyers judge, and whether
this be not an arbitrary illegal power which they have assumed, any that
considers what is said, and the act 27. of the 2. Parliam. of Char. 1. may
judge: and possibly it was for this cause that they resuised to give an extract
of their sentence, although it was humbly craved.

But to clear what good grounds there were and yet are for refuiseing to take
that oath. Let first the oath it selfbe considered and compared with the former
oath of alleagiance. The oath now tendered is thus worded in the acts of this
Parliament several times.

I, for testification of my faithful obedience to my most gracious and
redoubted sovereign, Charles King of Great-Britaine france and Irland, etc.
affirm, testify, and declare, by this my solemn oath. That I acknowledge my
said sovereign, only supreme governor of this Kingdom, over all persons, and
in all causes, and that no foreign prince, power, or state, or person civil
or ^elesiasticke, has any jurisdiction, power, or superiority, over the same,
and therefore do utterly re^nce all for^aigne power, jurisdictions and
authorities, and shall at my out most power defend, assist and maintain his
Maj. jurisdiction fo^elaid against all deadly and shall never decline his Maj.
power and jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God.

This is the oath which they call the oath of alleagiance: but is indeed very
far different therefrom as will easily appear to any who will compare the same
with that oath of alleagiance, which King James treats of in his dialogue
called God and the King lately reprinted and published by his Maj. royal
procla^tion for the instruction of all his subjects, in their duty and
alleagiance for thus is that oath worded.

I, A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, tostifie and declare
in my conscience, before God, and the world that our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful and ^ightfull King of this realm, and of all other his Maj.
dominions, and countries, and that the pope neither of himself nor by any
authority, by the Church and see of Rome or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King or to dispose of any of his Maj.
dominions, or Kingdoms, or to authorize any foreign prince to invade or
annoy him or his countries, or to discharge any of his subjects, of their
alleagiance and obedience to his Maj. or to give license or leave to any of
them to* bear arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence, or hurt to his
Maj. royal person state or government: or to any of his Maj. subjects, within
his Maj. dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the pope or his successors, or by any authority derived or
pretended to be derived, from him or his see, against the said King, his (...)
or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience: I
will be^ faith and true alleagiance to his Maj. his aires and successors, and
him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their persons,
their crown and dignity, by ^easone, or color of any such sentence, and
declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor, to disclose and make
known, unto his Maj. his aires and successors, all treasons, or treitours, or
conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any of them.
And I do further swear that I do from my heart abho^e, detest, and abjure as
impious and heretical this damnable doctrine, and position. That princes which
be excommunicated or deprived, by the pope may be deposed, or murdered by their
subjects or any other whatsomever. And I do believe, and in conscience am
resolved. That neither the Pope, nor any person what somever, has power to
absolve me of this oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge, by good and
lawful authority, to be lawfully Ministered unto me. And do re^unce all
pardons and dispensations to the contray. And all these things I do planely and
sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express words, by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the
same words without any equivocation or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgment heartily,
willingly, and truly upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God.

This is the oath of alleagiance and how far it differs from the former which
was lately tendered, is easily discerned. These few words in the short oath
[only supreme governor in this Kingdom over all persons, and in all causes]
contain the main difference betwixt the two, and the main grounds of scruple;
for they hold forth two things. The King's supremacy in matters civil, and his
supremacy in matters ecclesiasticke.

It is true Ministers ought both to be (and to carry duti fully as becomes)
subjects, and to refuise nothing lawful, which is* required of subjects: but
oaths, being matters about which much tenderness and carfulness ought to be
used, it becomes Ministers to look well to this and not to engadge in any oath
rashly: Advisement and deliberation is most requisite here, especially in a
time when snares abound, and when there is good ground to suppose, that the
oath is tendered of purpose to be a snare to the conscience.

The oath as to it is substance, or maine thing intended, (which lies wrapped
up in those few words last cited,) is not, (as is obvious to any) so clear as
oaths ought to be; yea the imposers themselves will not deny this; but are
forced to acknowledge, that as it is worded, in respect of that part thereof,
which is only scrupled at, and which contains the substance and maine thing
intended, it is at best ambiguous, and general: and for this cause (if there
were no more) every Christian ought to forbear to swear the same: And that
because, every oath must be sworn in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness
Ier. 4: 2. but an unclear and ambiguous oath cannot be sworn in truth, because
it has no truth in it; for what is ambiguous is not true, as doctor. Sanderson
says de jur: promis: oblig. prael. 6.. 10. a preposition of an ambiguous and
indefinite sense, before the matter be distinguished, is not a true
proposition, yea nor a proposition at all* for a proposition, as its definition
clears, should signify either a truth or a falsehood, without any ambiguity
And therefore this proposition that the King is only supreme governous over
all persons, and in all causes being ambiguous till it be clared by some
distinctions, cannot be sworn, in truth, because the truth thereof cannot be
known: Nor can it be sworn in righteousness, because such as swear it cannot
be sure but that in taking that oath, they may be wronging others, wronging
Parliaments, and which is worse, wronging the Lord Jesus Christ, who is King
and head of his Church. Nor can it be sworn in judgment, because its meaning
cannot be known.

But now seeing the oath, in respect of its substantial part as it is now
worded is ambiguous and unclear* reason would require that the tenderers
thereof should explain the meaning thereof and make it as clear as may be: But
when this is refuised what can such do who are pressed to take that oath; but
refuise the same; partly because of its ambiguity, and partly because, by the
sense, which by their other Acts and Actings, they who tender it, do put upon
it, it appears to to be most unlawful: all divines and casuists do grant that
an oath must be taken in his sense and meaning in whose favors and for whose
sake and faifty it is conceived and who tendereth it: And therefore it is not
only lawful but necessary to enquire what sense the Acts and Actings of the
Parliament, do put upon it.

And as to the civil part of the oath (which here is to be examined) no other
explication needs to be enquired after then what they give forth in their
Acts on record; all which to cite here, at length, would be tedious. The
citeing of the acknowledgement of his Maj. prorogative, (which is a part of the
11 Act, Anno 1661. and where the substance of many preceding Acts is summed
up) will be a sufficient evidence, and here it is declared. That it is an
inherent privilege of the crown, and an undowbted part of the royal
prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, to have the sole choice and
appointment of the officers of state, privy councillors, the Lords of the
Session; That the power of calling, holding, and dissolving of Parliaments, and
all conventions, and meetings of the estates, does solely reside in the Kings
Maj. his hairs and successors, and that as no Parliament can be lawfully
kept, without special warrant and presence of the Kings Maj. or his
commissioner; so no Acts nor statutes to be past in any Parliament can be
binding on the people, or have the authority and force of laws without the
special, approbation of his Maj, or his commissioner interponed thereto, at
the making thereof; that the power of arms, making of peace and war, and
making of treatjes and leagues, with foreign princes or states, or at home by
the subjects among themselves, does propperly reside in the Kings Maj. his
heirs and successors; and is their undowbted right, and theirs alone; and that
it is hig^ treason in the subjects of this Kingdom, or any number of them,
upon what soever ground to rise or continue in arms, to maintain any forts,
garrisons, or strengths, to make peace or war, or to make any treaties or
leagues with forraigners, or among themselves, without his Maj. authority first
interponed thereto. That it is unlawful to the subjects of whatsoever quality
or function, to convocat, convcen, or assemble themselves, for holding of
Counsels, conventions, and assemblies to treat consult and determine in any
matters of state, civil or ecclesiasticke (except in the ordinary judgments)
or to make leagues or bonds upon whatsoever color or pretense without his Maj.
special consent and approbation had thereunto. That the league and covenant
and all treaties following there upon, and Acts or deeds, that do or may relate
thereunto are not obligatory; -- and that none of his Maj. subjects should
presume, upon any pretext of any authority whatsoever, to require the renewing
or swearing of the said league and Covenant, or of any other Covenants, or
public oaths concerning the government of the Church and Kingdom, and that
none offer to renew or swear the same, without his Maj. special warrant and
approbation.

This acknowledgment does sufficiently clear what that supremacy in civil
matters is which they grant unto the King as his due, and which by this oath,
they would have all to acknowledge also: So that there is no great difficulty
to clear the grounds ofscrupleing at this oath even upon this account, and to
show that such as have refuised the same cannot be accounted disloyal: for all
indifferent persons will see that there both was, and is good ground to
scruple at this oath thu^ sensed by this act, if they shall consider these ten
Particulars following,

1. The Parliaments of Scotland from the beginning have been partakers and
fellowshareis of supremacy, with the King: and the Kings of Scotland never were
the sole subjects thereof as appears by their appending of their own seal
with, and distinct from the King's great seal, in treaties with foreign
princes and in some important acts and sentences at home, of which there is one
instance yet on reco^d in the acts of Parliament viz: act 112. Parl. 14. King.
^am. 3.

2. The Parliaments of Scotland have had the power of settling the government:
for they did willingly swea^ to Fergus and his posterity: and and when he died
and left two young sons ^erlegus and Mainus both unfit for government they
resolved upon a new course. That neither a child should govern nor yet their
oath which they made to Fergus be brocken, which was this. That when the Kings
children were young at their fathers decease, some other of the posterity of
^ergus fit for governing, should be chosen who should rule the Kingdom all his
days (which law continued 1025. years until the reign of Kenneth the 3.) and
accordingly when Fergusius died they choosed Fer^haris, and when ^erlegus came
to age, he desired to be put in possession of the Kingdom, but it was
refu^sed, so long as Feritharis lived. And when Cotb^edus died they passed by
his sone C^tbred and made choice of Darda^us the grand child of Metellan, and
thus did they always unto the days of Kenneth the 3. Epropinquis (says
Buchanan in vita (...)] Regum defunctorum, non proximos sed maxim idoneos,
modo a Fergusio primo Scotorumrege essent oriundi; eligere consueverant] And
who but they, did condescend to that law at length that the Kings eldest son
should be called prince and should succeed, and if the son died before the
father, then the grand child should succeed unto the grand father, and that if
the King died leaving a young child to be heir of the crown a regent should
be chose to manage the affairs of the Kingdom dureing his minority, till he
were 14. years of age at which time he might choice his curatours: was there
ever any such thing concluded without the Parliaments consent?

3. The Parliaments of Scotland have had a great share of the legislative
power. Therefore the laws are styled the acts of Parliament, and not the acts
of the King, and they are said to be enacted by the Estates of Parliament. So
do the many explicatory acts witness that they share in the supreme power of
interpreting the laws of the land, which demonstrateth their legislative power
and both these are no small part of supremacy.

4. In the time of Finnanus the 10 King there was a law made [Ne quidreges,
quod majoris esset momenti nisi de publici coucilij authoritate, juberent, that
Kings should command nothing in matters of any moment but according to the
authority and command of Parliament.] And so when Milcolumbus the 92. King was
giving away, for peace with England, Northum Berland the Estates were against
it denying. [jus esse regi quicquam de sinibus regni detrahere, nisi omnibus
ordinibus consentientibus. That the King had any power to give away any part of
his dominions without the consent of all the Estates of Parliament.

5. The Parliaments of Scotland have regulated the actions of princes and have
censured and punished them for enormities: let the lives of Thereus, Durstus,
Ethus, Luctatus, Mogaldus, Conarus, Constantin, Ferchardus, 1. Ferchardus, 2.
Eugenius, Donaldus, 8. Culenus, and others recorded by Buchanan in his
chronicles be seen, and considered, and the power of the Parliaments of
Scotland over their princes will casily appear. So at that Parliament in which
King James the 6. was created King, and the Earl of Murray settled in the
regency, it was debated what course should be taken with the Queen concerning
whose access unto her husbands death there were such shreud toakens. And some
voted that justice should be executed upon her, and others that she should only
be kept in prisone: see Buchan, lib. 19.

6. The Parliaments of Scotland have had express power in some cases to
withstand and resist even by arms, the King, if he should break treaties of
peace, made and concluded by him and them, with foreign princes and states;
as is yet to be seen extant in the records of their old treaties of peace with
England and France.

7. The Estates of Scotland wrote unto the Queen An. 1559. Oct. 23. thus Ex
literis tuis ac mandatis, etc. Buch, lib. 16. that is [By your letters and
mandats sent us by a herald we understand how obstinatly you are set against
piety toward God, and the public good of our nation, and the common liberty
of all. But that we may, according to our duty, defend all these. We in ^e name
of our Kings do suspend and prohibit all that public admininistration titles
and superiorites, which you take upon you being certanely persuaded that those
things which you ^ow do, are contrary to that constant good will which Kings
have carried toward the welfare of this Kingdom: And as you do (...) lo^k,
upon us as lawful subjects of this Kingdom, and as a la^full Parliament; So
nor do we look upon you as regent or as exer^ing any public Magistracy:
Especially, seeing your power (if there be any such committed unto you) is upon
good and weig^ty reasons suspended by us, in the name of the Kings of this
realm. So Anno 1567. they put the queen regent mother to King James from her
regency which deed of theirs is fully vindicated by the earl of Mor^on in his
discourse to the Queen of England, a part whereof out of Buch: Lib. 20. because
useful both for clearing of this particular, and some others before mentioned
shall be here transcribed. Primum Factum ipsum, etc. As for the deed it self of
punishing Kings or queens: The ancient custom of our predecessors, will not
suffer it to be accounted new, for it were not necessary to enumerat how many
Kings have been punished by death, ^onds, and exile by our nobles, far less
were it necessary to confirm this deed of ours by foreign examples, seeing
there are so many, so obvious in ancient histories. But now the nation of the
Scots have been a free nation from the beginning, and have made Kings to
themselves upon these conditions, that when necessity required they might
dethrone them, of which there are many footsteps remaineing fresh unto this
day, for in the isles about and in many places of the continent in which the
old language and laws had any abode, this custom is followed in the chooseing
of their governors, to this day: And the ceremonies used at the coronation of
Kings, do clearly demonstrat that the government is nothing else but a mutual
stipulation betuixt King and subjects as also the constant tenor of the ancient
law by which Kings were inaugurated, which remains unchanged in the least, to
this day: yea while so many of our, Kings have been banished, imprisoned, or
more severely punished, there was never one motion made of relaxing the rigor
of the law; and what wonder, seeing it was not of the nature of those laws that
change with tht time; but of those which are fixed in the heart of man by
nature and consented unto by all nations, and which being subject to no other
laws, do command and rule all, so that whether we will or not, they are before
our eyes, what ever we be doing and stick in our heart. This law did our
predecessors follow being always armed against violence, and ready to
suppress tyrants But that I may pass in silence the famous cities of Athens
Lacedaemon, Rome and Venice which kept this law so long as they kept their
liberty: Yea even then when Rome was under tyrants if any good man became
emperor he did account it his glory to acknowledge himself inferior to the
people and subject to the laws for when Trajanus gave a sword, according to
the custom, unto the praefectus urbis, he said use it for me or against me, as
I shall deserve: and Theodosius, a good emperor in these worst times would
leave this noble saying among the laws, that he confessed he was under the
laws. Neither was this law unknown to barbarous nations as all histories
testify: But lest I should be thought to gather together examples now out of
use I shall only make mention of two later; the one is of Christieris the King
of the Dens who for his intolerable cruelty was put from the Kingdom, he
and all his posterity; which is a sadder punishment then ever was inflicted by
any of our progenitors -- what did the mother of Charles the 5 that made her
deserve perpetual imprisonment -- and now what did we but following the
examples of so many nations and Kingdoms, suppress tyranny, which swelled
above all law, not indeed so severely as our predecessors did in like cases --
for had we followed their example we had been far from, not only the fear of
danger, but also, here calumnies. Thus he, and much more is added to this
purpose there. More over this same Queen regent was told by the Earl of
Ruthven, that same night that David Rizio was killed as Buch reports lib. 17.
That the government of the Kings of Scotland was always very lawful and that
it was exerted not after the lisst and pleasure of any one man, but according
to the laws, and by the consent of the nobles, and if any King did otherwise
he suffered accordingly, and now Scottish men are not so far degenerated from
the institutions of their predecessors as to suffer the tyranny and slavery of
one who is a stranger and whom they look not upon as deserving any honest
service.

8. Yea in the 8 Parliament of King James 6. Act. 2. the honor and authority
of the Supreme court of Parliament, continowed past all memory of men, is
ratified, and there it is said. That by the court of Parliament under God, the
Kingdom has been upholden, rebellious and traitorous subjects punished, the
good and faithful preserved and maintained, and the laws and acts of
Parliament (by which all good men are governed) are made and established -- and
therefore they statute and ordain that none take up on hand to impugn the
dignity and authority, of the estates, or to seek or procure the innavation or
diminution of their power or authority under the pain of treason. It is true
that in the preceding Act, they confirm the Kings Royal power and authority
over all estates as well spiritual as temporal. And therefore their maintaining
of the power and privilege of Parliaments is the more remarkable: And by the
two Acts compared togethe^ it is abundantly clear that the authority
mentioned, in the first Act of that Parliament, which is granted to the king,
is not over the Estates of Parliament; but over private persons whether civil
or ecclesiastic: And so it is but a granting of him to be singulis major,
which will easily be granted: And this will be more clear if it be considered
what occasioned that Act, at that time. As was shown above in the first
Section, the Lord was stirring up his servants to act something for the settling
of the government of the Church, which occasioned the displeasure of many at
court, and when Ministers were freely rebuking sin in and about the court, they
were accounted railers and traitors: And being accused of treason before the
King and his Council, They declined them as incompetent Judges. Upon this
account in this hour of darkness by the means of the Earl of Arran. This
Parliament is suddenly called (whereby there were two Parliaments in one year
1584. the one meeting May 22. and the other (which is called the ninth
Parliament, as the former was called the eight) Agust 22.) which grants this
supremacy to the King over persons ecclesiastic and (for formalities sake)
civil, and therefore in the end of that act, it is declared to be treason to
decline his Maj. or his Council in any case. So then the question was not
betwixt the King and the Parliament: But betwixt the King or his Council; and
the Church in spiritual matters: It is true also that in the 1. Act of
Parliament 18. Anno 1606. [His Maj. sovereign authority, Princely power,
Royal prerogative, and privilege of his Crown over all Estates, persons and
causes whatsoever,] is acknowledged: But this act is of the same nature with
the former, no prerogative over and above the Estates of Parliament is
acknowledged here to belong properly to the Crown: And moreover, these words
are but fair flourishes and parliamentary complements. Finally the prerogative
here spoken of is founded upon personal qualifications where with they say he
was endued far beyond his predecessors such as, [extraordinary graces, most
rare and excellent virtues, singular judgment, for sight, Princely wisdom.]
and the like, and these may be wanting in one possessing the crown: and
therefore it could not be the mind of the Parliament to give a supremacy
founded upon such qualifications, to these who had not those qualifications,
and so they could not annex it unto the Crown.

9. Together with these particulars let this be considered. That in 3 Article
of the league and Covenant, they did all swear [Sincerly, really, and
constantly, in their several vocations to endeavor the preservation of the
rights and privileges of the Parliaments;] And then it shall appear that there
was good ground of scrupleing at that oath, which as explained by their acts
tends to the overturning of those rights and privileges: For none who desired
to make conscience of the oath of the Covenant, might swear an oath so
apparently opposite thereunto. It is true those questions concerning the power
of Princes and Parliaments are dark and ticklish; and Ministers, not being
lawyers by profession, can not be supposed to be well acquanted with the laws,
and constitutions of the realm; or with the nature, and extent of the same, in
all points: Yet it concerns them to see to this, that they run not themselves
upon the rocks of contradictory oaths: And having sworn to endeavor in their
places and callings, the preservation of the rights and privileges of Parl. it
concerns them and all not alitle to search so far into the rights and
privileges of Parl. as that they may know when an oath is tendered unto them
which crosses the same: and being once engadged in an oath, in a matter not
sinful, not to change, or to swear that which destroys and contradicts the
former oath. But leaving those things, and not laying more weight on them, then
they will bear, other particulars more weighty and pressing must be spoken to:
and therefore let it be considered,

10. What dreadful consequences will follow upon the taking of this oath, thus
explained, as to its civil part, by the forementioned act concerning the
prerogative and other acts now to be mentioned, as

1. A condemning of the convention of Estates Anno 1643. conform to the Act 6.
of this Parliament. 2. A condemning of the Parliaments, Anno 1640, 1641, 1644,
1645, 1646, 1647, and 1648. conform to their Act 15. as also the committees
and Parliaments thereafter Anno 1649, and 1650, and 1651. conform to their Act
9. 3. A condemning of all the Acts made by these Parliaments, conform to their
Act 3. 4. A condemning of all the meetings, Counsels and Conventions of the
subjects, at the beginning of the late work of Reformation, conform to their 4
Act. 5. A condemning of the League and Covenant, conform to their Act 7. 6. A
condemning of Scotlands joining with, and helping of England, in the day of
their strait, conform to their Act 7. 7. A condemning of the renueing of the
National Covenant Anno 1638, and 1639. conform to the last words of the 11
Act. 8. A condemning of the General Assembly 1638, and several others
thereafter, conform to their 4 Act. 9. A condemning of Scotlands riseing in
arms in their own defense against the Popish, Prelaticall, and malignant
Party, conform to their 5 Act. 10. A condemning of their seizing upon forts
and castles in their own defense, conform to the said 5 Act.
Was there not then cause to scruple at the taking of this oath which would
have imported a condemning of all those things? sure there was, as shall be
shown in speaking to each of the particulars mentioned: Now it is clear that
the taking of this oath, would have imported a condemning of all these
particulars, from this: That the Parliament does condemn all these mentioned
particulars (as the acts specified do clear) because done without his Maj
consent, which ought (say they) to have been had by virtue of his prerogative
royal and supremacy, and the perogative, does explain his supremacy in things
civil, as shall be shown more fully hereafter.

But to come to the particulars, first There was no ground for condemning that
convention of Estates 1643. notwithstanding that the Kings consent was not had
thereto. 1. Because, in point of conscience, the Estates of the land being
essentially judges, are bound, when the publict affairs of the Kingdom do
require to conveen and consult thereanent when Religion, laws, and liberties
are in hazard, and when the necessity is such as will admit of no delay: pure
legal formalities of state must be dispensed with, when they cannot be gotten
followed; as in this case, it was clear: The true protestant religion, his Maj.
honor and the peace of the Kingdoms, were in hazard by papists, and their
adherents in arms in England and Irland. The King refuised to call a
Parliament, at that time, though he was oftin requeested, there unto. In this
case what could the states of the Land do (who were bound by the laws of God
of nature and of nations to see to the preservation of the Kingdom, to their
own interests, and to religion that should be dear^ to them, then any things
else, and were bound by the law of God to judge and govern the land) but obey
God, and dis^ense with state formalities, according to the many examples of the
Estates of Scotland before; who did conveen in Parliament whether the King
would or not; as that Parliament which did imprison donald the 70. King: and
the Parliament at Scone which summoned King Culenus before them, and that
Parliament which deprived the Queen mother of her regency. But to avoid
tediousness let Buchanans Chronicle be perused, and many such like Parliaments
shall be seen. 2. Who was it who summoned all those Parliaments which conveened
for the election of new Kings and of viceroyes: as that which did choose
Notatus the brother, and not Ruther the son of Dornadilla the 4. King: and that
which did choice Even brother to Durstus, and not Durstus his son: and that
which made Dardan King and not Corbred's son being under age: and that which
make Te^rasell brother to Conarus King, and not E^hodius son to Canorus and
many moe^ Yea Buchanan no stanger to the constitution of the scottish Kingdom
shows in his book [de jure regni apud Scotos] that the Parliaments of
Scotland were summoned not only without the consent of their Kings, but against
the same. What ground was there then for condemning of this convention at this
nick of time when matters were in such hazard? Especially, 4. Seeing the very
next Parliament which conveened Anno 1644. by virtue of the last act of the
Parliament Anno 1641. at which the King himself was present, did ratisie and
approve that convention upon these grounds, as their 5. act bears
[Considering that the Lords of his Maj. privy council and Commissioners for
conserving the articles of the treaty, having according to their interests and
trusts committed to them, by his Maj. and Estates of Parliament, used all
means by supplications, remonstrances, and sending of commissioners, for
secureing the peace of this Kingdom and removing the unhappy diseractions
betwixt his Maj. and his subjects in England, in such away as might serve most
for his Maj. honor and good of both kingdoms; and their humble and dutiful
endeavors for so good ends having proven so ineffectuall, and their offer of
mediation and intercession being refuised by his Maj. And thereby finding the
weight and difficulty of affairs, and the charge lying on them to be greater
then they could bear: did therefore in the Month of May 1643. meet to gether
with the commissioners for common burdens? that by joint advice. Some
resolution might be taken there in: and in respec^ of the danger imminent to
the true protestant religion, his Maj: honor, and peace of these kingdoms, by
the multitude of Papists, and their adherents, in arms in England and Irland;
and of many other important and public affairs which could not admit delay,
and did require the advice of the representative body of the kingdom,
appointed and indicted a meeting, his Maj. having formerly refuised their
humble desires for a Parliament.

Secondly there was no ground for an^ulling those Parliaments mentioned in the
act rescissory, and act 9. 1. Because in both those acts there is no mention
made of any informality, which might justly either in law or conscience render
these Parliaments null. Only there is mention made of their acts and deeds but
these cannot in any manner of way annull their constitution for a Parliament
may be a Parliament legally conveened, though it should astablish iniquity by
a law: and if the ground which they have laid down in these two acts 15 and 9.
forannulling of these Parliaments hold good, indifferent men will soon see that
they have anulled their own constitution, and declared themselves no
Parliament; for if their acts were compared, with the acts of these Parliaments
which they have annulled, and examined either by the rule of God's word (which
all Christian commonwealths and Parliaments should stir their course by) or by
the fundamental laws of the land, they would be found more worthy to be
condemned. Sure succeeding ages need take no more, but the ground which
themselves have laid down here whereupon to declare this Parliament null. But
2. These Parliaments were all legally conveened and called; for the King called
the Parliament 1639, and sent the Earl of Traquare, as his commissioner
thither, which was adjourned to Anno 1640. then after some time, it was
adjourned to Anno 1641. and at this Session of Parliament, the King himself was
present, and so owned them as a lawful Parliament being called by his command,
and continued hither till, and ratifyed all their Acts, among which this was
one viz Act. 17. Anno 1640. That every third year, once at least, there should
be a full and free Parliament, and that the time and place should be appointed
by his Maj. or his commissioner for the time, and the Estates of Parliament,
before the end, and el^sing of every Parliament. According to which Act King
and Parliament did appoint the next Parliament to meet Iun 1644. and this
Parliament is continued till Ian. 1645. thence till March, thence till July
1645. and from thence it is adjourned to November 1646. and then till March
1647. and at the close of this last Session of Parliament conform to the
forsaid Act 1640. They appointed the next meeting of Parliament to be Anno
1648. This Parliament adjourned to March 1650. but with all, they give power to
their committy or the quorum thereof to call the Parl. sooner if they saw
necessity, accordingly it is convocated An. 1649. and at the time appointed it
meets An 1650. and so adjourned to times convenient. So that there is no
informality here at all discernable. If it be said that neither the King nor
his commissioner was present at those Parl. and so this informality annulled
all Ans. 1. The want of this formality cannot be the cause of annulling these
Parl. or Sessions of Parl. because they annull the very Session of Parliament
164^. at which King Charles himself was present. 2. There is no law making the
presence of the King or his Commissioner essential to every Parliament, far
less, to every Session of a Parliament. 3. There have been many Parliaments
holden in Scotland, without either king or Commissioner as in the days of King
James 2. Anno 1437, and 1438, and 1440. where there is no mention made of the
King in the Acts, as there is at the next Parliament 1443. but only of the
[three Estates of Parliament concluding and ordaining:] So Anno 1560. there is
a Parliament holden at Edinburgh by the three Estates without either King or
Queen and an Act thereof ratified first Parliament King James 6. Act 2. So Anno
1567. the Parliament is kept by the Regent and the three Estates, without the
Queen who then did Reign as the Acts of Parliament 1581. King James 6. show;
for there these words are to be found in the first Act thereof [And especially
the Act made in the Reign of the Queen his dearest mother in the Parliament
holden at Edinburgh the 19 of April, Anno 1567. (...) Whereby it is abundantly
clear that she was then governing when this Parl. did sit; and yet the
Parliament was kept without her, as the Acts show. So in the days of Queen
Mary the Acts of Parl. run in the name of the Lord Governor and three Estates
of Parl. and this Governor was not representing the Queen as her Commissioner;
because when she was present, as Act 1. Parl. 2. of Queen Mary both she and the
Governor are mentioned thus. [The which day the Queen's grace with advice of
the Lord Governor and three Estates of Par.] and moreover it is not usual to
have any Acts running in the name of a Commissioner; For where a Commissioner
is present the King is supposed to be present, and therefore to this day, all
the Acts of Parl. made were a commissioner is present (except such as are
wholly concerning the King himself.) Run in the name of our sovereign Lord
with advice and consent of his Estates of Parl. but where neither King nor
Commissioner is present, then the Acts run thus, The Estates of Parl. enact;
etc. So that this Stilus curiae being punctually observed to this day;
consirmeth the observation concerning the fore mentioned parl. viz. That they
were holden without King or Queen, when neither King nor Queen is mentioned in
the Acts. 3. Is it not strange how they could annull the parl. 1648. among the
rest; seeing the Acts of that parl. were more homogenious with their own Acts,
then the Acts of the rest: For the Acts of, and design carried on by, that
parl. were no such injurious violation of his Maj. power and authority; nor
were they Acts of rebellion as they suppose the Acts of the other parl. to have
been: So that the ground upon which they rescinde the rest of these Parl. will
not warrant them to rescinde this; and so it is not upon the ground of their
Acts that they rescinde these parl. Because then they would not have rescinded
this parl. 1648. What grounds then they will seek out next, who can tell? For
all the grounds which they have hitherto to given, whether from their Acts and
deeds o^ from informalities, through the want of the presence of the King or
his Commissioner, are declared null and of no effect by themselves. 4. It is
yet more strange how they could annul the Parl. 16^8. When all the members of
that parl. (some of whom no doubt were members of this) did Iun. 10. declare
and testify their resolution and obligation to acknowledge that Parliamentre
have been a free and lawful Parliament, likeas they did oblige themselves,
upon their honors and credit, and as they desired to be, and to be holden true
lovers of their country, and of the religion laws and libert^es thereof
efauldly and faithfully to the uttermost of their power to join and concur
with their persons and estates, every one according to their several stations
and callings, in the maintenance of the freedom and lawfulness of that
Parliament, and they ordained that that Act should be subscribed by all the
members of Parliament present and absent, and by all noblemen, Barons, and all
other subjects inhabitants of the Kingdom in their thires and brughs. 5. It is
yet more strange that this Parliament had so far forgot it self as to reckon up
the Parliament, 1648. among the rest in the Act rescissory, when in their 9.
Act, they had acknowledged it to have been a Parliament, for there when they
are approveing the Engadgment, the all and only bussinesse which that
Parliament 1648. was carrying on, they style them the estates of Parliament of
this kingdom which is a title agrying to none but to lawful Parliaments. Thus
it is clear that there is no ground warranding a consent unto these Acts
rescissory, but good ground to scruple at that oath, the taking whereof would
have imported a consenting unto the annuling of these Parliaments: considering
6. How King Charles the first, in the large treaty, in his answer to the first
demand, says that at the humble desire of his subjects he did call and
conveen a Parliament to beholden at Edinburgh, Iun. 2. 1640. so that this
Parliament was lawfully convocated and acknowledged to have been so by King
Charles the first himself.

Thirdly nor is there ground for assenting and consenting unto the anulling of
those Acts done and concluded in these Parliaments for 1. They are Acts made by
Parliaments lawfully conveened 2. They are Acts not repugnant to the word of
God; but Acts made, for the carrying on and advanceing of the work of
reformation (except those made by the Parliament 1648) which every one
according to his place and power is sworn to maintain and promove, and this
the very vieuing of them will evince, how ever that whole work be now branded
as rebellion and sedition: So that none could swear that oath as now tendered,
and by Acts explained, but withal he must condemn the whole work of
reformation, and all Acts made for establishing of the same, in doctrine
worshipe, discipline and government 3. did not King Charles 1 in the large
treaty give this answer unto the first demand. That for as much as the King's
Maj. at the humble desire of his subjects did call and conveen a Parliament to
be holden at Edenbrugh Iun. 2. 1640. wherein certain Acts were made, which
Acts, his Maj. for the peace and good of this kingdom, is pleased to publish
in his own name, with consent of the Estates, and therefore commands that the
said Acts bearing date ^un. 27. 1640. be published with the Acts to be made in
the next session of the same Parliament, and that all the said Acts, as well
of the precedent as of the next Session to be holden, have in all time coming
the strength of laws, and to be universally received and obeyed by all the
subjects of the kingdom of Scotland. His Maj. does in the word of a king
promise the publishing of the said acts, in such sort as is above specified?
And more over at that next Session of Parliament, Anno 1641. when himself was
present all those Acts were approved and ratifyed fully: and did not King
Charles 2, before and at his coronation, ratify and approve the Covenant, and
all Acts made in order to the carrying on of the ends of the Covenant? So that
now they are full and complete laws, wanting nothing, even of formality, which
can be desired, seeing he has ratified and approved them all. 5. Are there not
many of these Acts made by those Parliaments very much for the glory of God,
and the good of the country? did not themselves see this, when, for shames
cause they were forced to make some Acts of the same nature, for curbing of
vice, since they would not be said to renew them; so that it were hard to put
Christians to condemn those Acts, and laudable laws 6. Is it not strange how
they could condemn and make null and void all the Acts done by the committees
and Parliaments after 1648. seeing by this means they shall condemn all the
applications which were made unto his Maj. while he was in Holland, and also
they shall condemn the Kingdoms receiving of him, yea and their crowning of
him, both as null and as done by a Non-Parliament? And thus they will have the
King no crowned King of Scotland; and how deep this may draw let lawyers judge.
It was never yet heard of that a King was crowned in Scotland but by a lawful
Parliament whose deed was valide; and if this deed of that Parliament was not
valid let wise men conjecture what the consequences will be. It is true they
except in their Act 9. All such Acts as were passed in any meeting of
Parliament or committee of Estates authorized by his Maj. presence. But his
Maj. presence will not make every company of men a Parliament; yea his being
present with them at any of their Sessions says he owned them as a lawful
Parliament. 2. How ever, all these Acts which concern himself (seeing he was
not present at their making) are null. 3. How comet^ it to pass that the Kings
presence Anno 1641. did not avail to keep that session of Parliament from a
stroke with the rest? And further it appears that they annull the Parliament
1650, and 1651. altogether, because if that had been a Parliament it had been
the first Parliament of King Charles. 2; and so the Parliament 1661. had been
his second Parliament: But the Parliament 1661. is called his first Parliament,
and therefore there was never a lawful Parliament before, in his reign, and
thus by their principles he has never been crowned in Scotland as yet: What a
Praemunire they fall into here, let lawyers judge?

Fourthly There was as little reason to condemn these meetings counsels and
conventions of the subjects at the beginning of the late work: Because those
meetings were necessary for the defense of Religion, against the bloody
Prelates, who were seeking the overthrow and destruction of all. 2. Nor is
there any Act condemning such, which can with any color be allaiged, except
the Act of that Parliament 1584. wherein things were carried on by a strong
faction in great haste, for they had five Sessions in three days; and with
great secrecy, for the Lords of the articles were sworn to secrecy; and the
doores^ were kept closse all the time of Parliament. See laborious Mr Petree
his History page 442; and the Act of this Parliament did mainely strick against
the assemblies of the Church for that was the thing designed. 3. What ever can
be made out of this Act against civil meetings, it will not stricke against
those meetings, because the Parliament 1640, in their Act 29. has shown the
true meaning thereof to be otherwise, saying. It cannot be extended, against
any counsels conventions, assemblies, committees, or meetings, made holden and
kept by the subjects, for mantenance, and preservation of the kings Maj.
Religion, laws, and liberties of the kingdom or for the public good either
of Church or state and this Act was approved by the large treaty, and again by
the next Session of Parl. An. 1641. where the King himself was present. 4. The
secret council which then was, did approve of these conventions or tables (as
they were called) so did his Maj. commissioner thereafter. So then these
meetings might be warrantably kept, for God's glory, and the removeing of the
just grievances of the subject being no ways prohibited by the municipall
laws, which only disallow such conventions as are for disturbance of the
peace, or usurpation against authority neither of which can be allaiged here;
for no invasion, violence, offer of wrong by word, or deed, to any person, no
not even to these against whom they had justly complained, followed thereupon:
And those meetings were only to consult upon the most fit and humble way of
supplicating his Maj. and for the most convenient propositions to be presented
to his Maj. to the Parliament, and to the assembly; all which are most
compatible with the loyalty, and duty of good subjects and do no ways encroach
upon authority, seeing they assumed not any judicial determination, in any
matter of state civil or ecclesiastical, but by voluntary instructions, and
opinions every one to another in a common cause of religion, did resolve what
might be most conduceable to their lawful and just ends. To use the words of
the protestation, December. 18. 1638.

Fifthly Nor is there just warrant and ground upon this account, to annull the
League and Covenant. Because 1. It was against no municipall law; for as to
that 12 Act of the Parl. 10 of King Iam. 6. Anno 1585. it is so explained by
the 29 Act of Parl. 1640. as that it cannot be extended to any bands and
leagues, made for the preservation of the Kings Maj. Religion, laws, and
liberties of the Kingdom or for the public good either of Church or state,
and this may be further cleared by vieuing the 43 Act of Queen Mary, which the
forecited Act of King James 6. relates unto, and ratifieth; for that Act is to
be understood of particular leagues or bonds of man-rent (as they called it) or
maintenance respective, and that by private persons in brugh and land, and
therefore cannot be understood of leagues or bonds, made by the body of the
land, in their representatives in Parliament; which has so much power in
making of leagues, that without their consent the King cannot make a league, as
is clear by a league which King Robert 2. consented unto betwixt Scotland,
France and England, which was annulled because it wanted the Parliaments
consent; for says Buch in the end of his 9 book neque enim ipse pacem vel
inductas facere poterat nisi ex sententia publici conventus, nec firmas
pollice^ sine publico decreto. He could neither make nor promise truce or peace
without the Parliaments consent, and in the Parliament, 10. King Iam. 6. Anno
1585. among the unprinted Acts there is one containing the assent of the
Parliament, for concludeing of a league with the Queen of England. 2. The
Parliaments of Scotland have made leagues with foreign Princes without the
Kings consent, as that Parliament which deposed the Queen Mother from her
regency, did enter in a league with the Queen of England. 3. All leagues and
bonds made by the Parliament were ratified by this King, by his solemn oath,
both before and at his coronation; and therefore none in conscience could
condemn these bonds, or take an oath importing the same. What is more
allaidged against the league and covenant shall be fully examined hereafter,
Sect. 2^.

Sextly Nor was there just cause, upon this account, to condemn Scotland for
aideing and assisting of England in their strait and extreme danger. Because.
1. It is a most ordinary thing for one nation to send help and relief unto
another: thus the french and the Englishes helped the Hollanders. The king of
Britain offered to help the Rotchell, and the Palatinat. 2. It was against a
common enemy, a popish prelaticall and malignant faction, seeking the ruin of
religion, laws and liberties in Scotland as well as in Engl. By the light of
nature, a common fear uniteth even these who are furthest divided; and so while
Scotland fought for England they fought for themselves, and their own saiftie,
and what ever law will warrant nations, now to join together against the Turk
will warrant Scotland their joining with England against the common enemy: Yea
nature has taught heathens to prevent their own ruin and destruction by
joyneing their forces with other nieghbours against one who designed nothing
but the promoteing of his Empire. Thus the Romans warred against Philip left
Greece being subdued, he should make war against them. Thus the Lacedamoniam
warred against the Oly^hii and diverse other instances might be given. 3.
Scotland and England used to join together before, and to enter in a league
with other princes, for the defense of the protestant religion as Anno 1586.
and again 1587. and 1588. they draw up a league among themselves. But it will
be replied that this was with the consent of the supreme Magistrate. Ans. True,
but the want of this consent will not make such aideing and supplying
unlawful, so long as the law of nature is to the fore, obligeing every man to
defend his neighbor: and are not Scotland and England near nieghbours, being
in one Island, and under one King: Neither did they wait for the consent of
Scotlands supreme Magistrate when they helped them first against the French and
next against a faction of papists within their own bosom: and therefore
Scotland should not now wait for the consent of England's King, when they were
to help them against a popish and prelaticall faction. Nor needed Scotland
wait for the consent of their own supreme Magistrate, because as the law of
nature does oblige every one to defend himself by force of arms, against an
army of bloody enemies, though the King should not consent (as shall be shown
hereafter) so the law of nature will warrant any to defend their brother,
though the King should not consent especially seeing thereby they are but
defending themselves, against such an enemy as would next fall on them. 4. The
law of God will warrant this communion of saints Prove. 24: 11, 12. and the
commendable practice of those who helped David. 1. Chron 12: 18. 1. Sam. 22: 2.

Seventhly nor was there ground for condemning the lands renewing of the
national Covenant Anno 1638. and 1639. Because. 1. There is no absolute
necessity for asking and obtaineing the Kings consent, to the same; as if a
Kingdom once sworn and obliged in covenant with God, might not renew the same
obligation, as often as they thought fit. There is no such necessity of having
his Maj. express consent and approbation, either to the first making, or to
the renewing of the same with God (as shall be more fully shown hereafter.)
There is no law of God for this. 2. Nor is there any municipall law inhibiteing
the renewing of that covenant: Yea that warrant by which all the land took it
at the first, viz the King's and his councell's command to Ministers, to put
their parishoners to take it, and several acts of General Assemblies, stand
still in force: and accordingly in each universitie, the Covenant was renewed
yearly. 3. Moreover the General Assembly Anno 1639. enjoined by ecclesiastical
authority the subscription of the same; and the Assembly presented a
supplication unto the privy Council desireing their ordinance for the
subscription of the same, by all the subjects of the Kingdom, and this was
granted Agust. 30. and Anno 1640. the parliament by their act 5. did ratify
the act of the General Assembly, their supplication, and the act of Council
thereupon; which act of Parliament was approved by the King in the large
treaty, and thereafter by his personal presence at the next session of
Parliament, where all was ratified. So that this deed of renewing the National
Covenant wanted nothing, either in point of law or conscience to make it
lawful and therefore it had been unlawful to have taken such an oath, as
would have imported the condemning of that deed.

Eighthly nor was there ground for condemning the Church Assemblies, at which
the King's commissioner was not present, or which wanted his special
approbation. 1. Because there is no warrant in the word of God, clearing this
necessity; but much to the contrary. 2, No munipiall law of the land is against
such meetings, because the act 1584. Was taken away and rescinded anno 1592.
and since that time there is no lawanulling all Assemblies which want his Maj.
approbation and consent. 3. It was never either the profession or the practice
of that Church, as is clear by what is said Sect. 1. It will be a fitter place
to speak to this, when the ecclesiasticke part of the oath is spoken to which
shall be done Sect. 12.

SECTION. XI.
The former purpose further prosecuted and the lawfulness of Scotlands
defensive war demonstrated.

THere are other two Particulars (or rather one for they are much to one
purpose) which virtually would have been condemned, by the taking of this oath
thus explained, as to its civil part: viz Scotland their riseing in arms in
their own defense against the King's armies of papists and malignants and
their seizing on the castles, which within their own bosom were threatening
their ruin when garisoned with adversaries. These must now be spoken to, and
so,

Ninthly, There is no ground to condemn that defensive war. Though much has
been said by court parasites, and others; who were ambitious of gain and
preferment, to exaggerat and aggraige that supposed crime, and thereby to make
them and their cause, odious to all the World; yet rational and indifferent
persons will after serious pondering of a few particulars, forbear to pass
any rash sentence. Much has been already said in the defense of that
bussinesse, by the author of Lex Rex, and more then ever could or will be
answered. And therefore that book behoved to be answered by a fiery faggot: and
by Mr Prins sovereign power of Parliaments, etc. a book published by authority
of Parliament and never answered to this day: And therefore there will not be a
necessity of insisting much on it here, only a short hint at some particulars,
will suffice.

1. In point of conscience, it will be hard to prove that the power of war
resideth only in the King, and that he only bears the sword: For 1. Romans 13.
The sword is given to all Magistrates; for the Apostle there speaks of heigher
powers indefinitely, in the plural number, without specifying any kind; and
it is certain Rome had not two or mo^ Kings at once: And if the Apostle had
intended only Nero, he would have designed him in the singular number. He
speaks of powers that are of God, and are ordained of God, and this agrees
to Inferior Magistrates, who are God's Deputies, and judge for him, as well as
others, 2 Chronicles 19: v. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 1: v. 16. Numb. 11: 16, 17. He speaks of
Rulers and this name agrees to inferior Magistrates, as may be seen, Exodus 18:
v. 21, 22, 25, 26. and 16: 22. and 34: 31. 2 King. 10: 1. 1 Chronicles. 12: v. 14.
and 26: 32. He speaks of such as must not be resisted but subjected unto; and
Peter shows who these are, 1 Peter 2: v. 13, 14. even Governors under the
King, as well as the King himself. He speaks of such as are God's Ministers
which is a general word, comprehending all civil Governors. He speaks of
all such, to whom tribute, custom, honor, or fear is due; and so he must take
in all Magistrates, otherwise this text should not concern commonwealths, which
are ruled without a King. He speaks of such as are revengers by office to
execute wrath on them that do evil, and thus are a terror to evil doers, and
a praise to such as do well: And this agreth to all Magistrates, and therefore
this place cannot be understood as speaking of any single person, or of Nero
concerning whom it is a great question among lawyers, if, at this time, he had
the heighest sovereign power in the Roman State, as learned Prin shows in
his sovereign power of Parliaments, etc. part. 3. page, 109, 110, 111, and 112.
2. Inferior judges do judge for the Lord and are deputed of him, and therefore
they are endued with power from him, for that effect, 2 Chronicles. 19: v. 6, 7.
Deuteronomy. 1: 17. 3. Inferior judges are commanded to rule well, and they are
threatened and rebuked for mal-administration: See Ier. 5: v. 1. Isa. 1: 17,
21, and 5: 7. and 10: 2, and 59: v. 14. Ier. 22: 3. Ezekiel 18: 8. Amos 5: 7.
Micah 3: 9. Levit. 19: v. 15. Deuteronomy. 17: 11. Exodus 32: 2. Now would God command
those inferior Magistrates, to relieve the oppressed, to judge the fatherless,
to plead for the widow if they had not the power of the sword, for this effect,
or would he challenge them, for neglecting this duty, if they had not been
empowered by him, for that effect? doubtless not. So then if inferior
Magistrates be endued with power of the sword, they ought to defend the
fatherless, the widow, and the oppressed subjects, by the help of the sword,
they ought to rescue them from the hands of their oppressors: And therefore
when Popish malignant enemies rise up in arms, and seek to destroy the Land,
Man, Wife, and Child, the inferior Magistrates, much more the Parliament, may
lawfully draw the sword, which God had given them, for the relief of the
innocent, and defense of the country, of their lives, lands, goods Religion,
and all that is dear to them, against malicious and open enemies.

2. Buchanan, a man well acquainted with the laws and constitutions of
Scotland in his Book, De Iure Regni apud Scotos, says that the Kings of
Scotland had no power of peace or war without the Parliaments consent. So
that a war raised by the Parliament, against the common enemy, in defense of
the Kings honor, the saifty of the people, and the purity of Religion, cannot
be condemned, as unjust and illegal.

3. The renowned Historian Buchanan shows also that the Kings of Scotland
have been oftintimes resisted by arms, which a few instances will evidence,
when Durstus the 11. King banished all his Fathers Friends, and became loose
and dissolute, he was pursued by the Nobles, till he was forced to profess his
repentance, and promise amendment and afterward when he had cut off many of
his Nobles by treachery, the rest did rise up in arm against him, and kill him
in battle. So they rose in arms against Gillo for his wickedness, and against
Even 3. who was a most vi^ and wicked man: So with one consent they arose
against Dar^an, and slew his wicked servants who had been instruments of much
evil: They routed his forces and took himself prisoner. When Mogaldus grew
odious by reason of his vices, they rose up in arms against him. So did they
levy forces against Athirco: when Romach had become cruel and had put many to
death, they rose in arms against him: when Ferquard 1. turned tyrant, he was
summoned before a Parliament, and when he refuised to come, they levied forces
against him, and pursued him, they stormed his castle, in which he thought to
shelter himself and at length he was taken prisoner. So did they purpose to
rise in arms against Ferquhard 2. If they had not been diverted. Likewise when
King James the 3. had been seduced by his evil courteours, and had plotted the
murder of the nobles, they raised an army against him, and at length killed
him. So did the nobles take up arms against Bothwell and the Queen and pursued
her until she rendered herself prisoner. The nobles wrote unto the queen
regent, Anno 1560. for removing of the french forces and did add (as Buchan.
says Lib. 17) Which terms if they be rejected we take God and men to
witness, that we take arms from no innate malice, or hatred; but sore against
our wills are forced to assay the last remedy, least we should expose our
selves, our fortunes, and our posterity, to the worste of colamities Hence it
is clear that it was the common practice of the Parliaments of Scotland (and
lex currit cum praxi) to rise in arms against their Kings, when they turned
tyrants: And therefore, the Parliament their late taking up of arms in their
own sinlesse self defense, can no ways be condemned; let court sycophants
speak what they please, to make that bussinesse odious, they both bewray their
malice and ignorance of the fundamental constitution of that kingdom.

4. Though, for all that is said, the Parliaments interest in war should be
questioned; yet their late defensive war may be justified upon clear and
undeniable grounds, for there is no such connection betwixt these two, but they
are rather two distinct questions, natural sinlesse, self defense, may belong
to such, as have not propperly in stricke law, the power of war.

5. The practice of other protestant princes and Magistrates shows that their
practice was not so odd nor odious, as men (who have taught their tongues to
speak lies) would make the world believe it was; for Sleidan lib. 8. and 21.
and 22. and Bilson out of him, in his difference, etc. part. 3. page 274.
says that the German princes levied war against the Emperor; viz. the Duke
of Saxon the Landgrave of Hesse, and the Magistrates of Magdeburgh together with
other Princes and cities, joining in the war who having had the advice and
resolution of lawyers after mature deliberation did conclude. That the laws of
the empire, permitted resistance of the Emperor in some cases: That the times
were then so dangerous that the very force of conscience, and necessity did
lead them to arms and to make a league to defend themselves, though Caesar or
any in his name, would make war against them. and That if the Emporour had
kept his bonds and covenants; they would have done their duties, but because
he made the first breach the fault was his; For since he attempteth, to root
out religion, and subvert our liberties, he gives us cause enough to resist
him with a good conscience: The matter standing as it does, we may (say they)
resist, as may be showed both by sacred and profane histories. Unjust violence
is not Gods ordinance: Nether are we bound to him by any other reason, then if
he keep the conditions on which he was created emperor. By the laws
themselves it is provided that the superior Magistrate, shall not infringe the
right of the inferior, and if the supriour Magistrate, exceed the limits of his
power, and command that which is wicked, not only we need not obey him; but if
he offer force, we may resist him. Upon these grounds did those worthies
resolve to defend themselves by arms. 2. Next they have the exemple and
precedent of the protestants in France, who in the reign of Francis 2. Anno
1559. being oppressed with the Guisian faction assembled themselves, and
consulted lawyers and divines concerning resisting of the king in that case,
and it was resolved That they might lawfully oppose themselves against the
government which the house of Guise had usurped, and when needful, take arms
to repulse their violence: If the princes, who in this case are borne
magistrates, or some one of them would undertake it, being ordered by the states
of the realm, or by the sounder part thereof. See Genesis history of France page
682. 683. So Anno 1614. The prince of Condee with other princes, Peers, dukes,
noblemen; and officers of the crown conveening at Meziers, wrote to the Queen,
compleaning of diverse grievances, and wrongs, and sought remedy and redress,
by the assembly of the three estates, protesting that they desired nothing but
peace and the good of the realm, and that they would attempt nothing to the
contrary, unless by the rash resolution of their enemies (who covered
themselves with the cloak of state, under the Queen regents authority) they
should be provoked to repel the injuries done unto the King and state, by a
natural, just, and necessary defense: see the continuation of the life of
Lewis the 13. page 59. etc. So in the reign of Charles 9 when all Acts of
pacification were broken; after many fruitless petitions, and vain promises,
they take up arms, whereupon a bloody civil war ensued: and when this King
contrary to his oath, An. 1572. caused that massacre at Paris, the protestants
in Languedoc Rochel and other parts, took up arms in their own defense. So
when Henry the 3 came to the crown, the protestants saw a necessity of standing
to their defense, and being assaulted, they manfully defended themselves: and
again, when the peace which was now concluded was broken by the instigation of
the Catholic Leaguers; The King of Navarre, the Prince of Condee, the Marshall
of Montmorancy and others, resolved to defend themselves whereupon followed a
sixth civil war which ended in a new peace, Anno 1580. So in the reign of
Lewis his son when the Queen mother who was then regent, would give no redress
unto the protestants just grievances, The prince of Condee and diverse others
raised forces in their own defense, and the duke of Rhoan and other
protestants did join with them: A peace was concluded Anno 1616. but the very
next year the prince of Condee is seized upon, whereupon the princes meeting at
Soyssons resolved to defend themselves by war which continued Anno 1621,
1622. at last a peace was concluded but it lasted not long by cardinal
Richelien's means. 3. They have in the third place the practice of the
Netherlands (mentioned in the General history of the Netherlands, Lib. 9 p.
369, etc.) who, being oppressed in bodies, and states, by the duk of Alva, and
the Spaniards tyranny, and their consciences tyrannized over, by the spanish
inquisition, introduced of purpose to extirpat religion, after serious
deliberation, and consultation with lawyers, divines, and learned men of all
sorts, did unanimously conclude to enter into a solemn covenant to defend
religion, lives, and liberties, by force of arms: and, Anno 1572. the Prince
of Orange and his confederats published a protestation showing the grounds of
their riseing up in arms viz. [for zeal to the country, for the glory of God,
because of the inhumanities, and oppressions, and more then barbarous and
insupportable tyranny, and encroachments upon their privileges, liberties, and
freed^mes.] 4. They have the practice of the Waldenses in Piemont, Anno 1558,
and 1561. who being persecuted by the Lords of Trinity, and other Popish
sovereigns, assembled solemnly together to consult how they might prevent
danger, and after long prayer and calling upon God, they concluded to enter
into a solemn mutual Covenant for defense of themselves and their Religion,
and did so with success obtaining many notable victories against their
persecutors, See Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. page 208, 209. So Anno 1571. Nov.
11. There is a league made for mutual assistance of each other in times of
persecution, a copy whereof is to be seen in Mr Morland's History of Piemond,
page 252, 253. 5. They have the practice of the people of Arragon (mentioned by
Blanca in his Comment. page 661, and 652. An. 1286. in the days of Alphonso 3.
who when there fell out a contest betwixt him and the Parliament, through the
evil counsel of his courteours, resolved to associat themselves together and
to raise forces, it being lawful, for the common cause of liberty to contend
not only with words, but with arms, and their suprarbiense forum or Iustitia
Aragoniae, which was erected of purpose to with stand the tyranny of Kings, had
power to resist their King with force of arms: So Anno 1283. they tell Pedro
3. their King, that if he would not contain himself within the Limits of the
laws they would pursue him by arms. 6. They have the practice of other
Spainyards, as may be seen in the general History of Spain, lib. 13, 14, 15.
who rose in arms several times against Pedro the I. King of Castile. 7. They
have the practice of the Hungarians, Anno. 1608. in the days of Mathias for
when he denied free exercise of Religion unto the Protestants of Austria, they
took up arms in their own defense and assembling at Horn sent a protestation
unto the Estates of Hungary requireing assistance conform to the offensive and
defensive League: See Grimstons Imp. Hist. page 730. etc. 8. They have the
practice of the Polonians who oftintimes levied war against their Kings as
Grimstone in his Hist. Imp. and Chytraeus in Chron. Sax. show. 9. They have the
practice of the Danes riseing in arms against Christierne the 2. who Anno
1524. was solemnly deposed as may be seen in Chytraeus Chron. Sax. lib. 10.
10. They have the practice of the Sweds, riseing up in arms against
Christierne the I. for breach of his Covenant made at his coronation, this was
about the year 1499. See Chythraeus ubi supra. 11. They have the practice of
the Helvetians: first three of their Cantons viz. The Suitians, Vrjaus, and
Vndervaldians, Anno 1260. levied war against their oppressing Nobles, and did
prosecute the same twelve years: and Anno 1308. They join in Covenant to
defend themselves, against the House of Austria, and defended themselves most
resolutely, against the hudge armies of their adversaries, and upon the 16 of
Nov. 1315. obtained a great victory, and that same year they renewed their
Covenant at Brunna; in which Covenant, the other Ten Cantons, at several times
thereafter; being oppressed by their Nobles, did join, and at length, by war
brought themselves into that state of liberty, in which they are at this day:
See for all this Simlerus de Repub. Helvet. 12. And lastly they have the
practice of the Bohemians who in the Days of Wenceslaus, and Sigismond waged
great wars under the conduct of valiant Zizca. See Fox's acts and monuments
Vol. 1. And thereafter in the days of Ferdinand they resolved to fight
courageously against all their enemies how great so ever they were. But in
case, some should be so bold, as to condemn all those Acts, as treacherous and
rebellious, let it be considered.

6. That some of those same practices are allowed and approved even by the
Kings of Britain, for King James in his answer to cardinal perron justifyeth
the protestants of France their taking up arms in their own defense. Memorable
is that speech which King James had in the Parliament house, Anno 1609. a King
(says he) governing in a settled Kingdom ^easeth to be a King and
degenerateth into a tyrant, so soon as he leaves to rule by his laws, much
more when he begineth to invade his subjects persons, rights, and liberties,
to set up an arbitrary power, impose unlawful taxes, raise forces, and make
war upon his subjects, whom he should protect and rule in peace; to pillage,
plunder, waste, and spoil his Kingdom; Imprison, murder and destroy his
people, in a hostile manner, to cap^vat them to h^e pleasure. This is a
sentence well worthy to come out of a Kings mouth, and to be^ingraven upon the
thrones of Kings and princes: and does more then abundantly justify Scotland,
in their late defensive war. Moreover Queen Elizabeth, and King James both,
by the public advice and consent of their realms, did give public aid and
assistance unto the protestants of France against their King, and to the
Netherlands against the king of Spain, and to the protestants in Germany and
Bohemia against the Emperor, and entered into solemn leagues and covenants
with them: if they had been traitors, and rebels, and that action of defense,
utterly unlawful, would those princes have joined with them in this manner?
who can think this? So did King Charles the first openly avow to aid the
protestants in France at Ree and Rotchell, against their King, who was come in
arms against them: and the Germane Princes against the Emperor: and the
Netherlands against the King of Spain; And entered into a solemn league with
them, for that end. All which do abundantly justify the Scottish defensive
wars, and free Scotland from the aspersion of disloyalty and rebellion. But
moreover,

7. It is to be considered, That King Charles I. himself has fully freed them
of all these aspersions in his public Acts in his Parliaments declareing, [The
Scots late taking up arms against him, and his Consellours, in defense of
their religion laws, and privileges, to be no treason nor rebellion, and them
to be his true and loyal subjects, (notwithstanding of all aspersions cast
upon them, by the Prelaticall and Popish party) because they had no evil nor
disloyal intentions at all against his Maj. person, crown, and dignity, but
only a care of their own preservation, and the redress of these eno^mities,
pressures, and grievances in Church and state which threatened desolation to
both.] See the acts of oblivion and pacification. Here is enough to stope the
mouths of all Calumniators and to vindicate them, and to clear the innocence
of their cause before all the Wo^d. And further King Charles who now is, did
approve of the same in his declaration at Dumferml^ which is cited Sect 2.

8. Some of their chief antagonists, are forced through the clearness of
truth, to assert such things, and grant such particulars, as will by clear and
undeniable consequence justify their taking up of arms and resisting the
armies of their King, when they came against then to destroy Religion, Lives,
Laws, and Liberties. (Beside that all of them are forced to speak most in
consequently unto their own principles, and by their concessions do overthrow
their own grounds, and arguments as might easily be made to appear if to
discourse at length of this subject were designed now.) As 1. John Barclay,
Lib. 4. Cap. 16. he says expressly, That if a King will alionate and subjecte
his Kingdom to another, without his subjects their consent, or be carried with
a hostile mind to the destruction of all his people, his Kingdom is actually
lost, and the people may not only lawfully resist and disobey; but also depose
him.) This is more then the Scots could desire for they plead not for deposeing
or dethroning of kings, but only for resisting and withstanding them, when they
carry a hostile mind against them (whereof a strong army of strangers,
marching with arms to their borders, after they were (contrary to all law)
declared rebels, is as evident a demonstration as can be) and are seeking the
ruin and destruction of their own subjects. They plead only. That in that case
the people may, and are bound before God, to defend themselves, when their
religion (which ought to be dearer to them, then any thing else) is sought to
be taken away, or altered, and service books, or mass books, and the like,
tyrannically obtruded upon them. So Contra Monarch. lib. 3. c. 8. He grants
that [the people have right to defend themselves against great cruelty] and
what greater cruelty could be expected by a nation from their King then to be
blocked up by sea and land, threatened with utter ruin and exti^pation,
unless they would sell soull and conscience and all; does not this speak
abundantly for the justifying of them? 2. D. Fern. Part. 3. s. 5. acknowledges
[that personal defense is lawful against the sudden and illegal assaules,
of the Kings messingers, or of himself, in so far as to ward off his blows, to
held his hands; and when the assault is inovitable.] Now if resistance be
lawful against sudden assaults, much more against premediated, deliberated
and advised assaults; If resistance of illegal assaults be lawful, then they
cannot be condemned, because the assaults of the King's forces were against all
law and reason, for there is no law warranding the King, or any other, having a
commission from him, to force popery upon them, by arms: If resistance be
lawful against inevitable assaults, then they are justified; for how could
they resist the assault of so many thousand armed men; but with armed men? Yea
when he allows in such a case that hands may be laid upon the prince, he more
then justifies them, who never did intend harm to his Maj. person, and
honor; but wished and sought the saifty and preservation thereof, by all
means. And again when he would answer the argument taken from Elisha's
resisting of the King, he grants [that itis lawful to resist the Kings
cutthroats] and what did Scotland more then resist his bloody emissaries?
Moreover he allows [to private persons liberty to deny subsidies and tribute
to the prince when he imployeth it to the destruction of the common wealth] and
is not this a clear resistance and a taking of the sword out of his hand? But
what shall a nation do that cannot get pay holden from a plundering army of
enemies, and so cannot get them disbanded, but take up arms and force then to
it? This is but resistance, and the other is resistance. Majus and minus non
variant speciem yea it is a question if it be lawful to deny to the King any
of his tribute though it be clear enough that it is lawful for a nation to
defend themselves against the King's unjust and illegal commissions. The same
Doct. in conscience satified Sect. 5. confesses that Salus Popul^ est suprem^
Lex and if so, some means must needs be allowed unto the people, to preserve
their own saiftie, when it is in hazard; and to recover it when almost lost, by
the invasion and tyranny of governors, who instead of levelling all to that
end, which should be before their eyes, are taking courses tending to the
destruction of the people; To come with an army of armed enemies against a
common wealth, is no sit mean to preserve that common wealth, but to common
sense speaks out an intention to destroy the same: and therefore Scotland can
not be condemned for preserving it self in such a case. 3. John Bodin de
republ. lib. 2. c. 5. grants. [That if a King turntyrant he may lawfully, at
his subjects requ^est be invaded, resisted; condemned or slain by a foreign
prince] and proves it at large from several exemples. And if a foreign
prince may do this why may not the subjects themselves do it if they be able?
if the subjects may petition for this help, why may they not forbear to trouble
strangers, if they be able to do it themselves? a foreign prince has no more
superiority nor right, over their prince for that effect, then they
havethemselves, yea not so much. And elsewhere in that book viz, lib. 1. c. 10,
and lib. 5. c. 5. he allows subjects to resist and to depose Kings in some
cases: which is more then Scotland does desire. 4. Arnisaeus de author prinp.
c. 2: n, 10. grants [that if the prince proceed extrajudicialiter, without
order of law by violence every private man has power to resist] much more then
may the body and representative of a land resist, when he comes against them
with fire and sword, which is the most extrajudiciall acting imaginable. So c.
16. n. 4. he grants that [limited princes may be resisted] and such an one
is, and always was, the King of Scotland; for they never knew an absolute
prince, as is clear from what has been already said. 5. So Grotius who de Iure
belli and pa^is. lib. 1. c. 4. n. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. denies that the war of
subjects against superiors is lawful, and would prove it by the law of
nature, the Mosaicall law, the Gospel, and by the practice of the primitive
christians: and n. (...). denies this not only to private subjects but also to
inferior Magistrates: all which to examine is not the work presently intended;
only it is worth the noticeing that even he is forced to grant many things,
which serve abundantly to justify the practice of Scotland for ibid. n. 7. He
grants [the law of not resisting does not bind when the danger is most
weighty and certaine] and does prove it thus; because the laws of God in some
cases admit the exception of extreme necessity, as the law of the sabbath: and
further adds, that this law about resistance has its ^ise, from their will
who did first associat themselves in a society, and created governors over
themselves; for if they were asked whether they would acknowledge these
conditions that they should die rather then resist, in any case, they would not
grant it, unless in this case when resistance would wrong the common wealth,
and occasion the killing of many innocents. He further proves it from that
passage which was cited out of Barclaius. yea he dar not condemn any, no not
the lesser part of the people who rise in arms, in extreme necessity, far
less would he condemn the body of a land useing this last remedy in the
extremity of hazard and danger, further he proves this from David who took
armed men 1. Sam. 22: 2. and. 23: 13. to resist the violence of Saul after he
had learned for certanety that he was seeking his life: and from the Maccabces
whom (as he thinks) nothing else can defend but the great and imminent danger
in which they were. And further n. 8. he grants that such princes may not only
be resisted but also punished by death, who are not absolute. And it has been
shown that the Kings of Scotland have been obnoxious unto their Parliaments
and yet they desire not so much as is here granted. Moreover n. 10. he
assenteth to Barclaius saying, as has been cited, that if a King alienate his
Kingdom he loses it: but further he adds if ^e prince but attempt to do so,
and to subject it to another, he may be resisted, and also n. 11. he assenteth
to Barclaius saying as has been cited, that the King does lose his power when
he seeks the destruction of his subjects. And again he says, N. 13. If the
king has one part of the supremacy, and the senate another, then the king may
be resisted when he incroacheth upon the senate, and that notwithstanding that
it were granted, the King only had power of war for that is to be understood
only of war with forraigners. Thus he does abundantly justify, the late
defensive war of Scotland, against their prince, who was incroaching upon the
liberties of Parliament and people.

These particulars seriously pondered will do much to clear their innocence
unto the world, and to vindicat their cause and practice from the many foul
calumnies and aspersions which the D^gs of the generation did cast upon them,
of purpose to foment the discord, betwixt the king and his faithful and loyal
subjects. And though by what is said, and conceded by their adversaries, the
clearness and equity of their cause appears, both in point of law and
conscience; yet for further clearing of the same, these few following
particulars may have some weight.

1. There is great difference to be put, betwixt actual disobeying of,
rebelling against, and violently with force of arms resisting, the lawful
Magistrate, doing his duty, and commanding just things warranded by the laws of
God, and the land: And disobeying his unjust Acts, and resisting his violent,
tyrannical, oppressing, plundering, spoiling and killing armies. The former is
a resisting of the very ordinance of God, forbidden, Romans 13. where the Apostle
is speaking of the civil Magistrate doing his duty, and in his place, as God's
deputy, exerceing the duties of his calling, and executing his office. But in
the other case, the Magistrate is out of his function and calling; for God
gives no command to do evil, nor to tyrannize. He is not God's vicegerent
when he plays the tyrant; and therefore he may be resisted and opposed,
without any violence done to the office or ordinance of God. As the King's
messinger may be resisted and withstood when he crosses his commission and
warrant, without any wrong done to the office or to the King. Every
disobedience in things sinful is not a resisting of the ordinance of God. The
office may be owned, and the person in the office honored, and esteemed, as he
ought, when yet his unjust violence may be resisted, and his sinful commands
disobeyed; for it is only powers that are ordained of God that must not be
resisted, and tyrants, or Magistrates turning tyrants, and exerceing tyranny,
cannot be called the ordinance of God; though the office abstracted from the
tyranny, be the ordinance of God: And there is no hazard of damnation, for
refuseing to obey unjust laws, but rather hazard of damnation, in willingly
following after the command: And so there is no danger in resisting such Acts
of tyranny; for tyrants exerceing tyranny, are no terror to evil doers: But on
the contrary they are a terror to good works, and therefore that place, Romans
13. cannot be understood of tyrants. It is a true and a worthy saying of famous
Mr Knox in his history of So^land Lib. 2. page 141. There is a great difference
betwixt the authority which is Gods ordinance and the persons of those, who are
placed in authority. The authority and God's ordinance can never do wrong; but
the corrupt person placed in authority, may offend; So that the King as king is
one thing, and the king Acting tyranny is another thing. They plead not for
rebelling against the office, or resisting that, which is God's ordinance. They
did never intend to destroy Magistracy, or to lessen the Kings Maj. just power
and lawful authority, or to wrong the office in the least. And therefore all
the arguments of their adversaries taken from Rom, 13. or the like places,
which speak against withstanding and opposeing of the office, and divine
appointment of God, are of no force, against them, and their cause. Tyranny is
one thing, and the office of the King is another thing: And what arguments
speak well against resisting the office, or the person duly, and legally
dischargeing the duties belonging to that office, will not conclude against
resisting of tyranny. So that all the arguments taken from Numb. 16. Exodus 22:
28. Eccles. 10: 20. and. 8: 2, 3, 4 Prove. 17: 26. And the like places, do not
speak home to their case.

2. There is also a great difference betwixt riseing up in arms without any
just lawful ground, or for trissles, or matters of small moment, as for the
exacting of some more tribute then is due by the law, or the like, and riseing
up in arms in extreme necessity, when religion, laws, lives, and liberties,
and all that was dear to them as men, and as christians were in hazard, and
this was their case, for the king came with an army upon them, and blocked them
up both by sea and land, and thus, with forraigners, was seeking to subdue
them, and so to overturne religion, laws, liberties and all, was not this
extreme necessity? What more imminent danger could be expected then an army of
bloody papists bent to prosecute their bloody designs coming with fire and
sword, encouraged by a commission from the king and so approaching their very
borders? Was there not then a necessity, an extreme and inevitable necessity,
to rise up in arms, for the saiftie of religion, laws, lives, and liberties,
when all was thus in most imminent danger? Should the Parliament and the whole
body of the land give up unto the lust of these bloody irish, popish,
prelaticall and malignant enemies, their own lives, and the lives of their
wives and children, their liberties as men, and as christians? Should they sell
religion and the land, their soulls, and their consciences unto those men
because (for sooth) they had a commission from the King? there is no reason in
the world for this. Therefore seeing there is nothing more dear to people then
their religion, their lives, and their liberties, a war raised in the defense
of these, cannot be accounted a war raised upon trissles, or sedition,
faction, or mutiny; but a necessary defensive war, not raised upon private
injuries and discontents, But upon matters of the greatest importance and
necessity, viz to prevent the extirpation of religion, the subversion of laws,
and liberties, and the destruction of lives and all Cicero de officis lib. 2.
can tell us that omnium societatum nulla est gratior mella carior quam ea quae
cum republica est nui cuique nosirum; cari sunt parents, cariliberi,
propi^qui, familiares, sed omnes omnium caritates patria una complex a est, pro
qua quis bonus dubitat mortem oppetere si ei sit profuturus.

3. There is also a difference betuixt a war raised of purpose to force the
supreme Magistrate to be of the same religion with the subject, or else to
dethrone him; and a war raised to defend that religion, which both Magistrate
and subject owneth. Betuixt a war raised in defense of that religion which has
never been established by the laws of the land; and a war raised in defense of
that religion, which is publicly owned by the laws of the land and which King
and subject both, are sworn to maintain, and which by the laws, becomes a
civil right and a part of the civil liberty of the subject. Whatever may by
said against a war raised in the former case; yet in this last case a war
defensive is most warrantable, and this was the very case of Scotland; for they
were seeking to defend the religion, which was established by the laws of the
land, and which popish and prelaticall malignants, were seeking to overturn; So
that any argument, which adversaries can bring from the practice of the
primitive christians, will conclude nothing against them; because the true
religion was not then established by law, the emperors had never consented
thereunto, but it was otherwise in Scotland as has been abundantly shown Sect.
1. and 2.

4. There is also a difference betuixt a violent laying of hands upon the
person of the King, of purpose to destroy, and cut him off, or to denude him of
his just power and privilege, and that in cold blood too, by private persons,
for some personal injuries: This they abhore and ever have abhored: and
betuixt a sinlesse self defense when unjustly assaulted by armies sent by the
King, to destroy and cut them off. In pleading for a sinlesse self defense,
they do not plead for an illegal taking away of the life of a King. Their
raising of forces in their own sinlesse self defense cannot be condemned; there
being an actual invasion made upon their lives and liberties which made their
war to be [tutela vitae proxima] the last refuge for the life, and the only
remedy that was left for the saifty of religion, and of all that was dear unto
them. So then their case not being a prosecution of adesigne of some private
persons upon some private injuries received, to destroy' and cut off the King,
or to denude him of his just power and privilege; but a national defense of
religion, lives, and liberties, against the Kings armies unjustly seeking to
destroy and violently to overturne all; None of the arguments of adversaries
taken from. 1. Sam. 24: 6, 10. and 26: 9, 11, 23. 2. Sam. 1: 12, 16. do
conclude against them, or speak to their case.

5. There is also a great difference betwixt a war contrived and carried on,
by private persons when grievously oppressed: And a war carried on, by the
body of a land in their representatives in Parliament, against a king. Suppose,
the first could not well be defended (which yet is not absolutely denied) yet
this last is clear; for a Parliament has more power over a king then any
private person, or subject how great so ever, has: judicious Calvin is clear
for this in his institutions lib. 4. cap. 20, n, 39. saying if there be
inferior Magistrates, such as the Ephori among the Lacedaemonians; Tribuns
among the Romans The demarchi; among the Athenians, and as the Estates of
Parliament in kingdoms now, if these connive at the king's oppressing of the
people they become persidious because they betray the peoples liberty, which by
God's appointment they are to protect. Thus Scotland is cleared, for their
war was carried on by the body of the land in their representatives, by their
Parliament, acting in its public and parliamentary capacity: and so the
arguments drawn by adversaries from the practice of the primitive Christians,
speak nothing against the Parliament of Scotland Their levying war against
the king in their own defense, and in the defense of the liberties and laws of
the land.

6. There is a difference betwixt a war raised by a Parliament of purpose to
cut off the king, and to depose him from his throne and government (which has
been several times practiced by the Parliaments of Scotland, when their kings
turned tyrants and vicious in their lives, as was shown above) and their case,
which was a case of pure defense, there being no intention to offer the least
violence to his Maj. person, crown or dignity: but only to defend religion,
and the kingdom, against the popish and malignant, invading, plundering
forces, which were sent forth to destroy all: for their armies advanced with
petitions seeking redresses of wrongs with all humility, and showing their
willingness and readiness to lay down arms so soon as they were secured in
the peaceable enjoyment of the religion sworn to, and freed from the just
fears of these bloody invading forces who were seeking the destruction of their
lives and liberties. So then when their adversaries reason against riseing in
arms against the King they speak not to the point; none of these arguments
come near to their case which was a case of natural sinlesse self defense.

7. It would be considered that the war did not begin upon the Parliaments
side; but they were forced and constrained to it: The King commanded all the
English Nobility, with all their power and forces to meet him at York April
1639. that they might advance with him toward Scotland. The Scottish Noble Men
who were at court, were also sent down toward Scotland to raise their friends,
having some expert foreign Officers with them: There were three thousand Men
sent down with the navy, and six hundred Horsemen were sent down to the
Borderes to make incursions, all which preparations of war did clearly speak
out his Maj. intention, and did necessitate them to bestir themselves in their
own defense; against those invaders, and to keep their own rights unviolated:
And yet with all they had their supplications ready to present, after the
granting of which, viz. a quiet and peacable enjoyment of their Religion,
Lives, Laws, and Liberties, they resolved to lay down arms and accordingly
did so; for after the pacification, Iun. 18. 1639. their army was disbanded.
Again when the Parliament which was convocated by his Maj. command conform to
the pacification, was, contrary to the articles, and contrary to the liberties
of the land, and privileges of the Parliament, prorogued; the Castles of
Edinburgh and Dumbritton, were fortified with men and ammunition; These friends
traveling to England and Irland were constrained to swear unlawful oaths; or
to go to prisons; The sea was stopped; and no liberty was granted to
trassique, and so the land was blocked up; The articles of pacification were
broken; Berwick and Carlisle, were fortified; The Commissioners who were sent
from the Parliament to the King, were imprisoned, contrary to the law of
Nations; The Castle of Edinburgh was killing many, and threatening to destroy
the whole city with their cannon; their ships were intecepted by sea, and their
merchands spoiled of their goods, sea men were taken prisoners and miserably
handled: When matters went thus, were they not constrained to take up arms
again, and to advance toward England that they might seek peace, from his
Maj. not being able to maintain an army on the borders, after they had been so
impoverished, through the long want of fine tradeing, and not to lay down
arms, until their necessary and just desires were granted? Now let any judge,
whether they can be justly blamed for standing to their defense, being thus
necessitated as they would not betray the Land, their Laws, their Liberties,
and their Religion, and so sell their soul and consciences and all into the
hands of their malicious enemies?

So then, when this shall be made the state of the question whether or not the
Parliament, and body of the Kingdom of Scotland, may not lawfully take up
arms (having no purpose to wrong his Maj. person, or to spoil him of his
just rights and privileges) to defend themselves, Lands, Liberties and (no
less then) their Religion after it had been settled by law: When the King (in
stead of granting their just and necessary desires viz. security, that they
should be ruled by lawful general Assemblies, and other inferior Church
judicatories in Church matters, according to the ancient discipline of the
Church: And by a free Parliament in civil matters, according to the
foundamentall laws of the Land; And that they might be free from illegal
courts and alteration in their Religion: and that the articles of agreement
should be kept and that granted which was promised under hand and seal) is
raising a strong army of forraigners, Irish, Popish, prelaticall, and malignant
enemies to the Church and kingdom of Scotland intending to destroy their Land,
Liyes, and liberties, to overturn their Religion, and Privileges; and for this
end blocketh them up by sea and Land, fortifyeth Castles in their bosom,
giving them commission to destroy all they could and denunceth them all rebels
and treatours? Sure it may be supposed that, seeing this is the true state of
the question it shall easily be granted, that this was a necessary defensive
war, and that Scotland could do no less then they did, unless they would
have willingly betrayed their Religion and all which they had as men, or as
Christians, into the hands of their bloody and cruel adversaries, which no law
would have warranded them to do.

But to put a close to this. This their practice is abundantly warranted.

1. By Lawyers affirming that such a defensive war, Cui libet, omni jure,
ipsoque rationis ductu permissa est. Such a war is warranted to all, by all
laws imaginable. Spigelius tells ^s in his Lexicon tit. bellum. That [that is a
just war which is undertaken for defense,] and cites let Vim. ff. de just.
and jur. Yea he tells us that if a war be not undertaken for defense, it is
sedition, though carried on by the Emperor; for he can no more hurt by war
then he can take away a man's life without a cause, and again he tells us,
that that is a just and necessary war, Quod sit se and sua defendendo, that
is, for defense of a man's life, lands, and goods, and liberties, and what is
dear unto him. Hence is that common saying, Vim^i repellere omnia jura
permittunt. It is lawful by all law, to resist violence by force of arms.
And, Defendere se est juris naturae and gentium. The law of nature and nations
teaches every man to defend himself. And Cajus the lawyer says, That the
very law of nature permits a man to defend himself against danger. And
Florenti^s, It is right that what ever a man has done in the defense of his
own body, should be accounted lawfully done. Yea Ovid tells us the same,
Armaque in armatos sum^re jura sinunt. To meet armed men with arms, all laws
allow.


2. By the concessions of adversaries; for they grant that it is lawful to
flee from the tyranny of abused authority, as Moses did Exodus 2. David, 2 Samuel
19. Elisha, 1 King. 19. Joseph and Christ, Mat. 2. and this Christ warranteth
expressly Mat. 10. Now this flying is a plain resisting of rulers, and if
resisting be unlawful, this must be unlawful likewise, and if this be not
unlawful, resisting cannot be unlawful: for the the same justice and equity
which warrandeth men by flight to decline unjust assaults, does also warrant an
escapeing of them by resistance, when flight will not do it: (Which was indeed
the case of Scotland, for it is not imaginable, how a whole land, man, wife,
and child, old and young, sick, and whole, can flee from their habitations and
go seek their livelyhoods in other Kingdoms; beside, that it is a great
question, if the States of a land, the peers and inferior judges, were bound,
by flying to leave the Land, Liberties and all, unto their enemies, if they had
power to defend themselves) for if the law of nature oblige men to preserve
themselves by flight from tyranny it does also oblige them to defend themselves
by resisting, when they cannot conveniently secure themselves by flight; o^
when they cannot flee without betraying of the country, Religion and all. All
this will be so much the clearer if it be considered that if a tyrant has
legal power from God to kill, he has the same legal power to summon legally,
and siste before his tribunal, such and such persons: And therefore if it be
unlawful to resist his tyrannous murders, it must be also unlawful to resist
his legal citations to that effect, and so unlawful to flee; for one and the
same power cites and judges: Therefore if the law of defense warrant one to
resist his summonds, and not to compeer it warrandeth one to resist his
tyranny, if he can be able; It is true the one resistance is more, but majus
and minus non variant speciem: And if the one be a fault in conscience, so must
the other be: See Lex Rex, Page 325, 326. Next, they grant that it is lawful
for subjects to resist a foreign enemy, invadeing the land with arms; and
thus their practice is justified. It is true their enemies had the Kings
Commission; but the having or wanting of such a commission, will not alter the
case of the land, which is put to defend it self: For whether these enemies
have such a commission or not, they are strangers and foreign enemies to the
land, and they come with a hostile mind to destroy, and to conquer the same;
and therefore what ever commission they have, the people are bound to defend
themselves, their Families, young and old, their Lands, their Liberties, and
their Religion, and all which they have. They grant also, that a private man may
defend himself, when violently assaulted, and his life is in danger, and when
he can no way escape, he may rather kill as be killed. So Gro^us de ^re Belli
ac Pacis, Lib. 2. c. 1.. 3. Si corpus impetatur vi praesente cum periculo vitae
non aliter vitabil^, tunc bellum esse licitum, etiam cum interfectione
periculum inferentis. Much more will this hold good in the case of a whole
Kingdom, when they are assaulted by cruel enemies and cannot escape with their
wives and children; but must needs fall upon the sword of these bloody enemies,
unless they use an innocent and lawful resistance Yea ibid.. 6. He grants
that in case a man be in danger to suffer mutilation he may resist; Seeing the
loss of a member especially if it be a chief member, is sad, and in some
respect comparable to the life; And moreover (says he) it can not be known
whether or not the life may not be in danger thereby: Will not this then serve
abundantly to justify Scotland, when their enemies came with a purpose not only
to mutilat but also to kill? They grant likewise that a maid may resist the
King when he is seeking to abuse her; And shall not an army of malignants be
resisted, who if they get their will would abuse Virgins, and married Women
also.

3. By the law of Nature, Nature has given to beasts and birds power and
ability to defend themselves, hence that

-- -- Omnibus hostem
Praesidiumque datum sentire, and noscere teli,
Vimque modumque sui.
'T is given to all, their foe to know,
And how to guaird and ward the blow:
To know their weapon even by sense,
And how to use it in defense.
And that of Horace,

Dente Lupus, corn^ Taurus petit, unde nisi in^
Monstratum?
That Wolves with tearing teeth and mouth,
And Bulls with pushing horns pursu'th,
Whence is it that this skill they have;
Nature within, it to them ga^e
And that of Lucretius,

Sentit enim vim quidque suam, quae possit abuti,
Cornna nota prius vitulo, quam frontibus extant:
Illis iratus petit, atque infensus inurget.
Creatures their strength do early know,
Which they may use, abuse also,
The calf his horns does know, before
On's fore head they show less or more:
Pushing with them in tender age,
And pressing hard as in a rage.
and shall beasts be in a better condition then man? Shall a bull have liberty
to defend it self with horns, and shall man have no liberty to defend himself
against tyrants, or souldeours in their name coming to kill, plunder, burn, and
slay all? Nature allows, Vim vi repellere, To resist violence with violence,
to all; and against all violence without exception; Nature can put no
difference betwixt violence offered by a Magistrate, and violence offered by
another person. Defensio vitae necessariae est, and a jure naturali profluit;
It is necessary by the law of nature that a Man defend his life. And the reason
is because God has implanted in every Creature, inclinations, and motions to
preserve it self. Each are bound to love themselves better then their
neighbors, for the love of themselves is the measure of that love which they
owe to their neighbor. The law of nature allows one rather to kill then to
be killed, and to defend himself more then his neighbor, Cicero Lib. 1. De
Officiis says [Injustitiae duo genera sunt, etc. There are two kinds of
wrongs, one of these who do the wrong, the other of those who when they may
hold off the wrong, do it not: He who without cause feteth upon any, being
angry, or some other way stirred up, lays violent hands upon his neighbor;
but he who does not defend nor resist the injury when he may, is as far in the
wrong as if he should desert his parents, his friends, and his country.] And
again, cum sint duo genera decertandi; etc. There are two kinds of
contending, one by argueing which is propper to men, the other by force, which
is propper to beasts, we must flee to this last when we cannot make use of the
former] and again in his Orat. pro Milone he says, Est haec non scripta,
etc. [This law is not a law written, but a law borne with us, we have not
learned it, nor acquired it', nor read it, but we have taken it, drawn it, and
extracted it from nature it self, to which we are not taught but made, we are
not instructed but are endued with it, that if our life be in hazard by snares,
by violence, and darts of thieves or enemies all honest ways must be assayed
to free our life. So reason teaches this to the learned, necessity to the
Barbarians and custom to nations, and to beasts nature it self has prescribed
this, that whatever way they can, they should resist all violence and save
their lives.] Thus you see nature it self and such as spoke by the light of
nature do warrant such a practice.

4. By the law of nations, the actions of some of which have been mentioned
already and he who desires to see more may consult [Prin's Appendix to his
sovereign power of Parliaments, etc.]

5. By the law of God; as we see by many examples. 1. Of David who being but a
private man, and a subject, and now unjustly persecuted by Saul the King, who
was seeking his life, is forced to defend himself with arms, by taking to him
first 600. men 1. Chron. 12. and then a great host v. 22, 36. and this was
warranted of God, for the Spirit of God commends them for their valor v. 2,
8, 15, 21. And the Spirit coming on Am^sai v. 18. prompting him to speak what
he spoke clears it also. 2. of Elisha, 2. King. 6: 32. He keeps out the
house against the King, by force; and resists him who was coming to use
unjust violence. 3. Of the 80 Priests who resisted Uzziah: 2. Chron. 26. 17.
Those are called most valient men and it is said [they withstood Uzziah and
they thrust him out.] 4. Of the people their rescueing of Jonathan 1. Sam. 14.
unjustly condemned to die. They resisted the Kings act and edict
notwithstanding of his oath: Yea they did swear the contradictorie of the Kings
oath. 5. Of Libnah revolting from Ichora^. 2. Chron. 21: 10. because he pressed
them to idolatry, as is probable from v. 13. so says Lavater, Zanchius and
Cornel a lap. see for this also that noble commentator Trochreg on the
Ephespag. 923 6. of the city Abell resisting Ioab. 2. Sam. 20. 7. of Elijah. 2.
King. 1. killing many hundereds of the Kings men and emissaries sent to
apprehend him. 8. By Christ bidding his disciples Luke 22: 36, 37, 38. Buy
swords. Nor is there any thing in scripture contrary to this; for the passages
of which the adversaries make use, do either speak against opposeing of lawful
acts of just governors, as Eccles. 8: 2, 3, 4. Numb. 16. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2:
13, 14. or against opposeing of inferior Magistrates, as well as others, and so
serve not their purpose, such as 1 Pet. 2:1 4. etc. Romans 13. Exodus 22:28. Job
34:18. or speaks not of a pure defensive war but of seeking the utter
destruction and ruin of the supreme Magistrate, as some of David's expressions,
which they make use of.

6. By right reason: for there is no striker obligation betuixt a prince and
his subjects then betuixt parents and children, yea not so stricke; and yet if
the father become distracted and rise up in a fury to kill his children, the
children may lawful join together and resist him, and bind his hands; So may
the wife resist the unjust violence of her unnatural husband, much more may
subjects resist the unjust violence of their King. 2. Otherwise a King who was
an ordinance of God ordained for a rich blessing; should become the greatest
curse imaginable, if actu primo he be invested of God with power to tyrannize;
and the people be put out of all capacity to resist, he should become the
greatest of curses to a people. 3. This should cross the end for which people
did set up a King over themselves; it was to preserve them, and to keep them
from wrongs and not to put power in his hand to kill and murder them as he
pleases. 4. This would put rational creatures into a worse condition then the
beasts are into for if their King will, he may cut all their throats, destroy
all their liberties, ravish all their wives, and daughters, destroy all their
lands and livings, and that without any control or the least resistance
imaginable. But who can believe this? Yea put the case there were but three or
four Kings in all the world all the lives of the rest should be at their
devotion; so that if they in a fit of fury and madness give out the word of
command, they may cause kill all, without any resistance: and would not this
reflect upon the wisdom and godnesse of God, if he ordered matters so? but the
absurdity of this is abundantly clear so that more needs not be said. He who
desires more satisfaction in this question may peruse Innius Brutus his
vindiciae contra tyrannos Quest. 3. a book as yet unanswered by any: and Lex
rex which got never another answer nor a faggot, a quike way forsooth of
dispatching an answer, and Mr Prins [Soveraigne power of Parliaments etc.]
Where the matter is fully cleared both in point of law and conscience, which
was published by order of Parliament: and a book entitled de jure Magistratus
insubditos: and Trochreg's commentary on the Ephesians where he will find this
question prudently judiciously and satisfactorily handled from page 911. to 925.

Thus in some measure is this Ninth particular cleared and the Iawfulnesse of
Scotland's defensive war clearly shown, and hereby the unlawfulness of
swearing any oath, which might have imported a condemning of that war, is
also demonstrated.

By what has been said to this Ninth particular, the Tenth and last is
likewise cleared viz. The lawfulness of Scotland their seizing upon the
Castles within themselves: For if it be lawful for a land to defend
themselves; and to use resistance by arms, in their own necessary defense; It
is also lawful for them to seize upon such castles and strengths, as may prove
a fit and necessary mean of defense. It is lawful to possess these, and keep
them out against the enemies of the country, who if they had them, would make
use of them for the destruction of the land and for the subversion of Religion,
Lives, and liberties: What ever law will allow of self defense, will also allow
the use of all fit means for that end; For the end includes the means
leading to the end. Moreover these Castles and Fortifications were originally
appointed for the saifty and security of the Kingdom, and of none else, and
therefore at the learge treaty, it is concluded in answer to the second demand;
[That the Castle of Edinburgh and other strengths of the Kingdom should with
the advice of the Estates of the Parliament, according to their first
fundation, be fournished and used for defense and security of the Kingdom.] So
that hereby the King approved of all which was done in this business, before:
and acknowledged that according to their first fundation they were for the
Kingdom's advantage. It is true, these Castles were annexed to the Crown Parl.
11. Act 41. King James 11. but that was done to guaird against the poverty of
the real me, and for all that the King might not give them away in fee or
heritage, nor in franck tenement without the advice, deliverance and decree,
of the whole Parliament: And for great, soon, and reasonable causes of the
realm, otherwise any alienation or disposition was to be of no avail; And it
was enacted that the Kings of Scotland should be sworn at their coronation to
keep his statute in all points: and Act 9. Parl. 9. king Iam. 6. says that
[These Castles are for the welfare of the realm, as well as for his Maj.
behoof: so Act. 125. Parl. 7. K. Iam. 6. The Castles are called, the keys of
the realm. So though the King has the custody and command of them, yet it is
always in order to the right end, that is, for the saifty and good of the
country, and if he should make use of them, for the ruin and destruction of
the country, they should be abused, and might lawfully be taken out of his
hand and converted to the right use, as when a father turning mad will kill his
children with a sword, the children may lawfully take the sword from him with
which, he was bound to defend them, against the common enemy, and make use of
it in their own defense. Castles and fortifications are not the King's
patrimony, but belong to him as King and Governor of the land, so that he is
to make no use of them, but for the countries good, he cannot dispone and sell
them as he may do other things, that belong to his patrimony: Therefore Scotl.
cannot be blamed, for seizing on these for their own saifty, seeing this is
their native end, and the only thing they were ordained for. Nor can any be
blamed for refuseing that oath which would have imported a condemning of this
lawful and necessary deed.

Thus reader thou have shortly laid before thee a hint of what clear grounds
there were, of stumbling at the taking of this oath as to the very civil part
thereof, seeing this civil supremacy is and must be the same with his perogative
and his prerogative is such as has been shown. A difference betuixt the
supremacy and the prerogative is not imaginable, unless it be this. that the
supremacy is more comprehensive, and takes in all the prerogative and
something more: yea by some posteriour acts, they are made of one and the same
latitude, as in the act for the national Synod, the settling of the external
government of the church is said to belong to his Maj. as an inherent right of
the crown. and how? by virtue of his prerogative royal and supreme authority:
so that, his prerogative royal and supreme authority are made one: and if they
be one as to ecclesiastical matters much more must they be one and the same, as
to civil matters: and more clearly in the King's commission for the heigh
commission, where it is said His Maj. by virtue of his royal prerogative in
all causes and over all persons etc: so that any may see that his supremacy
over all causes is one and the same thing with his prerogative. Moreover this
is certane that whosoever do acknowledge and recognosce the King's power and
supremacy, in all causes, and over all persons, do acknowledge and recognosce
all that which they say agrees to him as King, and whosoever do acknowledge
and recognosce this, do acknowledge and recognosce his royal prerogatives: for
his royal prerogatives are such things, as agree to him as King, because they
are annexed to the crown, as they say. It is true in their 11 act of parl: the
acknowledgment of his Maj. prerogative is mentioned beside the oath of
alleagiance: But that will nor make them to differ so far; yea the
acknowledgment of his Maj. prerogative is but explicatory of a part of that
supremacy mentioned in the oath of alleagiance. So that his prerogative over
parliaments and over their actions and over all other subjects, is but a part
of that supremacy which they say he has over all persons and in all causes. So
in the oath for asserting his majesty's prerogative, defensive arms and the
Kingdoms entering in a league with England and all their proceedings in the
work of reformation are condemned, and this cannot be denied, though there be
an express oath afterward conceived of purpose for that end, viz the
declaration set forth. ^ept. 2. 1662.

SECTION. XII.
The meaning of the oath of Alleagiance as to its ecclesiastic part opened,
and some reasons why upon that account it could not be taken.

THe civil part of this oath of alleagiance being thus spoken to, in the next
place the ecclesiastic part must be handled; and when this is but explained,
reasons without much difficulty will appear, why as to that part of it, it
could not then, (nor as yet can) in conscience be subscribed unto.

In this part, as in the other, the sense which the tenderers thereof do put
upon it, must be searched and sought for, out of their acts: for though it
could have been wished (and both reason and religion would have required it)
that after the example of Abraham, they had made the oath as plain and easy
as might be, so that the sense and meaning of it had been obvious to all; or
had annexed such a gloss and meaneing, as the words in ordinary construction
would bear, and tender Christians might saifly assent unto: yet there was no
such thing done: yea not being desired to do it, would they do it: yea nor
would they suffer any to enquire at them, in what sense they would have the
oath taken: yea which is more, they made an act dischargeing all to offer any
sense of the oath under the pain of treason. So that there is no way now left
to find out the meaning of the oath as to this part but by their acts and
actings, which, when considered, together with some other things useful in
this bussinesse, will help to clear the true sense thereof. Three things then
must be spoken to. 1. The rise and progress of this bussinesse, which is
imported by this part of the oath, viz, the Kings supremacy over persons
ecclesiastic, and in ecclesiastic causes, in England. 2. The rise and
progress of it in Scotland 3. Some acts and deeds of the King and Parliament
who now tender it.

As to the first of these. It is notour enough what King Henry the Eight did,
when upon some private discontents he shook off the Pop's supremacy Anno 1530.
for having caught the Clergy in a Praemunire, for countenanceing some way or
other the Pop's legate, he would not be satisfied with their payment of 100000.
lib: unless also they would acknowledge him, for the supreme head of the
Church on earth, which after some debate in their Synod both in the upper and
lower house of convocation, was condescended to, in form as follows cujus,
etc. of which Church. (viz the Church of England) we recognosce his Maj. to be
the singular protector, the only and supreme Lord: and (so far as Christ's
laws will permit) the supreme head.) This was subscribed unto by all, and put
into their public acts or instruments, and presented to the King: afterward
Parl. 24. c. 12. upon this ground it was statuted and ordained that all
ecclesiastical suites and controversies, should be determined within the
Kingdom, and all appeals to Rome were prohibited: and Parl. 25. c. 20. The
manner of electing of Archbishops and Bishops was altered, and that power given
and granted to the King, and upon this same foundation. Parl. 26. c. 1. it was
declared that the King is supreme head of the Church of England, and that he
should have all honors and preheminences which were annexed unto that title:
and after this there followed another act. c. 3. for Tenths and first fruits as
appertaineing to that head-shipe and supreme authority. Hence also Anno 1532.
The convocation submitting unto the King's Maj. promises in verbo sacerdotis
[That they would never from thence forth presume, to attempt, allaidge, clame
or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute, any new canons, constitutions,
ordinances, provincial or others or by whatsoever name, they shall be called,
in the convocation unless the Kings most royal assent may to them be had, to
make promulge and execute the same, and that his Maj. do give his most royal
assent and authority in that behalf.] Which deed of theirs the Parliament did,
shortly thereafter, ratify in these terms [That none of the said clergy from
thence forth should presume to allaidge, clame, or put in ure, any
constitutions, or ordinances, provincial or synodall or any other canons nor
should enact promulge, or execute any such canons, constitutions or ordinances
(by whatsoever name or names they may be called) in their convocations, in time
coming (which always shall be assembled by the Kings write) unless the same
clergy may have the kings most royal assent and license, to make promulge and
execute such canons constitutions, and ordinances provinicall and synodall;
upon pain of evry one of the said clergy doing the contrary to this act, and
thereof convicted, to suffer imprisonment and make fine at the king's will. 25.
Parl. c. 19.] So Parl. 35. c. 1. There was another oath devised, and ratified
which was to be imposed upon the subject, for the more clear asserting of the
King's supremacy.

By these Particulars any may see that Peter Martyr had good ground to say, as
he does on. 1. Sam. 8. That King Henry took all that power to himself which the
Pope challenged [atque ho^ fortasse est quod Rex Angliae, voluit se secundum
Christum appellari caput ecclesiae, putavit enim camp^testatem quam sibi Papa
usur paverat, suamesse, and in reguo suo ad se pertinere, i. e, he would there
fore be called head of the Church next under Christ, because he thought that
all that power which the Pope did usurp did belong to him within his own
dominions] and he had good ground to say that [it was a proud title which gave
much offense unto the godly] Nor was it without reason that judicious Calvin
did inveigh so much against that title in his commentary on Amos 7. saying qui
juitio tantopere etc. i e. They who at the first, did so much extol Henry king
of England were no doubt, inconsider as men, they gave unto him the supreme
power over all; and this did always wound me; They were blasphemous when they
called him supreme head of the Church, under Christ.] So that Peter Heylyn must
not be believed, when he tells the world in his discourse of the reformation
of the Church of England, page 13. [That th^se statuts which concern the kings
supremacy, are not introductory of any new right that was not in the crown
before, but only declaratory of an old] and again page 48. 49. [That when the
supremacy was recognized by the Clergy in their convocation to king Henry 8. It
was only the restoreing of him to his propper and original power invaded by
the popes of these later ages) for that title of supreme head, not only seemed
to have some what in it of an innovation (as himself is forced to acknowledge
in the following words) but really had an innovation in it of no small
consequence as shall appear.

But this title of supreme head gave offense both at home and abroad and
therefore Queen Elizabeth did change it into this [of supreme governor over
all persons, as well in all causes ecclesiastic as civill] and in these terms
it was kept, and is to this day: But all this change, did not much help the
matter; for many were offended even there at, and what wonder, seeing it seemed
to attribute to her Maj. no less spiritual jurisdiction and power then what
the former oath did importe. Whereupon the Queen, in the first year of her
reign, after the Parliament had condescended on the forementioned oath
published an admonition in her injunctions, of purpose, to explain and
interpret the sense and meaning thereof; and gave it this sense [That nothing
was, is or shall be meant or intended by the same oath, to have any other duty
alleagiance or bond required by the same then was acknowledged to be due to the
most noble kings of famous memory King Henry 8. her Maj. father and King Edward
6. her Maj. brother. That her Maj. neither does nor ever will challenge any
other authority, then that which was challenged, and lately used by the said
noble kings, which is and was of ancient time due to the imperial crown of
this realm. That is under God to have the soveraignity and rule over all
manner of persons borne within these realms, dominions and countries, of
what estate either ecclesiastical or temporal, soever they be; so as no other
foreign power shall, or ought to have any superiority over them.] And this
was confirmed by Parliament 5. Eliz. cap. 1. But neither did this remove the
offense; for still the oath did import more then soveraignity over all
persons, even over all causes also: and it was certain that King Henry 8. did
both challenge and use more power then that, and therefore the convocation of
the clergy meeting Anno 1562. took notice of the offense, and saw a necessity
of declareing another sense, for the satisfaction of all, and this they did
Artic. 37. declaring and signifying, [That there was no authority in sacred
matters contained under that title, but that only prerogative, which had been
given always to all Godly princes, in holy scriptures by God himself: viz That
they should rule all Estates, and degrees, committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or temporal, and to res^raine with the civil
sword, the stbb^rn and evildo^rs, as also to exclude thereby the Bishop of Rome
from having any jurisdiction in the realm of England,] and this Article was
assented unto, by the Parliament 13. of Eliz. c. 12. and is insert in the
statute book. But, under favor, any may see that this covering was not
sufficient to hide the deformites of that oath as worded, for all the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome was hereby excluded: now the Bish. of Rome's
power was more then civil, for it was ecclesiastic also; and the oath gave
unto the Queen that which was taken away from the Pope: and more over, supreme
governor in causes ecclesiastic imports more then this explication does.
And therefore it had been much better, if no more had been intended, then this
explication saifly taken, does hold forth; to have changed the words of the
oath and made them more conformable to the gloss: for every one who reads
and sees this sense will not be able to discern an harmony betwixt them; the
oath as worded holding forth more then the gloss and hence it was that for all
this gloss, the English divines were put to much trouble to defend themselves;
and when sorely pressed with the words of the oath they seemed to be at some
loss and disadvantage; and were constrained to run from the words of the oath,
unto the gloss, which is a sufficient proof that if no more be intended by the
oath, then what is held forth in the gloss give^, the oath ought to be
otherwise worded. and hence also it is that all the followers of Erastus, to
this day, do look upon the Church of Engl. as wholly of their judgment, and
this puteth such divines as write against Erastianisme to great pains, to
search out the meaning of the English divines, to answer that objection, and
certanely these divines would have wished that the oath had been otherwise
worded; So that adversaries might have had less ground to boast of the Church
of Englands being of their judgment. Yea Triglandius in diss^rt. de Civil. and
Eccles. pot. Waveth the English divines, in this point, fearing possibly that
he should not be able to extricate himself out of the thicket of difficulties
which he might see before him, and therefore says, Cap. 8. Page 154, and 155.
Controversiam Anglorum, i. (...). We own not the controversy of the Englishes
with Papists, upon this subject a^ owrs; for we are not of the judgment of
Papists; nor are we necessitated to defend our judgment, by the judgment of the
English divines. And again in his Amapologia, Page 726. Col. 2. Quamvis non
di^eamur, etc. Though we cannot deny, but they (i. e. the Englishes,) in
respect of the usurped hierarchy there, and the King's power over it, have
extended the King's supremacy further then it ought to have been. And Apollonius
in his Ius Majestatis, Part. 1. Page 11. tells us that [Some reformed divines
in the heat of disput against the Papists out of hatred to the Roman hierarchy
did turn a little out of the right way, and that they spoke according to the
laws of that Kingdom and commonwealth in which they lived. This especially is
to be noted in those divines who wrote of the King's supremacy in the Kingdom
of England. The learned have seen the writtings of Lancelot, Tooker, Burchill,
Thomson, and Salcobrig, etc. And the writtings of their adversaries, who
debated with them concerning the King's supremacy, and all who are not slaves
in their judgments, unto the great ones of the World, may see clearly that
there are failings on both hands.] And again out of Didoclave, Page 43. he
tells us, [That albeit they did blote out the metaphorical title of the head
of the Church, lest it should give offense, and put in its place, the Supreme
Governor; Yet the sense was the same; for Henry of Salisburry says, That the
King of England is the primat of the Church of England, and that he is a mixed
person, having both Ecclesiastic and temporal Jurisdiction, and that in a
supreme way: and proves from the statute I. Eliz. that the jurisdict. Eccl.
which was, or might have been exercised, by any spiritual or Church power, for
visiting the Ecclesiastic state and order, for reforming, bringing into order
and punishing Churchmen, all sort of errors, schisms, abuses, offenses, and
enormities, within the Kingdom, is for ever annexed unto the Crown.] So that
it is too too apparent that several of the English divines run a further length
and give a larger exposition of the supremacy: So dangerous a thing is it to
admit of oaths, which must have strained glosses, and commentaries, for
clearing of them; and which the words will not in a fair construction, bear:
moreover if any consult the later actings of King and Parliament there in
England, they shall see a far other sense put upon it; and such as plead for
the present change of Church government there, walk much upon this supremacy;
and particularly the author of the grand case asks how any man who has taken
or is willing to take that oath, can speak against the King's power of setting
up what form of Church government he pleases in the Church; which whether it
may not make Englishmen of a truly tender conscience scruple now, at the
taking of that oath, let wise men judge.

Next as to the rise of this power over the Church, and the occasion of this
oath in Scotland: seeing it may sufficiently be gathered from the short
historical narration of the government of the Church set down Sect. 1. a short
recapitulation will be sufficient here.

In the confession of faith (which was ratified and approved by the Parliament,
Anno 1560. and again ratified and insert in the records Anno 1567) cap. 25.
the power in Church matters which is there given unto the civil Magistrate is in
these words. [That to them chiefly and most principally appertains the
conservation and purgation of religion -- and they are appointed for the
maintenance of the true religion, and for suppressing of idola^ry and
superstition] and in that same Parl. An. 1567, Act 2. there is an act which was
made Anno 1560. ratified ordaineing that the ^ishop of Rome called the Pope
have no jurisdiction or authority within this realm, and that none of his Maj.
subjects, suite or desire title, or right of the said Bishop of Rome or his
sect. to any thing within his realm under the pain of banishment, etc. and
that no Bishop use any jurisdiction in time coming by the said Bishop of Romes
authority under the pain forsaid, whereby the Popes authority was quite
rejected not only in civil matters, but in Church matters, and yet there is no
express word of the Kings being invested with any such power.

Anno 1568. There was one Thomas Bassenden Printer in Edinburgh who did printe
a book entitled the fall of the Roman Church, and in that book the King was
called the supreme head of the Church. This gave great offense, and moved the
general assembly to cause call in these books, and to delete that title of the
Kings. But all this did not preserve the Church from encroachments, for when
Montgom. pretended Archb. of Glasgow was proceeded against, the king summoned
the whole synod of Lothian before him and afterward when this same Mr
Montgomery was summoned before the National Assembly, there came a Messinger
of arms from his Maj. to discharge the Assembly under the pain of rebellion
and of putting of them to the horn, to proceed any further; whereupon the
assembly did complain of this incroachment, April 27, Anno 1580. as such the
like whereof had never been made before. But this availed not for Mr
Balcanquell and Mr Dury were summoned before the Council for some freedom
which they had used in preaching: Of this the Assembly did complain again,
which occasioned a conference betwixt the King and some Ministers, the result
whereof was [That in all time coming the trial of Ministers doctrine should be
referred to Church Iudicatories as the only competent Judge.] But this was soon
forgotten, for Anno 1581. Mr Balcanquell was again accused, and the privileges
of the Church were incroached upon, which did put the Church to supplicat Anno
1582. and complain that, [His Maj. by advice of some consellours was about to
take the spiritual Power and authority upon himself propperly belonging unto
Christ as the King and head of his church, and of the ministry; and the
execution thereof unto such as bear office in ecclesiastical government, so
that in his person some men press to erect a new Popedom, as if his Maj.
could not be full King and head of the commonwealth unless the spiritual as
well as the temporal power should be put into his hand, unless Christ be
bereft of his authority, and the two jurisdictions confounded, which God has
divided, which tends directly to the wrecke of all true relig.] and it their
next assembly there was an article drawn up to be presented unto his Maj. to
this affect [That seeing the jurisdiction of the Church was granted by God the
Father, through our Mediator JESUS CHRIST, and given to those only, who by
preaching and overseeing, bear office within the same, to be exercised, not by
the injunctions of men, but by the only rule of God's Word; That an Act of
Parliament concerning the liberty and jurisdiction of the Church, be so
plainly declared, that hereafter none other under whatsoever pretense have any
color to ascribe or take upon them any part thereof in placeing or displaceing
of Ministers of God's Word, in spiritual livings or offices, without the
Churches admission; or in stopping the mouths of preachers, or taking upon
them, the judgment or trial of doctrine, or of hindering or disannulling the
censures of the Church, or exeeming any offendour there from.

By the endeavors of these faithful worthies, any may see what a Spirit was
stirring then, when the King would assume to himself spiritual power and
authority, and so rob Christ of that which belongs to him, as King and head
of the Church; and make himself a Pope and the fountain of all power and
jurisdiction, both civil and ecclesiastic, and challenge power, to give
commission for deposeing and ordaineing of Ministers, and hinder free
preaching, to try and censure doctrine, and to anull all Church censures as he
pleased. This was the Spirit that was then stirring at court, and this is the
supremacy to the life, and this was it which court parasites said, did belong
unto the crown, let the Church, say and do to the contrary what she could.
Hence a little after this Mr Melvin was accused for his sermon, and after he
had declined the King and his Council as incompetent judges in that cause, was
forced to withdraw to Berwick, for fear of his life.

Anno 1584. The Parliament which was suddenly convocated did put the
copestone upon this bussinesse, and gave the King in form what he had assumed
to himself formerly upon the matter, and in their very first Act give him Royal
power and authority over all Estates as well spiritual as temporal, within the
realm. And Statute and ordain that he and his heirs or successors be
themselves, and their Councels in all time coming, judges competent to all
persons of whatsoever Estate degree, function, (...) condition they be of,
spiritual or temporal, in all matters -- and that none decline their judgment
in the premises under the pain of treason. From this supremacy flowed the
impowering of Bishops with Church jurisdiction, as commissioners from the King,
so that when the King wrote unto a Prelat he stilled him, Our beloved Clerck
and Commissioner in Ecclesiastical causes. So that by this supremacy, the power
of Church jurisdiction was made propper to the King, and the exercise thereof
was committed by him, to whom he would.

After this blast was something blown over Anno 1592. Papists and others at
court stir up his Maj. against the government of the Church, so that when the
commissioners of the General Assembly had met, and had sent some of their
number to show the King what offense was taken, at his calling home the Popish
Lords, he was offended and asked how they durst meet without his warr^nd. But
Mr Andrew Melvin answered, [That there were two Kings and two Kingdoms in
Scotland, and that Christ was a King, and the Church, his Kingdom, and that he
himself, was a subject unto Christ, and a member of his Church and neither head
nor King thereof and that the spiritual office bearers, to whom he had
committed the government of his Church had power and warrant to conveen.

But the King went on, and told the Ministers thereafter, [That there should be
no agreement betwixt him and them, until the marches of their jurisdiction
were rid, and that they might not speak in pulpit of the affairs of the Estate
or Council, and that no General Assembly should meet without his special
command, and that Church judicatures should meddle with fornication and luch
like scandalls, but not with causes whereupon his laws do strick.] and shortly
thereafter Mr Blake was summoned and did decline, and his declinature was owned
by several hundereds of Ministers: when King James saw this he labored to
ensnare the Ministry and therefore invented the bond which was mentioned Sect.
1. Page 27. whereby any may see what was intended and designed. But when he is
in possession of the crown of England then the poor Church finds his hand
heavier then formerly; for Anno 1606. Six Ministers were convicted of treason,
and condemned for declineing the council as an incompetent judge in matters
ecclesiastic, and all by virtue of the Act of Parl. 1584. And the Parliament
which did meet that year 1606. to make all sure, did acknowledge his Maj.
sovereign authority, princely power, royal perogative, and privilege of his
crown over all Estates persons and causes whatsoever -- and ratifieth approves
and perpetually confirms the same, at absolutely amply and freely, in all
respects and considerations, as ever his (...) or any of his royal
progenitoure Kings of Scotland, in any time by gone, possessed, used and
exercised. Thus was the copestone of this supremacy put on again: And at that
pretended assembly at Glasgow A^no 1610. it was acknowledged that, The
indiction of the General Assembly did appertain unto his Maj. by the
prerogative of his royal crown. And it was ordained that the oath (which is
set down before page 37. be sworn by all ministers at their ordination: and
the Parliament which conveened Anno 1612. ratified all this. And finally Anno
1633. in the 1 Parl. of King Charles, Act 3. that Act which was made Anno 1606.
was again ratified and this conclusion was drawn from it, that he has power
to prescribe what apparel he thinks fit for Kirk men, which was done of
purpose for this end that his Maj. might with greater facility get the use of
the surplice by Ministers, established by law and practiced.

And now by all this, any may see what is the nature of that supremacy which
the higher powers have been all alongs grasping after and which the faithful
servants of Christ have been withstanding according to their power.

But in the last place, the sense and meaning of this late Parliament which did
tender the oath, must be sought out of their acts and actings, and out of some
commissions granted by his Maj. and thereby it shall be seen what ground there
was of scrupling at the oath and how the fears of such as did then scruple at
the oath were not groundless seeing the after actings of king and Parlia^. have
abundantly confirmed the apprehentions, which such had of their giving to the
King, and of his taking, more power in Church matters then themselves would
then acknowledge or confess did belong to him. Now for clearing what power was
then and is now assumed by and given to the King in Church matters these
particulars may be noticed.

1. When these Six or Seven Ministers who were cited before the Parliament had
offored a sense, in which they would willingly have taken the oath, they could
not be heard, though they granted unto him in their s^nse offered, as much
power in Church matters, as the word of God, the confessions of faith, both of
the Church of Scotland and of other reformed Churches did allow; for they did
grant that his soveraignity did retch ecclesiastik causes objectively, though
in its own nature it was always civil, and extrinsick. But this did not
satisfy and therefore it was evident enough that they did intend some other
thing by that oath, then every one could well see.

2. In the 4. Act of their first session it is made a part of the Kings
prerogative, That none of his heighnesse subjects, of whatsoever quality state
or function, presume to convocat, conveen, or assemble themselves for holding
of counsels, to treat consult and determine, in any matter of state, civil or
ecclesiastic, (except in ordinary judgments) without his Maj. special
command, of express license, had and obtained thereto under the pains, etc.
By which it is apparent that they will have no Church judicatories without his
command or license otherwise his prerogative is violated, and so it is a piece
of his perogative and supremacy, to have all these assemblies depending ^o upon
him, as civil meetings do, that is, that they shall be null without his
express consent and command; for this part of the act is in every word
conform and relative to, that black act Anno 1584. viz act 3. parl. 8. King
Iam. 6, by which all Church judicatories which had been set up conform to the
second book of discipline viz sessions presbyteries, and synods, were
discharged.

3. In the 16 Act of the first session concerning religion and Church
government they say. [That as to the government of the Church his Maj. will
make it his care, to setle and secure the same in such a frame, as shall be
most agreeable to the word of God, most suiteable to monarchical government,
and most complying with the public peace, and quiet of the Kingdom, and in
the mean time his Maj. with advice and consent foresaid does allow the present
administration, by sessions, presbyteries, and Synods.] So that by this act it
is clear, that they think that there is no particular form of Church
government s^t down in the word 2. That every nation is left at liberty in
this, to choose what form they will, as most suit^ing to civil government and
complying with the people, temper. 3. That he is judge of what form of
government is most agreeable to the word of God. 4. That this government must
be some other government then that which is by Sessions, Presbyteries, and
Synods, which is but allowed in the interim.

4. There is a commission or act from his Maj. for a National Synod, ratified
by Parliament in their second Session, which is worth the noticeing, the Act is
thus worded; [For as much as the ordering and disposal of the external
government of the Churh, and the nomination of the persons by whose advice,
matters relating to the famine, are to be settled, does belong to his Maj. as an
inherent right of the Crown, by virtue of his prerogative Royal, and supreme
authority in causes Ecclesiastic: And in prosecution of this trust his Maj.
considering, how fit and necessary, it is for the honor and service of
almighty God, the good and quiet of the Church, and the better government
thereof in unity and order. That there be a National Synod and Assembly duly
constitut within this kingdom. Has therefore appointed and declared, and by
these presents appoynts and declares. That there shall be a National Synod of
the Church of Scotland: And that this Synod for the lawful members thereof
shall consist and be constituted of the Archbishops of St Andrews and Glasgow,
and the remanent Bishops of these two Provinces, of all Deanes of cathedral
Churches, Archdeacons, of all the moderators of meetings for exercise, allowed
by the Bishops of the respective dioeceses, and of one Presbyter or Minister of
each meeting to be chosen and elected, by the moderator and plurality of the
Presbyters of the same; And of one or two from the University of St Andrews,
one from Glasgow, one from the King's college, one from Marshells college of
Aberdeen, and one from Edinburgh: And this Synod thus constitut, is to meet at
such times, and in such places as his Maj. by his proclamation shall appoint;
And is to debate, treat, consider, consult, conclude, and determine upon such
pious matters, causes, and things, concerning the doctrine, worship,
discipline, and government of this Church, as his Maj. under his Royal hand
shall deliver, or cause be delivered to the Archbishop of St Andrews, and
president of the said National Assembly, to be by him offered to their
consideration,

The Estates of Parliament do humbly recognosce and acknowledge his Maj. Royal
power and prerogative before said, with the piety justice and prudence of his
Maj. resolution therein: Like as his Maj. with their advice and consent does
hereby establish, ratify and confirm this constitution of a National
Assembly, as the lawful constitution of the National Synods and Assemblies of
this Church: His Maj. or his Commissioner (without whose presence no National
Synod can be kept) being always present: and declares that no Act canon,
order or ordinance shall be owned as an ordinance of the National Synod of the
Church of Scotland, so as to be of any effect force or validity in law, to be
observed and kept by the Archbishops, Bishops, the inferior Clergy, and all
other persons within the realm, as far as lawfully, being members of this
National Church, it does concern them, but that which shall be considered,
consulted, and agreed upon, by the president and major part of the members
above specified. It is always hereby provided that nothing be enacted or put
in execution by authority of a National Synod, within this Kingdom, which
shall be contrary to his Maj. Royal prerogative, or to the laws of the
Kingdom and that no act, matter or cause be debated, consulted, and concluded
upon, but what shall be allowed, approved and confirmed by his Maj. or his
Commissioner present at the said National Synod.

In which Act these things are remarkable 1. That Church Assemblies may not
meet without his warrant. 2. The King or his Commissioner, are essential
constituent members thereof. 3. That the King has power to appoint the very
constituent members of the Synod. 4. Ruleing elders are excluded out of Church
judicatories. 5, That the constant moderator has a more then ordinary voice in
the exercise; for the member to be chosen there, must be elected by him, and
the major part of the rest. 6. Nothing can be agreed upon without the consent
of the Archbishop of St: Andrews, and thus he has a negative voice. 7. Nothing
must be debated either concerning doctrine, worshipe, discipline or government,
but what his Maj. pleases. 8. Nothing must be concluded but what his Maj. or
his commissioner does approve and confirm. 9, All this is founded on his
supremacy. 10. And his supreme authority over all persons, and in all causes,
and his prerogative royal, are declared to be all one.

5. There is another commission granted for the heigh commission a part whereof
follows.

Our Sovereign Lord ordaines a commission to be passed and exped under his
Maj. great seall of the Kingdom of Scotland making mention, That in
consideration of the multiplicity and weight of Church affairs, and of the
Estate, incumbent upon the Lords of privy council, so as they cannot attain
the due execution of the laws -- and to the effect that the disorders and
contempt of authority -- may be timeously suppressed -- His Maj. by virtue of
his prerogative in all causes, and over all persons, as well ecclesiastike as
civil; has given and granted, like as his Maj. by the tenor hereof gives and
grants full power and commission to the Archbishop of St Andrews. The Lord
chancellor L. treasurer, archbishop of Glasgow, Duk Hamilton, Marquis of
Mon^se etc. -- or any five of them, an Archbishop or Bishop being one of the
number -- To summon and call before them, all -- contemners of the discipline
of the Church, and for that cause suspend deprive, and excommunicat all keepers
of conventicles, etc. -- to appoint ministers to be censured; by suspension and
deposition; and punished by fineing, confineing, and incarcerating them, and
all other persons who shell be found transgressors as aforesaid; etc.

Out of this Act, these things are remarkable. 1. Here is a mixed court made up
of Church men and civil men. 2. A court meddling both with civil and
ecclesiastic punishments, for they have power of deposeing, excommunicating
fineing and imprisoneing. 3. A court founded upon his Maj. prerogative in all
causes, and over all persons, as well ecclesiasticke as civil. 4. An Archbishop
or Bishop is s^e quo non and one of those with four others may do all
themselves.

By what is said, something of the meaning of this oath, according to their
sense who tender it, may be discovered, and the bussinesse being so clear much
time needs not be spent, in handling that long and tedious controversy
concerning the Magistrates power in Church matters: Only a hint at some few
things, as reasons why this oath thus tendered and explained, could not be
taken, will be sufficient.

1. By this means, they should upon the matter have affirmed, that the King
was head of the Church for it is clear that he assumeth to himself power of
appoynting new officers in Christ's house, and new courts and judicatures,
which Christ did never appoint, and of committing Church power to whom he will;
of appoynting what form of Government in the Church, he thinks fit;
modelling the constitution of Church idicatories, appoynting who shall be
members, and who not, and who members sieve quibus non, of limiting the bounds
of their procedour, by appoynting what they shall treat of, and what not; of
putting life in their canons and constitutions, etc. Thus all Church power shall
flow from him, and he shall become the head of the Church, under Christ, the
same way that he is head of the commonwealth under God: And indeed the prelate
and their creatures, are not ashamed in their public prayers, to style the
King head of the Church. Now could any faithful and zealous Christian of
servant of Christ, consent unto this dreadful incrouchment and usurpation, by
subscribeing any oath which might import the same: Who can but hear of it, and
his heart not tremble: Let all the arguments which the reformed divines make
use of, against the usurped headshipe of the Pope be considered and they will,
with equal strength, militat against this usurpation, and justify the
refuseing of this oath upon that account: yea Arminius himself disp. de pontif.
Romans These 3. says that the Church has but one head, otherwise she should be
a monster.

2. By this means, they should upon the matter lick up popery which they have
abjured again and again, for none will say that they have abjured such a
piece of popery, only as it was seated in the head of the man with the treeple
crown that sits at Rome, and not simply in it self as a blasphemous tenent:
No reformed divine writes against the Popes supremacy and headshipe, as a
power usurped by him, to the prejudice of some one prince or other; but as a
heigh and insolent usurpation of that, which belongs unto him who is King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, for this were not to speak against an incroachment
made upon the privileges and prerogatives of the King of his Church, but
against some civil wrongs done to a neighbor prince or state: and indeed the
adversaries are not ashamed to say that the Pope in his usurpation of this
Church jurisdiction, wronged not Christ; but more immediately the King and
Princes, unto whom that power did belong of right before and therefore, they
say, that King Henry 8. assumed but his own back again and that he neither
took, nor did the Parliament give him, any new power which did not belong to
him before: So said Heylyn as was shown. But if any should assent unto this
they should consent only unto the change of the pope but not unto the change of
the Popedom and should shake off an ecclesiastical Pope and submit unto a
civil Pope: For Zepp^rus speaks with reason, when he says, P^lit. Eccles.
Lib. 3: c. 13. [ Quando tota Doctrinae and cultus etc, i. e. When all the
matter of Doctrine and worship, as also of the constitution of the Church is
ordered according to the pleasure of the Prince alone; the counsel and advice
of the ministers of the word, and of their synods, being despised; and when
such are declared rebels who will not assent unto all that which these
politicians do, and when the whole Government of the Church is made over to
them almost by an apostolic authority, who only exerce an external and
political power on the outward main: Then does themagistrat go beyond his
bounds, and the Popedomeis not taken away, but changed; yea and made twofold
worse] yea and the Arminians in their apology do call this the very heart and
marrow of Popery which being granted all his other usurpations do necessarily
follow.

3, By this means, they should grant that ministers, is the very discharge of
their ministerial function, are subordin^ unto the supreme Magistat and his
power, acting under him, as his servants and commissioners. This is clear in
the exercise of jurisdiction and discipline. The prelates are his Maj.
Commissioners in matters of discipline, they receive their commission from him,
to depose, to silence, and to excommunicate; and so also they must Act as his
commissioners in lesser censures, as in public rebuking for sin, and the like:
and seeing both the keys of doctrine and discipline were given at once, if the
key of jurisdiction or discipline come from Christ mediatly, and from the King
immediately, so must the key of doctrine, for the scripture shows no
distinction, and none may separat the keys, which Christ has tied together:
and thus every minister must come forth, and preach, exhort, rebuke, censure
and ex communicate, not in the name of Christ immediately, but in the name of
the King. But to this they could not assent, and therefore they could not take
the oath.

4. By this means, they should grant that the supreme Magistrate himself,
might, immediately in his own person; rebuke publicly the scandalous, debarr
from the sacraments, depose, suspend and excommunicate; for what his
commissioners do, by virtue of a commission from him, that he may do himself
immediately, But this could no be yielded to; there being not the least warrant
for it imaginable out of the word, but much against it: and therefore none,
except an Erastian or Arminian will condemn such as refuse an oath which would
import this, see Voetius de politia ecclesi, page 146. arg. 12.

5. By this means, they should have, upon the matter, opened a door unto the
King's bringing into the Church, what popish rites and external superstitious
ceremonies, he pleaseth^: By the act for the national Synod he has, as an
inherent in the crown, the ordering and disposal of the external government
of the Church, and power to settle all things concerning doctrine, worship,
discipline and government, by the advice of the national Synod which is but as
his Council, so that the whole power of ordering, and settling the matter of
the worship, is in his own hand: and it was upon this ground that the former
prelates did warrant their use of the ceremonies: his supremacy was a basis unto
this: So said Camero in his prael. Tom. 1. page 370. 371. and Tom. 2. page 41.
That in all things perteineing to external order in religion, Kings may
command what they will pro authoritate. And thus they should consent unto
opening of a door unto all the trash of Rome, and the significa^t ceremonies
that are there: for if the King have such power, what ceremony may he not bring
in? and who is there to control him in any thing of that kind? who may ask
whether lawful or unlawful, seeing no question he himself will call all that
which he does, most lawful; and he is not without the compass of his power,
or authority, or calling, when he appoynteth the use of those ceremonies, if he
be thus rector Ecclesiae. Now who can acknowledge that any such power does
belong unto the supreme Magistrate, to institute any significant ceremony, or
part of God's worship? this being the very sin of Ier^oam. 1. King 12: 28, 33.
It was his fault to devise of his own heart, those ceremonies of sacred signs,
places, or persons and times. And therefore they could not take such an oath
and be guilt^sse.

6. By this means, they should have granted that he had power to change the
whole frame of religion, and so give way unto his bringing in the whole body of
popery, or what he would; for by this oath he should have granted unto him, the
supreme power in matters concerning doctrine, worshipe, discipline and
government. It was charged upon the Church of England, by some adversaries,
that the great alteration of their religion that was made from popery to the
truth and back again to popery, and so forth in the days of Henry 8. Edward
6. Mary and Elizabeth, in the space of Thirty years, wa^ grounded upon, and
occasioned by that which is contained in this oath; for by virtue of this oath,
these several Kings and Queens took upon them, to alter and change as they
thought good: and this is ordinaryly seen in supreme powers, when they begin to
usurp. So that it is a sad truth which Calvin has in his c^mment on Amos.
cap. 7. v 13. and h^ sacrilegium, etc i. e. and this sacrilege rages and
prevails with us, because they cannot keep within lawful bounds but they
think they cannot reign, unless they take away all the authority of the
Church, and become the heigh est judges as well in doctrine as in all the
spiritual government Therefore the devil gave to Amaziah this counsel -- a
mediocrity should therefore be kept because this desease has always been in
princes, that they would make religion how according to their own lust and
pleasure. And this is a part of the Cesario-papatus the state papacy of which
Wigandus in his 13 cvill complains viz. That they set up a new form of
religion. And now seeing doolfull experience proves how ready princes, and
Magistrates are, to go beyond bounds, and to arrogat to themselves more then is
allowed, is it fit for Ministers or Christians to blow at that coal of
ambition, by asserting in words as much as they desire? They do not much value
the glosses which any may devise afterward, to cover the shame of their
nakedness: were it not better to hold back such as run too willingly of their
own accord, to the ruin of religion, and the interests of Christ? It cannot
then be saife, for any to have a hand in setting up a state Antichrist to the
ruin and destruction of the Church of Christ And though the gracious
disposition of the prince should be otherwise set, and he should not abuse his
power to the hurt of religion; yet no thanks to his sycophants who ascribe
such power to him* as, if put into act, would ruin religion and the Church of
Christ, and which of its own nature tends thereunto, if it meet not with
accidental stops: whatever may be said of the power of the supr. Mag.
concerning determineing and appoynting what religion shall be publicly
professed within his dominions, yet this power agrees not to him byvertue of
his supremacy in Church matters, but by virtue of his supreme Magistraticall
power by which he is to have a care of all public things: But this supremacy
in Church matters, is a far other thing, for it gives intrinsicke and
Architectonicke power in Church matters, and this agrees only to the Lord
Jesus, who is the alone head of the Church and therefore it cannot be said to
belong unto the supreme Magistrate.

7. By this oath they should grant that the civil, magistrate as such, should
be a Church member; because he who has a chief hand in Church affairs, cannot
but be a Church member: he who is a chief member in Church judicatories, cannot
but be a Church member: He who has Church power cannot but be a Church member:
and he whose commissioners Ministers are in Church administrations, must
certanely be a Churchmember: Now all these they give unto the King not as a
Christian, but as a King; for they annex them unto the crown, and make them
part of the royal prerogative. But this cannot be assented unto, for then
every heathen Magistrate should be a Church member, because a heathen Magistrate
is a Magistrate, as essentially, as a Christian Magistrate: Christianity adds
no Magistratical power, it makes not one more a King or a magistrate, then he
was; it only qualifieth and inableth him for the right administration, or
execution of the power, but adds no new power. Moreover magistracy has
nothing to do, either with the matter or with the form of Church member shipe,
real grace and union with Christ makes one a member of Christ's mystical
body; and serjous profession of the true religion, makes one a member of the
visible Church, but magistraticall power, honor, and dignity has no interest
here, no such thing commends a man to Christ.

8. By taking of this oath, they should have said that the civil magistrate as
such, is a Church officer, because as he is in possession of the crown and of
the royal prerogatives thereto annexed, he has the disposal of the external
government of the Church: No national Synod can hold without him, none of
their acts has the power of canons without him: He has power by his
commissioners civil and ecclesiastic persons, to excommunicat, depose, and
suspend ministers, etc. But this cannot be granted; for then. 1. Heathen
magistrates should be Church officers. 2. Such as are not Church members should
be Church officers. 3. Women should be Church officers, for such may be
Magistrates. 4. Then no magistrates should be chosen, but such as have the
qualifications requisite in a Church officer. 5. There is no ground or reason
which can be given for this. 6. There should be no Church officer but such as
are mentioned in the gospel; and among all the Church officers mentioned in
the gospel there is not one word of him.

9. By taking of this oath they should say, Not only that the supreme magistrate
as such, is a Church officer; but that he is a Church officer of the heighest
degree; the supreme Church officer next under Christ, for he is put above all
the ordinary Church officers, who act only in subordination unto him: pastors
and Doctors are but his commissioners, and have their power from him, and must
be accountable to him, in their administration. But certanely this cannot be
true, for then. 1. This must be also affirmed of a heathen: for a qua tali ad
de omni valet consequentia. 2. It is not credible that Christ should have
appointed such an eminent Church officer who was to continue unto the end of
the world and never show us how he should be called, nor what his
qualifications should be, nor the way of his ordination, nor his work. 3. Then
women and children might be such eminent Church officers. 4, Or none should be
supreme Magistrates, but such as are fit for such an eminent Charge in the
Church. But both these are false.

10. By taking of this oath, They should lay the foundation of a lasting
confusion betuixt Church and state. God has been pleased in all ages, to set
clear and distinct limits, and bounds, to each of those, that they might not be
confounded or mixed together: In the old testament there was a clear difference
be ^uixt the two, and so in the new testament: Divines writting against Erastus
have made it clear that they are distinct toto genere; both in the fountain of
their power, in the subject matter, in the manner of working, and in the
nearest end designed, and many such like: so that it is needless to say any
thing of it here. Now in asserting this supremacy they should lay the ground of
this confusion, and yield that a Church as a Church should be (...)
commonwealth and a commonw^ (...) ipso that it is a commonw* shoud be a Church,
because a supreme governor in Church matters has reference unto a Church, and
a supreme governor in civil matters, has reference unto a commonwealth: and
so make the supreme governor of the commonwealth, upon that account that he is
such a supreme governor, the supr. gov. of the Church and then ^o ipso that he
is the supreme governor of the commonwealth he should have reference unto the
Church, and so a Church should be a commonwealth, and a commonwealth a Church,
which is most false. Moreover this new commission court is another speaking
evidence of this mixture flowing from this supremacy; for in that court Church
officers meddle with civil matters: and state officers meddle with Church
matters and both do so, as they are such and such officers, and as his Man*
commissioners and therefore they could not assent unto this. That which Luther
says in responso ad Melanth de ceremonijs, cited by Voetius ubi supra page
174. Is worth the marking Seeing it is certane that these administrations are
distinct viz. the ecclesiastic and politic, which Satan did confound by
Popery we must watch and see that they be not again confounded -- and if we
suffer this we should be guilty of sacrilege, and we must rather choice to die
then sinso see further what he cites out of Olevianus page 179. and 180.

11. By taking of this oath, they should grant that the magistrate as such is a
propper and competent judge in Church matters, a propper and competent judge of
ministers, of their doctrine, and of other Church matters; because it was upon
this ground, of faithful ministers their declineing of the King's and his
council their judgment, in Church matters, that the Parliament 1584. Did
grant unto the King this supremacy. It was intended for this end, that he might
have power to call, convent, judge and sentence Ministers for the faithful
discharge of their duty, and exoneration of their consciences, as their
lawful, formal and competent judge in Church matters, though under the notion
of treason and sedition. Moreover he is made propper judge of what is the best
form of Church Government, of what is the best constitution of a Church
judicature, and what are the most sit and lawful acts and conclusions or
canons of Synods: and he is made propper judge in matters deserving
excommunication, suspension and deposition, and all these are Church matters.
Now the falsehood of this is so satisfactorily discovered by divines that none
can be blamed for refuseing an oath, which would import an assenting unto these
things as truths. Sure every Magistrate is not fit for such matters; and should
no other be a Magistrate but he who is fit for such questions? Where is there
any precept or precedent for thi^ What need is there then for Church Officers
for Church matters if the civil Magistrate may do all? see learned Voet polit
Eccles. page 146. Arg. 12. yea if they had taken this oath, they had condemned
their worthy predecessors who took their hazard, and declined the judgment of
the civil Magistrate in Church matters, and should justify the severe sentences
of imprisonment consinement, and banishment, which passed against them; and
should assent unto the lawfulness of all these acts, which established
iniquity and tyranny by law: And how could they have done this with a good
conscience?

12. By taking of his oath, they should grant that Ministers in the discharge
of their Ministerial function, were not under Christ immediately but under the
Magistrate; for as his commissioners they sit in the high Commission court and
are accountable to him, for their mal administration, and so are immediately
under him, as their immediate superior and Master. But this they could not
grant. Seeing 1. As was said, these two powers are toto genere distinct, and so
there cannot be a subordination amongst them. 2. There is no warrant for
Ministers receiving of instructions from the Magistrate. 3. Nor for any civil
Pope more then for a Church Pope. 4. Ministers in scripture are said to have
immediate relation unto, and commission from God, and not from the Magistrate
therefore they are called priests of God. 2. Chron. 13: 9, 12. Men of God. 2.
Pet. 11 2. Tim. 3: 17. And are commissionated from Christ Luke 10: 2. Mat. 20:
2. and 21: 34: 25. and 22: 2, 3, 10. and 24, 45. Isa. 6. v. 8* Ioh. 20: 21.
Gal. 1: 1. and not from the Magistrate. They act in the name of Christ, and by
power from him. 1. Cor. 5. But there is enough spoken to this by judicious
Wallaus and others writting against Vtenb^gard and other Erastians which will
abundantly justify the refuseing of this oath: see further learned doct.
Voetius de polit Eccles. page 145. Arg. 10.

13. By the taking of this oath thus tendered, they should grant that the
supreme Magistrate is exempted from subjection unto the Ministry of the
messingers of the Lord; for if Ministers in their Ministerial function, act
as commissioners from him, and as accountable to him; then in the same
administration they cannot be above him; a commissioner in the particular
wherein he is a commissioner, cannot be over him whose commissioner he is. But
this they could not grant; because there is no warrant for this exemption.
Kings of old were not exempted from rebukes, and all are commanded to obey such
as are set over them. Heb. 13: 17. no King is excepted: Emperors have submited
unto discipline. Therefore they could not take this oath.

14. By taking of this oath, they should yield unto many palpable and into
lerable incroachment* made upon the liberties and privileges of the Church of
Christ, Which could not be done without great sin and iniquity: As 1. That
there could be no Church judicatories or assemblies without his warrant or
express consent for in the act concerning the acknowledging of the royal
prerogative, among other things annexed to the crown, this is one, the
conveening of his subjects, and this is explaned Act 4. Where it is ordained
that none of his subjects conveen for holding of -- Assemblies, to treat
Consult and determine in any matter -- ecclesiasticke: And upon this ground
does the act concerning the national Synod go: And upon this ground did King
James take upon him to prorogate assemblies either to definite or indefinite
times, as he thought good. Now no faithful Minister or Christian could assent
to this: Because 1. Whatever may be said upon the grounds of prudence at some
times; yet when the bussinesse is spoken to, as a case of conscience, and
according to the rule of the word, this is true, that though the Church be in
the commonwealth yet she is a distinct society from the commonwealth, and has
power from Christ, to hold her own meetings and Assemblies, for her own
government, as she did while she was under heathen Emperors in the days of
the Apostles. 2, It has been shown before what is the judgment of the Church
of Scotland, in this particular, in their preface to the confession of faith.
3. There is no express command either for seeking or having his express
consent. The reformers of the Church of Scotland never once thought of this,
but as often as conveniently they might, and as necessity urged, they kept
Assemblies, not only without the consent of the supreme Magistrate, but oftimes
against their will, thinking it their duty to Assemble for the relief of the
Church ay until some difficulty were laid in their way which they could not
win over, until some physical restraint, or some what equivalent were laid
upon them. 5. It would neither be fit nor saife, for them to condemn the
worthies who stood so zealously for the truth, and kept that Assembly at
Aberdeen, which occasioned their banishment. 2. That the power of convocating
and indicting of Synods and Assemblies does belong only unto the Magistrate. The
act for the National Synod does abundantly clear this. But to assent to this
were a palpable wronging of the Church which has intrinsic power for this,
and needs not go out of her self to seek it. The Synod which did meet (...)
15 was not indicted by any civil Magistrate. The Church should then be in an
irremediable case when the civil Magistrate is an enemy; but God has provided
means for the saifty and preservation of his Church, Even when the higher
powers are but small friends unto her, (as oftimes it falls out) see the
judicious and learned doct. Voet: de Pol: Eccles: Page 184. Quaest: 5. 3. That
the power of delegating unto assemblies does belong to him alone, so as he may
appoint all the constituent members thereof, according as he pleases, as the
Act for the national Synod says, he does; and that by virtue of his
supremacy. But this were a gross wronging, and robbing of Churches, of their
power and privilege, of delegating such, as they think fit, according to the
Example of Antioch sending Paul and Barnabas to that Synod Act 15. and the
practice of the Church in all ages see Voet: ubi supra Page 187 Quaest. 7. and
8. Yea if so the persons delegated should vote in his name and not in the name
of Christ, or of the Church: and the meeting should not be a pure Church
meeting but either wholly political, or else politico-ecclesiasticall. 4. That
he might dissolve Church assemblies, and Synods when he pleases for the fore
mentioned Act for the Not. Synod warrandeth them to meet only at such times, as
he pleases: But this were a great wrong done unto the Church privileges: See
Voet. ubi supra Page 190. Q^. 13. and 14. Synods should be no helps unto the
poor Church if they might sit, no longeri (what ever necessity might urge) then
his Maj: thought good to suffer. There is no warrant for any such dependence of
Church judicatories upon the civil Magistrat's discretion. If Christ has
allowed Synods to his Church for determineing in Church affairs, he has
allowed them to sit until they finish the bussinesse for which they did
assemble: Yea if they should yield to this they should condemn the assembly at
Glasgow 1638. which did sit until they had ended their bussinesse,
notwithstanding of a command to dissolve. 5. That his presence or the presence
of his commissioner is necessary unto each national assembly, for the Act of
Parliament ratifying the Act for the national Synod says expressly that
without the presence of the King or of his commissioner no national Synod can
be kept. But 1. there is no law of God for this. 2. The Synods in the
primitive times, were held without his presence. 3. There were many general
assemblies held in Scotland without his presence. 4. The Magistrate as such is
no constituent member of the Synod, and therefore his presence is not
necessarily requisite see Voet: ubi supra Page 188. Quaest. 9. 5. If there be
such a necessity for his presence at national Synods, he must not be absent
from lesser assemblies, and thus there shall be no Church judicature held
without his presence, which were most absurd: See what the learned and famous
Voetius says to this pol. Eccles. Part. 1. Page 199. 200. 6. That Ministers
have no proper decisive fuffrage in Synods, because the forecited Act says,
That matters are to be settled only by their advice, So that in their Synod they
are only the King's counselors conveened to advise and consult, and a power
only to advise, is no decisive fuffrage: and so the Act concluded, is the deed
of the supreme Magistrate following their advice, and is not their deed. Now
this is most absurd and destructive to all Synods, and of all their power: and
thus it should be far worse with Synods now, when Magistrates are Christians
then when they were heathens. Moreover there is no warrant for his having with
the rest of (...) the commissioners, a voice in those Synods, far less, for
his having the whole power. It is clear that as a Magistat he can have no
suffrage or voice in these Synods; for then heathens who are no way qualified
for such a bussinesse should have it likewise, Yea if it were so, all the
determinations of Synods should be civil Acts, and no Church Acts, being done
by one who is no Church officer, yea nor a Church member, as such, let be a
Church judicature. This was Episcopius the Arminian his judgment in disput. de
jure Magistratus circa sacra These. 16. viz. that he may convocat assemblies,
choose members, prescribe laws unto them, and the way of pr^cedour, ask the
suffrages, and either peremptorily enact, or approve what is done, that it may
pass into a law: see Voet. ubi supra, page 191. Q^. 16. 7. That the
judicatories of the Church be prelimited: for nothing may be enacted by the
national Synod which is contrary to his Maj. royal prerogative; or to the
laws of the land, so says the Parliaments ratification of the Act for the
national Synod. But what if iniquity be established by a law; and what if
Christ's royal prerogatives be taken from him and given to the King? shall the
Church in her judicatories do nothing for the truth? shall she give no
testimony against these usurpations? shall the laws of the land and the King's
prerogatives be her Cynosura? what use shall be made of the word of God then?
where is there any such caution or limitation given to the Church? But enough
of this. 8. That Church judicatories may not so much as consult and debate,
about any Act, matter or cause, but what shall be allowed and approved by his
Maj. or his commissioner; for these are the very words of the Act of
Parliament. But who can assent unto this intolerable jncroachment, destructive
of all Church judicatures, making them no judicatories at all, but a company of
men conveened: for giving advice. But where was there ever the like of this
Church judicature? The nameing of those things is sufficient to discover their
vanity: see excellent Vo^t. ubi supr^ Page 189. Quaest. 11. 9. That no Church
canon or ordinance has any effect force or validity but what shall be approved
and confirmed by him or his commissioner, for so much does the fore cited Act
import, now who but he who has drunken in the opinions of Erastus and
Arminians will assent unto this? It is true the canons and ordinances of a
Church judicatory, cannot have the strength of a municipall law, without the
Magistrat's civil sanction: But yet they may have the strength of Church
Canons, whether he approve of them, or not; as the Acts of the Council at
Ierusal. Act 15. and of all other Synods and Assemblies, which the Church had
dureing the first three hundred years had: Otherwise the Church should be in a
hard case, when the civil Magistrate did refuse his concurrence. and (as has
been often hinted) in a better case, under heathens, then under Christian
Magistrates. Therefore this could not be assented unto. 10. That all Church
Canons are his proper Acts, and flow natively from him, and his power; for the
meeting is but for Counsel and advice to him, and all which they say, is
without force unless he approve it, as the Act says, and so all their Acts
and Canons are his only and not theirs. But this could not be granted, because
1. what ever he does, as supreme Governor, or Magistrate, is a civil Act and
no Church Act, and so no Church Canon. 2. No Church Canon can be made by any
but by Church Officers, who are empowered by Jesus Christ for that effect, but
the Magistrate as such is no Church Officer. 3. This power is without all
warrant of Scripture, and therefore can not be acknowledged.

Thus you see what encroachments upon the Privileges of the Church the taking
of this oath, thus sensed, by them; carries along with it, and albeit there be
some Erastians and others who take these for no encroachments, but trut^es; Yet
reformed divines such as famous and worthy Voetius, Apollonius, and others have
sufficiently manifested them to be grosle errors, and because the end designed
in this undertaking is satisfaction to orthodox and reformed sound divines,
with whose principles, the present suffering Church of Scotland, does accord,
it is accounted sufficient only to mention those things which the taking of
this oath as explained by their Acts and deeds who tender it would clearly
import an assenting unto. But to proceed.

15. By this oath, They should grant that the Church is very imperfect so long
as she wants a Christian Magistrate; for she wants a chief Officer: And
hence it will follow, that the Church in the days of the Apostles and some
hundereds of Years thereafter was imperfect as to its Constitution, wanting
this supreme Governor: Otherwise they must say that Nero, Caligula, and the
rest of the Roman persecuting Emperors, did sufficiently fill up this place:
And that the Apostles did upon the matter, and would not have refused, plainly
to have affirmed that these persecuting heathens, were supreme Governors over
all persons, and in all causes Civil and Ecclesiastic. But none of those can
be affirmed, with any probality or show of reason.

16. Yea by taking this oath, They should grant that the Apostles and primitive
Church, walked not regularly in the matter of governing the Church: Because
they acted with no such subordination unto the supreme Magistrate who then was,
they derived no power from him as their supreme Governor; in causes
Ecclesiastic. To say that necessity did put them to this, is but a poor
defense, for then out of necessity the primitive Church did rob the Magistrate
of his power, or else this power agrees not to all Magistrates; but only to
Christian Magistrates, and it so, it cannot be a power or Privilege annexed to
the Crown; And further it does not agree to them as Christians, nor yet as
Magistrates otherwise it should agree to all Christians, and to all Magistrates,
which is false: and therefore i cannot agree to them as Christian Magistrates
for as learned and renowned Doct. V^us says, Pol^t. Eccles. Page 137. Duo
subjecta, and principia formalia, quae non sunt unum, au^ un^a per se, non
possunt fundare effectum formalem per se unum sc. ex. gr. Homo unus si sit
Consul, and Pat^r, non pote^ dici habere potestatem consularem in cives, qua
Consul-pa^er, nec potestatem patriam in s^ium qua Pater-consul

17. By taking of this oath, They should yield unto the opening of a door unto
the utter destruction and overthrow, of all Church judicatories, for by their
judgment, who tender that oath, the King is the fountain of all Church power,
and who ever executes any Church power, executes it as his Commissioner, and
he may employ in this bussinesse whom he pleases, and by the Act for the heigh
commission he imployeth civil persons, who are no Church Officers in
deposeing Ministers, and in excommunicating, and so he may employ such persons
always and only such, for he is at liberty, to employ whom he will, and so at
length he may put aside all Church Officers, and so lay aside all Church
judicatures, and handle all Church bussinesse in civil courts. But what
Christian could yield to this? See Voetius ubi supra Page 146 Arg. 11.

18. By this oath, they should grant unto the Civil Magistrate power to erect
new courts, which have no warrant in the word, and such courts as the Church
had not all the days of the Apostles, nor many centuries of years thereafter,
for by virtue of his supremacy he erecteth this new court called a Heigh, or
Grand Commission, wherein civil persons meddle with Church matters, and
execute Church censures, and Churchmen meddle with civil matters, and civil
censures. But to yield to this, should be to destroy all Church power, and to
condemn the Apostles, for not leaving behind them, the example of such a
court; and the primitive Church, for not setting up such a court. By
Presbyterian principles no judicature must be acknowledged for a court of
Christ, but that which has Christ's warrant.

19. By taking this oath, They should yield unto the lawfulness of appealing
from a Church judicature unto the civil Magistrate; for it is lawful to appeal
from an inferior judicature, unto a superior, and by the tenderers of the
oath, the supreme Magistrate is a superior judicature. It is lawful to appeall
from the Commissioners unto such as have given them that commission; And
Ministers in these judicatories are but his Commissioners: But sound divines
writting against Erastus and the Arminiant will justify their refuseing to
yield to this: and if they should have yielded to this, they should have
condemned the General Assemblies, that declared such as appealed from a Church
judicature, unto the King, and his Council, censurable with the sentence of
excommunication, And approved of such perverse troublers of the Church, as took
this corrupt course to keep themselves from censure. Moreover there is no
example of any such lawful appellation, for Paul's appeal unto Caesar was from
a civil court, from Festus, and was in a matter of life and death, and from no
Church judicatorie: See Voetius ubs supra, Page 197. Quaest. 24.

SECTIO XIII.
The former purpose further prosecuted, and Mr Stilling fleet's notion examined.

THere is one reason more pleading against the taking of the oath as it is now
glossed, and it is this,

20. By taking of this oath they should assent unto that power which is given
unto the King, in the 16 Act of Parliament, viz. a power to settle and secure
Church government, in such a frame as shall be most agreeable and suiteable
unto Monarchical Government, and most complying with the public peace, and
quiet of the Kingdom: And so grant 1. That there is not one form or model of
Church government, set down in the word, obliging Churches in all ages to
follow the same 2. That the supreme Magistrate alone may appoint what form he
thinks good.

To speak to this head at length, would take a long time in regard that one Mr
Stilling fleet has been at the pains to give the World a proof of his
learning and reading, by engaging in this quarrel, and in pleading against the
privilege and prerogative of the Crown of Christ, whom God has made King in
Zion, and who will reign until all his enemies be made his footstool. He
would, without all doubt, have had more peace, when stepping into eternity, if
he had employed his parts and abilities for Christ and his interests as King
and sole King in his Church, and Kingdom.

But yet though the nature of this discourse will not admit so long and full an
examination of the grounds whereupon this learned man walks: Some thing must
be said in short, and so much the rather because, through the injury of the
times, the labors of such; as have fully and solidly answered him, cannot be
gotten printed.

And therefore till providence so order matters as that both those and several
other things against prelates, may receive a free Imprimatur. Take these few
observations upon his whole book which he is pleased to call a weapon salve
etc. so far as concerns the bussinesse in hand

Obs. 1. He grants page 154. That it is necessary there should be a form of
government in the Church by virtue not only of that law of nature, which
provideth for the preservation of societies, but likewise by virtue of that
divine law which takes care for the Churches preservation in peace and unity.
So then if there be such a divine law for a form of Church Government; and i^
in the primitive times there was a form of Church Government followed, the
point is gained by Mr Stillingfleet's own concessions; for part 1. c. 1: 3. He
says that there is not the same necessity for a particular clear revelation,
in the alteration of a law unrepealed in some circumstances of it, as there is,
for the establishing of a new law: as to the former, a different practice by
persons guided by an infallible Spirit is sufficient, which is the case, as to
the observation of the Lord's day under the Gospel; for the fourth command
standing in force, as to the morality of it, a different practice, by the
Apostles may be sufficient, for the particular determination of the more
rituall and occasional part of it. Now there being a standing moral law for a
form of Church government, the practice of the Apostles who were guided by an
infallible Spirit is sufficient for an alteration: And so as their practice
obliges now, to the observation of the first day Sabbath, because of the
standing force of the moral law for one day of Seven; So their practice
obliges now unto that form of Government, which they used, because of the
standing force of the law of God for a form of Church Government: So that we
need not enquire after a particular and clear revelation in this case where
there is but the alteration of a law unrepealed as to some particular
circumstances. And thus, if the morality of the first day Sabbath stand, the
morality of the government of the Church which the Apostles did set up, will
stand also. Their practice altering the last day of Seven into the first, will
no more oblige then their altering of the ancient government, into a new one,
which was distinct from the former.

Obs. 2. Part. 2. c. 1.. 4, 5, 6. When he is about the stateing of the question
he will have a national Church, to be understood as a Church in which a form
of Government should be settled. It is true a national society incorporated, is
a Church; It is also true that the notion of a Church agrees to other
societies, then national, and as himself says, wherever the notion of a
Church particular is to be found, there must be a Government in that Church:
and so every society which may be called a Church, should have a Government in
it. But now the question is whether every such society as may be called a
Church, should have its own liberty, to set up what form of Government it
thinks best, or only a national Church? If only a national Church have that
liberty then that liberty agrees not to a national Church, as it is a Church,
but under some other notion, and what is this other notion? Is it because they
are under one civil Government? But many nations may in some respect be under
one civil Government, and in some respect there is hardly any one nation, which
in all its parts incorporations and cities, is governed after one and the same
manner. But further, what has the Church to do with the civil laws or civil
way of Government, especially seeing himself grants that the Church is a
quite distinct society from the civil state? But next if every Church has this
liberty then in one and the same national Church, there may be many several
sorts of Governements, and this would occasion the greatest confusion in the
world, and looks no way like the ordinance of God, which neither tends to
union nor edification but to confusion and distraction, and will make every
parochial Church (and he cannot deny a parochial Church to be a Church) to
have its own distinct form of Government, thus porachiall Churches should be
like the Cant^ns of Helvetia or distinct Kingdoms ruled by their own laws and
after their own manner. If it be said that the unity and peace of the
national Church ought much more to be looked after, then the peace and unity
of any one particular congregation Ans. will it thence follow that every
particular congregation, in a national Church, should be Governed after one
manner? then it will follow also that all national Churches being members of
the Church universal, must be Governed after one and the same manner; for the
peace and unity of the Church universal is preferable unto the peace and unity
of a Not. Church, as the peace and unity of a Not. Church is preferable unto
the peace and unity of Particular congregations. But where shall a Magistrate be
found for establishing this one form of Government? Is it not then saifest to
say That Christ has set down such a form which all Churches, all the world
over are obliged to follow and imitat: for he is only head of the Church?

Obs. 3. When he stateth the question Part. 2 c. 3,. 1. He limiteth the disput
unto two sorts or species of Government thus Whether the Church should be
Governed by a college of presbyters; or by a superior order above the
standing ministry having the power of jurisdiction and ordination belonging to
it. But under favor, this is not fair dealing in stateing of a controversy
for his bussinesse is to show that there is no form at all settled by a Ius
divinum. That there is no warrant in the word, for any one form more then for
all the rest, and that there is no one form so determined by a positive law of
God, that all the Churches of Christ, are bound to observe it; but that it is
left to the prudence, of every particular Church to agree upon its own form,
which it judges most fit for the ends of Government, in it self: and if this
be his drift and scope, may not every one see how he prevaricateth here, in
limiting the disput to these two forms; seeing there are more forms pretended
unto. The independents will grant that there is no warrant in the word for
either of those two forms mentioned; and yet will allaidge that there is
another form allowed of God and determined: The Papists have a form of
Government, and it may be the prelates think that their form differs from
that. The Morellians have another form distinct from all these, the Erastians
have a sixth, and it is possible that Mr Baxter shall give him a seventh made
out of presbyterian episcopal, independent and Erastian. now if his principles
exclude all these why was the disput limited to two? or does he think that
these other forms are expressly excluded by the word, and that Churches are not
left at liberty to make choice of any of them, but only of either of the two
which he mentioned? Then the scripture is expressly and determinatly against
several forms of Government, and if this be true, his principles are
overturned, for if the law of God be expressly against some forms, it must be
more for other forms, then for these, and all forms are not indifferent, nor
are men left at liberty to pitch upon what form they please.

Obs. 4. He grants Part. 2. c. 2.. 1. That the Government of the Church ought
to be administered by officers of divine appointment. And now what shall become
of that Government by a superior order above the standing ministry; for a
prelat as a superior order is a distinct officer from presbyters; and so must
have a divine appointment, and if he has a divine appointment, he must be a
standing officer, as well as presbyters; and if so, men must not, as they
please, lay him by; but the Government by prelates must be juris divini: and if
upon the other hand, he be really a distinct officer, and has no divine
warrant, or appointment, the Government of the Church by prelates must be
utterly unlawful.

But what says he to this objection? Part. 2. c. 4.. 11. These officers are
only said to be new that were never appointed by Christ: and the Church may
appoint none such: but if such be meaned as have a Charge of more then one
particular congregation by the consent of pastors themselves, such an officer
is not ne^; for beside the general practice of the Church, from the first
primitive times, which have all consented in the use of such officers, we find
the foundation of this power laid by Christ himself, in the power which the
Apostles were invested in, which was extended over many both pastors, and
Churches; and this power must be proved extraordinary, before it can be said to
cease; and that must be done by some arguments proper to their persons; for if
they be of a moral nature, they will prove the office, to be so too -- I say
not but that the necessity of the office, as in their persons, for the first
preaching and propagating the Gospel did cease with them; but that after their
death it became unlawful to take Charge of di^ecesian Churches I deny; for to
make a thing unlawful, which was before lawful there must be some express
prohibition thus he.

To which it is answered. 1. It appears then that a Bishop is a distinct
officer from a Presbyter, for the Apostles were distinct from Presbyters, and
their office by Mr Stilling fleet, is the same upon the matter with that of the
Apostles, viz a power over both Churches and pastors, for he will not grant
that that power in the Apostles was extraordinar, for he says that the
foundation of this power, was laid by Christ himself, in that power which the
Apostles were invested in: and therefore that power of the Apostles, and the
power of Prelates must be one upon the matter, and so Prelates must be distinct
from Presbyters as the Apostles were. 2. It is strange how he can so
confidently say. That it was the practice of the Church of God from the first
primitive times, to consent to the use of such officers: s^ing himself is at so
much pains to prove that antiquity is most defective in the times immediately
after the Apostles, and that none dar with confidence believe the conjectures
of Eusebius at 300 years distance from the Apostolical times, when he has no
other testimony to avouch but the hypotyposes of an uncertain Clement and the
commentaries of Hegesippus, etc. Page 296. 297. 3. To let this pass. Mr
Stilling sleet would do well to show whether the office of Apostles (which is a
distinct thing from their extraordinary immediate mission (which he is pleased
to make the maine distinguishing note of an Apostle) and also from the power of
working miracles to confirm the truth of what they preached) did cease by
God's warrant and approbation or not: if not, how could any be so bold as to
lay this office aside, by which persons should be invested with power over many
both Churches and pastors? and how can any say that it is not still necessary:
Mr Stillingfleet seems here to plead for the divine right of prelacy: And
indeed if the office and power of Apostles be the same with prelacie, and if
that power or office be not laid a side with God's warrant and approbation, it
must still be an office allowed of God, and if so, Mr Stillingfleet's notion
will fall to the ground. His saying that the necessity of the office, as in
their persons for the first preaching and propagating the Gospel is ceased is
nothing to the purpose, for he must speak of the office, as it is the same with
the office of Prelates. It is certain the necessity of the office as in their
persons must cease, because they are gone, and the work of first preaching and
propagating the Gospel, could be done by none after them, when they had done
it themselves but that was not their ordinary office, if Mr Stillingfleet speak
truth here. If this office did cease by God's warrant, then how can any raise
it up again without his express warrant? for either it was the Lord's will
when he caused it to cease, that it should cease till he was pleased to make
use of it again, or till men pleased to raise it up, at their own pleasure:
This last cannot be proved and therefore seeing God thought fit to lay is aside
and gave no signification of his mind, when the Chur^ should be at liberty to
make use of it again. It must now be a^ new office unwarranted of God and so
unlawful. 4. That rule, the to make a thing unlawful, which was before,
lawful, there must be some express prohibition for bidding any further use of
such* power will not always hold in this case; because some oth^ thing may be
equivalent unto an exprese prohibition, (...) when God removes the special
propper work of such an office, and the special proper qualifications, with
which such officers were endued, when those cease the office cease; and God
thereby declares that the office and work was extraordinary, and therefore
should not continue. As for Example in the primitive Church there were some
Prophets, and these were distinct from Apostles and Evangelists, and Pastors,
etc. so were there workers of Miracles, and such as had the the gift of
healing, and of speaking with tongues. And when God withdrew those gifts fiting
those off^cers for the work unto which they were then called, did he not thereby
declare that it was his will that that office should cease? and was there a
necessity for any other express probition? And because of the want of this
express prohibition will it be lawful now for any to set up such officers and
offices, in the house of God, when God gives not the qualifications and so
gives not the call thereunto? So is it in this case of the Apostles; when
their qualifications, and their special work ceased, their office ceased; and
there will be no call for such officers till there be fit work, and God give
fit qualifications; and without a call and warrant it must be unlawful to set
up such an office again. This will be clearer if it be considered what was the
special work of an Apostle It was this. A planting of Churches, and settling of
the Gospel government in them, by ins^nteing the standing officers thereof,
and that by an eminent power immediately granted by Christ to them, solely. This
was their special work, and this ceased with them, and so did their office
with it, As also the qualifications: And therefore it would be unlawful now
for a Church at here own hand to set up such an officer again though there be
no express probition. By this it is clear. 5. That the power and office of
Apostles laid no foundation for prelaticall power, the work belonging to them
as such, being altogether extraordinare. It is true, their power did extend
over many Churches and pastors but yet. 1. They were not fixed to such and
such particular dioecies, as propper to themselves; but sometimes more of them
were to gether in one place, following their work, Nor. 2. Did they account
themselves the sole pastors of such or such a Church after other ministers had
been ordained there. 3. ^or did they ordain alone in Churches constituted.
nor. 4 Did they exerce jurisdiction alone, but always they joined others with
them in Churches settled. 5. They assumed to themselves no negative voice either
in ordination or jurisdiction: and so in them there could be no foundation for
prelacy laid, even as to their common work, or work of a lasting nature which
did not properly and peculiarly appertain to them as Apostles. 6. Neither
finally were they consecrated and ordained after the manner that prelates are
now consecrated, being first made Deacons, and next Presbyters, and then
Bishops, so that there is a vaste disparity.

But distrusting this answer he gives a second. 12. to this purpose. The
extending of any Ministerial power, is not the appoynting of a new office,
because every Minister has a relation Actu primo, to the whole Church of God,
the resiraint and enlargment of which power is subject to positive
determinations of prudence and convenience in Actu secundo -- The exercise and
execution of the power of order belongs to every one in his personal
capacity, but as to the power of jurisdiction, though it belong habitually and
Actu primo to each presbyter, yet being about matters of public and common
concernment, the limit ation and exercise of it belongs to the Church in
common (such is the power of visiting Churches, of ordination and censures) and
when this is devolved to some particular persons, by the rest of the pastors or
by the Magisrat, quoad executionem it belongs to them.

Ans. 1. This contradicts the former answer, for the former answer did
suppone that these were distinct officers from presbyters, because their office
was such as the ordinary office of the Apostles; and the Apostles were distinct
from other Church officers, even by their office, and not in respect only of
their extraordinare mission, or power of working miracles. But this answer
affirms them to be one and the same with presbyters. But. 2. By this answer
he might plead for the Pope for every Minister in actis primo has a relation
to the whole Church and so might be a Pope, if the supreme Magistrate or the
rest of the Ministers, would devolve upon him the execution of the power of
jurisdiction; and so the Pope is no new officer but a mere presbyter, only his
power of jurisdiction is enlairged: So may he plead for Cardmals, Patriarchs,
Primats, Archbishops, as well as for Bishops. But it will be objected that the
Pope pretends to some other thing as the warrant of his power even to a jus
divinum Ans. and so do prelates, but with Mr Stillingfleet, all is one whether
that be pretended unto, or not, for it is no matter what they say of
themselves, but what any may feign of them, to the end they may both deceive
others, and be deceived themselves. This is, as if one would defend a man who
had taken upon himself to be a King of such or such a common wealth, contrare
to the fundamental laws of the land, and would allege that he were no
distinct officer from any other member of Parliam. because (for sooth) the
power of Government, as to its execution, is subject to positive
determinations, and Parliaments may, and do commissionat some of their number
to some eminent piece of work, as to be a General or the like; and he who
calls himself King, is nothing else, notwithstanding that he rule the
commonw. with as absolute power and unlimited, as ever King did. Sure any man
of understanding would smile at such a defense, and just such an one is Mr
Stillingfleet's, prelates rule and domineer with as absolute and unlimited
power, as ever any did, and when it is alleged that they account themselves
distinct officers from, and superior to other presbyters, and that there is no
warrant for any such officers Mr Stillingfleet, their new advocat comes in,
and says: They are no distinct officers, let themselves say what they will,
you may take them up as no distinct officers, and so suffer them to domineer
still, if you look upon them as no distinct officers there is no hazard, all is
saife, be they Pope be they Prelat and let them pretend to never so high and
special commissions, as special and distinct officers, yet they may be
submitted unto and obeyed, this mental conception will make all right. 3. When
any are disputing against an intruder in the house of God whether is it saifest
to take him up, in his own colors and to look upon him as he holds forth
himself, or to paint him as any think best? If any disputant would take liberty
to paint him as he pleases he should not dispute for truth, but deal
deceitfully. Let Mr Stillingfleet answer this question: Whether is it possible
that a man may give out himself for a new officer, or not? or whether is there
any hazard that such an one may be acknowledged and countenanced as an officer
and as such an officer as he gives himself forth to be, in the house of God:
or not? If Mr Stillingfleet be consonant to his principles, he must answer
that it is not possible: for really there can be no new officers warranded of
God; and every one is at liberty to take them up under a right notion: and
there is an end: and then let all the popish rabble and ten times more come in,
they may be submitted unto; for really there can be no other officers in God's
house, but pastors and deacons (with Mr Stillingfleet) and every one may look
on all the rest as having their power either restricted or enlairged, according
to the determination of prudence. 4. It may be asked: whether the Apostles were
distinct officers from presbyt. yea or not? If they were distinct; what was it
which made them distinct? It could not be their different way of mission for
Matthias had not such a mission as James, John and Peter and the rest had and
yet all of them were Apostles and Matthias no less then the rest. It could not
be their extraordinary qualifications, for Prophets and workers of miracles and
speakers with tongues, had extraordinary qualifications; and yet they were not
the same with Apostles: and further distinct qualifications make not distinct
officers. Or was it a larger extended power? Then it is certane that prelates
upon the same account must be distinct officers, from other presbyters; for
they have a larger extended power then other presbyters have. 5. Does Mr
Stillingfl. think that there is no difference betuixt a man who acts as
commissionated from a judicature, having his power and particular commission
from them; and a man who does all of himself by his own power, having a
commission from none? and that there is no difference betuixt one who receives
commands from others as accountable to them, and one who takes upon him to
command them as he think best: and betuixt the general of an army sent
forth by the Estates of a land (ruled without a King) having power and
commission from them; and a King making use of the Estates, or of the
Parliament of the Kingdom as his counselors whose advice he will follow, or
not follow, as seems him good, and commanding all of them a^ pleases him
best? If he think that there is no difference betuixt these, then indeed he
cannot be much blamed for thinking that the prelat whom he busketh, is one and
the same with the prelat of whom the controversy is. But in sober sadness let
it be asked of Mr Stillingfleet; If he did satisfy himself with this his
fiction and notion. There is no controversy now about what may be, or of a man
in the moon, but of the prelates who are now in being, and concerning these it
would be asked whether he thinks that they ar^ chosen by the Church over
which they are, and that they are empowered by that Church, or by the officers
of that Church, for that effect, and that they are accountable unto them, so
that their power may be restrained at the Churches pleasure: Or not rather that
they choose and ordain the presbyters, and commissionat them, calling them to
an account, and punishing as they think sit, usurping and useing this power as
their own, not borrowing it from the presbyters, in whole or in part, as being
themselves solely invested with all Church power from Christ, and letting out
the same to presbyters as they think meet. Now it is of these that the
controversy is and it is such as are understood when it is said that they are
new Church officers, and there is no controversy concerning Mr Stillingfleet's
supposed Commissioners; for whether such as he speaks of; be new distinct
officers, or not, it is no matter, so long as these of whom the disput is, are
such without all question, for any thing which Mr Stillingfleet has said to
the contrary; for the persons he speaks of, are not the same with the persons
concerning whom the controversy is: Commissioners having all their power
derived from others are one thing, and such as have all the power from and with
in themselves are another thing. But. 6. To put the matter more out of doubt,
let it be considered that a distinct proper work with a distinct ordination for
that effect, is enough to make a distinct officer: What distinguishes
Presbyters and Dea^ns (Let ruleing elders be laid a side, seeing Mr
Stillingfleet will not own them as Church officers) but their distinct
peculiar work and ordination: and so since prelates assume to themselves as
their peculiar work, the power of jurisdiction, and ordination (to speak
nothing of the power of order) they do account themselves, and so must all take
them to be, distinct officers: All the prelates that ever were yet in the world,
did look upon themselves as distinct from presbyters: and all who ever wrote of
prelates, took them up as such (whether Iure Divino or Humano all is one, as to
this bussinesse of their being distinct) till Mr Stlling fleet did vent his new
notions. 7. That a judicature which acts jointly in matters of jurisdiction,
may, in some particulars for facilitating their execution, empower one or more
of their number for that effect, is easily granted; but that they may so
Empower them, as to denude themselves wholly of the power; and so enlarge the
power of others as to null their own; must be otherwise proved then by Mr
Stilling fleet's bare assertion: Christ's commission takes in both the power
of order and jurisdiction, and allows his servants no more to denude
themselves of the one, then of the other. They themselves must answer for the
duties of the one as well as for the duties of the other: And every Presbyter
has the Ius to both as well in actu secundo as in actu primo. judicious
V^etius Polit. Eccl. Page 224. Quaest. 15. does abundantly clear this
particular, showing that such a delegation is not lawful out of Mat. 18: 18.
and 16: 18. 1 Cor. 5. Act. 20: 28. 1 Timothy 5: 17. 1 These. 5: 12. 1 Pet. 5: 1, 2.
comp. with 1 Timothy 3: 5. Ioh. 20: 20. 1 Timothy 3. and 4: 13, 14. 2 Timothy 2: 2. and
4: 2. Tit. 1: 3, 5, 7, 8. Whatever may be done in case of necessity, for
dispatching of some particular Act, which is transient. And how or what way the
limitation and exercise of the power of jurisdiction, belongs to the Church
in common more then the limitation and exercise of the power of order, is not
yet clearly demonstrated by any thing which Mr Stillingfleet has said: And it
is known that Prelates arrogat to themselves, a special or sole interest in the
power of order, as well as in the power of jurisdiction, and therefore they
style themselves the only Pastors of the Dioecies, and say that the Presbyters
are but their Substitutes and Vicars; And it is certane that they assume to
themselves, the sole power of ordination. And though here in this place, which
is now under consideration Mr Stillingfleet is pleased to rank up ordination
under the power of jurisdiction, yet else where viz. Page 273. he says that,
The collation of orders does come from the power of order and not merely from
the power of jurisdiction. 8. How comes the Christian Magistrate in here to
appoint the constant limitation, and exercise of the power committed by Christ,
unto Church Officers? This is a very great power granted unto the civil
Magistrate and some warrant would be seen for it: But this is not the proper
place to examine his notions concerning the power of the civil Magistrate in
Church matters. Enough of this observation.

Obs. 5. With Presbyterians; the practice of the Apostles, and of the Churches
in their days, following their appointment and command, is of much weight. It
is true their examples as examples, do not bind; But when the Lord has sent
them forth, for this end and errand, to plant Churches, to ordain new
offices, and officers, immediately under him, and to appoint unto these
officers, their proper work, and to show them how and what way they should go
about their work, and when in all things they delivered nothing to the Church
but what they received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11: 23. and as Tertull. said de
praeser. adv. haereses, Apostoli nihil ex suo arbitrio elegerunt quod
inducerent, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam fideliter nationibus
assignaverunt; Sure then their practice and example ought to be followed. Seeing
they were sent forth for this end especially, viz. to reform and setle
Churches in doctrine, worship, discipline and government, according to a new
Gospel model, can any think that we are not obliged to follow their
practices. It it true there can be no duty without a law making it a duty; But
Christ's sending them forth for this end, and giving them a special commission
for this work, sending them forth as the Father sent him, and breathing the
Holy Ghost upon them, and commanding them, Math. 28: v. 19, 20. To go and
teach all Nations all things which he had commanded them: and Act. 1: 2, 3.
Speaking to them of the things pertainting to the Kingdom of God. By which
says Calvin on the place, Is signified that Christ would not go away till
first he had seen to the government of the Church, carry a law in their
bosom, and say that their example is obligeing: And when there is a law or
warrant for following such an example, it is but in vain to dispute, whether
it be the example which binds, or the rule making it our duty to follow such
an example. But moreover he will grant that examples in actions that are moral
natural are obligeing (whether as examples, or by reason of the morality of
the action, needs not be anxiously enquired after) and will not actions done
by them upon moral grounds, that are of perpetual concernement, become
actions moral natural, and so obligeing? Is not their example in observing
the first day Sabbath, obligeing? And why? He says, because there was a moral
law standing in force concerning the observation of one day in Seven: Why then
shall not their example in observing such or such a form of government be
obligeing, seeing there was a moral law standing in force concerning the
government of the Church in general? Is there any rule extant making their
example in the one case obligeing, and not in the other? If the Apostolical
practice in the one case make an Apostolical tradition, and so a divine
institution, so will their practice do in the other case: yea the examples of
the Churches practice in the Apostles times, and hints from their writtings do
sufficiently evidence an institution; we read of elders in Jerusalem, and hence
we saifly argue that they were ordained, though we read not in terminis
terminantibus of the manner how they were ordained, (says one.)

But he has four things to object against this ground taken from the practice
of the Apostles, though acted by the Spirit Part. 2. cap. 6.. 20.

As 1. That the Apostles did many things without any intention of obligeing
others, as preaching without maintenance, etc. Ans. 1. The consequence is null.
Because they did many things without such an intention, will it follow, Ergo
they did nothing with such an intention? 2. The disput is about such actions as
were done by them by virtue of their special office and calling, of which
kind, this is none, to preach at some Churches without wages. 3. Yea this same
action of preaching without wages, is to be imitated in the like cases, that
is, when Ministers have a competent livelihood otherwise, as Paul had who said,
he robed other Churches, 1 Cor. 11: ver. 8. and when there is no other way to
stope the mouths of false teachers, who thereby take occasion to hinder the
good of the Gospel, for this was the thing which moved Paul to take ^o wages
from Corinth. That he might cut off occasion from them that desired occasion,
and these were the false Apostles, 1 Cor. 11: v. 12, 13.

2. He says, The Apostles did many things upon particular occasions,
emergencies and circumstances, which things so done cannot bind by virtue of
their doing them, any further then a parity of reason does conclude the same
things to be done, as Paul's celebat, community of goods, their preaching from
house to house, absteaning from blood, etc. Ans. this is still to argue a
particulari because such and such particular practices oblige not Ergo no
practice obliges, is a weak consequence. 2. Actions done upon particular
occasions and emergencies, are of another nature, then such actions as are done
upon moral and lasting grounds. 3. If even those actions bind upon the ground
of a parity of reason, much more will these bind upon the same account: for
whatever ground or reason be given why the Apostles followed such a model of
Government in their days, will stand good now, and evince that the same model
ought to be followed. 4. And where as he says before an acknowledged
Apostolical practice be looked on as obligatory, it must be made appear, that
what they did, was not according as they saw reason and cause, for the doing of
it, depending upon the several circumstances of time place and persons; but
that they did it from some unalterable law of Christ, or from indispensable
reasons, as will equally hold in all times, places and persons he confirms
what is now answered; for the reasons of their erecting such a species of
Government, do equally hold in all times and places, nothing can be said for
the dependence of such a form upon the several circumstances of time place
and persons. As for the particulars mentioned by him, It is answered. 1. For
Celebat, Christ himself Mat. 1 9: v. 12. restricteth it to such as have the
gift of continency, and it binds none else. 2. The Community of goods was for
that time only, for the contrary is practiced in after times by all other
Churches and Christians; for when Paul is pressing the Corinthians unto a
contribution he never mentions this as an argument moving thereunto. 3. Their
preaching from house to house was for want of convenience of more public
places and yet when they had liberty they went to the temple, and to Solomon's
por^h, and to Synagogues. 4. As for that Act 15* concerning the abstaineing
from blood and things strangled, and things offered to idols it was only for
that time of the scandal, and not always; for Paul takes off this. 1. Cor
10: 25: when he says whatsoever is sold in the shambles that eat asking no
question for conscience sake and again when he says. 1. Tim 4: 3, 4, 5. Every
creature of God is good and nothing to be refused if it be received with thanks
giving. But there is nothing of this kind that can be shown, in the matter of
the species of Government as shall further appear when his alledgances are
answered afterward.

3. He says officers that were of Apostolic appointment are grown out of use
in the Church as widows. 1 Timothy 4: 9. or diaconisses Rom 16: 1. Ans. These
Diaconisses were not Church Officers having any Ministerial charge or office
in the Church, for there is nothing spoken of their ordination. But they were
poor eleemosynaries, and indigent women, taken in for some service, unto sick
strangers, or propter horam balnei; aut visitationis quando nudatum fui^ corpus
mulieris as says Epip^ rius lib. 3. Tom. 2. haeres. 79. And so their work was
for those ^ote countries, and because now there is no such necessity for
their work, themselves are laid aside. But 2. are there not several other
officers laid aside as Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists* and will he hence
conclude that therefore nothing of their practice obliges? 3. If this ground
be followed forth, that Apostolic practice even in the matter of officers
instituted by them, is not of an obligatory nature, then may all Church
officers be laid aside, and so his formerly mentioned position and concession
touching the government of the Church by officers only of divine appointment,
will fall to the ground. If he say that divine institution is one thing and
bare examples are another thing. Ans. Then his reason here is impertinent: for
all Church officers are of divine institution, and these Diaconisses among the
rest must be of divine appointment: and then what has this to do here where
the examplary practices of the Apostles are only spoken of; which yet to
presbyterians in the case of Government will speak fair for a divine
institution. finally if it could be cleared what was and ought to be the proper
work of these Widows and that it were of a lasting necessity unto the Church
in all places and at all times (of which the scripture is altogether silent) as
may be seen concerning other standing officers of the Church, respect should be
had to that ordinance of God, as well as to others.

4. He says Rites and customs apostolical are altered (...) dipping in
baptism, love feasts, holy kiss, and therefore men do not think that
apostolical practice does bind. Ans. 1. He still argues a particular^ which
is very unsure and fallacious: because in some things men look not upon the
practice of the Apostles, as bindeing therefore in nothing: This argument will
not hold. 2. There is a great difference betwixt rites and customs, which are
alterable: and such and such forms of Government which be of a more lasting
nature. As for dipping in baptism. It is no where commanded, nor was it
constantly practiced by the Apostles, nor other Church officers: It is true
they were commanded to Baptize, but this will not necessarily import baptizing
by dipping; for baptizing any thing may be otherwise then by dipping, as these
places do clear Mark. 7: 4. Heb. 9: v. 10. with Numb. 8: 7^ 1. Cor. 10: v. 1.
Rev. 19: 13^ compared with Isa. 63: 3. Mat. 3: 11. compared with Act. 2: 17.
And next it is several times found that they baptized, when and where they
could not get Dipping used as, Act 2, 41. and 4, 4. Where such multitudes could
not be gotten dipped, especially in the streets: so Act 9, 18, 19. This was in a
lodging when Paul was sick and weak and so unfit for Dipping: So Act 16, 33.
This was in the night in a private lodging when Paul and Silas by reason of
their sores were unable for dipping. And therefore all that can be said in
this, is that sometimes they used Dipping and sometimes sprinkling as occasion
offered: and this will speak nothing for the Apostles continual practiseing of
dipping, and so it will not speak home to the case in hand. 4. As for love
feasts, if they were ordinary seasts, amongst private Christians, it was but an
Act of civility to use these, and they needed no institution from the Apostles
practice, and a custom it is that continues yet; But if it be meaned of the
feasts which they kept at the Lord's supp^, when rich persons brought some
meat with them to make a feast of at that time; This was not constantly
practiced by the apostles (of whose practices we are now speaking) not yet was
it warranted by them; yea Paul writting to the Corinthians Epist. 1. c. 11. v.
22. says have ye therefore no houses to eat and drink in? And so would have
them forbearing that custom, which they had so much abused. Their custom was
to keep those feasts in the place of the assembly: and he would have them (if
so they would feast) keeping those feasts at home in their own houses: and
therefore this is nothing to the purpose in hand. 5. As for the Holy Kiss It
was only a civil custom used then in saluteing one another, and was not of any
Apostolical institution: famous Voetius Polit. Eccles. Page 466. says that
this Kiss was a common rite in its Kind and form, used according to the
received custom in toaken of love, friendshipe, familiarity, as also of
subjection and again Page 467. of what soever kind and form it was, it was
nothing but a common sign of love, good will, acquaintance, friendshipe,
familiarity, courtesy, reverence and honor in thwir meetings, conferences,
and salutations, especially in the Eastern conntreyes see Gen 29, 11. and. 31.
28. and. 45, 15. 1. Sam. 10. 1, 2. Sam. 20, (...). Mat. 26, 48. Luk* ^7, 45. It
is true Paul bids them salute one another with a Holy Kiss, but when he does
so he does not institute the Kiss but only orders the manner of their useing
of that salutation and exhorteh that it be not done wantonly or dissemblingly,
but Christianly and Holily. Voetius ubi supra says By thi^ Epithet Holy it is
distinguished from a lust full Kiss as that Prove. 7. 13. and Hypocritical,
like that Mat. 26, 48, 49. And it is called holy because the Kiss of Holy and
true charity as 1 Pet. 5. 4. And again he says It is propounded be^y of a
command not general, but special according to the particular and present
circumstances of time place and persons.

Thus it is apparent that for all these four reasons of his, the practice of
the Apostles in the matter of Government, ^being a bussinesse unto which they
were called, and for which they were endued, and specially assisted by the Holy
ghost, is obligeing and of binding force.

But there are some other things, which he all^igeth against this Part. 2. cap.
6.. 19. Which must be examined. He lays down as probable That the Apostles in
probability did not observe any one fixed course in settling the Government of
Churches, but settled it according to the several circumstances of places and
persons which they had to deal with. Though he lay not this down as a
foundation of his thesis, but only as a Doctrines of probability, yet if he be
able to make it out that the Apostles in some places did setle Presbyterian
Government, and in other places Episcopal Government, he shall gain his
point: And therefore his strength in this particular must be tried.

To this end he lays down three grounds. 1. The different State, condition,
quantity of the Churches planted by the Apostles. 2. The multitude of unfixed
officers which Acted then with authority over the Church where they were
resident. 3. The different customs observed in several Churches as t^ their
Government after the death of the Apostles. As to the last of these grounds it
cannot appear to be any at all: For the pracctice of the Churches after the
days of the Apostles will not prove what the practice of the Churches was,
dureing the days of the Apostles, nor what the practice of the Apostles was,
unless it could certanely be manifested, that these Churches did punctually
follow the practice of the Apostles which he will neither affirm nor undertake
to prove, unless he would flatly contradict himself. As to the second ground
it comes not up to be a sufficient ground for this position unless he will
prove that these unfixed officers or Evangelists, (such as Timothy and Titus
were as himself acknowledges) were proper Bishops, that is to say, were not
Evangelists, but fixed officers. 2: Though the Apostle made use of them in some
Churches, and not in others, it will not follow that therefore the Apostles did
set up distinct forms or models; for the way of setting up a model is
adistinct thing from the model itself: the model or species of Government
might be the same whether erected in a place immediately by the Apostles
themselves, or mediatly by the Evangelists at their direction. And 3. Neither
the Apostles themselves, nor the Evangelists (for any thing which can be seen
in Scripture) did act in matters of government, after an Episcopal manner,
but conjunctly with other Presbyters, in Churches constituted (and what
extraordinary course they took in Churches not yet constituted is not much to
the purpose in hand, for their way of erecting a model thus; being
extraordinary, is not necessarily imitable.) And thus one species viz.
Presbyterian is directly pointed forth.

But most of the stresse lies on the first ground, for proving of which he
lays down two particulars. 1. That in Churches consisting of a small number
of believers, where there was no great probability of a great increase
afterward, one single Pastor with Deacons under him were only constituted by
the Apostles for the ruleing of these Churches. 2. In Churches consisting of a
multitude of believers, or where there was a probability of a great increase by
preaching the Gospel; The Apostles did setle a college of Presbyters, whose
office was partly to govern the Church already formed, and partly in laboring
in the converting of more: As to this last particular it may be passed, because
it speaks nothing against the Presbyterians, they fully accord with him
therein; save where he says, That these two sores of elders mentioned, 1 Timothy
5: 17. were both preaching Presbyters, the one employed most in preaching, and
converting more, and therefore deserved both more respect and maintenance,
because of their greater burden, more abundant labors, and greater sufferings:
and others most in ruling the flock already converted. And so rejects ruleing
elders, as not being of divine appointment: But (that a word only may be spoken
to it here) his gloss agrees not to the place: for 1. This gloss makes the
ministry of the Word common to both, or else says that such as ruled at
home, did not preach at all, (and such the Apostle would not account worthy of
double honour^,) but the Apostle makes ruling common to both. 2. Then the
maine difference betwixt these two should lie in the word (...) where as the
Apostle makes the difference to lie in the whole sentence, lalabouring in word
and doctrine: For he says not these that rule well and are (...) in word and
doctrine; are worthy of double honor, but especially such who are (...). 3. We
find this word (...) given to others even to such as were fixed to some
certain place, as 1. These. 5: v. 12 (...). 4. These unfixed preachers behoved
to be either Evangelists, and such like extraordinary Officers, or ^reaching
Presbyters; Not Evangelists, for there was no doubt, about these; for all would
grant that they were worthy of double honor. And it is like the Apostle would
not have spoken so to Timothy who was an Evangelist: Not preaching Presbyters,
for there was none of those set apart for that end; The Scripture mentions no
such thing, but always teaches that Presbyters were fixed to certain places
(what Presbyters might do, and did when scattered abroad by reason of
persecution, is another question) Elders are ordained and appointed to
Churches, Act. 14: 23. Tit. 1: 5. But enough of this, in this place.

The first particular then must be a little more narrowly examined: he says,
That in some places at first there were noneplaced but only a Bishop and
Deacons, and for this he cites Clement's Epistle (saying, The Apostles
preaching through countries and cities ordained the first fruits of such as
believed to be Bishops and Deacons.) But by Bishops here he cannot understand
such Bishops, as are now spoken of, that is, such as had power over Presbyters
and Churches; for himself does abundantly clear the contrary: And what can be
allaidged to prove that he means only one Bishop in one place, is not yet
apparent, only he refers his reader to other testimonies, which must also be
looked upon, and examined: But it is certain the place it self speaks as
much for one Deacon in a place as for one Presbyter, or Bishop (for both are
one as himself will acknowledge) and as clearly for more Bishops as for more
Deacons in villages, or cities (...), here are as well Bishops in cities and
villages, as Deacons. But then he cites Epiphanius contra Ae^m Haeres. 75.
saying, That at the first there were no Bishops appointed, and then the Apostle
writteth to Bishops and Deacons (for the Apostles could not setle all things at
first) for there was a necessity of Presbyters and Deacons, for by these two
Officers, all Ecclesiastic offices might be performed; for where there was
none found worthy to be a Bishop, the place remained without one, but where
necessity required one, and there were some found fit, some were ordained
Bishops, but for want of convenient number there could be no Presbyters found
out, and in such places they were contented with the Bishop and Deacons. But
what can Epiphanius or any other writter in his time, do, as to the clearing of
what was the practice of the Apostles (concerning which is the present
discourse) must their testimony be believed without a word of Scripture to
warrant the same? Yea must they be believed when they speak contrary to the
word? Be it so that there was a time in which there were Presbyters and
Deacons, and again a time in which there were Bishops and deacons, what will
this say, so long as nothing is said to prove, that these Bishops and
Presbyters were distinct officers, and not one and the same, as is supposed of
the Bishops and presbyters now under debate, all this will never prove a
distinct species of Government but always one and the same, whether the
presbyters be called presbyters, or Bishops. 3. Be it so that in some places
there were only one Bishop or Presbyter and deacons appointed (of which there
can no warrant be seen in scripture for scripture says that there were
presbyters ordained (...) Act. 14: 23. and (...). Tit. 1: 5. for it was to
cities whither the Apostles did most resort to plant Churches and not to
country villages, where gentilisme did long thereafter continue, whence these
of that religion were called Pagani) what will this speak for Episcopal
Government; so long as this one Bishop could not be a Bishop properly so
called, not having presbyters under him? Or does he think that it is
inconsistent with presbyterian Government that one preaching presbyter be set
over a parish or a village, and that he and others join with the presbyters one
or more of a Neighbor city, in things of common concernment? or must he rule in
that village independently? Mr Stillingfleet will not acknowledge this: Nor can
he say that he can exerce Episcopal power: Therefore though this were granted
to him the Government may still be presbyteriall. 4, How can Epiphanius say
that the Apostles could not setle all things at the first? if they could not do
it who could do it else? had they not the Spirit in great measure to prompt
them to do what was fit and expedient? either they could not get men fit to be
Bishops, or a sufficient number to be presbyters; But this will suppone that at
that time presbyters and Bishops were destinct, which Stilling fleet will not
acknowledge; and Epiphanius cannot give one instance of a Bishop distinct from,
and superior unto preaching Presbyters settled in a Church alone with some few
deacons. The reader may see this passage more fully examined by Wallo
Messalinus, page 102. and page 277. etc.

The next author which he cites is Clemens Alexandrinus out of Eusebius
saying. That John after his ret^n from Pa^mos went abroad into several places,
in some constituting Bishops in some setting in order whole Churches, in other
choosing ^ur one among the rest, whom he set over the Church. But of this the
(...) is utterly silent, and therefore it cannot be received as an undo^ ed
thing, and what would Mr Stillingfleet gather from (...) He seteth it down in
the words of Walo Messalinus, Page ^25 In majoribus urbibus plures i. e. it is
probable that there were mo^ presbyters ordained in greater towns and fewer in
lesser tow^ b^ villages, or little parishes, one only, especially when there was
no* (...) number of believers. And now let any ^dge it there c^ (...) thing
gathered thence for Episcopal Government, and (...) thing for this end he must
prove out of this passage, (...) does nothing: He must prove out of it, that
the (...) some places did setle presbyterian Government, and (...) places
Episcopal, otherwise he is but beating the wind: for no asserters of
Presbyterian Government did ever yet find them selves necessitated to
maintain, that the Apostles did set up an equal number of Presbyters in every
Church, or yet a plurality of preaching presbyters in each village, or country
place, or such as the Greeks call (...) or (...), so that though all this were
granted his point would not yet be proved.

At le^ he cites Ambrose (or rather ^ilarius) in Ephesians. 4. saying primum enim,
etc. i. e. at first all did teach and all did baptize, at any time, or on any
day -- but when the Church took in all places about, there were conventicles
instituted and there were Governors and other offices appointed that so none
might assume to himself that office which did not appertain to him, not being
as yet ordained -- and therefore the writtings of the Apostles do not in every
point agree with the ordination which now is in use in the Church etc. But how
this can speak home to the point i^ not discernable; For the author is to give
the ground why the writings of the Apostles were not suiteable to the times in
which he lived, viz because matters were other ways settled in his time then in
the days of the Apostles: and will any hence infer that the Apostles settled
Churches with distinct forms o^ models, because after ages did so? who will
believe this consequence? 2. There is no mention made of any change in the
Apostle Paul's time; for the author mentions here his Epistle to Timothy,
which was written near to the end of his days. 3. Though there had been some
change and alteration even in the Apostles days, as to the manner of going
about the work of preaching and baptizing (and these are all the particulars,
which the author mentions) and some order settled thereanent, which had not
been settled before, what will this speak to the matter of Government, which is
the only thing now under debate? will it follow that because there was a settled
order condescended on in preaching and baptizeing which at sirst was not
followed, therefore the Apostles in some Churches erected presbyterian
Government, and in others, Episcopal? By what Medium will this consequence be
proved? 4. But how how shall it believed that things were better settled
afterward then they were in the Apostles days; or that the practice of after
ages is as obligatory as the practice of the Apostles? It is but a dream then
to think, that the Apostles did not observe any settled form in Governing
Churches, but only Acted according to the principles of humane prudence,
according to the necessities and occasions of the several Churches which they
had planted; for neither this author nor any other which he has cited to this
effect, does prove it: And though they should all say it, we were not bound to
believe them, seeing the law and the testimony shows the contrary, as may be
seen in the writings of such as plead for Presbyterian Government, where they
show that the Church of Jerusalem Ephesus and others, were Governed by the
common consent of Presbyters, and that the manner of the government of all
Gospel Churches mentioned in the new Testament was uniforme.

But he has another thing to say against the practice of the Apostles, viz.
That we cannot have that certainety of Apostolical practice, which is
necessary to constitute a divine right. This notion he prosecuteth at great
length Chap. 6. and as a ground thereunto he Prefixeth. 4. That the Apostles in
the forming of Churches did observe the customs of the jewish synagogue. And
thereupon proceeds to clear both what the Government of the jewish
synagogues was, and how the form set up in the Christian Church did correspond
thereunto; all which concerns the bussinesse in hand little or nothing* and
there fore may be passed; seeing it is not very material to consider whether or
not jewish synagogues were so Governed? and whether or not the Apostles did
follow that copy: for that which is now sought for is such a Government as was
practiced by the Apostles; and instituted, as the form of Church Government
which was to continue, and such a Government as had the stamp of divine
authority, or of a divine institution; But now, no jewish Government as such,
could have this; but only such a Government, as these, by their practice did
institute, who were thereunto appointed of God, and extraordinarily called and
qualified. And moreover if the jewish Synagogues were Governed uniformly, and
if the Apostles did set up a Government in the Gospel Churches, in a way
correspondent there unto, It will inevitably follow that the Apostles did take
an uniforme way in settling the Government of all the Churches, and this
crosses what he said of late, and confirms what was Answered.

But leaving this. The proposition now under consideration is a question of
fact the certanety of which is doubted of, as he allaidgeth, viz, what course
the Apostles took in Governing Churches. or after what manner, did they setle a
Government among them? The uncertanety of this matter of fact, he thinks to
evince by three arguments. The last of which viz the defectivenesse, ambiguity,
partiality and repugnancy of the records of the succeeding ages which should
inform^ (...) what Apostolical practice was (which he prosecuteh largely and
satisfactorily From. 16. to. 19.) may be passed, as concerning the bussinesse
in hand nothing, as to Presbyteriaus; for if they be not able to prove the
practice of the Apostles, out of the sacred write, they despair, as much as he
can do, of proving the same from humane records, and that for the same reasons
which he there gives. But as for the other two reasons or grounds they must be
examined.

The first then is this The equivalency of the names and the doubtfulnesse of
their signification by which this form should be determined -- now there is a
fourefold equivalency of names Bishop and Presbyter. 1. That both should
signify a Presbyter as. Theodor in 1. Tim. 3. 1. 2. That both should signify
a Bishop. 3. That both should signify promiscuously some time a Bishop and
sometime a Presbyter. and. 4. That the name Bishop always imports a singular
Bishop, but the name Presbyter does promiscuously signify both -- equivocall
words can never of themselves determine what sensethey are to be taken in --
all that can be inferred from the promiscuous sense of the words, is that they
may be understood only in this sense, but it must be proved that they can be
understood in no other sense, before any one particular form of Government,
as necessary, can be inferred from the use of them.

Ans. 1. This is a ready way to cast all scripture as unable to determine any
controversy; for if adversaries may be believed all these passages which are
made use of against them, do carry another sense, and must be otherwise
interpreted, and so all scripture must go under the name of equivocall
sentences, and must be laid aside. 2. Presbyterians do not lay the stresse of
their bussinesse upon the name; They have other things whereby to prove their
point then either the one name, or the other; And so this does not concern
them much. 3. The question betuixt Presbyterians and their adversaries is this,
whether there be such an officer as a prelat having superiority of jurisdiction
over Presbyters and people, and sole power of ordination, instituted by Christ;
or not: and not whether these two words signify one thing or another; for it
is granted by all the Episcopal party (except one who in his Annot on act 11.
says that there is no evidence whereby these inferior presbyters may appear
to have been brought in the Church so early.) That there were presbyters
ordained in the Apostles days; and all the question is concerning bishops, as
distinct from presbyters, whether or not they were ordained: and Presbyterian
divines do demonstrat that even in those places where the name Bishop is, no
such officer can be understood. As to that which some fathers say, who writting
some centuries of years after the Apostles days, and speaking of the state of
the Church in the Apostles days, after the form and manner in their times,
concerning the promiscuous use of the two names, it does no way wrong the cause
in hand, until it be proved, that there was indeed such an officer in rerum
natura, and this is not yet done. 4. Whatever these names may signify is not
very material, but what indeed they do signify in such and such places: And
if there was not such an officer in the days of the Apostles, as a Bishop
distinct from a Presbyter (as shall be supposed until it be better proved then
yet it is,) it will necessariely follow that both those names must signify one
and the same thing, one and the same officer viz a Presbyter. 5. To say that
both these names are promiscuonsly used sometime for a Bishop and some time for
a Presbyter if these two be distinct officers, is to lay a blot on the Spirit
of God speaking in the scriptures, for by what rule shall it be known when he
is speaking of the one, and when he is speaking of the other? and in what a
mist and labyrinth must all be lest, in this bussinesse, especially when the
maine difficulty touching the being of one of these officers, is not removed.
6. But to put an end to this, let these few things be considered by Mr Stilling
fleet. 1. Is it probable that Christ or his Apostles would institute a new and
distinct officer, and an officer who was to continue unto the end of the world
as an ordinary and necessary officer, and yet give him no peculiar proper name,
by which he might be known, and every one might know when he were speaken of,
especially seeing all the other officers in Christ's house both ordinary and
extraordinary have their own distinct names, whereby they are known and
distinguished from others.. 2. Where will Mr Stilling fleet show that an
inferior officer was styled and called by the name, properly belonging unto a
superior officer where will he find a Deacon styled a Presbyter Apostle ^phet
or Evangelist? Where will he find a Presbyter styled a^ Apostle or Evangelist
(taking these names as restricted to be peculiar names of two extraordinary
officers, and not in their general acceptance as 2 Cor. 8, 23 and Phil. 2,
25.) how can it be then that a Presbyter was called a Bishop, if there was a
superior Church officer going under that name as proper and peculiar to him.
3. Is it not strange that in all the places of Scripture, where there is
mention made of this Bishop, it cannot be clearly demonstrated that any other
Church Officer is or can be understood, then a Presbyter, as to Phil. 1: v. 1.
it is beyond all denial: and as to Tit. 1: 7. Act. 20: 28. There the Bishops
are expressly called Presbyters: And 1 Timothy 3: 1, 2. Is the very parallel of
Tit. 1. 7. In both which places the work mentioned and qualifications, are only
the work and qualifications of a Pesbyter. 4. What mark will Mr Stilling fleet
give to know when the spirit of God mentioning Bishops is to be understood of
mere Pesbyters and when he is to be understood as speaking of Bishops distinct
from Presbyters; for neither the name, nor the work, nor the qualifications
will point out this distinction of Officers, or direct us, which of the two to
understand. 5. Let Mr Stilling fleet say, whether it be not saifer to conclude
an identity of offices from the identity of names, qualifications, and work;
then to conclude a distinction, where there is no ground for a distinction,
appearing in Apostolic times? 6. Had Mr Stilling fleet once proved that there
was such an officer, as a Bishop distinct from, and superior to preaching
Presbyters, instituted by the Apostles, in any of the Gospel Churches, then
this notion touching the promiscuous use of the two names had said something;
But seeing that is not done, both these names must signify, and import one and
the same officer: And so these two names shall be synonimous, and not
equivocall.

The second thing which he allaidgeth is this The places most in controversy
about the form of government may be understood without any apparent
incongruity of either of the different forms. Ans. It is certain they cannot
be understood of both, only the question is, of which of the two they must be
understood: And all this which he says will not much advantage his cause; for
hence he can only conclude, that there is a difficulty to find out the
species of Government which these places speak to; but not that there is a
liberty granted to own either of the two, because it is not well known which
of the two, the places cited, do most favor. He is pleased to name some few
passages, and these none of the clearest for the Presbyterian cause. But to
pass this piece of unfaire dealing, the passages which he mentions shall be
examined, and then some others shall be adduced, to which his answers will not
so well suite.

The first passage which he cites is Act 11. 30. Which (says he) may either
be understood of the elders of the Church at Jerusalem or of the several
Bishops of the Churches of ^udea. Ans. Is it credible that learned Mr Stilling
fleet could satisfy himself with this answer? Does he verily think that these
elders were or could be Bishops? If so what were these Churches over which they
were set? Could Jerusalem want a Bishop when the other lesser Churches of Judea
had? If Jerusalem had also a Bishop who was he? He will not say that James was
Bishop there, for James was an Apostle, and so, far above an ordinary Bishop;
where finds he the name Presbyter in all the New Testament, taken for a
Bishop distinct from a Presbyter? Or where finds he a company of Presbyters
taken for a company of Bishops? Is it not also strange that where there were so
many Bishops, there should not one of them be designed by name. 2. What though
there should be nothing in the place (and what wonder when liberty is taken to
put such glosses upon it, as cannot be confirmed by any other like passage)
that expressly excludes the one, is not this enough, that there is no thing in
all the Scripture speaking for that one, nor any thing in that passage expressly
for it? If there be no passage clearing that Bishops were instituted by Christ
or his Apostles, every passage which speaks of the government of the Church
by Presbyters, excludes Bishops, if it do not expressly and directly include
them, as this passage does not. But 3. Look the context and this will be
cleared: It was the Church of Jerusalem that sent Bar^bas thither to Antioch.
Ver. 22. And Agabus the Prophet who did foretell of the famine was come also
from Jerusalem, Ver. 27. And so it was to the Church of Jerusalem that Barnabas
was sent back again, with this contribution; Because this was the chief Church
where were many Christians: and there are few plantations beside found, as yet
in Judea, that could make up Bishoprics.

The next passage he cites, is more considerable, Act. 15: v. 6. [Where, he
says, nothing is expressed to make us know whether these were the fixed
elders of that Church, or the Bishops of all the Churches of Judea.] Ans. What
was said to the last, may be replied to this also: And further it was the
elders of that Church unto which Paul and Barnabas were sent Ver. 2. and this
was the Church of Jerusalem, that they should go up to Jerusalem to the
Apostles and elders. 2. When they came to Jerusalem they found the Apostles and
elders, there present: what could the Bishops of all Judea be doing there at
that time? If it be said, that they came together upon this solemn occasion.
How did they know of this occasion? For the Apostles knew not of it themselves
till the Commissioners from Antioch told them, Ver. 5. [That there were certane
of the Sect of the Pharisees arisen which believed saying that it was needful
to be circumcised, etc.] And then, Ver. 6. [The Apostles and Elders came
together for to consider of this matter.] He who can imagine that these Elders
were the Bishops of the several dioecies of Judea, may easily cast by the
plainest and fullest passages of Scripture that can be, and may imagine what he
pleases. But to put a close to this, let that passage, Act. 16: 4. be
considered, where it is said, [They delivered them the decrees to be kept
which were ordained by the Apostles (...) and Elders in Jerusalem,] or who
belonged to the Church of Jerusalem, or stayed there.

The third passage is Act. 21: 11. of which he gives the same dubious sense,
upon as little ground as before, and his conjectures may receive the same
answers: Only where he says, They might be the Elders of the several Churches
of Judea, he seems to prevaricat, for the point of difference is not betwixt
Elders and Elders; But betwixt Elders and Bishops, and betwixt the Elders of
that particular Church of Jerusalem, and the several Bishops of the dioecies
of Judea: But it seems he blushed to name this once, and therefore thought it
best to put in Elders, but this was not fair dealing. Neither is his
conclusion fair when he says, There is no certainty of the Church of
Jerusalem, how that was governed, whether by Apostles themselves, or other
unfixed Elders, or only by James, who exerced his Apostleshipe most there, and
thence is afterward called Bishop of Jerusalem: For the question is not whether
the Church of Jerusalem was governed by all the Apostles, or only by one; But
whether by Presbyters in common, or by one Bishop above and distinct from
Presbyters: And by this conclusion he would seem to say that there were no
Elders in Jerusalem at all, and no Governors there, but Apostles one or more.
Moreover it is sufficiently proved by the Presbyterian divines; that the
Apostles, when acting in government together with other Elders or Officers,
did not act as Apostles, but as ordinary Officers; And also that James did not
govern the Church of Ierus* alone, as a Bishop

The fourth passage which he cites is Act. 14: 23. upon which he says, That
no more is imported, but that no Church wanted an Elder, but not that every
Church had more Elders. Ans. whether was this single Presbyter a Prelate* or
not? If not, what is this to the present question? The government may be
Presbyteriall where one Minister is fixed to one particular flock. If he was a
Prelat, where were his Presbyters under him? 2. It is true (...) will signify
no more but Ecclesia^m, Church and Church; but will (...) signify no more but
one Presbyter? Had it been said (...) it might import, but one Presbyter in one
Church: Or yet if it had been said (...) But (...) must needs import more.
Theodoret knew the import and force of that phrase, when he rendereth the like
passage in Tit. thus, (...), a Presbytery in each city.

The last passage which he cites is Act. 20: 17. There is no certainly (says
he) whether these elders came only from Ephesus, or also from the several
Churches ^f Asia about. Ans. Upon what ground can he once think that the elders
of Asia may be understood here? He has none other but this, that it is said,
v. 18. that from the first day he came into Asia he had been with them at all
seasons, and because he did not remain all that time at Ephesus as appears
Act. 19: 20, 22, 26. But this cannot so much as ground a probability; for it is
certane the most part of his abode was at Ephesus, for full two years and three
months are specified Act, 19: 8, 10. and the rest of the three years (if there
be not ro^ndatio numeri here) he might now and then have visited other parts,
and have most of his residence at Ephesus, heither reaching in the Synagogue
nor in the School of Tyrannus, where he had taught two years and three months:
and so, granting that he might have made some visits, unto the other parts of
Asia, dur^ing, these Nine months; yet he might well say to th^se of Ephesus.
That from his first coming into Asia, they had known after what manner he had
been with them, again it will not hence follow, that others then these of
Ephesus were there, more then from these words v. 25. Y^ all among whom I have
gone preaching the Kingdom of God, it will follow that all the people he had
preached unto both in Ephesus, and in other places of Asia minor, and Asia
propria, were present. But whom can we expect to have been there, except such
only who were sent for, viz the Elders of the Church of Ephesus? and therefore
they are called the Elders of the Church and not the elders of the Churches, as
they would have been called if the Elders of the Churches had been there
present: as we hear of the Churches of Judea Galilee and Samaria, Act. 9: 31.
and of the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1: 2. Churches of Asia 1. Cor. 16. 19. of
Ma^edonia, 2 Cor. 8: 1. and of Syria and Cylicia Act. 15: 41. so would we hear
of the Elders of the Churches of Asia. But there is no such thing; only there
is mention made of the Elders of that one Church (...). To conclude this,
himself says cap. 7.. 2. page 349. [That this flock and Church were the
Christians of Ephesus and that all these spoken to were such as had a pastoral
charge of this one flock.]

Thus it has been shown how weak the ground is, upon which Mr S^illing fleet
walks, and how little reason he has to conclude his notion from these
passages which he has mentioned: and further the groundlesnesse of his conceit
will appear if some two or three passages of scripture be but viewed, which he
has passed by without once noticeing and unto which the answers which he was
pleased to give to others, will not quadrate, as. 1. That place. 1 Cor. 5. If
any look through that epistle they shall easily see that there were many
preaching Presbysers in that one Church and here Cap. 5. they are about a work
of excommunication, and so are endued with episcopal power. In this Chap. the
Apostle speaks to them all alongs in the plural number, and Mr
Stillingfleet, who is no friend to the independent way, will easily acknowledge
that what is there said was spoken to the Church Governors: So then, Mr
Stillingfleet must say that these Governors were Presbyters of that one Church
ruleing it together communi corsilio: And that they can not so well be
understood of Bish. for one Church should have but one Bishop: So then here is
a place which cannot be understood alike of both, but must of necessity be
understood of a Presbytery, and of a Presbytery having full Episcopal power,
in the matter of jurisdiction, what Mr Stilling fleet will reply to this, can
hardly be conjectured. A second passage is Phil. 1: v. 1. where mention is made
of Bishops and Deacons; now these Bishops, could not be Bishops properly so
called in opposition to, and as distinct from preaching Presbyters; Because of
such Bishops there can be but one in one Church at once, and therefore they
behoved to be Presbyters endued with Episcopal power, having the thing as well
as the name, and Presbyters of that one Church: So that this passage cannot be
equally understood of both, with any show of reason. A third passage is 1.
These. 5: 12, 13, 14. Where there are some mentioned who were laboring among
the people, and were over them in the Lord, and these were to warn the unruly,
etc. So that in this one Church there were several Presbyters, and Presbyters
endued with power of warning the unruly: Mr Stillingfleet cannot imagine, any
colurable pretense whereby, without much apparent incongruity, this passage may
be understood of either of the different forms. And seeing this ground fails
here, we may for all which he has said to the contrary, arrive to such an
absolute certainty of that course which the Apostles took in settling Churches.
So much for this observation.

6. It may be observed; That Presbyterians have more then the practice of the
Apostles, even their positive institutions, in these few particulars. 1. In
ordaining and instituting such and such Officers, as Pastors, Doctors, Elders,
and Deacons, as may be seen, Romans 12: v. 6, 7, 8, 1 Cor. 12: 28. Ephesians. 4: v.
11, 12. In all which places there is no mention made of a Bishop distinct from
a preaching Presbyter. If Mr Stillingfleet say, according to his principles,
that there was no necessity of making mention of him, particularly, because he
is no distinct officer from a Presbyter, but only empowered by the rest as
their Commissioner. Beside what has been replied to this formerly, this may be
added here. That if this be truth which Mr Stillingfleet affirms, he has
wasted much paper and pains in vain, when he went about to prove that no
certanety of the practice of the Apostles could be come at whether they did set
up episcopal or Presbyterian Government; for these should not be two distinct
Governments: And he had a shorter cut for Answering all the places of
scripture, then the way was which he took: Yea he might have spared his whole
book, and given out this one Thesis for all, viz: [Though Presbyterian
Government be Iuris Divini yet the Presbyters, may lawfully intruste one of
their number with some special piece of the exercise of jurisdiction and
ordination.] And then he might have had more to say, upon the ground of
prudence or the like, for himself, then now he has. But it is not good to be
wise above what is written, and it is best wisdom and prudence to follow the
rule of the word. But more over. 2. They have the Apostles institutions
concerning the qualifications of these officers, as is to be seen in Paul's
epistles to Timothy, and Titus. 3. These officers are commanded to such and
such pieces of work, Some to rule, some to teach also, some to take care of the
poor. 4. These officers are commanded to attend that work of theirs with all
diligence, in their own proper persons, without rolling it over on others Romans
12: 6, 7, 8. The Minister is to wait on his Ministry, and he that teaches on
teaching, he that gives is to do it with simplicity, and he that rules is to
rule with diligence. 5. In matters of discipline and juridiction they are
commanded to Act jointly, for the officers of the Church of Corinth were
appointed to conveen together that they might deliver the incestuous person
unto Satan 1 Cor. 5, 4, 5. So the brethen the officers of the Church of
Thessalonica were exhorted to warn the unruly. Now lay all these together.
Such and such officers, set to such and such work, and appointed to attend the
same, and ordained to Act jointly in matters of government, and there is a
species of Government, and a species warranted by Divine institution viz: by
Apostolic commands; for these positive commands are of a lasting nature till
God repeal them again. Himself gives some (...) Marks, whereby to know when
positive laws bind immutably, the first whereof mentioned Part. 1. c 1.. 6.
and Part. 2. c. 2.. 2. Is useful here viz. when the same reason of the command
continues still. Now let Mr Stilling fleet show, if he can, what reason could
plead for Ministers acting collegiatly in matters of discipline then, which
will not be of force now; was there less of the spirit then, nor is now? Or
was there fewer able and fit men for to be Bishops then, nor is now? Or was
there less care to have things done orderly and exactly? or shall we say that
all these commands were for that age of the Church only? If so, there is an
easy way found to cast all the commands and injunctions of the Apostles,
though they were induced with the spirit. Shall it be thought that the command
given to the Church officers of Corinth to conveen and to excommunicat, did
bind them only, and at that time? if so, there should be a wide door opened to
much evil, and a way prepared for laying aside all the injunctions and
instructions of the Apostles as now useless, and as an almanac out of date.
Enough of this consideration.

Obs. 7. It would seem to be a great reflection upon Jesus Christ who was
faithful to him that appointed him, and that as a son and so beyond Moses
who was faithful as a servant, Heb. 3. 2, 5, 6. To say, that he has not
appointed a standing form of Government in his house. Mr Stilling fleet
replyeth Part, 2. c. 4.. 1. 1. That then it must be made appear that the
settling of this form was a part of his mediatory work Ans. This may easily be
made to appear; for it did belong to his Kingly office, and so was a part of
his mediatory work, as well as his instituting of officers in his house, and as
Mediator the Government is laid on his shoulders Isa. 9. 6. And all power in
heaven and earth was given to him Mat. 28, 18. He adds I grant he is King of
the Church, and does Govern it outwardly by his laws, and inwardly by his
spirit, but shall we say that therefore any one form of Government is
necessary which is neither contained in his laws nor dictated by his spirit?
Ans. No, not at all, for the Government which Presbyterians do account
necessary is both contained in his laws and dictated by his spirit, as is
shown; and they reject all other forms only because they are not contained in
his laws, nor dictated by his spirit. He replyeth. 2. That if this
correspondency hold the Church of Christ must be equally bound to all
circumstances of worship Ans. The Christian liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free, should not be abridged in the least, nor should this correspondency be
pressed so exactly and straightly, as to make it bleed; and yet there is no
necessity to grant that in nothing the correspondency will hold: It is true as
to the circumstances of actions much is left to Christian liberty now, and so
under the law, in several things, much was left to the liberty of the jews.
But to say that the model of Government should come in among circumstances is
to speak without any proof or sure ground, especially when the Change of the
model will be the bringing in of a new officer, which himself will not grant
to be a thing left to Christian liberty. He replyeth. 3. That there is such a
disparity betuixt the Gospel and jewish state as will weaken the argument Ans.
Of these disparities he names four The first whereof is the same with that
which went before, viz. our Christian freedom from ceremonies and the like.
But will it hence follow that Christians now must be at liberty to choose what
form of Government they will, popish prelaticall, Erastian, independent,
morellian, or Presbyterian? Must they be at liberty to choice what officers
they will; Or must they be left at liberty, to cut out their work to them? It
is good to stand fast in the liberty where with Christ has made us free; but
it is not good to turn that liberty unto licentiousness, and to extend it
beyond the due bounds. Mr Silling fleet would do well to have a care of the
first day sabbath, ^st he let the morality of that pass with the morality of
Church government in specie, for his grounds will lead him sorth equally
against both.

The second difference is this, That the Government of the tribe of Levi was
agreeable to the rest of the tribes. and therefore of the argument hold, Christ
must prescribe a civil Government. Ans. whether the Gover^ent of the tribe of
(...) was (...) or not, is not very material; for this is certain. Moses was
faithful in the house of God ordering all things according to the will of God,
So must Christ be in his own house and Church, ordering all things there
according to God's mind: It is not the Government of the state, but the
Government of Christ's house which is looked after. But. 2. Had the Church
under the law no Government? Where was their priests and their Levites then?
and where was their Sanhedrin lesser and greater? Sure this was distinct from
the Government of other tribes; Yea even from the Government of the tribe of
Levi, as it was a part of the state: And as a Church they had other officers
then the state had.

His third difference is, That the jews were a whole and entire people when
one set form of Government was prescribed them, but the Church of Christ, was
but in forming in the days of Christ and the Apostles and therefore one could
not serve it then and now, when whole nations are converted: A pastor and
deacons might serve a a city when converts are few, but cannot when increased
to many congregations. Ans. This will plead for a necessity of multiplying
officers of the same kind conform to the multitude of believers, but will not
evince a necessity of having new officers. It will plead for the enlargeing of
the same Species of Government; but not for the bringing in of a new Species:
though the garment cut out for one in his infancy, will not serve him when
grown in years: yet a garment of the same kind of cloth will serve. 2. It is
strange that when the Church was small she behoved to be ruled by a company of
presbyters; but now when she is grown large, one Bishop will suffice: One would
think that if the Government had been episcopal then, it should be
presbyterian now; for the larger the Church is she requires the more
Governors. 3. There is mention made of the Churches of Judea, Galatia, Asia,
Syria and Cylicia; and so of many large countries and territories converted
unto the faith, and why might there not such a model of Government be fallen
upon, in those large countries, as would suite whole Kingdoms? 4. It is
sufficiently known that Presbyterian Government will suite all Churches, be
they lesser, be they larger: were there but one congregation of believers in a
country, Presbyterian Government will sit that little Church: and again were
there great Kingdoms and nations converted the same Government would suite
them, and most certainly attain the end for which it was appointed. 5. If the
form of Church Governm. which Moses did appoint did suite the jews both when
they were in the wilderness walkeing as an army and when they were settled in
the land of Canaan, in a formal and complete Kingdom, and where their number
was multiplied, and when they were under Various sorts of civil Government
sometimes under Judges, and sometimes under Kings; shall Christ be less
faithful, and not appoint such a Gospel Government as will suite a greater
Church as well as a lesser, and suite the Church under whatsoever kind of
civil Government she may be?

His fourth difference is almost the same with the second, for it is this, The
jews lived under one civil Government; but Christians under diverse forms,
and then as Church Government, at the first was formed according to the civil
Government so should it be now. Ans. That the jewish Church Government was of
the same kind with the civil Government is not yet proved, and it cannot be
yielded without probation. 2. The parallel betwixt Christ and Moses, lies not
in this, that both did follow one immediate copy: but in this, that both did
institute a Government according to God's will, and such a government as he
would have set up in the Church and to continue in the Church so long as that
polity should stand, that is to say, as Moses did appoint a government which
should unalterably endure so long as the temple, the typical and dark
dispensation should stand; so Christ should appoint a form which should
unalterably endure so long as the new dispensation should last, that is, until
the end of the world; for Christians look for no other change. 3 One and the
same form of Church Government will suite all Churches now, in all time
coming, under what soever kind of civil Government they be, as has been
already said.

Obs, 8. Mr Stilling fleet is not well pleased with such as lay any weight upon
the former ground mentioned viz: Christ's being obliged there unto by his
office as mediator and King and Lord of his house; and would have them rather
proving that Christ has determined a form of Government, then that he ought
so to have done. Therefore we shall show that Christ has so done indeed. And
what the Apostles did at his command, or by virtue of the commission he gave
unto them, will easily be granted to be equivalent. But to pass this, Christ
himself has laid down the maine ground and foundation of a species of
government in Math. 18: ver. 15, 16, 17. For there he is setting down a
course, for the removing of scandalls that will fall out among his Disciples,
and followers, and ordering the matter, so that when private means will not
gain the offending brother, more public means must be used, and he must be
brought unto the Church judicature, and that Church judicature has power to
excommunicat him, if so be he hear them not, as to the removing of the
scandal. It is true many parties endeavor to press these words for their own
use, but it will not hence follow that therefore these words are incompetent to
determine any one form; for if this ground be relevant much of the scripture
should become incompetent to determine matters of faith and doctine; because
several parties labor to wrest the same to their own judgment. It would be
tedious here to examine the clames of all parties unto this place, and the
present work is only to deal with Mr Stillingsleet, and therefore only his
notions concerning this place must be examined.

Concerning this place then, he gives his judgment, 2. part. cap. 5.. 8. and
first he takes the trespasses mentioned to be matters of private offense and
injury, and not matters of Scandal, and his grounds are these. 1. The parallel
place Luke 17: ver. 3. is to be understood of private injuries; because it is in
the power of each private person to forgive them. Ans. So said Erastus before
him but after narrow search it will be found that the forgiving mentioned in
the Text Math. 18. is a desisting from any further prosecution of the
bussinesse, and a forgiving which must not be granted until the brother be
gained: But whether the offending brother be gained or not, all private injuris
must be forgiven him, and none must keep up a Spirit of revenge against him:
And therefore these trespasses must be matters of Scandal, which, unless the
offending brother be gained, must be prosecuted until the yondmost step be
used. 2. He says, It appears from the next words of Peter, ver. 20. This is
another of Erastus's shifts: But for answer. It will not appear till Mr
Stillingfleet first clear that there is such a connection betwixt these verses,
as will undoubtedly demonstrat that one purpose is to be understood in Both.
But commentators show the matter to be otherwise, and indeed there is nothing
that can so much as ground a probability of such a connection here, unless it
be these words, Then came Peter to him, but whosoever shall look on Luke 8: v.
19. shall have the like, thus, Then came to him his mother, etc. And yet this
was not immediately after what was said before, as will appear when compared
with other Evangelists: And so since it is not certain that this was
immediately after the former purpose, no reason can be given to evince the
identity of these purposes. 3. He says, If it were meant of any scandalous
sin it might so fall out that matters of scandal should be brought before the
Church, when only one person knows it. Ans. It is not said that every such
scandal or trespass whereof only one is conscious should be brought in
public, but that more noture scandalls ought to be brought before Church
judicatures, when more private admonitions will not gain the offender. But 2.
This inconvenience will recurre upon himself, in the case of private offenses.

But next as to the word Church he says [It is a select company called
together to hear the whole cause and this was agreeable to the jewish practice,
pudefacere coram multis: and delictum publicare, and to this the Apostle
alludeth, 2 Cor. 2: v. 6. and this is the reproof before all, 1 Timothy 5: v. 20.
Ans. 1. The word Church is not usually so taken in the New Testament, and the
Hebrew words (...) and (...) in the Old Test. do always import a company
imbodied in a stated way, as a fixed congregation, either for government or
Worship. Mr Leigh in his Critica sacra says that among the Grecians, and
chiefly the Athenians from whom it came, it was used for a multitude called
together by the command of a Magistrate. 2. Christ says tell the Church (...),
and so directs them to a fixed standing company. 3. That pudefacere coram
multie being the same with, 2 Cor. 2: 6 the censure of many confirms this;
For that censure was by a Church judicature conveened in the name of the Lord
Jesus to take course with a scandalous person, 1 Cor. 5. Again 4. No
commentator takes the words so, only Grotius and other Erastians put such a
gloss upon them. 5. Christ's scope is to have the offending brother gained,
and not to have matters of fact which are questionable, cleared. 6. If this be
the meaning of the word Church what shall be the sense and meaning of these
words, Let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a Publican? He answers, Tho
meaning is look upon him as an obstinat refractary creature, and meddle no more
with him, then with a heathen and a publican. And is this all the punishment
which the offender must meet with: Who gave private men this power to pass such
a sentence? But 2. This must be a Church sentence because it is added,
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. To this he
replyeth, That the meaning is, it is an evidence, that his sin is bound upon
him, and that he is liable to punishment. But how is his sin bound upon him, or
how is he made liable to punishment? There must be something done on earth,
which God must ratify in Heaven, and on earth there is none to do any thing,
but either the pursuer himself, or the select company: It cannot be the
pursuer, for that were a dreadful and intolerable slavery, to subjecte every
man to the lust of his enemy and pursuer. If it be the select company, how or
whence have they this power? If they be clothed with authority, then are they
a judicature, and this is the thing pleaded for. And thus, it appears that
scandals are here understood, and that this Church is a Church judicature,
notwithstanding of all which Mr Still. has said to the contrary, which is but
the very same, which others had said before him, and which was sufficiently
answered by worthy and learned Mr Gillespy in his Aarons rod blossoming though
he will not so much as once take notice of his replies. The ancients did so
understand the place particularly Orig. Tract. 6. in Mat.

But that it may be cleared how there is a foundation here laid down for a way
of removing of scandals by Church officers in communi associated together in a
judicature, and so how there is a way laid down for presbyterian Government,
let those particulars be considered. 1. From the beginning of the chapt, the
Lord is speaking of scandals, and first of scandals given, as is clear, v. 6:
8, 9. and after he has used some arguments to press his followers to beware
of that evil, he comes v. 15. with an (...) (which may be rendered but if thy
brother) to another case, about the same purpose or head: viz. to clear this
question what shall be a christians carriage when his neighbor stumbleth or
offends him, by his unchristian carriage in his ordinary walk: So Galvin
Aretius and others: and so he is speaking of real scandals for. 1. They are
Brethren, or Church members with whom this course must be taken. 2. The
offending brother is to be rebuked or convinced of his fault (...) imports
such a convinceing as' is for sin Ioh. 8: 9, 46. and so the LXX. use it Lev.
19: 17. where sins and scandals are spoken of. 3. He says if he hear thee
and not if he repay thee the wrong he has done, or if he be reconciled. 4.
Then he is gained now (...) (as Stillingfleet himself confesses) is used for
conversion and turning others from sin. 1. Cor. 9: 19. 1. Pet. 3: 1. compared
with Iam 5: 20. Hence. 2. It would be considered that the Christian's scope in
this bussinesse should be to gain the man's soull, and for this cause he is to
assay all calm, peaceable gaineing, and private means, to bring the offending
brother to conviction, and acknowledgment of his fault; and so first speak to
him alone, and then take some others with him to be witness both of his
Christian carriage toward him, in desireing to have him gained, and of his
unwillingnesse to be gained; that so they may bear witness of both, unto the
Church judicature. 3. When private means do not work, he is to be delated unto
the Church judicature; for the person offended must tell the Church: What
Church? He must tell that Church unto which the witnesses will be useful, and
that is, a judicature; for to that, witnesses have a relation. That Church
which is able to convince if any do it. That Church whose sentence is the last
remedy. The Church which has power to bind and loose. That Church which has
power to bind and loose with a promise of the ratification of what they do, in
heaven. That Church which has the keys Mat. 16. and power authoritatively to
pardon and retain sins, Ioh. 20: 23. That Church which has power to
pronunce that sentence, after which, the man is to be looked upon, as a heathen
and a publican. 4. And when this Church judicature can not get him convinced,
they must pass a sentence upon him, and this sentence is the sentence of
excommunication, as learned Mr Gillespy has abundantly showed Aaron's rod.
book 3. c. 2. and 3. Hence it is clear. 5. That here is set down the way of
taking away Church scandalls, by inflicting Church censures: And this by
Christ's appointment is not to be done by any one person, but by the Church
officers in communi collegiatly; for it was never heard of to this day, either
in sacred or profane writtings that one man was called a Church or (...). And
this is a good basis for Government yea and for presbyterian Government or the
Government of the Church communi consilio presbyterorum. and here there is not
only a foundation for graduall appeals, [as himself confesses here: though
part. 2. cap. ult. 8. he would say that presbyterians, found their
subordination of courts, Upon the principles of humane prudence] for Church
censures, and for the lawful use of excommunication, as he confesses also;
But also for the species or model of Government; Or for the manner of the
constitution of the judicatures, which should excommunicat and take notice of
Church scandalls; for it is called the Church, and so cannot be meaned of a
prelat who is no where so called, and yet arrogateth to himself all the power
of jurisdiction.

But Mr Stilling fleet has two arguments whereby he endeavors to prove that
Christ did never intend to institute any one form of Government in the Church,
part. 2. c. 4.. 4. 5, 6. etc.

This is a great undertaking and his arguments must needs be very strong, but
whether so or not, the reader may judge.

The sum of the first is this If there be any such institution of Christ's, as
a standing law, it must either be expressed in direct terms, which cannot here
be shown: Or deduced by a necessary consequence; and no consequences can make
new institutions but only apply one to particular cases; And then the
obligation of what is drawn by a necessary consequence, must be expressed in
scripture. Ans. It has been shown that the practice of the Apostles was for a
form of Government, and from their practice, a law may, by necessary
consequence, be drawn, considering their place, and office* how they were sent
forth to plant Churches, and to set up officers and to appoint unto each of
them their proper work, etc. And for this cause were endued with extraordinary
qualifications and assistence, confirming their commission by many signs and
wonders: And this carries an obligation in its bosom. There has been shown
also a standing law of Christ's, from which a form of Government may be
deduced, a standing law, about the removing of scandals which will found a
species of Government by Church officers in common, as well as appeals, Church
censures, and excommunication, and from thence there is an obligation for the
one, as well as for the rest. 2. But if all this will not satisfy, let Mr
Stilling fleet satisfy himself with the standing obligation of the morality
of the first day Sabbath, and he shall with all satisfy himself as to the
standing obligation of the morality of a species of Church Government: He can
produce no law for the first day Sabbath, but a law deduced by necessary
consequence (without any obligation expressed in scripture concerning that
which is so drawn by consequence) and if this be enough in the case of the
first day Sabbath, why not also in the case of Government: If he say in the
bussinesse of the Lord's day there was only an application of an institution,
to a particular case. It is Ans. So is it in the matter of Church Government,
for there was a law for a Government in genere, and this law drawn by
consequence, from the practice of the Apostles and primitive Church, is but an
application of that general to a particular species of Government.

His second arg. is this All the standing laws respecting Church Government,
are equally applyable to several forms Ans. Are they applyable to the
hierarchy, to Erastianisme, to independency, and to Morellianisme: Or only to
Presbytery and Prelacy? If only to these two, then all other forms but one of
these two are utterly excluded, and there is no more liberty left save to make
choice of one of these. But what if this ground of his shall not hold? He
refers all the laws to these three heads The 1. Head is the qualifications
of the persons for the office of Government, and so cites, 1 Timothy 3, 1, to 8.
Tit. 1, 5, to 10. Ans. And may it not be said, useing his own words, mu^atis
mutandis, that all these and the rest, are equally required as necessary in a
Pope, in a Patriarch, etc. As well as in a Bishop or Presbyter: Yea every one
may invent a number of new officers and defend them with this, that all these
qualifications agree to them. The 2. Head is. The precepts requireing a right
management of the work, and cites, Act. 20: 28. 2 Timothy 4: 2. and 2: 2. 1 Timothy
5: 19, 21, 22. Heb. 13: 17. Tit. 1: 5. And adds there is no precept in all
these Epistles to Timothy and Titus prescribeing whether, they should Act
solely, or only as Consul in Senatu. Ans. But if the precepts be such and
require such a management and such work, as can not, with any possibility, in
any tolerable manner, be obeyed and performed, by officers under such a form,
then it cannot be left to the will of men to set up such a form, and so is the
case here. The precepts are not applyable unto prelates: Is one man able to
exhort, reprove and watch over a whole dio^cy his alone, seeing he in all
probability shall never see their faces? (And as for delegation of Church power
Mr Stilling fleet himself says Part. 2. c. ult.. 8. Page 414. That there is
not the least footstep of it, either in scripture or antiquity.) Is it possible
that one man, can in any tolerable manner, obey these commands, and watch over
such a number, over which, Two or Three hundred ministers could not get well
watched? God lays not utter impossibilities on his officers. So then seeing
these precepts are not applyable unto any other form, then Presbyteriall, his
Argument falls to the ground; Seeing it is not imaginable that one man can
rule such a numerous people, and watch over them by discipline, over whom
fifteen or sixteen Presbyteries, each of them consisting of fifteen or sixteen
Ministers, and as many ruling elders (beside the competent number of ruling
elders which each particular congregation had) were set, and had all work
enough and more then they could well overtake. But. 2. What will he do with
that command, 1 Cor. 5. given to the elders of that Church to conveen together
for an Act of discipline? Does not that command concern Gospel Churches now,
as much as any of these precepts in the Epistles to Timothy or Titus? And how
is it imaginable that it can be applyable unto one man? Sure then this command
is not equally applyable to both forms; For a precept given to a collegiat
body, to meet together, is not applyable to one single person. The 3. Head is
general rules, such as these, that none preach without a call, Heb. 5: 2. Romans
10, 14. That offenders be censured, that complaints b^ made to the Church in
case of scandal, that all be done decently in order, and to edification. Ans
Well then if, it be a standing rule that complaints be made to the Church, it
is a standing rule that there should be a fixed Church to receive these
complaints, and all the question is whether this fixed Church which can take
notice of complaints and inflict Church censures, and excommunicate, can as
well be understood of a prelat, as of a body of Church officers incorporated?
And if Mr Stilling fleet can be able to show that the word (...) is or may be
taken for one single person, then his notion will be more able to stand; But if
not, of necessity it must fall to the ground.

Obs. 9. It is worth the considering how weighty a bussinesse the matter of the
Government of the Chuch is, and of what great consequence it is to have it
modelled aright: For experience has made it appear, how much more effectual*
for keeping of the Church of Christ pure from error and heresy, and for
beareing down of Prophanity, and for promoving of the work of Godliness in
power; one species or form is, then another: And this may speak very much for
the Lord's keeping that in his own hand and not leaving it unto any Prince or
Pastor to determine what shall be the species of Government: Especially
considering with what byasses and by-respects, the most of men are ready to be
carried, and how readyall are to model Church Government so as may most suite
their own ends, and serve most to make them great in a world. And hence it has
been seen that when men leave the simplicity of the Gospel, and the p^terne
there set down, they run wild, and never once consult the edification of the
Church, or the promoveing of the work of God in souls, etc. But their own base
ends: And when men will be wise above what is written, and follow their own
notions and devices God gives them up to delusions, and to more strange
phancies. And sad experience has proved how dangerous it is to depart from the
rule of the word, in matter of discipline; for by this means, it came to
pass, that the Church did not only get Bishops, distinct from, and superior
unto, Presbyters; but also Metropolitans; and after these Primats, and at
length Patriarchs, and finally the Pope. They followed not the rule of the
word, but thought that they were lest at liberty, as Mr Stilling fleet does
sadly make out Part. 2. c. 7. and would have the Chuch as pompous, as the
state, and so made the state Government their copy: And therefore as there
was one Emperor so there behoved to be one universal Bishop and Pope, whom
the world had never seen; had not this notion of Mr Stillingfleets been in
their head, viz. that they might order the matter of Church Government as they
pleased best: and though Mr Stillingfleet make use of this as a confirmation of
his notion, yet it is such a proof of it, as may make all tender hearted
protestants tremble at it and reject it, as being the very thing which raised
up Antichrist.

Obs. 10. Mr Stillingfleet is pleased in the last Chapt of his book to gather
together some expressions of Divines at home and abroad in France, Germany,
and the low countries, as favoring his purpose, which to examine, a work of
this nature will not suffer, any who will, may do it, and possibly shall find
some unfaire dealing. However, unto these whom he cir^th it will be sufficient,
though he had four for each one, to oppose the testimony of Churches which
may be seen in the harmony of confessions, and whose testimony, is of much
more authority, then the testimony of Twenty private divines, and moreover he
well knows that of private divines many are against him for one who is for him.

Obs. 11. He tells the reader in his preface, that he does not write to
increase the controversies of the times, nor to soment differences; but his
design is to allay the heat and abate the fury of that ignis sac^r or
erysipelas of contention, and so all alongs in his preface he would make his
reader beleve that he designed nothing but peace; and accordingly he entitled
his book Irenicum and a Weapon-salve for the Churches wounds. No man must
search his heart or judge in those matters; but this is certane, if such was
his design, the means he has fallen upon, look not to be very suiteable
thereunto; how such an under taking as this shall heal the Churches wounds is
hardly imaginable: And therefore it may very well be styled a Weapon-salve,
whose way of cureing is not very rational or obvions to every one; Yea nor
natural, if many may be believed. And this phisitian's undertaking shall never
cure the Churches wounds by Sympathy what ever it may do by antipathy: It
seems to be a sad interlocuture of a judge, when a plea comes before him,
betuixt a rober and one who offers to produce his evidences and rights for
such a possession, to say that all is common, and every man has a like right
to all, and may lay clame to what he pleases; and just such is this learned
man's determination of the question in hand. The Presbyterians off^r to prove
their right by the Testament of Jesus Christ, and to prove that prelates are
usurpers, and his interlocuture is that neither presbyterian nor prelat has
more right then other and each may take what they please. If this be a way of
ending controversies and healing wounds, it is indeed by the weapon salve of
antipathy: And the reader may judge whether it be not the readiest way to
increase divisions, and contention in the Church; and whether or not these
piles that seem very sweet and pleasant to the palate may not prove ^uell to
that bilious humor which as he himself confesses, is too too predominant
already. Sure it is, he seems not be a man for peace who thus has his hand
against every man, and every man's hand against him: But if he would have united
the broken, divided, and subdivided Church, he should have taken a way to have
strengthened her union with the head: Union in an evil cause is not good-
Pilat and Herod can a gree in a matter against Christ, and such an union as
this looks rather like the fruit of the weapon salve then any thing else. It
is sad that he could not get this weapon salve made up without such an
ingredient in it, as wrongeth the head and King of the Church: it is an
evidence of an Empirick and ill skilled physician who cannot attempt the
cureing of one desease without the causing of a worse, nor make a salve to cure
a wound in the body, till first he wound and wrong the head. Could this
learned man fall upon no way to cure the bleeding wounds of the Church, but
such a way, as in some degree and measure is a putting the crown off the head
of Christ Jesus who is head of the Church, and the scepter out of his hand? for
to say that he has not settled the Government of his own house by appoynting
his own officers, and appoynting each of them to their own work, is to say, he
does not act the part of a King and Governor in the Church which is his
Kingdom, and of how dangerous consequence this is, himself may easily perceive.

Obs. 12. It is likewise strange that this learned man should have made choice
of such an opportunity and occasion, wherein to vente his notion, for in so
doing he has no way consulted the good and edification of the Church. Because
he might well have known that by his book the higher powers of the land would
have been much encouraged, to set up the former prelaticall Government, which
had occasioned so much persecution unto the truly godly, so much opposition to
piety, and to the work of grace: and so he might well have expected to see all
these evil consequences natively springing up again, and to see the Church of
God decaying as much, if not more, then ever; for that is a Governem. which
destroys the very ends of Government, because no man were he never so good
could govern the Churches after that manner to edification: He might easily
see that one man could not watch over, in all the duties of a watch man, so
many thousands, or rather hundereds of thousands, as by that Government he
would be set over. It is true he advises to have lesser dioeceses but still
his thesis stands, and many will read and ponder his thesis, and the drift
and scope of his book, that will never value or regaird these few lines of
cautions or of advice, which he sets down in the end of his book. He might
well have known that the setting up of that Government would have been (as he
may now see with his eyes) matter of joy and Gladness unto all the profane
rabl^ in the land, and matter of lamentation and grief unto the godly and
pious. He might well have known that by that government, godly pious and
conscientious able Ministers of the Gospel, should be persecuted and thrust to
the door, and profane lazy and every way unfit men should be put in the
Ministry, who can do nothing else but read the service book and a homily. He
might well have known that by that government such as were no Church officers
should have the management of discipline, such as Chancelours and their
assistants. Yea he might well have known that if that government had been set
up again, the whole work of reformation should be demolished and cast to
ground, as he may see it done to day, and his eye may affect his heart, if he
be a kindly son of Zion, and a lover of the work of reformation which God owned
and carried on wonderfully to the Amazement of all: and might not these things
have deterred this learned man from venting his notions, when he might as
easily have seen, as he might have opened his eyes, that the consequences
thereof, should have been bitter lamentation and woe to the poor Church of
Christ in Britain and Irland? and what he can pretend to counter veil this
damage is not imaginable: For all his pretensions of peace and union evanish at
the first appearance of these destructive, and irremediable inconveniences. And
finally it is yet more wonderful and strange how this learned man has been so
bewitched and blinded with his own phancies, as to be in pain until he were
delivered of this birth, not considering the unseasonablenesse thereof at such
a time. There is a season and a time for every purpose under heaven says the
wise preacher Eccles. 3: 1. and a wise man's heart discerns both time and
judgment, Ecc. 8: 5. But it seems he has been so desirous that the world
should see this monstrous birth, that (...) he wanted a time, he would take
the most unfit season imaginable, for it; For it is hardly imaginable that he
could have chosen a more unfit time, for publishing this his notion; Because
though his notion, in th^si were unquestionably true, (as it is not) yet in
hypothesi it could not now be yielded, the Kingdoms being tied to one of these
forms, by the oath of God, the solemn League and Covenant, and so, not at
liberty to choose what form they please. His principles will not suffer him to
say that Presbyterian government is utterly unlawful, and that Episcopal
government is necessary: and his learning will soon discover a validity in a
Covenant about things not sinful, though not absolutely necessary: and his
piety will grant that conscience should be made of such oaths: And now when
the Kingdoms were under the oath of God to set up a government most agreeable
to the Word of God; And to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy, could there be
a more unseasonable time for venting this his notion, touching the
indifferency and lawfulness of either Presbyterian or Prelaticall? For
suppone his notion were a truth, of what use could it be now, when the Churches
hands were bound up, by a solemn vow and Covenant from following their
liberty? Sure his disputing so much for the liberty of the Church in such a
case, at this time, says that in his judgment the oath of God is of no value,
otherwise at least he would have casten in this clause of exception some where,
and so have stated the question as a case in Utopia, if so be it was as a fire
within him that could not be kept in. And now indifferent readers may judge
whether intentio operit (I shall not say operantis) was union, peace and
edification. To teach people to break Covenant with God, and to null their
oaths and vows, is no way to the good and edification of the Church; Such an
union by perjury, will be nothing else but a sinful conspiracy; Peace in such
away, will be but dreadful security when the judgments of God are at hand: And
such edification is nothing but destruction. But it seems his silence in the
matter of the Covenant all alongs, says that in his judgment, the obligation
of the Covenant is null, and so this weapon-salve of his, must be strong, that
will eat through the bones of a Covenant, but because it is so dangerous and
destructive unto the substantials and vitals of Religion, it is the less to be
valued, whatever virtue he allaigeth it has for cureing wounds in the flesh.
Did he think that tender Christians would get the Gordian knot of a Covenant
oath and vow so easily cut as to think themselves at liberty to choose what
form of government they pleased? Or if he did not presuppose this, of what
use, did he think his book would be? Though it were to be wished that this
learned man had employed his talent more for him who gave it; Yet seeing he
would not forbear the publishing of his notions and conceptions, he might have
spoken his mind concerning the obligation of the solemn League and Covenant:
For so long as that Covenant stands in force, his notion will evanish as a
cloud without rain.

But we must end this digression (in which we have insisted the longer, because
it is one of the maine grounds, upon which the complyers of this age do walk)
and go on, that we may hasten to some other particular.

SECTION XIIII.
Such reasons or objections as are allaidged for taking, and against refuseing
of the oath of alleagiance, as it is called, Answered.

BEfore any other particular be entered upon, or this concerning the oath,
which is called (though falsely) the oath of alleagiance, passed from, there are
some few objections which would seem to militate against the refuseing to swear
and subscribe the oath, as it was tendered, which must be rolled out of the
way; And these are either such as concern the civil part, and so seem to
weaken the grounds of scrupling at the oath upon that account, which were laid
down Sect. 10, and 11* or such as concern the Ecclesiastic part, and so seem
to weaken the grounds of scrupleing at the taking of the oath upon that
account, which were mentioned and prosecuted Sect. 12, and 13.

First then as to the civil part it will be objected. 1. That there was no
ground of scrupleing at taking of the oath upon that account. Because it was
but the acknowledging of that very power, which did properly belong to him
before, and which former Parliaments had recognosced as his due, viz. the 18.
Parliament of King James the V I. which did acknowledge his Sovereign
Autherity, Princely Power, Royal Prerogative, and Privilege of his Crown over
all Estates, persons and causes whatsomever. Ans. This Objection was
sufficiently obviated above, Page 126. where it was shown that these were but
Parliamentary flourishes and complements, grounded upon personal
qualifications: And indeed the act seems to raise this structure upon his
Maj. being put in possession, as the righteous inheritour, of the famous and
renowned Kingdoms, of England, France and Irland which far surpass the wealth
power and force of the dominons of his progenitors Kings of Scotland, and
thereby having a greater increase of care and burden, and with all upon his
extraordinary graces, most rare and excellent virtues, where, with he was
endued for the discharge of that trust. Now any man of understanding may see
that the increase of his extensive power and authority, or of personal
qualifications, is no sufficient ground for the increase of his intensive
power, or for the enlargeing of the privileges of the crown. Moreover it is
said expressly in the act that they ratify approve and perpetually confirm the
same, as absolutely, amply, and freely, in all respects and considerations, as
ever his Maj. or any of his royal progenitors, Kings of Scotland in any time
by gone, possessed, used and exercised the same. Whence it appears that they
gave no new power, only they did recognosce what he and his progenitors had
before. Now, as was shown above, neither he nor any of his progenitors had
such a supremacy over parliaments, as is now allaidged to belong unto the
crown: For as to that first act parl. 8. Anno 1584. it was shown above Page
125. how notwithstanding of the supremacy there granted unto the King, the
privileges of Parliament remain entire, as they had been continued past all
memory of man, without any alteration or diminution whatsomever: And after this
Anno 1587. in the 11. Parl. act. 33. the ancient order, dignity and integrity
of the parliament is restored, and particularly act. 40. the King does
faithfully promise to do or command nothing which may directly or indirectly
prejudge the liberty of free voteing of the Estates of Parliament.

But 2. It will be objected, That all this supremacy was acknowledged by the
Parliament 21. Anno 1612. when the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow Anno 1610.
were ratified, among which this was one, that Ministers should swear the same
oath which was tendered by this Parliament, and which is there set down. Ans.
It is true it was appointed by that pretended Assembly that Ministers at their
entry, or admission to the Kirk should, Testify and declare, that the King was
the only supreme Governor of the realm as well in matters Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as in things temporal, etc. And it is true this Parliament
did ratify and approve this deed, so that it had the force of a law. But 1.
There is a great difference betwixt such a civil sanction as this is, and an
other Act of Parliament, other Acts stand in force until they be repealed,
but, when the Church constitution, which is the ground and Basis of the civil
sanction, cease, the sanction cease, and the Act perish^, without any
formal repeall: The Act ratifying and approveing the deed of a Church
judicature, stands in force no longer, then the deed of the Church judicature
stands in force, and the deed of a Church judicature may be altered without
any respect had unto the civil sanction, or notwithstanding that the civil
sanction is not formally removed, because the civil sanction did follow and
depend upon the Church Act, and the Church Act does not depend upon the civil
sanction. 2. It is not incumbent unto a Church judicature to determine the
limits of the King's civil supremacy, far less to determine the same in the
first place: and this pretended Assembly was more anxious about the King's
Ecclesiastic supremacy, then the civil, and it was his supremacy in Church
matters which was here intended by them, and approved by the Parliament: And
therefore it is added, And that no foreign Prince, State nor Potentat has or
ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence or authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual. 3. What ever civil supremacy may be supposed to
be here included, there is no supremacy over Parliaments acknowledged; But any
civil power that is here recognosced as his due, is in opposition to foreign
Princes, States, or Potentats, and not to Parliaments within the Kingdom. If it
be said that the oath tendered by this Parliament, Anno 1661. being every way
correspondent unto that oath which is recorded Parliament 21. Anno* 1612. can
import a recognosceing of no more civil power then that Anno 1612. and
therefore might lawfully have been sworn. It is replied. That the oath Anno
1661. is more express for civil power and supremacy, then that An. 1612. But
if there had been no more, then the words of the oath Anno 1661. there had not
been very great ground of scrupleing at the taking thereof upon the account of
the civil part: for it is not the words of the oath, that ground that scruple
upon that account, so much as the gloss put upon the words, by their other
acts particularly by the act for acknowledging his Maj. prerogatives which as a
commentary, explaineth what they mean by his being supreme governor over
states civil, and in all causes civil: Now the like of this was not done by the
parliament Anno 1612. Or any other before or since that time, till this
parliament Anno 1661. which hereby has put another gloss upon the civil part
of the oath then ever was done before.

But. 3. It will be objected May not Parliaments give more civil power unto the
King then he had before and so enlarge even intensive the privileges and
prerogatives of the crown and so denude themselves of that in whole or in part,
which did formerly appertain unto them: And when the Parliament has done this
and annexed such and such power unto the crown, can it be unlawful for private
subjects to acknowledge that the King has indeed so much power. Ans. in point
of law it will be a very great question, whether Parliaments who are but
trustees entrusted by the people, whose commissioners they are, and virtually
if not expressly bound to maintain their rights and privileges, may betray
their trust, and give away the just and ancient privileges of Parliament and
there with the just and ancient liberties of the people. It will be agreat
question if they at their own hand, may alter the foundamentall laws of the
land, without the consent of these whose commissioners they are. And it will be
a greater question in law; if this Parliament might have sold or given away the
privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the people, seeing so much in point
of law may be objected against its being a free Parliament, if the want of
freedom of election in shires and brughs, if prelimitation, if the election of
such as were not capable, by the foundamentall constitution of Parliaments, and
practice of the Kingdom, and other informalities, of that kind, may have any
place or weight in the anulling of Parliaments. But. 2. In point of conscience,
it is clear that Parliaments may not now give away and according to their
pleasure dispone of the rights and privileges of Parliament, for in the third
article of the league and covenant, all the people of the land, and Parliaments
among the rest, are sworn to maintain in their several places and
capacities; and so Parliaments, in their Parliamentary capacity, the rights
and privileges of Parliament. 3. Though the Parliament not with standing of the
bond of the covenant, should denude themselves of their privileges; yet now
seeing every particular member of the Kingdom is sworn, according to his
place, and station to maintain the rights and privileges of Parliament, they
may not assent unto such a deed of the Parliament, and by their oath and
subscription, approve of such a wrong; for that is the least that private
persons, who desire to mind and make conscience of the oath of God, can do, at
such a time, viz. to refuse to give an express, clear and positive assent,
unto such a wrong done to the rights, and privileges of Parliament, contrary to
the covenant. But 4. All this is to little or no purpose; for there is not the
least syllabe in all the Acts of this Parliament which does import any new deed
of gift, but all alongs they speak of these prerogatives as formerly inherent
in the crown yea as essential to it, and hence it is, that they condemn the
actings of the Parliaments and Kingdom of Scotland, these many years by gone,
because done in such away as was an actual and insolent (as they say)
incroachment and invasion upon the privileges and prerogatives of the crown.

Obj. 4. The acknowledging of the prerogative is distinct from the oath of
allegiance and therefore seeing they were not put to take that acknowledgement,
they could not refuse the oath upon the account of these consequences contained
in the acknowledgement. Ans. So is the Declaration dated Sep. 2, 1662. Set down
as distinct from the Acknowledgement and yet who ever swears and subscribeth
the Acknowledgement does swear and subscribe the Declaration upon the matter:
so is it here, who ever takes the oath of alleagiance does upon the matter
take the acknowledgem. also; for it is not possible to see any discrepancy
betwixt them, save such as is betwixt the text and the commentary; for the
acknowledgm. is nothing else upon the matter, then an explication or Exegesis
of the oath, and in the acknowledgem. the same thing is said and assirmed in
plain full and clear terms, which is but in general affirmed in the oath.
By their Acts they declare what things they account privileges of the crown,
and all these they comprehend under his supremacy, and so in their account his
supremacy over all persons, and the prerogatives royal, or privileges of the
crown, are all one, Therefore they could not acknowledge this supremacy,
because they could not acknowledge the prerogatives royal: See this objection
further answered above, Page 168.

In the next place, there are objections of another nature, which must be
answered; as. 1. Obj. Such as refuse this oath of alleagiance declare that they
are not dutyfull and loyal subjects, which Ministers and Christians ought not
to do Ans. It has been shown at the beginning of the tenth Section, what
difference there is betwixt this oath, and the oath of alleagaince, and there
is no Minister or Christian who would scruple at the taking of the pure oath of
alleagiance: Yea they would account themselves obliged to take the same, if
there were any necessity or just suspicion of disloyalty in them, which might
occasion the same. King James in his book called God and the King shows that
those treacherous persons, who occasioned the frameing of the oath of
alleagiance, were the Pope's bloody emissaries following the principles of Rome
and practiseing unparalleled treachery against King, Queen, and Parliament,
among whom, none will have the fore head to reckon such as did now refuse the
oath, as it was tendered. It is the supremacy in Church and state, which only
was scrupled at, and the acknowledging of this supremacy is no part of
alleagiance; for one may acknowledge, his father to be his father though he
should not say that he has power, as a father, over his soul and conscience:
one may acknowledge the King of Britane, lawful King of his dominions though
he should not acknowledge him to have as much dominion and power over them, as
the great Turk usurpeth over his dominions: And therefore letnone so interpret
that passage of the Apology for the ministers of England. page 2. Where they
prove that, they cannot be, challenged as guilty of Laese Majesty, because
they acknowledge that the King is defender of the faith in all causes, and the
supreme head and Governor; over all persons as well ecclesiastik as civil, as
if they would assert that all in Scotland who do refuse this oath and
acknowledgement, were guilty of Laese Majesty, merely upon the account of their
refuseing of the oath, seeing, as has been shown, their case and the case of
Scotland is not every way the same, and though they give out this as an
evidence of their loyalty, yet they do not pitch upon it as proprium quarto
modo unto a true loyal subject.

2. Obj. Will you allow his Maj. no power in Church matters. Ans. yes., Even
all that power which the first confession of the Church of Scotland does allow,
viz. tho conservation, and purgation of religion, the maintenance of the true
religion, and the suppressing of idolatry and superstition as also all that
which the later confession concluded by the Assembly of divines at Westminster
does allow: As also as much as sound reformed divines grant unto him, according
to the word of God: He has power over the (...) things extrinsecall, that
properly belong unto the outward man, and are common to the Church with other
societies. He is Custos ut^sque tabulae, in a civil manner, and must have a
care of both the tables of the law. It were tedious here to set down all the
particulars: See Gillespy in his Aarons rod blossoming, lib. 2. cap. 3. and the
CXI. Propositions, which are full enough to this purpose.

3. Obj. Why then was this oath refused seeing no more was required thereby?
Ans. More, yea much more was required, as appears by what has been said, and
cleared from their Acts and actings, especially from their refuseing of the
sense given in by these Ministers who were detained so long prisoners in the
Tolbooth and thereafter banished, which was large enough, and possibly larger
then some of these who gave it, afterward upon second thoughts would approve:
It is beyond questioning, that this Parliament gives unto the King by virtue
of this prerogative and as annexed to the crown far more then ever the
confession of faith of that Chuch or any other protestant reformed Church, did
give. And as they give, so he takes more, as might be evidenced by his letter
unto the Archbishop of York if it were now at hand.

4. Obj. But whatever they assume to themselves it is not much matter: Seeing
none (...) put to affirm, that so much power does belong unto him, and the
oath tendered has not so much in it, in terminis, Ans. When an oath is
contrived in such general and comprehensive terms, as may take in much and
when there is no other way to find out the just latitude and meaning of it;
but by their Acts and actings who tender it, it is of much concernment to know,
what sense their actions will put upon it, for by their actions, the true sense
must be learned: For it is a received and known principle, that oaths must be
taken according to their known sense and meaning of the words, who tender the
same; because oaths were first invented for their security, and therefore
whosoever would deal honestly and Christianly in taking an oath, must take it
in the very sense that it is understood in by such as tender it: Otherwise the
holy name of God shall be taken in vain, and the takers of the oath shall deal
deceitfully in frustrating the end of the oath, and the design of the
tenderers thereof To take an oath Quatenus, Eatenus, in fo far will not
satisfy as worthy D. Voetius judges de Pol. Eccl. p. 283.

5. Obj. This shienesse were good in case the oath as worded could bear such a
sense as is supposed to be meaned by the tenderers. But it is not so here. Ans.
It is certane the oath (as to the part controverted) is conceived in general
terms: It is certane that their sense who tender it, is not sound: and it is
certane that there is nothing in the oath contradicting their sense and
meaning: Yea it is certane that the very oath it self, as worded, will take in
all their sense and meaning; For it gives to him a supremacy of power both
over Civil and Ecclesistick persons and causes, all persons, and all causes
will take in both, and supreme Governor over all these persons, and in all
these causes, will take in a great power, and a very large supremacy: Yea the
very grammatical construction of the oath will bear this large sense fully
enough. Any of understanding may easily see these three things here. 1. That
the King is the same way supreme Governor over Church men, as he is over
Civil men. 2. That he is made the same way Governor in Church causes, as in
Civil causes. And 3. That he is the same way Governor over Church men in
their Church capacity, or in their Church causes and actions; as over Civil men
in their civil capacities, and in their Civil causes and actions.

6. Obj. The sense can be no other then this, That he is supreme Governor over
all persons what ever action they be about, as if he were in a ship he should
be supreme Governor over all the persons there, what ever their trade or
occupation were, and of the Governor of the ship among the rest; And yet it
will not follow, that he is the supreme Governor of the action of guideing the
ship, but only that the Governor of the ship, while he is guideing her, is a
subject: And just so is it here, as to Churchmen. Ans. Even his supremacy over
civil persons in civil causes is much to be questioned as has been said; But
to wave this here, their Acts and deeds which are more authentic
interpretations of the oath, then any private conjectures, speak some other
thing: were the oath worded thus, he is supreme Governor over all Persons,
this objection would have some color, but when it is said in all causes, yea
and in all causes, all is wrong. Next it is certane from what has been said
Sect. 10, and 11. that they intend more as to the civil part, then that he is
supreme Governor over civil persons and that they remain subjects while
about civil Actions; For he is made supreme Governor over civil persons, and
in civil causes; And must it not be so likewise, as to the Church part, seeing
the oath puteth no difference less or more betwixt them* 3. One maine end of
the oath was to shoulder out the Pope and his power and this was an immediate
cognition of Church affairs, and a power not only over persons, but over
causes; And what was taken from the Pope with the one hand, was devolved on the
King with the other. 4. The simile is a plain dissimile, as it is set down:
but make the parallel run thus. There is a forraigner within the ship
challenging power of making laws to all persons within it and particularly to
the pilote, and power of judging him in his actions as pilote, betwixt whom and
the Prince the debate comes to that height, that he is ejected, and to the
end, he may never be readmitted, the Prince imposes an oath upon all within
the Vess^ll, and particularly upon the pilote and seamen, That they should
acknowledge him to be their only supreme Governor, and in all their actions
and causes. And then any of ordinary capacity may discern whether or not the
pilot be not bound by his oath to acknowledge some thing more then that he is a
civil subject while he is about his calling and work. But all this is to no
purpose now seeing their Acts and actings make the bussinesse clear enough as is
shown above.

7. Obj. Where a Civil Magist. is affirmed to be Govern. of his dominions, by
common intendment this must be understoodof a civil government, and may not be
extended to that of another kind. Ans. With all due respect to the reverend
author of this reply, viz. Bishop Usher in his speech concerning the oath of
supremacy in the Star Chamber in Irland. This does not satisfy; because by
the same reason, might one who were clear for the primacy of Scotland, lawfully
swear, that the Archprelat of Saint Andrews were supreme Governor of Scotland,
over all persons and in all causes; because, by parity of reason, when the
government of a Church officer is spoken of, by common intendment, this must
be understood of an Ecclesiastic government and may not be extended to that
of another kind. And yet no doubt, this oath would be scrupled at,
notwithstanding of that common intendment. But 2. Their acts and deeds destroy
that common intendment, and respect must be had to their intendment, and not to
the common intendment. 3. Even as to this common intendment in respect of the
civil part it has been shown what just ground of scruple there was.

8. Obj. No other thing can be understood, for he is capable of no more, and
the predicat can agree no further to the subject, then its capacity will
permit. Ans. This is a shift for Children, but for none else: For. 1. Such
subjects are seen to assume to themselves more, then they are truly, by any
law of God, capable of. 2. By this means one might swear that the civil
Magistrate were Head, husband, King and savior of the Church without all hazard
of perjurie for these predicats can agree to him no further then he is capable:
As also one might lawfully swear that the Pope were supreme civil judge of the
King's Dominions, yea and swear the greatest untruths imaginable; but such
Salvo's will prove too narrow to cover perjury in the day of accounts. 3. Oaths
are the end of controversies, but this oath should then decide no controversy:
For the King's power should be as uncertain, as ever it was, for all this
oath. 4. The question is not so much what power does really appertain unto the
civil Magistat, but another thing founded on this, viz. what power may one
lawfully say and swear does indeed belong to him: And will any be so profane
and gross, as to say, It may be acknowledged by oath, that he has more power
then indeed he has? Such like metaphisicall distinctions, will not defend from
the wrath of God, in the day when he shall be a swift witness against all
false swearers.

9. Obj. Is it faife to contend with heigher powers about such things, and
bring on such sad sufferings? Ans. Christians should be most taken up with
duty, and should not value sufferings: They should buy the truth, and by no
means sell it, and this matter under debate is no small bussinesse, whatever
some may think. Not to mention here the sad consequences of this oath, as to
the civil part thereof, if the Ecclesiastic part thereof be only noticed it,
will appear to be a matter of greater moment then every one will believe; as
may appear from the reasons mentioned. Sect 12. Men who would be accounted
loyal subjects unto a King of clay will think it their duty to stand and
contend for a small and inconsiderable bit of a thing, going under the name of
a privilege of the crown, to the hazard of life and all; and shall any
Christian accounte such things, as are real privileges of the crown of Christ,
frivolous, And not worth the hazarding of any thing for? The asserting of
Christ to be head and King of his Kingdom, which is distinct from all other
Kingdoms upon earth, and that he alone has power to rule this his Kingdom,
with his own laws, and by his own officers; And that none may rob him of his
crown and scepter, or of any part or pendicle thereof, seem to be no small
matters. Who will condemn the generation of the righteous who like valiant
soldiers, have stood for the defense of their master's prerogatives, and
would not give their consent, unto the spoiling of his crown, no not in the
least, even when condemned to death therefore, and banished out of the land of
their nativity: The words of famous Mr Welsch in his letter to the Lady
fleeming from his prison at Blackness Ian. 1606. Are worthy to be noticed and
kept on record What am I (says he) that he should first have called me, and
then constituted me a minister of glad things, of the Gospel of salvation,
these fiftine years already, and now last of all, to be a sufferer for his
cause and Kingdom; to witness that good confession that Jesus Christ is the
King of saints, and that his Church is a most free Kingdom, yea as free as any
Kingdom under heaven, not only to convocate, hold, and keep her meetings,
conventions, and assemblies: But also to judge of all her affairs, in all her
meetings and conventions, among his members and subjects: These two points. 1.
That Christ is tho head of his Church. 2. That she is free in her government
from all other jurisdiction except Christ's are the special cause of our
imprisonment being now convict as traitors, for maintaining thereof. We have
been waiting with joyfulnesse to give the last testimony of our blood in
confirmation thereof. If it would please our God, to be so favorable, as to
honor us with that dignity.

Obj. 10. Howbeit the matter as set forth by you seem considerable; yet as
comprehended in the oath, it seems very inconsiderable: Were these things
expressly affirmed, there were some color of reason for refuseing to
acknowledge the same; but seeing they are only your inferences and groundless
fears there is less reason to refuse the oath. Ans. It is no new thing, for
sufferers to be blamed as faulty: This is certain, and every one may see it,
that the temptation is stronger for taking then for refuseing of the oath,
there being much more outward and worldly advantage to be had by taking then by
refuseing of it; and therefore such should be Christianly sympathized with
seeing the matter they stand upon, is not t^ial, the bussinesse they contend for
is concerning the due bounds and marches of the Kingdom of Christ, and
concerning the just extent of the privileges of his crown; and if they be
mistaken, it is in this they are mistaken: They desire not to rob the civil
Mag. of his due; but when they apprehend that there is an in croachment made by
him upon the privileges of Christ, as King and head of his Church, no tender
Christian will blame them for standing upon their ground; and to be willing for
the interest of their Lord and master to lose their liberties, yea and their
lives too But. 2. It is sufficiently manifested already that neither these
inferences nor their fears, were groundless, so that it were superfluous to
add any more here for cleareing of the same.

Obj. 11. But the Parliament or Council would give liberty to persons to
explain themselves, and to express what their meaning of the oath was, and in
what sense they would take it: Why was not this favor accepted? might they not
have taken it in their own sense, seeing no doubt, that would have been a saife
sense? Ans. 1. Some indeed report that this favor and courtesy was conferred
on them in private, and therefore they had no scruple to take the oath: but all
had not this in their offer. 2. Others as wise and judicious, would have looked
upon* such an offer as no savor or courtesy at all, and indeed it deserves
not the name of a favor, to give liberty to any to mock God, others, and
themselves; Such a liberty could be nothing else but a snare to the conscience:
For, by words, to put a gloss upon a written or printed oath, which in strick
construction it will not bear, and then swear it and subscribe to it, is to
mock the most high who will not be mocked. To subscribe an oath in terminis as
it is offered, and set down in write or print, after it is mentally or verbally
glossed, is to stumble the truly godly, and to harden the wicked in the age
present; and to mock posterity, who shall see the oath in terminis subscribed,
but neither see nor hear of the gloss, which as a salvo was cast in; yea and
it is to deceive themselves by intangleing themselves into the bond of a
sinful oath, with fair speeches and plausible apprehensions, or rather
dreams. But. 3. Why would they not suffer such as they required to take the
oath, to set down their sense in plain terms before their subscription? And
why would they not rest satisfied with that which the Six or Seven
forementioned ministers did? Sure, if it had been tendered upon any other
account then as a snare to the conscience, this would have been granted; but it
is true, the taking of the oath after that manner, would not have served their
purpose so well as now it will, when subscribed as set down in terminis: li^ra
scripta manet, and dolus versatur in generalibus. 4. Who ever would have fuller
satisfaction to this objection let him consult Doct Sanders. de jur. prom.
oblig. prael: 6.. 10. whose words shall be here translated and set down
atlength because so full and satisfactory dico (says he speaking to the same
case) etc. i. e. I say that it may be suspected, that there is some deceit
^rking and therefore every pious and prudent man should refuse such an oath
offered under such terms. 1. Because in the oath it self, truth is required;
but a proposition having an indefinit and ambiguous sense, before there be a
distinction used for clearing, is no true proposition, yea it is not a
proposition at all; for a proposition, (as children know by it is d^ition)
should signify either truth or falsehood without ambiguity. 2. Because of him
who tendereth the oath, for the proper end of an oath, is that he in whose
favors it is taken should have some certainty of that whereof he doubted
before, but there can no certanty be had, out of words which have no certain
sense. 3. Because of him who swears who if he take such an oath on these
terms, either stumbleth his neighbor or else spreads a net for his own
feet; For to what else should such collusion tend then either that by our
example others (though against their conscience) may be induced to take it, and
this is to lay a stumbling block before them; or that afterward by virtue of
that oath some thing may be required of us which is either unlawful or hurtful
and this is to lay a snare for our selves. Therefore let every prudent man
bewar of suffering himself to be deceived by these wiles and of thinking so
much either of the favor or of the ^ll will of any other as to swallow the
bate under which he is sure there is a hook. It is expedient that in the matter
of oaths all things be done aright, and that the sense be clear to all, and
that is jurare liquido (...) swear with a clear conscience. Sic tamen and
liquido juratus dicereposses.
When in thy conscience thou art clear.
Then may thou without scruple swear.


Obj. 12. Though the Parliament upon grounds of state policy should not think
fit to alter the words of the oath, which have been condescended upon by former
Parliaments, and see down in their Acts; But keep the same in termin^s lest
giving way to alter upon the desire of one, they should alter and change it in
insin^um, according to men's several phancies and desires: Yet to hazard upon
suffering upon such an account cannot be commended. Ans. 1. Every sin even the
least must be shuned upon any hazard; Yea all are commanded to abstean from
every appearance of evil. It may be suffering for righteousness sake, in the
eyes of God, which men may account suffering for needless serupulosity. If
they had been of the same judgment with such divines (called so at least) who
now a days publish to the World, their new found out principles, whereby all
oaths may be loosed, or broken rather as rotten ropes; They might have taken
and digested a cartfull of oaths (to use the expression, which some who now
have renunced that oath and Covenant which once they swore, did utter, when
minded of their former oaths) and never once enquired whether lawful or
unlawful (and to say this on the bye it is no small matter of admiration to
think what security, such can expect from others by oaths who themselves
profess and publish the Art of loosing all the bonds of oaths; but it would
appear that, this is not the thing designed, but rather this that seeing they
know such as they have to deal with are men of conscience, they would have them
either ensnared, in the same guilt, and drawn unto the same excess of
wickedness and Atheism with themselves, or else exposed to their fury and
cruelty) but they love not such principles of prophanity and Atheism, but
rather desire to fear an oath knowing that God is jealous, and will not hold
such guiltless as take his name in vain. 2. If this be the oath of
alleagiance, it is very far changed from what it was, as was shown above
Sect. 12. and it is not fair to change it so as to make it worse. 3. In the
matter of oaths, reason and religion would require, that the meanest who are
concerned in it, should be condescended unto: Rulers should follow the laudable
example of Abraham, who did condescend unto his servant in the matter of an
oath, which he was tendering unto ^im: It is consonant both to reason and
Religion, that oaths, before they be imposed; Be examined again and again,
and so worded, as none, no not the meanest, who is endued with understanding in
those matters, may have the least real ground of scruple. And as to this oath,
they are not a few conceity and self willed persons, who scruple at it, but if
Impartial search be made, it will be found that the most understanding,
faithful conscientious and Zealous in the land, both Ministers and others, do
stumble at it, and that not upon imaginations and fears, but upon real and
evident grounds. Now, no doubt, understanding Christians, will easily grant,
that in such a bussinesse the^stumbling of so many, so able, eminent, and
gracious, is not to be despised: And none will deny this but such as would
plead for a lawless liberty to Magistrates, to tyrannize over the souls and
consciences of people, which were a more dreadful tyranny then any exercised
by the cruelest Nero or Caligula that ever was. But. 4. If they would not alter
or change the words of the oath, might they not have published such a sense of
the oath as none might have scrupled at, there are several acts of Parliament
explicatory of former acts, and why might not this have been explained by a new
act? 5. What these grounds of state policy are why they would neither help the
oath and word it other ways, nor yet give a sound gloss thereof, and make it
as public as the oath it self, is not very needful to enquire; yet there are
some so obvious and conspicuous that he who runs may read them, viz. That if
the oath had been conceived in plain, clear and saife terms, or so
interpreted as that no scruple had been left in the minds of tender
Christians, it had not proved such an engine to wa^pe out of the land under the
notion of dis^yall persons, such as feared an oath and durst not comply with
foresworne prelates, or their ways.

SECTION XV.
Concerning the hearing of such as are now thrust in upon the people in the
Room of those who are put away.

WHen by these ways forementioned a great number, even the third part of the
Ministry of Scotland, was put from preaching the Gospel, and banished from
their own, parish Churches: There were a number of naughty base men who had
denied the faith which once they professed; and renunced that covenant which
they had sworn with hands lifted up to the most heigh God; Men for the most
part of flagitious lives, corrupt both in their principles, and in their
conversation, unfit to have the privilege of Church members, in any well
governed Church, let be to be officers in the house of God: And men who will
willingly comply with any course which Satan and his instruments can set on
foot, thrust in upon the people, sore against their wills, having presentations
from patrons, and collations from the prelates, and no more, for a call. And
there are others, alas too too many, who being in the Ministry before, have
basely betrayed their trust, and complied with those abjured prelates, and gone
contrary to that covenant which both themselves did swear, with hands lifted
up to the most high, and which they caused all within their several
congregations to swear, in a most solemn manner, as has been shown above:
And now did the trial come near to the doors of the poor people for there was
an Act of Parliament, I^l 10. 1663. Enjoying the people to attend all the
ordinary meetings for divine worship under these pains and penalties, viz.
each nobleman, gentleman and heritour the loss of a fourth part of each years,
rent, in which they shall be accused and convicted: And every yeoman, tennent
and farmer the loss of such a proportion of their free movables (after
payment of their rents due to their Master and landlord) (...) ^is maj.
Council shall think fit, Not exceeding a fourth part thereof. And Every burges
to lose the liberty of merchandizeing, tradeing, and all other privileges
within brugh -- and the fourth part of their movables -- and such other
corporal punishments, as the Council shall think sit. And yet notwithstanding
of this act, faithful and honest Christians were constrained in conscience, to
withdraw; and could not yield obedience unto this act; but resolved rather to
suffer affliction, what ever it might be, then countenance such as had intruded
themselves without a call, and had made such defection from the truth and cause
of God; and for this cause many have suffered, and many are put to suffer
daily, whom no tender hearted Christian will or can condemn, if these few
particulars be considered.

1. To yield obedience unto this act enjoining them to hear such men always
and to attend all the ordinary meetings for worship, and so to countenance them
as lawful pastors, were to comply with the sinful defection of the time, as
appears from these two particulars. 1. It were a countenanceing of these men
who have broken covenant, and overturned the whole work of reformation, and an
approving of them in the same; for themselves look on all such as obey that
act, as their friends, and the act it self says that a cheerful concurrence,
countenance and assistence given to such Ministers, and attending all the
ordinary meetings for divine worship, is an evidence of a due acknowledgment
of, and hearty compliance with, his Maj. Government ecclesiaesticall and
civil, as now established by law within this Kingdom, for in order to this
last, the act says that this Maj. does expect the former; And experience
proves much of this to be true, viz. that such as do countenance them after
this manner do indeed approve of them, and by the contrary they look on others,
as disaffected persons, so that obedience to the Act is the very badge of
compliance; And therefore upon that account cannot in conscience be yielded;
for in such a case many things which otherwise might be lawful or indifferent
cannot be lawfully done, as being most inexpedient, and what is not expedient,
in so far as not expedient, is unlawful, and un^defying; and therefore must
not be done, as Pau^ says, 1 Cor. 10: v. 23. 2. It were some way also the
acknowledging of the power and authority of Prelates: And so contrary to the
league and Covenant, and the reason is, because, these men come forth, from the
Prelat having no other call or warrant, but what the Prelat gives: And so a
receiving of them is a receiving of the Prelat, as a refus^ing to own them,
will be accounted a slighting of the Prelat and his power. These things will be
clearer, if two things be considered 1. That now there is no door opened for
getting any wrongs redressed, and corruptions in the ministry, which creep in
and abound, removed; There is no access for grieved persons to present their
grievances; Corruption and defection is carried on with such a heigh hand, that
there is no liberty once to speak or object against such and such corruptious;
Yea all these corruptions are approved: So that all possibility of getting any
redress made, is away: And in such a case as this, when private persons have
not access to propound their objections, against such or such a man's
exerceing the ministerial function, or no hopes of getting a hearing; But by
the contrary such persons as they would objecte against, would be the better
liked; And these things, which they might objecte as heinous crimes, would be
accounted virtues and matter of greater commendation; what can they do else,
but withdraw and not countenance such vicious and naughty persons, nor do any
thing which may import, a consenting unto, or an approving of these grievous
wrongs and enormities* Especially considering. 2. How there is now no other way
left for persons to exoner their consciences before God and the world, and to
declare their Nonconformity unto this wicked and corrupt course of defection:
All other doors are barred by law, so that now they must either give testimony
against this course of defection this way by refuseing to give obedience unto
this Act, and to countenance these men (whose chief qualification is perjurie)
as Ministers of the gospel; or else they must be accounted consenters: For how
else shall their dissatisfaction be known. There is no patent door now, for any
legal exoneration of their consciences by remonstrances, and protestations,
the Parliament having declared such Actions to be treasonable: Yea there is
not so much as liberty granted for petitioning or supplicating against any such
abuse: And of necessity, they must some way or other give public testimony
against these courses (for they must not partake of other men's sins) as are
carried on, contrary to the word of God, to the Covenant, and to their former
resolutions: And there is no other way so harmless and Innocent as this,
though suffering should follow thereupon.

2. By giving obedience unto this Act, they should be in hazard, not only of
falling away unto a detestable neutrality and indifferency in the matters of
God; but ere long, they should be in hazard to fall away in heart and
affection, from the cause of Christ, and from the work of reformation sworn
unto, and owned so much; for there is no other way now apparent, whereby the
difference shall be kept up, betuixt such as honestly mind the covenanted
work of reformation: and the corrupt prelaticall, and malignant party, but this
of refuseing to give obedience unto this Act. So that, as it is already too too
apparent that some who had no scruple to hear these men, and withal thought to
abide constant to the cause of God, were ere long found to be deceived; for
piece and piece the edge of their Zeal was blunted, and their affection to the
work of God cooled, and they at length were brought to condemn it: So
dangerous a thing is it to suffer the standing difference to wear out of
sight: So that let a Man once begin to countenance those men, as lawfully
called and authorized Ministers, and by this means, keep up no standing
difference, he shall, ere he be aware, slide into their camp, and side with
them in all things: Therefore it is best to keep up this distance and standing
difference by with drawing.

3. By giving obedience unto this Act, they should quite undo and betray their
posterity: For though now the honest party be not in a capacity, to transmit
the work of reformation unto their posterity, in such a manner as were to be
wished, it being now defaced and overturned, by this course of defection, which
is so violently carried on; yet they may, and should do something for keeping
fresh the memory of the good old cause, that it be not bury^d quite in
oblivion, and this must be, by keeping up some footsteps of a standing
controversy, for Zions interest, and the work of God against the common enemies
thereof, the prelaticall and malignant faction: But now take this weak and
inconsiderable appearing in the fields against these corruptions, away, what
appearance of a standing controversy shall posterity see? Shall not they
conclude that the day is lost, and the cause gone when they see that this
generation has fled the field or rather sold and betrayed the cause, by
owneing, countenancing and complying with the enemy, and that there is no
standing testimony against corruptions, or nothing seen in the practices or
carriage of their fathers, that may in the least signify their dissatisfaction
with these courses. Where as if there were but this much of a standing
difference, betwixt the people of God, and the common enemies of Zion, to be
seen, posterity would in some measure, be kept from being deceived, and would
see the interest of Christ not killed, nor buried quick; but living though in
a bleeding condition: and this would occasion their engadging for Christ and
interessing themselves in the quarrel: And it is far better to see the cause
of Christ owned, though by suffering and blood, then sold and betrayed by base
flenching and complyin gwith persecuters.

4. There is not a more ready way to harden and encourage the enemy in their
wicked and malicious way of opposing the work of God, then thus to countenance
them in obedience to this act. This is a way to strengthen their hands in their
wicked courses; for then, they encourage themselves in evil when they see how
they are countenanced by all, and that there is no disrespect put upon them,
nor dissatisfaction evidenced against their courses, then they conclude that
they are approved of all, and this hardens them, so that they never once
think of the evil of their ways: Whereas were they disowned, notwithstanding
of the act, it would cool their courage, and possibly occasion some reflecting
thoughts upon their courses, sometime or other; And who knows what might
follow? It is more then probable that the people of God, are not freed from
seeking the conviction, repentance, and ^dfiication, even of these their
malicious enemies: And it is certane they may not encourage them in their evil
ways, nor do any thing which may really tend to harden them in their wicked
courses. And therefore if obedience to this act will in all probability have
this effect, it ought to be forborne.

5. By giving obedience unto this act, they should stumble the truly tender in
conscience, by encourageing them to do contrary to their light and conscience,
after their example; when they are not clear to hear them, they are imboldened
or stirred up* thereunto, when they see others doing so, and thus they are
ready to halt in the ways of the Lord, and this is a grievous sin, to seek to
destroy those for whom Christ died. But it will be objected. That hearing the
word, is duty, and so, if any stumble thereat, it will be but a scandal taken,
and not given. Ans. The question is not whether it be a duty to hear the word
or not, but whether it be a duty to hear the word out of such men's mouths, and
that in obedience to the act; or so as the act does enjoyne, and if this be not
a necessary duty, the objection falls to the ground, for it is not at hearing
of the word, that men do stumble, but at hearing of such men preach who are not
lawfully called. This solution will be cleared by considering what is the
Apostle's answer in matters of meat and drink, Romans 14: and 1. Cor. 8: and
10. He would have them forbeareing such or such meat, at such or such a time,
when there were hazard of stumbling thereat, and for his part he resolved never
to eat flesh rather then by eating thereof he should stumble any weak
Christian, and yet it is an indispensable duty to eat meat, there is a command
for it, and the command does always oblige though not ad semper to all times.
So then though it be a commanded and necessary duty, to eat meat; yet it is no
necessary and indispensable duty, to eat such or such a sort of meat, as fish
or flesh, nor is it necessary to eat always at such or such a time, but both
may be forborne for the scandal and offece of the weak: So the parallel will
run clearly, it is a duty to hear the Gospel preached; but it is not a
necessary and indispensable duty to hear such or such a man always; and so in
this case, scandal may have place, as well as in the case of meats; and Paul's
arguments are of force here. And therefore Christians should be tender of those
for whom Christ died, and be loath to occasion their stumbling, by doing that
which is not a necessary and indispensable duty, as it is circumstantiated.

6. By yielding obedience unto this act they should cast themselves into snares
and temptations, and that because many of those intruders, if not all of them,
do teach false doctrine, tending to seduce the hearers, crying up the
lawfulness of prelacy, and venting bitter invectives against presbyterian
government, inveighing against the covenant, and so teaching and encouraging
people to follow them, in open perjury, and condemning the work of reformation,
as being nothing else but treason and sedition, which were blasphemy: Beside
some points of Arminianisme and Popery, which some of them are venting, now and
then. Seeing then there is such false Doctrine held forth, and taught with such
boldness, and impudency, can it be lawful for simple people to attend such,
when their souls are in such hazard to be seduced thereby, and when the Spirit
of God says cease to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words
of knowledge? Prove. 19: 27. Beware of false Prophets) is a command that is of
force now, as well as of old, John in his second Epistle v. 10: 11. says that
if there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not unto
your house neither bid him God speed, for he that bids him God speed is
partaker of his evil^ it is sure then John would never advise people to go
constantly or ordinarily to hear such deceivers who bring not with them the
Doctrine of Christ. He who would not have the less done would never consent
unto the more. Paul writting to the Romans Chap. 16: v, 17, 18. says. Now I
beseach you brethren Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to
the Doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them, for they that are such
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly and by good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Here is a clear warrant for
avoiding (and that will at least include a refuseing obedience to this Act)
such as teach things contrary to the Doctrine which has been already received,
and Learned out of the word, and do thereby cause divisions and offenses and
have nothing before their eyes but their own belly, and not the glory of
Christ. And how well this agrees unto those men now spoken of, any who know
them may judge. And therefore seeing it is their design and intended work to
deceive the hearts of the simple, by their bold and consident assertions, and
to cause them believe things contrary to the Doctrine which they have already
learned and received, it must be a necessary duty for poor simple people to
avoid such. So the Apostle writting to Titus cap. 1: 14. forbids to give
head to jewish fables and commandments of men that turn from the truth, and
who are these who teach such things? See v. 10, 11. unruly, vain talkers, and
deceivers, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. It
cannot then be lawful to obey this act. So writing to the Philippians cha. 3:
2. He says beware of dogs, beware of evil workers beware of the concision by
whom the false teachers of these times are to be understood. Now he commands
to beware of those, that is, shun them, forbear to hear them, follow them not:
And again v. 17: 18, 19. he says Brethren be followers together of me, and
Mark them which walk so as ye have us for ensample, for many walk of whom I
have told you oftin, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies to
the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, who
mind earthly things. So he would have them following such as taught as he did,
and walked as he walked, and not such as were enemies to the cross of Christ:
And certanely when Paul would have the Ephesians cap. 4: 14. No more carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by slight of men and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive he would not have them following or
attending the Ministry of such, concerning whom the question is. So when he
wills the collossians cap. 2, v. 8. to beware least any man spoil them
through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, he would not have people give
obedience unto this Act, and to attend the Ministry of such who teach false
Doctrine, By slight and cunning craftinese, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive and seek to spoil people of the truth by their Philosophy (such as it
is) and vain deceit after the traditions of men and not after Christ and seek
to beguile with enticeing words. So in his first Epistle to Timothy cap. 4. v.
1, 2. He says that in the later times some shall depaire from the faith,
giving head to seduceing spirits, speaking lies in Hypocrisy having their
consciences feared with a hot iron. It must then be hazardous and most
dangerous to give head to such seduceing spirits, as speak lies, and have their
consciences seared with an hot iron, as being the cause of departing stom the
faith; so that such as will guaird against departing from the faith would take
heed whom they hear. So in his second Epistle to Timothy cap. 3, v. 5. he
speaks of some whom he would have all honest people turn away from, and
these he describes first from their corrupt conversation, v. 2: 3, 4, 5. thus
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of these that are good, treatours,
heigh minded, heady, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God much time
needs not be spent in showing how fitly all these agree unto the persons now
spoken of, such as know them can best judge. But then secondly he describes
them from their Doctrine, v, 6, 8, 13. They creep into houses and lead captive
silly women; us Ia^es and I^mbres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobat concerning the faith, evil men and
seducers all which? particulars without contradiction, agree to these now
spoken of: And therefore the Apostle's command stands in force from such
turn away. By all these passages, It is clear that the Ministry of false and
corrupt teachers should not be attended.

7. If it were lawful to hear these in obedience to this Act, it would be also
lawful, upon an Act, to attend the Ministry of Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Socinians, Arminians, or Jesuits: And if it would not be lawful to do this, no
more can it be lawful to attend the Ministry of these in question, who seek
to pervert the right ways of the Lord, and labor to subvert the simple
people, and to turn them away from the truth.

8. Such as their Doctrine is such are the prayers, not only stuffed with
error, but larded with blasphemy, as might easily be shown, were it fit here
to mention what their expressions are: As their Doctrine tends to reproach
the work of reformation and the power of godliness, so do their public
prayers, as such as hear them can show, They pray for a blessing on the
prelates, under the name of Reverend, and right Reverend fathers, and on their
ways and courses (which God will curse and blaste) not to mention their
unsound and parasitick expressions concerning the King's supremacy calling him
head of the Church etc. Now seeing tender consciences can not join with them in
those prayers, how can they attend their Ministry? Are not all present bound
to join in prayer with them who should be the mouth of all the congregation
unto God and pray with them? and when out of the corruption of their heart they
ordinarily utter expressions savouring of blasphemy and error; can godly
tender consciences go alongs with them,? And seeing they cannot, how can they
be bound to attend their Ministry? There are snares in Prayer no less then
in preaching. Yea particular persons concur more with the minister in prayer
then in preaching; and there fore they may more saiflie hear error preached
then join in an erroneous prayer, for in the one they are purely passive, But
in the other they are some way active: and therefore unquestionably there is
sin in constant attending the Ministry of such, with whom if they concur in
prayer, they must sin.

9. Yielding obedience unto this Act were upon the matter a consenting unto the
great incroachment made upon the privileges of the Church. The Church has this
power and privilege from the Lord, to make choice of her own officers, as the
frequent examples thereof in the days of the Apostles do clear, and this
would be the greater sin now after the Lord has graciously delivered that
Church from that yoke, and put her in possession of her power and privileges;
after that the power of patrons, which was a piece of cruel bondage and
oppression unto the Church, is removed to consent again unto wreething of that
yoke about her neck, were no small transgression: And it is clear that the
attending of the Ministry of such, must be an accepting of them as Ministers
lawfully called notwithstanding that they want the election of the people, and
have nothing for their warrant, but a presentation from the patron: And so this
would be nothing else upon the matter but a consenting unto this incroachment;
And a joining with such as wrong and spoil the Church: To say that people in
that case should protest against these encroachments, and so exonere
themselves, were to put them, to run their heads against a wall: and next their
refuseing thus to obey the act, is, upon the matter a protestation, and if
after their protestation they were bound to hear them and attend their
Ministry, they should undo their own protestation, by their after carriage;
for by their protestation they declare, that they cannot look upon them as
Ministers having a lawful call, according to the laws of Christ, and by their
after carriage, in constant attending of their Ministry, they should declare
to all, that they own them as lawfully called Ministers; And thus their
practice should belie their protestation. Nor will it be of any force to say
that their forefathers did submit unto the Ministry of such as had no other
call but the patron's presentation: For there is a vaste difference to be put
butwixt a time wherein the Church is advanceing in a course of reformation; and
a time wherein she is declineing and slideing back from that degree of
reformation unto which she had already attained: In a time wherein the Church
is but coming out of darkness, and the day is but beginning to break up, many
things may then be comported with and tolerated, which may not be submitted
unto, after the Church has gotten all these abuses reformed. Every believer,
and every Church is bound to stand fast in that which they have attained unto,
and not to cede in a hoof: So that Christians living in a time wherein the
Church is but beginning to wrestle up, from under the heap of error and
corruption, may be allowed to do many things, which must not be done, when the
noontide of the day is come. In the time of the reformation begun by Luther and
others, many things might have been comported with in the Church, (reformation
being a graduall motion that has but small beginings and riseings) which now
since the reformation has been carried on, through the blessing of God, to
that degree it was advanced to, cannot be allowed: When God has wonderfully by
his mighty power and out-streached arm, brought a Church to a great length in
reformation, it will be the duty of that Church and of the members thereof to
adhere to that degree unto which they have attained, with all perseverence. It
will be lawful for the Church which is but coming up the hill to stand at such
a step until they gain another; when yet it will not be lawful for the same
Church, to go backward after they have advanced. The truth once bought should
never be sold: so then the consequence is null, Their forefathers stumbled
not, nor did scruple, at the doing of such or such things. therefore these in
this generation, who have advanced, through the blessing of God, unto a further
degree of reformation, should not scruple either: It is a poor consequence to
say, The posterity may return backward, because their fore sath. Is could not
advance further: Much more may be seen when the sun is up then in the twilight.
Therefore the scrupleing of honest people now, does no way condemn their
forefathers: But on the contrary, the steadfastness of their forefathers, in
standing to the degree, to which they had reached, and their endeavoring to
advance, will condemn this generation for backsliding. In their days those
abuses and corruptions were not remedied, the Church was not then freed of that
yoke of oppression. And further their after consent unto such Ministers made up
this defect; But those in this generation are not at liberty to give or grant
their after consent, because they are engadged to stand to the work of
reformation, and to own it in all its parts, whereof this is one, vis. the
putting away of the usurpation of patrons, and the putting the Church in
possession of her own privileges, and this they must own upon any hazard, if
they would not betray their trust. The right way of Election was not settled by
law in their forefathers days, and so they were groaning under that
oppression, and constrained to make the best of that ill bargan they could: But
it were utterly intolerable for those in this generation to consent unto the
wreething of that yoke, which has been once loosed from their Laws, about
their necks again. Nor will it be of any force to say, within few ages, yea or
years, such a thing as this will never be scrupled at: for if defection be
carried on, with as great vehemence, as it has been these few years by past,
it is like, gross popery shall not be scrupled at ere long, except by such as
now do scruple to countenance these intruders. And what ever the following
posterity may be allowed to do, to prevent worse, it will plead nothing for
these in his generation; because it is their part to stand in the gap and leave
their dead bodies there, rather then give way unto any degree of defection,
which may cause posterity to curse them. More is expected of a standing army,
then of straggling souldeours; these may make some shift after the army is
broken, to get as good quarters, as they may, when it were baseness and
utterly unlawful for any to do so; while the army is unbroken. Small things
should be stood at, in the time of the beginning of an apostasy: when the
watters of corruption are beginning to break in, the least hole should be
stopped, and watched over.

10. By giving obedience unto this act, they should, upon the matter, justify
and approve of, and consent unto the violent and cruel thrusting out of these
whom God had settled in those places, and whose labors he had blessed, and thus
they should consent unto this terrible act for persecution of the godly and
faithful Ministers of the Lord: And therefore they could not do it in
conscience. The antecedent is cleared thus. Because to embrace and encourage
such, were to approve of the ground, upon which they enter, and that is, their
compliance with the sinful defection, and their submission and obedience unto
the sinful injunctions of the time: And what were that else, but a condemning
of the honest Ministers who could not in conscience so comply, nor submit, and
an approving of the sad sentence gone out against them. He who willingly
submits unto an usurper, and accepts of him as a lawful superior, by
yielding all active obedience, does thereby declare that the right of the
usurper, is good, and better then his right who is outed by the usurper, or he
does what in him lies to make it so.

11. It may be questioned, as to some of them, whether they be Ministers at all
or not; for as they have not the qualifications required by the Apostle,
neither as to life, nor abilities, being scandalous in their life and
conversation, to the view of all onlookers; and as to doctrine, being either
corrupt, or utterly insufficient, having none of the qualifications requisite:
So nor have they any thing like a solemn ordination, or setting apart for that
office, having no imposition of hands of the Presbytery, with fasting and
prayer, according to the order of the Gospel; but the sole warrant and mission
of the prelat: and therefore it cannot be lawful to countenance such, and to
look upon them as lawful Ministers. It is true, private Christians may not set
themselves up into the chair, and judge of the enduements and qualifications
of Ministers and what nulleth their office and what not; yet every private
Christian, has the use of the judgment of discretion, and that way may judge
whether such an one, appear qualified according to the rule of the word, or
not. It is certain there may be times wherein such men may be set up into that
office as have few or none of all those qualifications required in the word:
Such corruption may overgrow the Church, (as by past experience has abundantly
evinced in the times of popery) as that the most unfit men imaginable shall be
installed in the office of the Ministry: Yea and now likewise some such might
be instanced, if it were fit. Now albeit it be hard for private persons to take
upon them to unminister such as are Coram homi^ibus (though not Coram Deo, in
God's account wanting these qualifications which his word requires) installed
in the office; yet when the standing, clear, and undeniable laws are rejected,
and such put in place, who would not once be evened thereunto if the
qualifications which the word requires, were once eyed, They cannot be
condemned for withdrawing from such, and for refuseing to attend their
Ministry, or to countenance and encourage them, as lawful Ministers of Christ
ought to be countenanced and encouraged. It is likewise certane that private
Christians may know whether such an one be ordained according to the primitive
order, or only has the prelates hands laid on him, or no imposition of hands at
all, and accordingly may carry themselves toward such.

12. It is certain there is much corruption in the way of their entry, if not
a whole mass of corruption, all circumstances being considered: And so the
yielding obedience unto this Act, now when these corruptions are well known,
should be an approving of these corruptions, whereas they should partake of no
man's sin, but keep themselves pure, and bear testimony against these
corruptions so far as they can; and there is no other way for them now to do
it, but by refuseing to yield obedience unto this Act: There is no access for
complaints, and such as would but petition, should in so far accuse themselves.

13. To yield obedience to this Act, and attend the ministry of such, when
there are others to be heard, either in public or private, were to wrong their
own souls to mar and hinder their own edification and spiritual prositeing,
by running to cisterns without watter: what blessing can be expected upon the
preaching of such, as have palpably perjured themselves, in owneing the
prelates; as have made defection from the truth, and are prosecuteing a course
of defection, and making themselves captains to lead the people back into
Egypt: as stuff their preachings with railing, against the work of God and
power of godliness: as encourage prophanity and wickedness and are them
selves paterns of all prophanity and debaucheries? can it be expected that God
will bless such, as are thus qualified for the Service of Satan, and are
driveing on his design? Can it be expected that God will countenance such as
run unsent, and are thieves climbing up at the windows, and are not entering
in by the door, who feed themselves, and not the flock, who strengthen not the
deseased nor heal that which was sick, nor bind up that which was broken, nor
bring again that which is driven away, nor seek that which is lost: But with
force and cruelty rule over them? Will God bless such, whom, he solemnly
protests by his oath, that he is against? Ezekiel. 34: 10. And seeing a blessing
cannot be expected upon their labors but rather a curse, as daily experience
makes good, when it is seen that even such as had something like parts before,
are now totally blasted of God; their right eye almost already put out, and
their right arm dried up: how can any think of attending their ministry: When
in stead of any work of conversion or conviction among people, there is nothing
seen, but a fearful hardening in prophanity, so that such as seemed to have
something like Religion before, now through hearing of them ordinarily, are
turned altogether loose and profane, Is there not a seen curse upon them and
their labors? Who then can adventure to obey this Act? Has it not been seen
how signally God has testified his displeasure against some who for fear or
some what else, over the belly of their light, would obey the Act; and upon the
other hand how he has signally approved such who have resolved to suffer
rather then sin upon that account? Instances of both might be given were it
pertinent: Shall it then be saife for any to seek the law at their mouth, seeing
it is so much to be questioned if they be the messingers of the Lord of hosts;
and so clear, that they are departed out of the way and have caused many to
stumble at the law and have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, and are now made so
contemptible and base before all the people? Yea where there is no such hazard
of being misled, it is lawful for people to go and hear such Ministers as
they posite most by; as worthy doct Voetius clears pol. Eccles. page 72. from
these grounds. 1. People should choose the best and most edifying gifts. 2.
Scripture favors this choosing Luke 8: 18. 1 These. 5: 21. And he further
there answers three or four objections: much more will it be lawful for
people to hear other Ministers in the case now under consideration.

14. Christ allows his people and followers to refuse to hear such unsent and
false teachers, as it is enjoined in the Act. Ioh: 10. where he gives it as a
mark and character of one of his sheep, that he will not follow a stranger but
flee from him, for his people know not the voice of a stranger. v. 5, and wh^
this stranger is, the former verses show, where he is called a Thief and A
robber v. (...). And that because he enters not in by the door, but climbeth
up some other way, and wants these qualifications of a good shepherd
mentioned. v. 3, 4. And therefore it cannot be sinful or unlawful to refuse
obedience unto that Act seeing such as are now commanded by the Act to be heard,
are, as to their entry, intruders, and in their doctrine erroneous, and as to
the discharge of their trust, mere hirelings and therefore must not be
hearkened unto, but fled from. Calvin on the place says this is the spirit of
discretion, by which his chosen ones do discern the truth from men's fictions
-- and their obedience herein is commended not only in that they pleasantly
meet together, when they hear the voice of a true shepherd but also in that
they will not hearken unto the voice of a stranger. It is one of Mr Hutcheson's
notes upon the place that The true sheep, are so far enabled to discern false
teachers and corrupt doctrine, as they do approve of neither* but will flee
from them, that they be not infected nor ensnared with their allurements; For a
stranger they will not follow when he calls them to follow him in a wrong way
but will flee from him, (as one they will have nothing to do with all) and that
because they know not the voice of strangers, that is, they do not approve
them, though they have a knowledge of discerning, whereby they know them, and
their Doctrine to be naught. This is asserted of Christ's sheep, not because
they cannot at all err, nor yet only because it it their duty thus to do (for
that is common to them with reproba^s) but because, when any do either embrace
false Doctrine, or fall in likeing with corrupt men, who run unsent, It is no
sign of their grace, but of their corruption so to do.

It will be objected. 1. That Christ commands to hear the scribes and the
Pharisees who did sit in Moses his chair Mat. 23. And these of whom now the
question is, are not worse then the Scribes and Pharisees were. And therefore
it cannot be lawful to refuse obedience unto this Act. Ans. For solution of
this objection, which seems to be the maine one. These things would be
considered. 1. That these scribes and Pharisees were as naughty men as then
lived upon the face of the earth, and were still enemies unto Christ, and were
false teachers, their Doctrine was leav^ned with sour and dangerous tenants
among which this was a chief. That Christ was not the Messiah and upon this
account Christ desires his disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
Mat. 16: 6. 2. They were men that had no lawful call unto that place which
they did assume to themselves which appears from these particulars. I. Christ
calls them thieves and Robbers and strangers John. 10: 1, 5, 8. and that not*
merely because of their false Doctrine, nor yet merely because of their carnal
way of entry, as hirelings seeking gain; but also because of their usurping
the place, and office, and entering thereinto without a call from God; for the
ground and reason why Christ calls and proves them to be thieves and robbers
is because they entered not by the door but climbed up some other way, and the
porter did not open unto them, v. 3. and they came before him, that is, without
his warrant and commission: They took not the right way of entry, they came not
in at the right door, and with God's approbation. 2. Mat. 15: 13. Christ
calls them plants which his heavenly father had never planted and there he is
speaking of them selves (and not of their Doctrine only) who offended at
Christ's Doctrine and it was them (and not their Doctrine alone) that Christ
would have his disciples letting alone let them alone (says he) For they be
blind leaders of the blind and this will suite the scope very well; for his
disciples had laid some weight on this that they were me^ in office and
therefore the stumbling and offendi^g of them seemed to be some great
bussinesse. But Christ replyeth That albeit they had been planted or had
planted themselves in that office and charge; Yet they were such plants as his
heavenly father had never planted, and therefore they were the less to be
regairded. Gualter on the place says that it is clear out of history, that
God did never institute the order of the soribes, which then was; Far less the
Pharisees and sadduces; But they had their rise from that greek, Or heathenish
school which Jason whom Selecus made high priest, did institute in Jerusalem
contrary to the law; and that the Pharisees did spring from the Stoics and the
Sadduces from the Epicures? And cites in the margin 1 Match 1. and 2 Match 4.
So ibid: He gives the sense of that word let them alone, discedite ab iis, go
away from them 5. The place which they had assumed did properly and of right
belong unto the Priests and Levits as Pareus hinteth on the place yet these
because of their learning and pride thinking themselves only worthy to be in
office, took upon them that place, without any further call; which is the more
likely; considering. 4. That those times were times of confusion and disorder,
so that ((...) Grotius observes) there was no care had about this business,
but every man who pleased was free to take upon him to iustruct and teach the
people and this is confirmed by that passage, Act. 13: 15. And after the
reading of the law and the prophet, the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them
saying, ye men and brethren if ye have any word of exhortation for the people,
say on. Consid. 3. That though the words, v. 2. Be rendered They sit in Moses
sea^ they may be as well rendered [They have se^ themselves down in Moses seat]
Pare^s on the place does fully clear this where he says [In my judgment
(...) is better undered, with the ancint latin edition sederunt, they did
(...) (...) as now commonly sedent, they do sit f^r that phrase of sitting in
Moses seat Signifies the office of teaching publicly the Doctrine and law of
Moses: the verb in the aorist takes not from them, but gives unto them the
present ordinary office of teaching, but withal it imperteth that this sect
had by ^ook and crook ^surped this office and place which at the first was
given by God unto the Priests and Levits. They have sitten, that is, they have
set themselves down in that seat of Moses which they now possess for the verb
(...) does signify not only neutraly to sit but also Actively to cause to sit,
to place in a seat, thus he. And Scapula indeed rendereth the verb Actively to
cause or command to sit and cites authors for it: so does Pas^r say, that
properly it signifies to place in a se^, or to cause one sit. 4. There is no
word of a command here given to his disciples (to whom with the multitude he is
here speaking) to attend the ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees, for if he
had commanded them to do so, it is like the disciples would have done so in
obedience to Christ's command; but the scripture speaks nothing of this: And
then they should have left Christ and followed the Pharisees which is not very
probable, and Christ himself would have taught them to do so, by his own
example, for he came to fulfill all righteousness. But there is no word of
this either. 5. By the contrare Christ is so far from commanding his dis^ples
and others to follow their Ministry, that he disswaddeth them there from, not
only else where, calling them blind Leaders of the blind, and such as should
be let alone and ^ed from as impostors, Mat. 15: 13, 14. and saying, John. 10:
4, 5. that the sheep know the voice of a lawful shepherd, but not the voice of
a stranger. Yea they will not follow a stranger but will ^ee from him and this
is meaned of the Pharisees as any may see who will look back to the end of the
Chapt. 9. but also in this same Chapt throughout, showing at great length how
naughty and perverse men they were, denunceing many a heavy woe and curse upon
them, and at length he calls them a generation of vipers and serpents who
could not escape the damnation of hell, v. 33. all which is but small
encouragement to his disciples and hearers to follow them, or attend their
Ministry. And it is observable how fitly many of the particulars for which
here Christ denunceth a woe unto these pharisees, do agree unto the persons
concerning the hearing of whom, the queston is* As. 1. They shut up the Kingdom
of heaven against men and neither will go in themselves, nor suffer such as
are entering, to go^ in. 2. They are at great pains to bring poor simple
people over to their opinion, and make them proselyts, and when they are made
such, they make them the Children of hell with themselves. 3. As the scribes
and Pharisees taught poople shi^s to evade the bonds of oaths telling them that
it was nothing to swear by the alter, or by the temple: so do these excel in
that art of teaching perjury; and looseing the knots of covenants and oaths, as
is too well known. 4. They are much taken up with punctilioes of formalities,
and in causing people at tend all their nodes, and desires; But as for the
weightier matters of the law, judgment mercy and faith they cast these behind
their back. 5. They declare themselves the children of them who killed the
prophets, and are fast filling up the measure of their fathers. But indeed. 6.
They are behind the Pharisees in cleansing the out side of the cup and
platter, and in appearing like whited tombs, for they have no show of piety,
and therefore are so much the more to be shunned and, may certanely, unless
they repent, expect all the woes that here are denunced upon the scribes and
Pharisees. 6. It would be considered, for further confirmation of the last
particular. That the maine thing which Christ is pressing upon his hearers
here, is that they would beware to follow the practices of these pharisees, for
all that heigh place which they took upon themselves in the Church, and on the
by, as it were, he speaks anent their receiveing of their true doctrine, by
way of concession, or of their doing and observing, whatsoever they delivered
as sitting in Moses's seat, whereof they were presently in possession, by their
usurpation, and while there were no other ordinarily occupying that seat at
that time. So that these things being considered it will appear, that this
place makes no way for the attending the Ministry of such men, there being no
command here, to hear the Pharisees at all, let be to hear them always and
constantly, only a command there is, to do and observe what they, from Moses
law, bad do and observe, which may import a hearing of them expounding the law
of Moses while there were no other ordinary teachers of the law: But if this
place prove not (which it will never do) that the Ministry of these scribes
was to be constantly attended, it will speak nothing against these who could
not obey that act.

It will be objected in the next place. That refuseing to give obedience to
this act, will be separation from the Church and ordinances, which are not, nor
yet can be corrupted by the corruption of administrators. Ans. For clearing of
this, let these things be considered. 1. Corruptions in administrators are of
two sorts: some personal, and these alone, it is true, cannot defile the
ordinances in their hands, and make them no ordinances: others are, to speak
so, Ministerial, or such as affect the office. And these again are either of
smaller moment and less dangerous, or else such as cut the very throat of the
office and make one no officer: and without all question those corruptions that
destroy the office, in it is essentials, and make the man no Minister, do
corrupt the ordinances in his hands: he who is no minister cannot baptize, nor
administrat the sacrament of the Lord's supper, nor preach with authority, as a
Minister, and he can do no Ministerial act: and it is past questioning, that
such may be shunned without all hazard of separation, and of this sort it may
be, some of those now spoken of, are. 2. When personal faults are very gross,
and palpable, open, and avowed such may be shunned without any hazard of
separation, because that man's being an officer, c^ram deo, is much to be
questioned and there is great probability that ipso sac^o, in the court of God,
he has forsaulted the same, though such should be the corruption in a Church,
that notwithstand of all this, he may be maintained. But. 3. separation is one
thing and not-hearing such or such a man is a far other thing; there may be
many just grounds of exception against such or such a particular person why he
should not be countenanced as a Minister, or why people may refuse to
countenance him, without any hazard of separation or joyneing with separatists
in their principles. Every not-hearing is not separation: a man may many a
time, be absent from hearing, and yet cannot be justly charged with separation:
Yea separation is one thing, and refuseing to attend the Ministry of such or
such a man, is another thing. A man may never hear such or such a man preach;
and yet be no separatist from the Church, wherein he lives; for he may join
with the ordinances in another congregation; and so testify that he has no
prejudice against the Ministry, not against the ordinances of Christ, nor
against the Church; but only a prejudice against such or such a man in
particular. 4. So then, so long as the refusers to obey that Act do not cast at
the ordinances but are willing to run many miles to enjoy them though they
should be inhumanely used, by the way, by soldiers, led forth of purpose For
that end; Nor cast at the Church as no Church (though they sadly fear that God
shall be provoked by this dreadful defection, which is carried on by these men
and their favorers, to give her a bill of divorce) Nor at the ministry, for
they love these who stand by their principles, dearly; and are most willing to
hear them either in public or in private, what ever inconvenience or suffering
may follow thereupon. 5. It is granted by all such as write against
separatists, that separation from a Church is lawful, when the case so falls
out that union cannot be kept up with her, with out sin, much more will a
forbearing to hant the ordinances in such a particular parish, and to attend
the Ministry of such a particular person, be justified, as no sinful
separation when the contrary cannot be done without si^, and so it is in this
case, as has been shown above. Reverend and Famous Doct. Vo^tius (...).
Eccles. Page 68. Quaest. 17. Grants that upon some such occasion one may
^bstean from explicit communion with a particular Church; for these reasons.
1. Such communion is not absolutely Necessary necessita^ Medi^, nor yet
necessita^ praecept^, when the Christian shall have more peace of conscience
and free exercise of Christian du^ else where. 2. such persons may keep
communion with other purer Churches, in other places. And Famous Mr Rutherford
in his due right of presbyteries Page 253. and Page 254. Where he is laying
down some considerations, about the degrees of separation, shows us, That
there is a separation negative, or a non union, as That in Augustin's time,
when the faithful did separate from the Dona^sts, which is lawful, and
landable: now if there be a separation here, it can only be a negative
separation, and not a positive separation. He shows us again ibid. That
there is a separation from the Church in the most and worst part, and a
separation from the least and best part, and that these who separate from the
worst and greatest part, do notwithstanding remain a part of, and a part in
the visible Church, because they do not separate from the Church according to
the least and best part thereof; as the godly in England who refused the popish
cerem^nies, and A^tichristian Bishops. Hence it will follow that though now
people should withdraw from communion with the greatest part of the Church
which is now corrupted they cannot be accounted separatists; because they hold
still communion with the better, though lesser part. Moreover he says Page
254: 255. That there may be causes of nonunion with a Church, which are not
sufficient causes of a separation, as, before the jews came to blaspheme
openly, (as they did Act 1^: 44, 45, 46, and 18. 16.) there was no just cause
why any should have joined to the Church of the jews, seeing there was a
cleaner Church to which converts might join themselves Act 2: 40, 41, 42. And
whether or not the reasons formerly laid down, will be a just cause of non
union (which is all we plead for) let the reader judge. Lastly, he tells us ibid
Page 255. When the greatest part of a Church makes defection from the truth,
the lesser part remaineing sound, the greatest part is the Church of
separatists* though the manyest and greatest part, in the Actual exercise of
discipline be the Church; yet in the case of right discipline, the best though
fewest, (...) the Church For truth (...) like life, that retireth from the
manyes^ members unto the heart, and there remains in its fountain, in case
of dangere. So that it is the Major part which has made defection, that is to
be accounted separatists, and not such as stand to their principles, though
they cannot complye, of join with the corrupt majoriti. Hence it is
abundantly clear, that such as refused to obey this Act cannot be accused as
guilty of sinful separation.

It will be objected thirdly. That by refuseing to obey that Act they declare
they look not on these men as Ministers, and if they account them no Ministers,
they must say that their baptizeing is no baptizeing: and also that the Church
of Scotland now is no organicall Church. And that such do well who refuse to
bring their Children unto them to be baptized. Ans. 1. Though it were affirmed
positively (as it is not) that all of these men were no Ministers; Yet it would
not follow that the Church of Scotland were no organicall Church; because all
these ministers, who are now violently restrained from exerceing their
Ministerial function, are Ministers and officers of the Church of Scotland
though bound up from exerceing their office: for as no deed of a Magistrate can
loose a Minister's relation, (so long as his life is in him) unto the Church
universal; so no deed of the Magistrates can loose a Ministers relation to the
national Church whereof he is a member, so long as he remains ^vis regn^ and
is not banished out of that Kingdom. Yea reverend Apoll^nius in his jus
Majestatis circa sacra. Par. 1. Page 331. thinks that when a Minister is
wrongously put from his charge, by a Magistrate, he remains still a Minister
of that Church from which he is banished, jure divino; Because of his call; and
has a right to exerce all his Church power there; as a wife ravished from her
husband remains still his wife, because of the marriage covenant which is
inviolable; and therefore all these Ministers who are yet within the Kingdom
are real officers of the Church of Scotland and full and complete officers as
to the power, only they are violently restrained from the actual exercise of
that power. And therefore the Church of Scotland is still an organicall Church,
as a man is an org^nicall body when bound hand and foot so as he can neither
work nor walk. But, 2. Whatever may be thought ofsome of these men, (whose
being real officers in the Church of God (as was said) may much be questioned)
and what sad consequences may follow upon the nulling of their office, let
these see to it who either send such forth, or employ them. Yet as to all of
them, this forbearing to yield obedience unto this Act, will not ground the
consequence alleged: For there is a difference betuixtthe not owneing and
dis-countenanceing of a man as no Minister at all, or no Minister of the Church
universal: And dis-owneing, or dis-countenanceing him as not being their
minister in particular, or as pastor of such a particular flock. It is certane,
a man may be a Minister of the Church universal and yet not the Minister of
such or such a particular place. It is certane, a man's relation unto such or
such a particular flock may be Changed by transportation, when his relation
unto the Church universal abides: And so it is certane that a denying of one
to be a Minister of such or such a particular flock will not, by any good
consequence be a denying of him to be a Minister at all; Many things may lo^se
a Minister's relation to such or such a particular congregation, which will not
a null his relation unto the Church universal: And when his relation to such a
particular flock is loosed, that particular flock is loosed from being a flock
owneing him as their Minister, for relata se mu^uo ponunt et tollunt. And when
such or such particular persons, refuse to own such a man as their pastor in
particular, it cannot be inferred that therefore they deny him to be a Minister
at all; Unless this consequence were good. He is a Minister in general to the
Church universal Ergo he is a Minister in particular to such a particular
flock: It is ill argueing a genere ad speciem, or a specie ad individuum
affirmative. So then there can no such thing be concluded from their practice
who refuse to obey that act. As for their refuseing to bring their children
unto such to be baptized; judicious and lea^ned Voetius in his polit Eccles.
page 640. does approve of it upon these grounds because no necessity compels
them to it, and they may wait until they have the occasion of a better
Minister either in their own paroch, or in another; for if the best gifts be to
be coveted, 1 Cor. 12: 31. why should not the best Ministers be preferred? and
why should not Christians show by their deeds that their delight is in the
saints, Psalm. 16. and that they honor such as fear the Lord and contemn a
vile person, Ps. 15: So Page 638. quaest. 8. he says the same for these
reasons. They should not partake of other men's sin, 1 Cor. 5: 9, 11. Ephesians. 5:
11. 2. They should not strengthen the hands of the wicked and make sad the
godly. 3. The authority of such Ministers should not be strengthened, etc. See
further, Page 637: q. 5.

Lastly, it may he some will objecte that passage Phil. 1: 18. what then?
Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached,
and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice: And hence gather. That seeing
the Apostle Paul, was glade that the gospel was preached whatever the men were
who did preach it; all should now be so far from refuseing to hear the gospel
preached, because of some prejudices which they may have at the men who are
employed in that work; that they should be glade and rejoice, that there are
any who will preach truth; And should rather encourage then discourage such.
Ans. 1. These of whom the Apostle there speaks, were not false teachers, or
such as did pervert the right ways of the Lord; But were, it seems, orthodox
in their Doctrine; only they were prompted to it, by an evil spirit of envy and
contention, that they might some way or other (unknown to us who (as Calvin
says on the place) are ignorant of the circumstances of the time which would
clear us) increase Paul's trouble and affliction: And therefore, there is a
difference be^ixt them, and these of whom our present disput ^s, who, as was
shown above, are perverting the right ways of the Lord. 2. The Apostle
speaks nothing of hearing, or not hearing of them, only he says that these
ambitious, and malicious preachers, did miss their mark; For whereas they
thought to ^nake his heart sad, and so add affliction unto the afflicted; by
the contrary, he would rejoice, that, whatever their intention was, God was
useing them as instruments, for carrying on his work. 3. In the best of times
there may be some such naughty Ministers, ^s mainely design, by their
preaching, some hurt to the eminent and worthy servants of Christ (Famous
Calvin sound this true in his own experience as he says on the place) and yet
may carry themselves outwardly so fair as that great and public scandals
cannot legally be fastened upon them; and it may be that these of whom Paul
speaks here, were such; And if so, there is, as was shown above, a vaste
difference betuixt them, and these concerning whom the question now is. 4. Or
be it so, that they were most vicious and outwardly loose and profane, Yea and
persecutets, there is nothing here warranding a constant or ordinary hearing of
them, or an owneing of them as lawful Ministers of Christ: all that is here,
is a rejoyceing that the gospel was spreading, though Satan and Sathan's
instruments were employed therein far against their intentions. There is
nothing which can import Paul's approveing of such, as lawful Ministers; for
as judicious Calvin says on the place Though he did rejoice at the gospels
advanceing: Yet if it had been in his power, he would never have ordained such
to be Ministers of the Gospel. So, though the godly now would rejoice if they
saw the Kingdom of Christ prospering, by the mighty power of God, carrying on
the same, far contrary to the intentions and designs of such as now call
themselves ministers of the Gospel (which, as it does not sensibly appear
unto them so it alters the case far) yet it will not follow that therefore
they are bound to own such, as lawful Ministers of the Gospel, for as Calvin
says on the place we must rejoice when God brings any good to pass, by
wicked instruments, and yet therefore such are not to be put into the
Ministry, nor to be accounted lawful Ministers of Christ: So that this place
can prove nothing, but that Christians should rejoice when they see the gospel
promoveing in the hands of wicked instruments coutrary to their intention and
purpose, through the mighty power of God outshooting the devil (as we say) in
his bow: And not that they should own such as lawful Ministers of the
gospel, and constantly attend their ministry when they may profit more
another way, and when their countenanceing these men so, shall harden their
hearts in their evil ways, shall stumble the truly godly, shall wrong their
own souls, and dishonor God. Rejoyceing at the gospel's prospering is one
thing: And countenanceing, encourageing, receiveing and approving of every one
who gives out himself for a Minister thereof, be he otherwise never so vicious
and insufficient, is a far other thing; And the one will no way infer the
other; as any, with half an eye, may see: Therefore whatever these preachers
were, whether such as sought praise of men, preaching out of envy that Paul
might not get all the glory, and with all indirectly accuseing Paul for
rashness and imprudence, and as justly suffering upon that account, to the
reproach of the gospel and scandal of the weak, as Aretius on the place
thinks: or such as desired to procure his death, That Nero, through their
preaching, hearing of the general disperseing of the doctrine taught by him,
might be thereby enraged to take away his life whom he had now in bonds; as the
English annotators think: Or both: there is nothing here that can with any show
of probability plead for hearing of, and owneing as Ministers lawfully called,
such as are spoken of in this debate.

SECTION XVI.
It is lawful for such Ministers as are banished from their flocks to preach,
wherever they be, either in public, or private.

WHen thus the honest Ministers, whose labors God had singularly blessed among
the people, are thrust from them by force, and insufficient scandalous and
naughty men, are thrust in upon them, sore against their will, their trouble
and trial, is made to grow daily, for now their meeting in any quiet place to
hear any honest man, preach the gospel of Christ, is called a conventicle and
diligent search is made after such, to the end, that both they and the Minister
whom they hear, may be apprehended and punished, according to the pleasure of
these persecuters: And thus the honest and Zealous servants of Christ, are
either put from making mention of the name of the Lord at all, whether in
public or in private: Or brought into great trouble and hazard thereby. Is it
not a very sad and astonishing thing, that when whole country sides, are
almost laid waste, people wandering from place to place seeking the word of the
Lord, and Thousands are perishing for want of knowledge, and multitudes deluded
with false teachers; such Ministers as were driven from their own flocks might
not lay out themselves for the good of perishing souls and do what they could
for instructing, strengthening, and comforting of the poor afflicted and
persecuted people of God? May not this be matter of admiration, that any upon
this account should be put to suffer? And certanely none with any show of
reason, will condemn those Ministers if they take notice of these few
particulars following.

1. Though they were banished by the sentence of a civil judge, Yet they
remained still Ministers; no such sentence of a civil Magistrate can depose a
Minister from his office: The spirit of the prophets, as to this, is subject to
the Prophets only. It is true, it followed upon their banishment as a necessary
consequence, that they could not exerce the Ministerial function in that place
out of which they were banished: But notwithstanding of any Act of banishment
they remained Ministers; for there is no such connection betuixt their being
Ministers, and their being in such a place. And all the sentence of the
Magistrate reached only to their being, or not being, in such a place. All this
will be beyond disput with such as are not gross Erastians; for no reformed
divine will acknowledge that the civil Magistrate can immediately depose a
Minister; far less can he do it by the sole Act of banishment. So then this is
clear, that those Ministers who were banished from their own parishes,
remained still Ministers of the gospel, yea and, as has been said in the
foregoing section, Ministers of the Church of Scotland.

2. It is no less clear unto all such as have not drunken in independent
principles. That all such as are Ministers, have a relation unto the Church
universal, and unto the national Church wherein they are, and so may,
wherever they are, discharge the duty of Ministers, in preaching and
administrating the Sacraments.

3. Not only may they do so, but there is a necessity laid upon them to preach
the gospel, and woe is due unto them, if they do it not, 1 Cor. 9: 16. If once
they have given up themselves unto Christ, as servants to him, they must
resolve to be employed for him, to the out most of their power, and must not
think of laying up their talent in a napkin; lest they get the wicked and
slothful servant's reward. They have a divine command to preach in season, and
out of season, and to lay out themselves, to the yondmost for Christ, and his
interest. This will also be undeniable: especially considering in the next
place.

4. That there was never greater necessity, for their bestirring of themselves
as faithful Ministers of the gospel, then now, when there are so many
thousands left destitute: and so many led away with false guides, who make it
their work to deceive people, and to pervert the right ways of the Lord: and
so many ready to faint under persecution and sore affliction. Is not the
harvest now great, and are not the laborers few, when a man shall go many
miles before he shall hear any honest Minister? And should such, on whom God
is calling aloud to teach, exhort, and comfort, be silent now? Is not Sa^ bussy
leading some away to Atheism, others to Prophanity, some to popery, others to
Quaker^sme? And does not this call aloud on all who would be faithful to their
master to be actively bestirring themselves now, for the good of s^uls and for
the glory of God? Are there not many honest followers of Christ lying under
sore oppression and bondage their spirits being grieved, and their souls wasted
with hearing and seeing what they do hear and see? And have not these need to
be comforted and cheered up under the cross? Does not God allow consolation to
such? and is he not calling on his servants to speak comfortably to such? Are
there not many almost fainting by reason of their weakness, and the
continuance of the trial and should not Ministers mind that command, 1 These.
5: 14. Comfort (...) feeble minded, and supporte the weak? Are there not many
in hazard to be led away with the temptations of the time? and has not Satan
many instruments wearying themselves in this service of seduceing poor people,
and drawing them into their nets and snares, and should not Ministers be doing
what in them lies, to keep out of the snare, such as are in hazard; and to
recover such as are already ensnared, out of the hand of the devil? Great then
is the necessity that poor people are into, and double must the woe be, that
abides such Ministers, as are silent, at such a time, when all things call
upon them to lift up their voice like a trumpet; and to show people their
transgressions, and their hazard, and to be burning and shineing lights, that
such as walk in darkness may see their way and be comforted.

5. Such a practice is abundantly warranted by the Apostles, and other Church
officers, in the primitive times: For they went to several places and preached
the Gospel; When they were persecuted in one city, they went unto another, and
still preached the gospel where ever they came: The history of the acts of the
Apostles, abounds with instances of this kind, so that it is needless to
cite any. If it be said that these were extraordinary officers Apostles,
prop^ets, and (...), who were not fixed to any one place, as the ordinary
officers were. It is answered. That preaching of the Gospel was not the
Charactersticke of unfixed officers, but common to them with fixed pastors and
doctors: and preaching unfixedly was not always their note and essential
mark, because in times of persecution, pastors and doctors might have preached,
wherever they came, as the officers of the Church of Jerusalem did, who, being
scattered abroad upon the persecution of Stephen act. 8. 1. Did go every where
preaching the word, v. 4. Those who were scattered behoved to be the fixed
officers of the Church of Jerusalem; for it is not probable, that the Apostles
would have left that Church of Jerusalem, so long without preaching officers
fixed for preaching and administrating the sacraments, seeing they had
instituted Deacons who were less necessary, Act 6: 1, 2, 3, 4. and seeing
themselves were not fixed there, but were to go through the world, according to
Christ's appointment, and the direction and guideing of the Spirit.

6. So is it warranted by the practice of the faithful and honest servants of
Christ in all ages, who through persecution being thrust from one place, went
and preached the gospel in another: both in the time of the first ten
persecutions, through occasion of which, the Gospel was spread far through the
world, and at several times since. The honest servants of Christ in Queen Mary
her days went abroad preaching the Gospel: So did the zealous servants of
Christ in Scotland, when banished, or compelled to flee preach in England,
^rance and Holland, without any new ordination, or any thing like it.

7. There is some necessity lying upon them to preach, as occasion offers
that they may not stumble the poor ignorent people, who upon their silence are
ready to think that the civil Magistrate has power to depose Ministers
formally: And therefore, if there were no more but this it were enough to
provoke them to preach, that the world might see, that they put a difference
betwixt the power of the Magistrate, and the power of the Church; And that when
they submit unto the Magistrate, keeping within the compass of his calling, and
exerciseing that power which formally agrees to him, though he should mistake
as to the application: They will not submit any further, to the wronging of the
privileges of the Church: And so will let the world see that they are still
Ministers of the Gospel, though banished from their particular flocks.

8. Their silence in such a case would be stumbling unto others, who look upon
it as an evidence of fainting, and fear in them, who dar not open their mouth,
nor appear for Christ and speak to the edification and encouragement of
sufferers, least it offend the Magistrate: And when such are so faint-hearted
how does it discourage others, and strongly prevail with some to go over the
belly of their own light and conscience, yea moreover it hardens the wicked
in their evil courses, and encourages them to persecute more and more, when
they see such fainting and discouragment among the followers of Christ.

So then when these particulars, are considered, It will be found that such
Ministers do but their duty, and that they would come short in their duty, if
they did not so preach the Gospel.

If it be Objected here. That to preach in such a disorderly way would be a
breaking of the established order of the Church viz. a preaching within such a
Bishops dioecy without his license, and so it would be a course not approved by
the God of order. It is. Answered. 1. That ceremonies or matters of mere order
must be passed by in times of necessity, such as this is. 2. Such an
established order as tends to the ruin of religion, is but iniquity
established by law, for that is not an order of God's appointment which is
destructive to the maine bussinesse, viz. the edification of souls, and
therefore such an order which is to destruction and not to edification, is not
to be regairded, 3. Where is there any warrant for such an order or appointment
in all the Gospel? Did the Apostles ever ask liberty from the corrupt Clergy
among the Jews, to preach Christ, in such or such a place? Where is there any
warrant for such as are Ministers called of God and orda^ned, to suspend the
exercise of that function till they have the license and good will of a
prelate? This is that popish leaven which the former English Prelates had from
Rome: preaching the Gospel is immediately commanded to all who are Ministers,
and there is not the least syllabe, for their going to a Bishop, who is nothing
else but a creature of man, to seek license: And certanely none can think that
these Ministers might have gone to the prelat, to obtain liberty; seeing that
would have been a clear acknowledging of them and their power, contrare to
their vow and covenant. So then it was better to take the way of the Apostles,
etc to obey God rather then men; and to preach at God's command, when man
forbids, as well as to preach truth when man commands the contrary, seeing
he has no power from God for that effect more in the one case then in the
other.

2. It may be possibly further objected. That how ever they remain Ministers
and so may preach as they have a call; yet to seek corners and hideing places
to preach in, to separated congregations cannot be allowed in a constitute
Church: Ans. If they be Ministers of the gospel, they may lawfully preach the
gospel, where God in his providence gives them a call to preach. 2. Since
they cannot have liberty to preach the gospel in public, they may and must do
it in private, when the necessity of the people calls for it. Christ and his
Apostles did not always get the public places to preach in, but were content
of private rooms: Many a time did Christ preach by the sides of mountains, by
the sea side, and in such by-ways; And so did the Apostles: Paul could get no
better at Ephesus then the school of Tyrannus: and two full years he preached
in his own hired house at Rome Act. 28: 30, 31. and therefore this practice of
theirs cannot be condemned; for. 3. As the Church was then in fieri, so is it
now in a decaying condition, and therefore though it were granted (which is not
yet clearly proved) that in a Church rightly constituted, such private
preachings, were not lawful; yet when a Church is fallen from her right
constitution, and is upon the decaying hand (at without all doubt, the Church
of Scotland is this day) many things may be allowed, as they are, in a time
when the Church is but in fieri: and as to this particular in question, a time
of persecution (as this is) is always excepted; so that it is lawful enough
now, so long as this persecution lasts, to preach the gospel in private when
no liberty can be had to do it openly. 4. These Ministers are gathering no
separated congregations, but only preaching to all who will come and hear the
word of truth, in such quiet and retired places, where they may get it done
most saifly and may be most free from distraction and trouble of their enemies,
who are waiting to find them out, that they may hail them to prisons. Who
then can condemn their carriage in this.

3. If any should further object and say. That this would be an open contempt
of the Magistrat's lawful authority, and disobedience to his lawful commands;
For though it be true, that he cannot take away the office of a Minister or the
power of order, and so degrade him; yet he may take away the exercise of his
Ministerial function, at least, he may discharge the exercise of the same,
within any part of his Kingdom or dominions Ans. Whether there be such an
express prohibition or not is not certanely known, nor whether or not the
objection does suppone, that the Magistrat's Act of banishing of them out of
their own parishes, or out of the bounds of their respective presbyteries, does
include a discharge of ex^erceing the Ministerial function, any more, within
the Kingdom. If the objection go upon this supposition it is sufficiently
answered above. But next, suppone there were such a command expressly
prohibiting them, they were not bound to give obedience. Because to inhibite
and discharge the Actual exercise of the function of the ministry is a
spiritual censure, it is real suspension, which is a sentence that can
lawfully be passed only by a Church judicature: and the civil Magistrate can no
more suspende from the exercise, then he can depose from the office; for the
one is a degree unto the other: See Apollde jure Maj. circa sacra: pars 1, page
334, 335, 336. And Rutherfurd's due right of presbyteries, page 430: 431. And
therefore though the civil Magistrate should pass such a sentence,
conscientious Ministers ought not to obey; because, the civil Magistrate, in
passing such a sentence, is not keeping within his sphaere but transgressing
the limits of his calling, and when the civil Magistrate is usurping the power
that does not belong unto him, obedience is not to be yielded, neither is he to
be countenanced or encouraged in that. Therefore though there were no more,
this is sufficient to call all Ministers to give testimony against such an
usurpation, by refuseing to obey any such Act, or by preaching, when God gives
a call, in his providence, in any place they come^ unto, though there were
never such an express Act to the contrary, They m^st not by their silence, And
obedience unto such commands, gratify the civil Magistrate and make him another
pope: See Apollon: ju^ Maj. circ^ sacra, par. 1 page 338.

SECTION XVII.
It is lawful for Ministers to preach after the pretended prelate has either
suspended or deposed them.

BEing now speaking of the trouble that Ministers are put to, for preaching of
the Gospel, it will not be amiss to speak h^e, of another case: And it is
concerning such as either are, or shall be suspended, or deposed by the prelates
or their Synods: And it may be; some may think, that though they be not bound
to be silent upon the sentence of banishment passed against them, by the civil
Magistrate: Yet being formally silenced or deposed by the Bishop, or his Synod,
they cannot lawfully contraveen that Act and sentence, it being the act and
sentence of a Church judicature, or of such as have formally Church power and
authority. But the serious pondering of these six things, will clear that
notwithstanding thereof they are bound to look upon themselves as Ministers,
and so not only may but ought to exerce their Ministry as God shall put
opportunity in their hands.

1. Submission unto such a sentence would be an acknowledging of the prelate
and of his power, and this is contrary to their oath and covenant: Such
officers as prelates, were cast out of that Church, and abjured, and now
submission unto their sentence, would be an express owneing of them, and
acknowledging them to be really clothed with Church power, and particularly
with power over preaching presbyters; and so they should acknowledge another
officer in the Church, then Christ has instituted, which no true Christian
ought to do. If the (...) should take upon him to depose or suspend any Gospel
Minister, would not that Minister acknowledge the power of the Pope, if upon
the receiving of such a sentence he should leave off the exercise of his
Ministry? And when the civil Magistrate takes upon him to depose a Minister
immediately, if that Minister should upon such a sentence, be silent and submit,
would he not thereby acknowledge that the Magistrate had power to depose
Ministers formally? Sure none could doubt of this: So then it is beyond all
question that to submit unto such a sentence, would be a clear acknowledging of
their power, and this is diametrically opposite unto an endeavor to extirpat
them.

2. If it were lawful to submit unto their sentence, it were undoubtedly
lawful to compeer before their court (...) before a lawful court, and answer
unto any accusation given in against them, for if one may acknowledge the
lawfulness of the sentence of such a court, they may also acknowledge it
lawful to answer before them, and so lawful to own them as a lawful court.
Now seeing conscientious Ministers could not have clearness to compeer before
the prelat or his Synod, when summoned; can it be expected that they should
counter-act their own testimony and condemn themselves, by submitting unto
their sentence?

3. Such a submission would prove very stumbling unto the godly for. 1. It
would encourage them to own the prelates as lawful Church officers, to compeer
before them, to obey their acts, and so to own and acknowledge them as
lawfully empowered; for if they be owned and acknowledged in one particular,
why not in all? 2. it would wrong the peace of the godly, who have hither^ill
kept a distance; and give a check unto their conscientious walk ing, when
they should see ministers submitting to their sentence, as to the sentence of
any uncontroverted lawful Church judicature.

4. Who ever condemn this non-submission, sure such, as of late, thought they
could not in conscience submit (and also all such as did approve them in that
particular) unto the sentence of deposition or suspension, passed against them
by a controverted assembly, because they looked upon it as no lawful General
assembly, being not lawfully constituted; cannot condemn this; but according
to their principles, must preach; for no doubt the power of prelates is much
more to be questioned; then the power of such assemblies, and even many who
will stand to the justifying of that assembly will never justify the power of
prelates, and therefore it cannot but be expected that such as thought the
sentence of that controverted assembly null, should now look on the sentence of
a prelat, as null and of no effect and therefore as little, if not less, to be
regairded and submitted unto.

5. Beyond all question, it is a sentence proceeding from such as have no
power, and therefore ought not in conscience to be submitted unto. A minister
who is called of God must not lay aside his office or the exercise of his
office and power, upon every man's desire: But if he be exauctorated at all, it
must be by such, as have lawful authority for that effect, unto whom he is
bound in conscience, to subjecte himself; And so he shall have peace though the
sentence be passed clave errante, unjustly. There will no man quite any of his
goods upon a sentence comeing from an incompetent judge; And shall a Minister
quite with his Ministry, which should be dearer unto him then any thing else,
upon a sentence proceeding from an incompetent judge, ora private person? this
in reason cannot be expected.

6. If so be they should submit unto this sentence and account themselves no
Ministers, It would follow that though the prelates were all away, they might
not preach nor exerce any ministerial Act, until a Church judicature would
take off the sentence again, and then not only they, but the Church judicature
also, in so doing, should acknowledge the validity of the sentence and
consequently the lawfulness of the power from which it did slow.

But it will be objected. 1. That that sentence comes not from the Bishop
alone, but from a Synod whereof he is only the moderator. Ans. Though the
sentence be given out at the meeting of such as are underlings to, and
complyers with him; Yet the sentence is only his sentence, and this he is
pleased to signify unto all, at their meeting, left they should forget it, and
so mistake him and themselves both; And he indeed makes a fashion of asking
their votes, to the end they may be partakers of the guilt, and of the odium
with himself; But he acknowledges them to have no power, unless it be to give
their counsel and advice. But. 2. It has been shown above that such meetings
are no lawful Church judicatures, no presbyterian meetings, but prelaticall
conventions and conventicles, set up of purpose, for his ends and for the
carrying on of his designs. And their not compeering before these meetings
says they did not acknowledge them to be lawful meetings, and therefore they
cannot now acknowledge their sentence.

It will be objected. 2. That though they ought not to be submitted unto as
prelates or co^rts of prelates; Yet they ought to be submitted unto as the King's
commissioners, and their sentence is in so far to be reverenced. Ans.. Whether
they sit and Act there, as principal or as commissioners, yet any such
sentence proceeding from them, is a non-habente po^estatem, from such as have
no power; For of themselves they have no such power, and they can have no such
power from the King for nemo p^test dare quod non habet, the King can not give
them the power which he has not, The King cannot depose a Minister immediately:
It is true he may put a lawful judicature to whom this power does properly
belong, to do it, or he may imprison or banish, and consequently put from the
exercise in such a place, but formally he cannot give out any Church censure of
suspension or deposition, against any Minister, and therefore he can commit no
such power unto any man whether he be a civil man, or a Church man. And thus It
is still clear that this sentence should not be submitted unto, if it were no
more but for this one cause, because it should be an acknowledgeing of the
Magistrat's power in the matter of Church censures, which is an assertion unto
which no sound reformed divine will assent.

It will be objected. 3. That seeing it is certane such shall be put from their
Ministry ere long however, for if they submit not unto the sentence, the
civil Magistrate will either banish or imprisone, or some other way put them
from it, whether they will or not, were it not faifer then to prevent further
suffering to themselves and theirs, by submitting in time? Ans. It is true,
that in all probability the civil powers will not suffer such to preach long,
after such a sentence is dissobeyed; But yet it is the duty of all, so to carry
themselves, when suffering is at hand, as that they may have most peace of
conscience, and quietness under the cross: And it is certane they shall have
far more peace, who continue preaching as opportunity offers, notwithstanding
of any such sentence, until some physical restraint or what is equivalent, be
laid upon them; Then such as shall willingly submit unto an unlawful sentence,
proceeding from an unlawful judicature, deriveing power from an empty
fountain, and thereby give offense and great scandal both to good and bad.

It will be Objected. 4. That submission to judicaturies established by law, is
necessary; Either obedience active or passive is necessary, otherwise there
shall be no order. Ans. Whatever may be said anent submission, or
non-submission unto the unjust sentences of lawful judicatures; Yet it will be
clear, that no submission should be yielded unto the unjust sentences, of
unlawful judicatures. For the authors of the review and examination of that
book entitled Protesters no subverters and Presbytery no Papacy grant, Page
96. This much, saying we plead not for submission to officers, and
judicatories, not of Christ's own institution, such as, not only, popes, but
prelates, -- and were no lawful Church officers so that here their arguments
conclude not, taken from the practice of Ministers, not submitting to the
sentences of prelates in the Church. So that then all the Church of Scotland, as
to this particular, it seems, was of one judgment and thought that Ministers
should not submit unto prelates passing a sentence of suspension or deposition
against them, these prelates being no lawful Church officers: and so it is
clear that this non-submission in this case, is no new thing in that Church,
but was the practice of several worthy and precious men before, as the book
before mentioned shows, which instances are worth the noticeing now.

SECTION XVIII.
It is lawful for the people, to hear those suffering Ministers, and to meet
for prayer and other Christian exercises, in private.

WHen the poor people cannot in conscience attend the ministry of such as are
thrust in upon them against their will; for the reasons already given; their
temptation grows double upon them; and their trouble increases; for now when
they go to hear such Ministers, as they may lawfully hear, either in publict
or in private, it is a cause sufficient for persecution: yea or if they meet
two or three together, in any private place, for prayer, conference, or any
other Christian exercise, they are in hazard to be hailed to prison and,
punished as keepers of conventicles.

Doubtless, it cannot be very necessary, to speak much, for the justification
and defense of those, who either have suffered, or may hereafter suffer upon
that account; seeing few who own Christianity, or know the sweet of Christian
exercises, and of Christian fellowshipe, will condemn such as value the good
and advantage of their souls beyond their bodies; yet lest some should be moved
to think that at such a time, such ways should be forborne, a little must be
spoken to justify both those courses.

And first for their going to hear, either in public or private such
Ministers, as are still lawful Ministers, what ever sentence has passed
against them; and have given a faithful testimony unto the truth, by adhereing
to their principles, notwithstanding of all the sufferings they do, or can meet
with, much needs not be said, seeing,

1. They are so expressly and often commanded to hear the word of truth, to
hear what is the mind of the Lord; for by the Ministry of his servants does
God manifest his mind unto his people. The priests lips should preserve
knowledge and the people should seek the law at their mouth, who are the
messingers of the Lord of hosts: It is their duty to wait at the posts of
wisdoms doors, this will be undeniable.

2. There is an innate desire in the saints, after the word of truth, as new
born babes they desire the sincere milk of the word that they may grow thereby,
1 Pe^. 212. So that, any who are offended with them, for this, must be offended
with them for being Christians, and must be offended with new born babes for
desireing the breast; and is it not cruelty to smite and punish poor young
babes for seeking the breast? What cruelty must this be then, to punish such
for this, to which their nature as Christians, leads them.

3. They have oftentimes, through the breathing of the spirit of God upon such
exercises, found a rich in-come: as they got life and quickening grace that
way, at the first, so have they often found their souls revived, and their hearts
enlairged, their eyes enlightened, their drouping spirits encouraged, their
feeble knees lifted up, their doubts answered, and cleared, and their souls
lifted up in the ways of the Lord, and strengthened to turn the battle to
the gate, and to stand against corruption, etc. And can any blame them for
seeking after those watters that they have been so often refreshed by, formerly?

4. There was never greater necessity; for upon the one hand temptations
abound, darkness, fainting, discouragment grow: And upon the other hand, they
have no other to go to, unless they would resolve to drink of fouled watters,
which their soul abhore: let none say that they thereby drive at separation,
for they desire not to separat from the Church, not from the public
ordinances, wherever they can have them without sin; they love the ordinances,
only they can not own such men as their Ministers, who have so palpably
betrayed their trust, nor can they attend the ordinances* here they cannot
enjoy them to edification, and the sheep must be a lowed to choose wholesome
food, and not to take poison.

But is it not a strange thing that they will not suffer Christians to meet
together for prayer? It would seem they look on that God to whom the saints do
pray, as their enemy, and that they are afraid of prayer: And indeed the time
has been when the prayers and fasting of the saints of God have been terrible
to the great enemies of God in that land, yea more terrible then Ten thousand
men, as themselves have professed. But what is this else then to banish
Christianity, to profess enmity unto Christian exercises? And sure no
Christian will condemn Christians for flocking together, as birds of one
feather do, for prayer and other exercises in this evil time: seeing,

1. It has been constantly practiced, especially in evil times, in all ages,
and why should it be condemned now? Learned Voetius de Polit. Page 969. Shows
that by this means, true religion was preserved and propagated, both of old
and of late, and how this course is followed, where popery reigns, or where
there is such formality as the truly tender cannot conform themselves unto.
Further he clears the lawfulness of this practice from that meeting in the
house of Cornelius Act 10. and that other Act 12: 12.

2. God has approven such and promised to reward them that in such an evil
time wherein the proud were called happy and they who did work wickedness,
were set up; Yea they that tempted God were delivered: Did speak often one to
another, Mal. 3: 16, 17. the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord and that
thought upon his name, and they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in
that day when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spar^th his
own son that serves him, would not this encourage Christians to meet together?
What will do it, if this will not do it?

3. The Apostle writting to the Hebrews cap. 10: 25. says not forsaking the
assembling of yourselves together as the manner of some is, and this is a
warrant for private Christians to assemble to gether; for he is there pressing
du^es on Christians in reference to other private Christians, as considering one
another and provokeing one another to love and to good works; And for this end
presses their frequent assembling together not only to the public ordinances,
but even also to private exercises whereby they may the better consider one
another, and as it follows, may exhort one another. Therefore this is a
commanded duty, and God must be obeyed.

4. Their necessity calls for it that every one should be helpful to
another; and therefore they should join together as one, for the mutual relief
and supply of one another: vis unita fortior. Eccles. 4* 9, 10. two are better
then one -- for if they fall the one will lift up his fell^w v. 12. and if one
prevail against him, two shall withstand ^m, and a threefold cord is not
quickly broken who then can condemn this practice?

5. There are some general comprehensive duties required of Christians, which
will necessarily require their meeting together or by good consequence clear
the lawfulness thereof. as,

1. They are commanded frequently to love one another Ioh. 13: 34, and 15: 17,
12. Romans 13: 8. 1 These. 4: 9. 1 Ioh. 3: 11, and 4: 7, 12. Ioh. 13: 35. 1 These.
3: 12. Now as love in other societies necessarily effects a frequent
assembling together: So will this Christian love draw Christians together for
these ends and purposes which love sets them on work to do, each to other.

2. They must be Kindly affectioned one toward another Romans 12: 10. as parents
to Children, and is it not ordinare to see parents and children together? And
where there ought to be such affection can any condemn their assembling
together.

3. They must be of one mind and of one m^uth* Romans 15: 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13: 11. 1
Cor. 1: 10. Phil. 1: 27, and 2: 2, 10. 1 Pet. 3: 8. And how is this possible
unless they meet together to communicate their minds unto other, and to pray
to God for light in any point of difference, etc.

6. There are some particular duties pressed upon Christians which will include
their assembling together: as.

1. They must consider one another so provoke unto love and to good works Heb.
10: 24. And this will necessarily imply their familiarity with other, and their
frequent assembling together, to provoke to love, etc.

2. They must exhort one another Heb. 10: 25, and 3, 13. and can this be done
if they may not confer together and assemble for this end?

3. They must comfort one another 1 These. 4. last and 5: 11. and must they not
meet together and speak together for this end? and pray that God would bless
the means and bear home the words of comfort?

4. They must edify one another 1 These. 5: 11. And is it possible for them to
do this duty and live as strangers one to another; this duty of edifying one
another is a very comprehensive thing, and does necessarily imply the saints
assembling frequently together, that one may be helpful, strengthening and
encourageing to another.

5. They must admonish one another Romans 15: 13. Press or urge a thing upon the
mind of another, and so instruct them aright, as children are instructed; and
this says they must often be together for this end.

9. They must teach and admonish one another in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs Col, 3: 16. and can this be done unless they assemble
together?

7. They must be kind or profitable one to another Ephesians. 4. last and this
says, they must not be strangers to other.

8. They must serve one another in love Gal. 5. 13. that is, they should spend
themselves for one another for their spiritual advantage, and that in love,
and should they not then assemble together?

9. They must receive one another Romans 15: 7. that is, receive with affection
and embrace, one another: And must they then scarre at the company of one
another? And not rather receive other into their intimate fellowship?

10. They must be subject one to another Ephesians. 5: 21. 1 Pet. 5: 5. every one
ready to give, and to take, reproofs to, and from another and to do service to
other as called thereto, and this says they must not live as strangers to
other.

11. They must confess their sins to one another and pray for another Iam.
5: 16.

12. They must ministere their gifts to one another, 1 Pet. 4: v. 10.

Obj. It will be objected that this is sedition and opposeing of established
laws, made for the good of the common wealth against such conventicles, and
therefore such controv^ers cannot be justified. Ans. It is not for fear of any
disturbance to the peace of the common wealth that such Acts are made, for a
few women, (who in all likelihood are able to do little that way) may not meet
together. 2. The heathens did pretend this when they made laws against the
meetings of the primitive Christians; And therefore their meetings, were called
Factions, And conventicles: And yet the primitive Christians did not forsake
the assembling of themselves together, notwithstanding of all these edicts, and
albeit that several times they were put to suffer upon that account: se^ this
fully made out by the learned Mr Stilling fleet in his Origines sacr^, Lib. 2:
cap. 9. Page 316. etc. And who then will condemn these Zealous Christians now
for so doing?

SECTION XIX.
The unlawfulness of compeering before the high Commission Court, demonstrated.

TO the end that the forementioned persecution of the saints and servants of
God might be the better carried on, There is a high commission court erected
consisting of the two arch prelates, and some other prelates, and of some noble
men, some Magistrates of brughs, and some soldiers and others: And this number
or any five of them, a prelate being always one of the five, have power
granted to them from the King who appoynteth them by virtue of his prerogative
royal and supremacy over all persons in all causes ecclesiastiek, as was shown
above Sect. 12. To suspend deprive and excommunicate, as also to punish by
fineing, consineing, committing and incarcerating all keepers of conventicles,
all Ministers who contrare to the laws and acts of Parliament and council,
remain, or introduce themselves upon the exercise of the function of the
Ministry, in those parishes and bounds inhibited by those acts; all preachers
who come from England and Irland without sufficient testimonialls, or leave of
the Bishops of their dioceses, all such persons who keep meetings and fasts at
the administration of the sacrament of the Lord's supper which are not approven
by authority: All who speak, preach, write or printe to the scandal, reproach,
and detriment of the Estate, or government of the Church and Kingdom, as it is
now established: All who contemn molest, and injure ministers who are orderly
settled: All who do not ordinarily attend divine worship, administration of the
word and sacraments, performed in their respective parishes by ministers
legally authorized, for taking the cure of these parishes: All such who without
any lawful calling as bussy bodies, go about houses, and places for
corrupting, and disaffecting people from their alleagiance, respect and
obedience to the laws: And generally, without any prejudice to the particulars
specified, all who express their dissa^sfaction to his Maj. authority by
contraveening the acts of Parliament and Council in relation to Church
affairs, etc. This court appears terrible unto the godly, for the
persecution of whom, and of none else, no not the most flagitious and profane,
it is erected; and seems to be as a new court of inquisition. But that which
is more lamentable is this: That there lies hid here a dreadful snare for
tender consciences; For it is such a court, as tender hearted Christians cannot
but scruple to acknowledge, or compeer before, without a declinature, the
giving in of which, would be accounted laese Majesty, and therefore in such a
case, such as resolved to keep a good conscience, in this day of trial and
defection, saw a necessity of withdrawing, and of not compeering at their
summonds, even though they might have pleaded them selves innocent of any crime
laid to their charge.

Now if any would desire to know the reasons why such a court cannot in
conscience be owned, acknowledged or submitted unto, as a lawful judicature,
let him consider these particulars, and lay them together, and he shall see
clear reason for either declineing or withdrawing.

1. This is a judicature meddling with censures purely ecclesiastic, such as
suspension, and deposition of Ministers, and excommunication both of Ministers
and people, and therefore must be acknowledged to be a Church judicature. Now
there is no warrant for any such Church judicature, in all the new testament;
nor is there any precedent of the like, to be found in the Gospel: and
Christians must acknowledge no Church judicature but what has a special
warrant from Christ's law and testament.

2. This is a Church judicature having its rise, power and commission only from
the King, and the King grants this power to this Commission and authorizeth
this court, by virtue of his royal prerogative over all persons, and in all
causes, as well ecclesiasticke as civil. So that none can acknowledge this
court but withal they must acknowledge the Kings prerogative royal, and
supremacy in all causes, and over all persons; and particularly they must
acknowledge that pure and proper church power, does properly reside in the
person of the supreme Magistrate, and that he has proper power to suspend and
depose ministers and also to excommunicate, and so has power to Commi^sionat
any of his subjects, he thinks good, for that effect: But what presbyterian,
yea what sound protestant who is not devoted to Erasius's Antichristian
notions, will or can acknowledge this.

3. In this judicature, civil persons as such, viz. the Chancellor, Thesa^rer,
duk Hammilton, Marquis of Montrose, Earls, Lords and others, who are no Church
officers, have power in Church matters, viz to suspend, depose, and
excommunicate. But this is against all the Discipline and laws of Christ's
house, for Christ will have the affairs of his house governed by officers of
his own appointment: Who then can acknowledge such a court, and not with all
consent unto this intolerable incroachment upon the privileges of Christ and
his crown, and justling of our Lord out of his rights? is not this the
fountain of all disorder, and confusion, tending in end to the utter overthrow
of all Church discipline, and to to the total overturning of the Established
order of Christ's house? and can any acknowledge such a court, seeing such sad
consequences will follow thereupon?

4. In this judicature, ecclesiasticke persons have power of civil matters and
civil punishments, for the court has power to fine, co^fine, committ, and,
inc^rcerat for contraveening the Acts of Parliament. But that Church officers
should meddle with civil matters, is diametrically opposite unto Christ's word,
Mat. 20: 25. Luke 22: 25. where he forbids all the exercise of any such
power as was exercised by Kings and civil powers on earth, saying the princes
of the gentiles exercise dominion, and they that are great exercise authority,
but it shall not be so among you so that the very exercise of the power is
prohibited, and if any should think that he means only the ^anny and abuse of
the power, because he uses the compound words (...) and (...) Luk does
sufficiently take away this objection when he uses the simple words (...) and
(...) and the scope of the place clears it also for the question unto which
Christ returns this answer is concerning primacy and power, and not
concerning the abuse of the power. So then whoever do acknowledge this court do
approve in so far of this contradiction to Christ's command.

5. The acknowging of this court, would be upon the matter a justifying of all
the Acts of persecution exercised against the worthles of old, for avouching
the Kingly office and power of Christ, and declineing the civil courts, in
Church matters; and so a condemning of the Zeal of those worthies, who hazarded
life and all which was dear to them, in giving testimony, against the
encroachments made upon the crown and privileges of Christ as King: But
certanely a Christian tender of the glory of God, and of his cause, which has
been, and is hated and persecuted by his enemies; would scarre at this.

6. Particularly the acknowleding of this court, would be a condemning of
worthy and precious Mr Rutherfoord, and Mr Dickson who declined the High
commission, and refused to pass from their declinature on any terms, wherein
they were singularly and eminently owned of God, and approved by his testimony
to their spirits: And what tender Christian could do this?

7. The acknowledging of this court, is a clear breach of the first article of
the league and covenant, in several particulars as. 1. the acknowledging of
this court, is an overturning of all the principles of Presbyt^rian Government,
and so contrary to that oath whereby every one is sincerely, really, and
constantly, through the grace of God, to endeavoure the preservation of the
reformed religion of the Church of Scotland in doctrine worshipe, discipline
and government: And that because. 1. It is contrary to the principles of
presbyterian Government to have Church power derived in whole or in part from
any prince or potent at upon earth, but only from Jesus Christ the sole King
and head of his Church. 2. It is contrary to the principles of presbyterian
government to have Church censures dispensed by any except Church officers. 3.
It is contrary to the principles of presbyterian government to have Church
officers meddling with civil affairs. 4. It it contrary to the principles of
presbyterian government to have any other Church judicatories, then such as are
allowed by the Gospel. 5. It is contrary to the principles of presbyterian
government to have Church power and civil power confounded, and in-distinct.
2. The acknowledging of this judicature, would be a condemning of the work of
reformation in part; for this is one piece of the doctrine of the Church of
Scotland, and one piece of the reformation viz. That Church officers should not
meddle with civil power or places, and this was much looked to, at the
beginning of the late work of reformation, and condemned both by Church and
state, Anno 1638, 1639, and 1640. And therefore tender Christians could not do
this, and sin against God.

8. The acknowledging of this judicature is a breach of the second article of
the same league and Covenant. Upon this account that it is an acknowledging of
the power of prelates in the highest degree of that power which ever they had in
Scotland. And next upon this account that it is an approving of that which is
contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, and so a partaking of
other men's sins, and a running the hazard of receiving of their plagues;
expressly contrary to that article.

9. As to the civil part of this court (for it is a monster of judicatories,
viz. two distinct bodies under one head) The acknowledging of it, would be a
crossing of the third article of the league and Covenant upon a two fold
account. 1. In that it is a wronging of the rights and privileges of
Parliaments, ^o own a judicature not approved and established by any Act of
Parliament old or late. 2. In that it is a wronging of the liberties of the
Kingdom, to consent unto an arbitrary power, assumed by the prince over them,
contrary to the fundamental laws of the land, in setting up what judicatories
he pleases without consent of Parliament, without whose special warrant and
authority the meanest fixed court cannot be erected.

10. It is a court unamimously condemned by the Church of Scotland in their
assembly 1638. Act S^ss. 14. upon very pregnant and considerable grounds for
they found that it had been erec^d without the consent or procurement of the
K^rk, or consen^* the ^states of Parliament: That it did subvert the
jurisdiction and ordinary judicatories and assemblies of the Kirk sessions,
presbyteries, provincial and national assemblies: That it was not regulated
by laws civil or ecclesiastical; but at the descretion and arbitrament of
the c^mmissioners: That it gave to ecclesiastical persons the power of both t^
swords, and to persons merely civil the power of the keys, and Kirk censures:
and therefore did prohibit the use and practice of it, as being a court
unlawful in it self, and prejudicial to the liberties of Christ's Kirk and
Kingdom, and the King's honor in maintaining the Established laws and
judicatories of the Kirk.) Now how could any true member and officer of the
Church of Scotland acknowledge this judicature so unanimously dis-allowed and
condemned by that Church?

11. The acknowledging of this court would be a clear breach of the national
covenant, as sworn and subscribed Ann^ 1638, and 1639. for in that covenant
the land was sworn to resist all corruptions, according to their vocation and
to the uttermost of that power which God had put into their hands, all the
days of their life: And among other things referred to the determination of
the General assembly, this, concerning the civil places and power of Kirk men
was one: And accordingly the General Assembly did determine act sess. 25,
December. 19. 1638. That it was both inexpedient and unlawful for pastors
separated unto the Gospel to brook civil places and offices: and the next day
there was an act made for subscribing of the covenant accord ing to this
determination for: (say they) it is found by the confession of faith, that the
five articles of Perth and the civil places and power of Kirkmen, are declared
to be unlawful. The assembly allows and approves of the same in all heads
and articles thereof, and ordains that all ministers, masters of
universities, colleges and school^ and all others who have not already
subscribed the said confession and covenant; shall subscribe the same with
these words prefixed to the subscription, viz. The article of this covenant,
which was at the first subscription, referred to the determination of the Genesis
assembly being now determined at Glasgow in Dec. 1638. And thereby-the civil
places and power of Kirkmen being declared to be unlawful We subscribe
according to the determination of the same free and lawful general assembly.
So that it is most clear that none can own this judicature without the breach
of this covenant so explained; because they cannot acknowledge this judicature,
but withal they must acknowledge the civil power and places of Kirkmen.

It will be objected. That the Commissioners of that court and particularly the
prelates may be owned as his Maj. Commissioners and so it will be lawful enough
to compear be fore them. Ans. If they be looked on as his Maj. Commissioners:
Then either as his commissioners in spiritual matters, or in civil matters:
If as his commissioners in Church matters, then no Minister or Christian could
own them as clothed with such a power, because his Maj. has no such power
from God, and therefore they can have no power from him by virtue of this
Commission: and moreover compearing before them under that notion as having
power of Church censuras by virtue of a commission from the King, is an
acknowledging of such a power in the King, which is contrary to truth, as is
shown above. If as his commissioners in matters civil, then Church men should
be owned as having civil power which were contrary to the clear word of Christ,
and to the express determination of the Assembly and also contrary unto the
national covenant.

But it will be objected in the next place. That upon the same ground no man
might lawfully compear before the High court of Parliament because prelates are
now made constituent members thereof, and so compearing before them would be an
acknowledging of the lawfulness of the Church men their having civil places
and power, Ans. It is true they may do nothing that may be an approving of
their having civil places and civil power: and therefore through they might not
decline the court of Parliament in a civil business, yet at their first
compearance they would be necessitated to declare, that they do not acknowledge
nor approve of Church men their having civil places and power, and to protest
that by their compearance before the High court of Parliament they might not be
looked upon as approving thereof, which protestation might in this case salve
the conscience, but no ways in the other case of appearing before the High
commission, and that because, the Parliament is a full and complete court
without the prelates, so that though they were laid aside the Parliament would
be a Parliament still: but without the prelates the high Commission is no court:
for one of them at least is sine quo non; so that lay these all aside and you
have no high commission court^ and therefore they being essential members of
the court, it is impossible to compear, and protest that in compearing you do
not acknowledge their civil power, without a self contradiction; for in your
protestation you have them virtually laid by, as no constituent members, and if
they be no constituent members there is no court, yet your compearance says
that they are a court; and so it would be a palpable contradiction to protest
against these as no constituent members and yet stand before them and answer,
as before a court: But as to the Parliament the case is far different, for when
the prelates are there laid aside there is a full compleet court remaineing,
before which, you may stand and answer for your self: the Parliament has
been, and may be, a full and complete Parliament without prelates but the high
commission never was a court without prelates, and may be a court with full
power and authority, when there are no other constituent members beside prelates.

Some may object. in the third place, and say This High commission court does
not meddle with Church censures, and therefore cannot be looked on as a Church
judicature, meddleing with Church causes and Church censures; but is only a
civil court medleing with civil causes, viz. the putting of the Acts of
parliament to execution. Ans. 1. Though this were granted; Yet there is ground
enough of scrupleing at the owneing of the same, as may be seen in the 4, 7, 9,
10, and 11. reasons formerly adduced. But. 2. It is not very material to
consider either how little or how much of their power they do put unto
execution; but the maine thing is to see what power they may exerce: Now the
best way to find out this, is to look to their commission, which will
abundantly clear us in this: Their commission shows how far their power does
reach, or what actions or causes fall within the compass of their power; And
by this we can best take up the nature of the judicature: So that if their
commission give them power to suspende, depose and excommunicate, every one
must look upon them as a judicature having that power, whether they should
always, or never exerce it: And that their commission grants to them this
power, will not be denied by any who has ever seen the same; And that part of
it which was cited, does clear it suffeciently: And therefore it is a mixed
judicature, being as well Ecclesiastic as civil.

If it be replied. That properly they have no power of suspending deposeing and
excommunicating immediately: But the meaneing is, they are to cause the
respective Church judicatures to suspende, depose, and excommunicate; for the
Act or commission containeing their power, says they have power to appoint
ministers to be censured by suspension, or dep^ion It is. Answered 1. They have
power to appoint Ministers to be censured by suspension or deposition, the same
way that they have power to appoint them and others to be punished by fineing,
confineing, committing and incarcerating: but this power they execute not by
putting other civil judicatures to do it, but they themselves immediately do it;
and therefore so have they power granted to them to do the other immediately,
the ground of the answer is clear from the very words of the commission, which
puts no difference betuixt the way of their appoynting Ministers to be
suspended or deposed and the way of their appoynting others to be fined and
confined or incarcerated, and we must not distinguish where we have no ground:
And therefore it is said more clearly in the former part of the commission,
that they have power for the causes specified to suspend deprive and
excemmunicate and these words make the matter as clear as can be, 2. This co^t
is raised of purpose to put the Acts of Parliament in execution, immediately;
for so says the commission it self That they are to ^se their outmost
endeavor, that the Acts of Parliament and council; ^or the peace and order of
the Church. etc. (...) put in vigor and in impartial execution Now as for
this end they immediately execute the laws for fineing, confineing, etc. So
have they power also immediately to execute these laws that are for suspending
and deposeing of Ministers. 3. The end why this court was erected shows
further that it is in part a Church judicature; For it was erected to keep the
peace and order of the Church and the government thereof by Archbishops and
Bishops: and to punish such as presume to violat, contemn, and disobey the
Ecclesiastic authority. 4. That which does put the matter yet more out of
doubt, is the Basis or ground on which this High commission is reared up, viz.
his Maj. prerogative royal; in all causes, and over all persons as well
Ecclesiastic as civil: Now if they looked upon this court, only as a civil
court, having power to meddle only with civil punishments, his prerogative
royal in causes civil had been a sufficient Basis for this. Therefore the
express mentioning of his prerogative royal in causes Ecclesiastic puts
it beyond all debate, that they have proper Church power granted unto them, and
so may immediately depose and suspend, etc.

In the last place, Some may object against the arguments brought from the
unlawfulness of Church men their taking upon them civil places; And say That
though they will prove it unlawful now for Ministers to take upon them such
places; Yet they will not prove it unlawful for any to compea^ before them
when instaled in those places; More then it can be unlawful to come before a
judge who possibly has come'^ to the place, by unlawful and indirect means:
that is his fault, and others are not concerned therein: so here it is the
prelates their fault to take upon them these places, and private persons are
not so much concerned therein. Ans. There is a vaste difference, betwixt the
prelates in this court, and other judges in other courts, though comeing to
these places by indirect means; For. 1. These other courts and places of
judicature are unquestionably lawful; But the High commission is not a court
so unquestionably lawful. 2. Other courts are not affected, in the point of
lawfulness or unlawfulness by the quality of the persons: But it is
otherwise here in the High commission, the very lawfulness of the court is
questioned upon the account of the prelates being members thereof sine quib^s
non. 3. These vices or indirect means, used by others for attaineing of such
or such a place in a judicature, are for ^he most partsecrete and not clear and
undeyable or obvious unto all. But that which is objected against the prelates
is notour to all who read the gospel, where they are expressly discharged by,
Christ to meddle in such a manner with any civil place or power. and so. 4.
That which is objected against the prelates is such a thing as affects the
very person and incapacitateth him for the place, but in the other cases
instanced, these vices affect only the manner of entry, but do not incapacitate
the person, a man may be one fit enough for such or such a place in a
judicature as to be a judge or a justice of peace or thelike, though he use
indirect means to come by the place; but the prelates as prelates (if so be they
will be accounted Church officers) and because they are Church men, are
incapable of such a place, and therefore though it will not be unlawful to
acknowledge a judicature unquestionablie lawful, notwithstanding of some
secret corruption in the entry ofhim who is in possession ofthe place: Yet it
will be unlawful to acknowledge a judicature in it selfquestionable (at best)
whether lawful or not, when such persons are made constituent members
thereof, yea and members sine quibus non, that by the express law of Christ
are incapable ofsuch a place: and the acknowledging of this judicature cannot
but be an approveing of that corruption: Because the very acknowledging of the
judicature says that the persons who are constituent members thereof, are
really and legally capable of the place: as the compearing before and
acknowledging of a court made up of mere civil persons having power to try,
ordain, rebuke, depose or excommunicate Ministers; should be (...)
acknowledgeing of civil persons, their having Church power, contrare to the
laws of the gospel. Therefore the arguments brought from the unlawfulness of
Church men taking upon them civil places, are still in force.

By those particulars, It is abundantly clear that that high commission court,
is a most sinful court, even as to it is constitution, and how dangerous it is
to compear before it, upon any account without a declinature, and how it is
saifest to with draw and escape the snare that is laid there for catching of
unwarry souls ere they be aware: See the learned Voetius pol. eccles. page 214.
quaest. 2. and 216. quast. 3,

SECTION XX.
The dreadfulness of the sin of covenant breaking particularly of abjureing the
national Covenant and the solemn league and Covenant, manifested.

MAny sad particulars have been mentioned, which may occasion grief and sorrow
unto all the people of God, yet there is one other which puts on the
copestone, and may deservedly make that land a gazeing-stock, and a hissing
unto all nations round about, who may stand astonished, and wonder what is
become of Covenanted Scotland: For it was not enough for the Parliament to
condemn the Covenants, which were solemnly sworn, and subscribed by
Parliament, and at their command by all ranckes of people in the land, and by
the King himself as was shown in the 2. Section. But they formed a
declaration, Septembr 5. 1662. which they ordained to be subscribed by [all
officers of state, members of Parliament, privy councellers, Lords of Session,
Commissioners in the exchequer, members of the college of justice, Sheriffs,
Stewards or commissaries, their deputies and clerks, Magistrates and counsels
of Brughs, justices of peace, and their clerks, or any other who have public
charge, office, and trust within the Kingdom] And by the subscribeing of this
declaration they promise as follows.

I -- do sincerly affirm and declare that I judge it unlawful to subjects
upon pretense of reformation, or any other pretense whatsoever to enter into
leagues and Covenants, or to take up arms against the King, or those
commissionated by him, and that all these gatherings, convocations, petitions,
protestations, and erecting and keeping of Council tables, that were used in
the beginning, and for carrying on of the late troubles, were unlawful and
seditious. And particularly that these oaths, whereof the one was commonly
called, The national Covenant, (as it was sworn and explained in the year
1638 and thereafter) and the other entitled A solemn league and Covenant:
were and are in themselves unlawful oaths, and were taken by, and imposed
upon, the subjects of this Kingdom, against the fundamental laws, and
liberties of the same. And that there lies, no obligation upon me, or any of
the subjects, from the sa^ds oaths, or either of them, to endeavor any change
or alteration of the government, either in Church or state, as it is now
established by the laws of the Kingdom.

May not the heavens be astonished at this? And may not all the world wonder,
that the only qualification necessary or qualification sine qua non of a
Magistrate (who should be a man fearing God, and a Man of truth, etc. Exodus 18:
21. 2 Samuel 23: 3. Neh. 7: 2. and 13: 13. should be perjury of the deepest dye?
May it not be for a lamentation, that no other should be in a capacity to
administrate justice, but such as are singular for unfaithfulness? Cicero in
offic; Lib. 1. says the ground work of justice is faithfulness and truth,
that is to say; constancy and truth in words and Actions: and how can such
execute justice betwixt man and man, and press faithfulness in words and
Actions, who are ringleaders in unfaithfulness themselves? How can they press
and force others to stand to their obligations and compacts, when themselves
have broken all bonds, and declared themselves not obliged to stand to any
obligation which they have made unto the great God of heaven and earth? What
justice can be expected from them, who will make no conscience of their oath de
fidel^ administratione? And how can it be expected that such shall make any
conscience of their oath de fidel^ administratione who have already declared
and avowed themselves perjured, and foresworne? For it is a presumption in law,
that qui semel mal^ ^mper malus in ^odem genere. How can such be judges in a
reformed land who would not be suffered to be judges amongst heathens? How can
those be admitted as judges in Scotland whose oath according to the laws and
constant practique thereof, will not be admitted before any judge in a matter
above Ten shillings money of Scotland? But oh how few is there found of all the
Magistrates in the land, who have refused to subscribe this declaration! And how
may this stand on record to the perpetual infamy (the punishment assigned to
perjured persons by the law of the 12. Tables) of this generation, that it did
both swear a Covenant with God, and now has openly and avowedly anulled,
cancelled, and broken the same, and thereby declared themselves to be the most
infamous and perjured generation, that ever stepped upon ground. And a
generation whose oaths, let be their words and promises, are no more to be
regairded, then if they were all Samnite^, with whom (as Live. says Annal lib.
9.) the Romans refused to enter in termea of peace, because of their frequent
treacherous Actings: or Carthaginians of whom it is said that they were always
perjured: or Cretians, who are always liars, Ti^. 1: 12. And what will bind
such whom oaths will not bind? How fitly may that of Iav^nal, (...) Satyr 13.
be applied to this generation?

Sunt qui in fortun^ jam casibus omni^ p^nunt,
Et nullo credunt, mundum rectore movers;
Natura volven^e vices and lucis and anni,
Atque ide^ in^repidi quacunque altari^ngunt,
Est alius metuens ne crimen po^ sequatur.
Hic put^t esse deo^, and pejera^, atque ^a secum;
Decernat quod^unque volet, de corpore ^ostro,
Isis, etc.
The weight, on fortune, some lay, of each thing,
And think, no God, the world does govern,
Nature alone, by running round, does bring
About both days, and years, hence they do learn,
To touch each altar without fear,
And boldly every thing to swear.
But others fear lest plagues their guilt pursue,
Think there are Gods who punish will such crimes,
Yet they will for swear (o such a wicked crew,
Resolving so to do at several times.
Let God decerne, with what desease
He will us punish, if he please.
And how many now are regairdlesse of all oaths; to whom that of juvenal,
(...). Sat. 13. does fitly quadrat.

Vt sit magnatamen, certe lent^ ira Deorum est,
Sicurent igitur cunctos punire nocentes,
Quando ad me venient: Sed and exorabile Numen.
For^asse experiar; Solet Hic ignoscere, multi
Committunt eadem diverso crimina fa^o;
Ille crucem sceleris, pretium ^ulit hic diademae.
And that Ibid.

Tam fdcile and pronum est, superos contemnere testee.
i. c.
Suppose it true that divine wrath be great
Its pace is slow, so will it come but late:
If it a truth be, that the Gods do care,
To plague and punish all who guilty are,
How long a time, I pray thee, may it be,
Before they come to reckon, and reach me;
Yea I may mercy find, God's exorable;
He uses to give pardons and is able,
It Is often seen, that men do perpetrate
The same vile crimes, and yet with diverse fate,
One has the gibbet for his crimes reward;
To others, crowns for crimes are often prepared.
So bent are men now to defy,
Heavns-witnes; even the Deity.
But moreover this oath must be pressed on others beside the persons mentioned,
by the privy council, which has power for this effect; and though already
many (and alas too too many) have subscribed this declaration, and thereby
abjured their former oath and engagement, and so not only have brought infamy
and disgrace upon themselves; but have also hainously provoked the Lord, to
send a sword, which shall avenge the quarrel of his covenant, and the broad
curse, which shall consume both the timber and the stones, of their houses:
Others cannot be blamed for refuseing to write after their copy, If these
three things be considered. 1. How sinful and heinous a crime it is to break
these covenants. 2. What dreadful judgments may be expected to follow upon the
breach of covenant and. 3. How weak the grounds are whereupon such go as cry
down the lawfulness and standing force of these covenants. The first of these,
shall be spoken to, in this Section, and the rest in the following Sections.

The sinfulnsse then of this practice will appear; if these Tuelue particulars
be considered, and laid to gether.

1. There is in the breach of these covenants, a clear breach of promise: All
covenants are promises, and these covenants have in them a plain and clear
promise: Now a promise is arationall Act of a man (as Aquin. says 22 (...).
Q. 38, Art. 1.) by which he declares. and orders his purposes to another;
And these are of two sorts. Either that which is called Pollicitati^, and this
(a^ Grotius says de jur. bell and pac. Lib. 2, c, 11,. 3.) is when the will
does determine it self for the time to come with a sufficient evidence showing
the necessity of persevering and this (as he adds) does either oblige simply
or under a certane condition: Or else such as are full and complete, promises;
Such as promises of giving and promises of doing, and in these (as he says
1b.. 4. Beside the determination there is also a sign of voluntary resigneing
the right over unto another. He further there proves, That these promises do
bind. 1. By showing from scripture, viz. Neh, 9: 8. Heb. 4: 18, and 10: 23. 1
Cor. 10: 13. 1 These. 5: 14. 2 These. 3: 3. 2 Timothy 2: 13. How God who is above
all law should yet do contrary to his nature, if he should not keep his
promises. 2. By that passage of Solomon. Pov. 6: 1. My so^ if thou be surety
for thy friend, if thou have stricken thine hand with (...) stranger then art
thou snared with the words of thy mouth, those (...) taken with the words of
thy mouth. So that pomises are strong bonds and ought to be kept: hence
that. Verbaligant homines Taurorum cornua fun^s,
Bulls by their horns, men bind with cords;
Men use to be bound by their words,


A heathen could say of a promise made to another. Vo^ me^ fat^tuaest. Ovid. 2.
Me^amor. And heathens made much of their promises. Yea it is said of some that
they refused to swear any oath, because that would have imported that their
bare word and promise, was not be to rested on, as security enough. Thus the
Scythians, (as Grotius says de jure bell. and Pa^. Lib. 2: c. 13.. 21.)
refused to swear to Alexander, and told him that colendo fidem juran^, They
swear by valueing their promise. So when at Athens a grave person came to give
his oath at the altar all the judges cried out that they would not suffer it to
be done ^o quod nollent religone videri, potius quam veritate fidem esse
cons^rictam. Spurius posthumus In his speech before the Senate (as Live. shows
Lib. 9.) says that promises no less then covenants, are religiously regarded
by all, apud quos juxta divinas religiones fides humana col^ur. when C.
Licinius and L. Sixtus, two T^bunes, were making some overtures tending to the
advantage of the people, one whereof was, that in payment of debts, all that
which had been paid i^ usurie should be allowed in the first place: Claudius
Crassus (...) of the Patricij had an oration to dissuade the people therefrom,
showing them how that by this means, all faith and trust should be banished,
and consequently all humane society should be destroyed: see Live. Lib. 6. The
Romans have been famous for keeping their public faith, hence in all their
straites the people did lend money most willingly unto the Senate, not knowing
how it could be better secured: (Live. Lib. 25.) And therefore they honored
their public faith as a Goddess and had a solemn place appointed for her, in
which place all their articles of peace and covenants were sworn, ^t ejus,
quiea violaret, sacrum diis inferis, caput esset (see Live. hist Lib. 1. and
Lib. 24.) Yea so much did they esteem of their faith, that they did not thinkit
enough, not to do any thing contrary thereunto; But they would not suffer
others to do any thing which might seem to reflect on them, and their
faithfulness; and therefore (as Live. shows Lib. 28. when Hanniball had over
thrown Saguntum a city in Spain, which had befriended the Roman interest,
they thought it their duty to recover that city out of the hands of Hannibal,
and did so. Memorable is the story of Fabius the dictator, mentioned by Live.
Lib. 22. who (when Hannibal was wasteing Italy, and had spared a piece of
ground that appertained unto him, of purpose to make the report go that he had
complied with him) seeing his fidelity thus in hazard to be questioned, sent
his sone to Rome to sell that piece of ground, and with the money thereof he
paid what he had promised for the relief of some captives, upon the public
faith: and thus fidem publicam privato impendio exsolvit. When Iugurtha King of
Numidia had killed the two Grand children of Masanissa that he might possess
the whole Kingdom. The Romans called jugurtha to answer for this fact and
secured him in coming by their public faith, and because of the saife conduct
which they had promised, they sent him away saife notwithstanding that he had
owned the wickedness done by (...) his companion, And had conveyed him away
quietly: See Salust. in jugurth. It is memorable also that when Scipio was
warring in Africa against the Carthaginians, there was a truce concluded, and
the Carthaginians sent some ambassadors to Rome, to treat for a peace, and in
the mean time Asdruball takes 230 of the Roman ships which had been driven
from the fleet by storm, and which the ambassadors that came from scipio upon
the report of this, were come, to Carthage they also were in humanely used and
hardly escaped; and notwithstanding of all this breach of truce, and breach of
the law of nations; the Romans because of their public faith sent away the
Carthaginian Ambassadors saife (See Live. Lib. 32.) So was it their public
faith which freed Han^o a commander of the Carthaginian forces, notwithstanding
that the Carthaginians had put Cornelius As^na a consul in chains, contrare to
their faith and promise. Many such instances might be given, but these may
suffice to make such as call themselves Christians to blush, when they see how
far they are out striped by such as had no rule to walk by, but the dim
letters of natures light. How may those religious heathens, (if they may be so
called, being compared with the more then heathenish Christians) have hissed
Matchiavel out of their commonwealth, and banished him their society, as
fitter to live among beasts, with his beastly overtours, then among men; Seeing
they tend in effect to turn men into bruits; For if no faith or promise be
kept, all humane society shall be broken up, and there must be no trasfieque,
no barganeing, but men must be left at liberty, to run and roave abroad, as the
wild beasts of the field, to catch what they can have. Memorable is that which
Buch. hist. lib. 9. relates of the borderers in Scotland who thought so much
of the breach of a promise that they would not eat nor speak with such as broke
promise, nor suffer him to come into their houses, and for his disgrace they
stuck up a glove upon a pole or a spear and carried it aboutin their public
meetings.

2. There is in the breach of those covenants, a clear breach of an oath. The
covenants are sworn covenants, and so the breach thereof is the breach of an
oath, and this is no small sin. Heathens acknowledged a great bindeing force in
oaths: hence Cicero de offic. lib. 3. says, That an oath is a religious
affirmation, and what is promised, God being witness, should be performed. and
again, He who violateth his oath violateth this faith. and again our
forefathers, would have no bond straiter then that of an oath, as the laws
in the 12. tables show, and their covenants whereby they did bind themselves
even to their enemies and the observations of their censores, who took notice
of nothing more then of peoples keeping their oaths. An high account then have
even heathens had of their oaths: Yea Livy says that faithful promises are
sufficient to rule a city though there were no laws nor Magistrates. Memorable
is the story of Regulus who being taken captive by the Carthaginians, having
given his oath either to return to Carthage, a prisoner, or procure in his
place the liberation of some of the Carthaginians then prisoners at Rome, got
liberty to go to Rome and when he came thither, It was not found honorable
for the people of Rome to render back any captives, yea himself (though he
would not vote, as a member of the Senate affirming that as long as he was
under the oath of the enemy he was not a free senator) dissuaded the^ from
rendering up any captives, because such as they had among their hands, were
able and eminent commanders of the Carthaginian forces, and himself was but an
old broken man and altogether useless. When the Senate had thus resolved,
Though he had many strong temptations to break his oath, as the offer of
liberty to stay at home in his own country, with his own dear family, and to
enjoy the honor and privileges of a member of the senate: and upon the other
hand the thoughts of his cruel and bloody enemies, and their not oriousnesse
in perfidy* Yet for all this, conform to his oath, he returned, and rendered
himself their prisoner; and when he did so (says Cicero de offic. lib. 3.)
his case was better then if he had stayed at home a perjured old captived
Senator. And Cicero when he is again speaking of this same business says
that he could do no otherwise then, when nothing was accounted surer then an
oath. And upon this account is it that this Regulus is so praised by Siliu^ ^t.
as Grotius shows de jur bell. and pac. lib. 2. c. 13., 16.

Qui longum semper famagliscente per avum,
Infidis servasse fidem memorabere Poe^is.
Through ages all increased shall be,
Thy spreading fame and memory,
Whom all the terrors fierce of death,
To Punicks made not break thy faith.
Memorable also is that passage of Pomponius the Tribun, who when Titus
(afterward Tarquatus) son to Manlius, came in upon him early in the morning
while he was in bed, and drawing his sword, swore that he would presently kill
him, unless he would give his oath, to let his father go free (against whom
there was an action intended) having given his oath thus out of fear, resolved
to keep it, and therefore according to his oath he lets Manlius go free
tantum illis temporibus jusjurandum valebat oaths were in such an account in
those days, (says Cicero ubi supra) Memorable also is the story of those
whom Hannibal took captive, and sent to the Senate upon oath to return unless
the Senate would liberat some of his commanders, and when the Senate refused to
do this (for they would redeem no capitives, though they might do it, at never
so easy a rate, that their soldiers might resolve either to die or to
overcome) they returned according to their oath, and rendered themselves
prisoners, but which is most remarkable, there was one among them, who after he
had given his oath, and was coming away with the rest, returns into the
enemies camp, a little, as if he had forgotten some things, thinking, by this
means, to free himself of his oath, and so when the rest returned to Carthage,
he stayed: But the Senate getting notice of the matter, took him, and sent him
bound hand and foot unto Hannibal: and upon this says Cicero relating this
matter ubi supra, fraus distringit, non dissolvit perjurium; fuit igitur s^ilta
calliditas perverse imita^ prudentiam, all his wiles could not help him out. It
is reported of Nerva. That when he was made Emperor to give a proof of his
Mederation, he swore that none of the Senate should be killed by his command,
which was very acceptable because Domitian a little before had caused execute
several of them upon small occasions: And such respect had he unto this oath
that when several of the senators had conspired against him, he spared them,
because of his oath (see Dion: in Nerva) Now shall heathens who had no more but
the dim starlight of nature make so much of oaths, and shall Christians
trample them under foot? When there is no greater security imaginable betuixt
person and person, and betuixt nation and nation; Nor no other way for ending
of controversies, for secureing peace, and mutual fellowship, but an oath;
shall Christians make no conscience of these bonds, though the law of nature,
and the law of nations, cannot imagine a bond beyond that? It was a foul
stain upon King James. 2. To kill William Earl of douglas in the castle of
Sterlin after he with some nobles present had assured the said Earl of his
life by their subsciptions, and it did so irritat the Earls friends; that they
took the public write and put it upon a board, and tied it unto a horsetaile,
dragging it through the streets: and when they came to the market place they
proclaimed both the King and the nobles perjured covenant breakers And
thereafter when James the Earle's brother had rebelled against the King, he was
desired to submit; but he answered that he would never put himself in their
reverente, who had no regaird to shame, nor to the laws of God or man, and who
had so perfidiously and treacherously killed his brother and his cusines. Yea
shall Christians, not only go beyond the law of nations and suffer heathens to
out stripe them in that which natures light does dictat: But will they also
break all the bars of the Lord's exexpresse word, and cast the cords of oaths
behind their backs, after that the Lord has so often commanded the contrary.
Scripture, is clear for peoples standing to their oaths which they have sworn
in the Lord. They are to swear in truth, in judgment and righteousness, Ier.
4: 2. They must not take the name of the Lord in vain, Which if done at all,
is done by fore swearing, or swearing falsely. It is the qualification of one
who is to inherit heaven Psalm. 15. That though he swear to his own hurt he
will not change. Such false sweareing is expressly against the mind of God as
these scriptures do clear, Levit. 6: 3. and 19: v. 12. Numb. 30: 2. Ier. 5: 2.
and 7: 9. Ezekiel. 16: 59. and 17: 16, 17, 18. Hos. 10: 14. Zech. 5: 3, 4. and 8:
17. Mal. 3: 5. Many precedents in scripture clear it to be duty to stand to
oaths: As these Gen, 21: 31. and 24: 9. and 25, 33. and 26, 31. and 31, 53. and
47, 31. compared with Cap. 50, 5. So Genesis 50: 25. compared with Exodus 13: 19.
Joshua 2: 12. comp: with Cap. 6: 22. So Ios. 9: 15, 20. 1 Samuel 24: 21, 22. 2 Samuel 19: 23. compared with, 1 King. 2: 8. 1 Samuel 20: 17. compared with, 2 Samuel
21: 7. 1 Samuel 30: 15. 1 King. 1: 13, 30. Neh. 5: 12. Now shall Christians make
no more of all these, them Sampson did of the new ropes? Shall neither law of
nature, law of nations, nor yet the law of God be of any binding force? If so,
they declare themselves not only to be no Christians, But to be no men. Sure
then it must be a heinous iniquity for any who are engaged in this Covenant, to
cast it behind their heels, and contradict what they have there sworn. It is
a great sin to break a promise, but it is a greater sin to break an oath;
because an oath is a greater ground of security, and in an oath the dreadful
name of God is invocated to attest the sincerity of the promises and purposes
of the promisers and this makes the obligation stronger, and so the breach of
this bond must be the sader.

3. There is in this, a clear breach of a vow, for in these covenants there is
a promise made unto God, and that is a vow. Now the obligation of a vow, is no
less then the obligation of an oath; For in every vow there is an implicit
calling of God to witness, and a vow is of the like nature with a promissory
oath, and so should be performed with the like faithfulness (says the
confession of faith, at Westminster cap. 22. Sect. 5.) That lawful vows ought
to be observed with all carfulness, many both precepts and precedents in
scripture do clear as Number. 30: v. 2, 4, 8. 1 Samuel 1: 21, Deuteronomy. 12: 11. and 23:
21, 23. Ps. 76: v. 11. Eccles. 5: 4, 5. Genesis 28: 20. Numb. 6: 21. and 21: 2.
Judge. 11: 30. compared with, Levit. 27: 28, 29, Ps. 132: 2. and 22: 25. and 56:
12. and 16: 5. Prove. 20: 25. Isa. 19: 11. Iona. 1: 16. and 2: 9. Nah. 1: 15. So
then the sin of violating these oaths or covenants, being likewise the
violation of a solemn vow, made unto the Lord, after which it is not lawful
so much as to make inquiry, must be great.

4. There is in this, a clear breach of a Covenant made with man, for in the
league and covenant, The King, the Parl. and the people of the three Kingdoms,
do mutually covenante each with other, for the performance of those things
which do concern them in their several stations, either as to the work of
reformation, or as to the preservation of each others mutual rights and
privileges. King and Parliament do Covenante to preserve the peoples liberties:
King and people Covenante to preserve the privileges of Parliament: Parliament,
and people Covenante to preserve his Maj. person honor and authority. And all
the people stipulat and engadge each to other; so that here without all doubt,
there must be a clear breach of a Covenant, and this must be a grievous sin;
for very heathens looked upon the breach of a Covenant as a heinous and uncouth
thing, and did abhominat the same. Hence Collicrates did dissuade the Ach^ant
from hearkening to Perseus the King of Macedon who intending war against the
Romans, was seeking to make peace with them: Because it would be a breach of
the Covenant which they had made with the Romans: see Live. lib. 41. To break
Covenant is a sin against the law and light of nature, and so condemned amongst
very heathens Romans 1: 30. and for which the Lord gave them up to a reprobat
mind, v. 28. The obligation of a Covenant is the highest assurance, and
greatest ground of security that natures light could find out, betwixt nation
and nation, or betwixt man and man, in matters of greatest concernment: And
this ground of assurance is generally rested on, by all, unless they have to
do with a Hannibal, or with the Samnites, whom no Covenant could bind. Hence
is that saying sides supremum rerum humanarum vinculum est] faith is the
highest assurance in humane matters. It is spoken to the dishonor of Philip
King of Macedon] that none could call him a good King, because that usually he
despised oaths, and broke his promise upon any light occasion, so that no man's
promise was less esteemed of] and of Hannibal [that in warring against Rome he
did wadge war more against his own faith and promise; and rejoyceing in lies
and deceit, as so many excellent arts, he resolved to leave behind him a
notable memory, of himself, but so as it should be uncertane, whether as of a
good man, or of an evil man.] The Trojans accuse themselves of this iniquity
apud Homer: As rendered by one, thus.

Rumpentes foedera sacra.
^uratamque fidem pugnamus, non quibus est fas.
Who sacred leagues annihilate,
Their faith though sworn do violate,
Against those on whose side stands no right
We do and may with courage fight.
Yea it is reported that the Romans would not break Covenant even to such as
had broken unto them, and therefore when Sergius Galba would have cut off 7000
of the Lusitanians who had broken Covenant, in a most perfidious way; he is
accused by Libo a tribun of the people for wounding the honor of the Romans in
recompensing, perfidiousnesse with perfidiousnesse and says Appianus
[persidia persidiam ultus, contra Romanam dignitatem, barbaros ^abatur] It was
a great evidence of baseness in the Sax^s when the pick^s refused to make any
Covenants with them, because that with them, Covenants, which with others were
the surest bond of friendshipe, were but snares for the simple. So Buchan in
vi^. Gorani. So that natures light teaches the obligation of Covenants to be
inviolable. And also the light of the scriptutes teaches the same, Ios. 9: 19.
Neh. 9: 38. 2 King. 11: 17. Ezekiel. 17. throughout, Ier. 34: 18. etc, Genesis 21:
27. 1 Samuel 18: 3. and 20, 16. Genesis 31: 36. and 44; 49, 50, 52. Neh. 5: 11, 12.
1 King. 5: 12. and 20, 34.

5. There is in this, a breach of Covenants whose tie and obligation is sacred,
and religious: of Covenants which God will own as his, he being called to
witness therein, by an oath, which was interposed. All Covenants confirmed
with an oath; whatever the things be, religious or civil, concerning which;
they are made, are owned of God as his (hence the Covenant: betwixt David and
Jonathan is called the Covenant of the Lord, 1 Samuel 20: 8.) and upon this
account the violating of those sworn Covenants must be a heinous and great
transgression, and therefore Zedekiahs fault in breaking his Covenant with the
King of Babylon, is aggraiged upon this score, Ezekiel. 17: 19. and so^ judgments
are threatened therefore [Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely
mine oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it
will I recompense upon his own head] The oath is called God's oath, and the
Covenant God's Covenant, which v. 16. is called the King of Babylon his oath,
and his Covenant: And upon this account the sin is aggraiged and he is the more
assured of judgments, because of his breach of this Covenant. So likewise that
Covenant mentioned, Ier. 34: 8, 9, 10. wherein the princes and the people did
swear to let their. Hebrew servants go free, is called God's Covenant v. 18.
and upon this account sorer judgments are threatened v. 19* 20. And I will give
the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words
of the Covenant, which they had made before me -- into the hand of their
enemies, So then the breach of this Covenant, which was sworn with hands lifted
up to the most high God, and in an eminent way, before the Lord, must be the
breach of a Covenant which God will own as his Covenant and as his oath, and
therefore the greater sin.

6. It will be the breach of Covenants made with God, for they containea vow
and a promise confirmed with an oath, made for doing of such things, as God
commands in his word, and therefora greater sin; for Covenants made with God
should be more bindeing and inviolable then Covenants betwixt man and man; For
in Covenants betwixt man and man, there may be dispensations in, and remissions
of the obligation: and moreover the ground of those Covenants may fail. Now
none can either dispense with, or grant remissions in, the matters of God.
Moreover Covenants made with God, are more absolute, and less clogged with
conditions, and so more obligeing. And therefore the sin of breaking such
covenants, must be the greater; and all may be sure that God shall avenge the
quarrel of these Covenants, which are his own, he being in them, not only
judge and witness, but also altera pars contra^ens, the party with whom the
Covenant is made Lev. 26: 15, 16, 17, 25.

7. It will be the breach of Covenants, made with God about moral duties. It
is a moral duty to abjure all the points of popery, which was done in the
national Covenant: and it is a moral duty to endeavor our own reformation,
and the reformation of the Church, which was sworn to, in both Covenants: It
is a moral duty, to endeavor the reformation of England and Irland, in
doctrine, worshipe, discipline and Government, which was sworn to in the
league and Covenant: It is a moral duty to purge out all unlawful officers
out of God's house, and to endeavor the extirpation of heresy and schism, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine, which was sworn to there also. It is
a moral duty to do what God had commanded toward superiors, inferiors and
equals; which by the league and Covenant, all were bound unto: And therefore
the Covevenants are strongly obligeing, being more absolute then other cov:
because they bind and vi materiae and vi sanctionis, both by reason of the
matter, and by reason of the oath, and so are perpetual Ier. 50: 5. And
therefore a breach of these must be a greater fault then the breach of such
Covenants, as are about things not morally evil, which only bind vi
sanctionis, and so it is beyond all doubt that the breach of these Covenants is
a most heinous and crying sin.

8. It will be a breach of such Covenants as are so framed as that they cannot
be made void though they should be broken, buried and forgotten; Because they
are Covenants, about moral, and indispensable duries, and such duties upon
which depends the glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord
and savior Jesus Christ; The honor and happiness of the King's Majesty, and
his posterity, and the true, public liberty, saifty and peace of the
Kingdoms, and the good of posterity in all time coming, and the Lord's being
one, and his name one in all the three Kingdoms: And so the transgessing of
such Covenants must be a greater fault then the b^each of such, which are of
that nature, as to be made void after some period of time, or after a failzy by
the one party. Therefore seeing, those Covenants must bind, though all had
broken them, and brunt them, also, so long as ^fe lasts; It must be a heinous
crime to break them.

9. It will be a breach of Covenants real and hereditary, such as reach not
only the persons themselves entering into Covenant, but likewise their
posterity, like that betwixt David and Jonathan, 2. Sam. 9: 7. and 21: 7. and
that betwixt Joshua and the Gibeonits: and that mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29: 14, 15. For
this Covenant is of that nature as shall appear, if that which Grotius de jur.
^el. and pac. lib. 2. c. 16.. 16. Says concerning these Covenants, be
considered; where he gives this as one evidence of such Covenants, viz. When
the subject is of a permanent nature and adds albeit the state of a
commonwealth be changed into a Kingdom, the Covenant must bind quia manet
idem corpus, etsi mutato capite though the head be changed, the body of the
commonw^alth is the same. And again he says, as grving another evidence of
such Covenants. When there is such a clause in the Covenant as that it should
be perpetual, or when it is such as is made for the good of the Kingdom and
adds, When neither ma^er nor expressions can certanely determine, then
favorabiliora creduntur esse realia the most favorable and advantageous are
real Covenants. So that by these marks and evidences, it is clear, that these
Covenants are real Covenants, obligeing not only them but also their
posterity; for. 1. The subject or the person, who did first enter into this
Covenant; was the body or universality of the people themselves, and then their
Parliaments in their Parliamentary capacity, like the oath of Joshua and the
princes which did bind the people in all time coming, notwithstanding of what
they might have said for themselves, as not owneing the same, but murmureing
against it. Yea the King in his princely capacity sitting on his throne, with
the crown on his head, in the day of his solemn inauguration: and this though
there were no more, will make it a real Covenant, binding the people according
to that, imperator foedus percussit, videtur, populus percussisse Romanus. As
King Zedekiah's oath* to the King of Babylon, did oblige the people: Now then
seeing where either the body of a land, their Parliaments, or their prince, in
their several capacities, do Covenante; the Covenant becomes real and
perpetually obligeing; much more must it be so, where all these three are, and
so theseoaths being Regal oaths, Parliamentary oaths, and national oaths and
covenants, they must be covenants perpetually obligeing; so that as long as
Scotland has a King or a Parliament; Yea though there should be none of those,
this obligation would stand, because mutato capite, maneret idem corpus: The
subject would be permanent, and therefore the faith of Scotland, being Engaged:
so long as Scotland is Scotland, the Engagement stands and will not be
dissolved. The faith of the Medes being Engaged, made it fare the better with
their tributary cities, even after the Medes did obtain the Empire, and had
their state changed. So the publict faith of Scotland being Engaged by all
persons in all capacities, as long as there are any scottish men to succeed in
those capacities the obligation stands. 2. Consider the very expressions of
the covenant and the and thereof and it shall appear to be perpetual, real
and public: in the preface, there are these words having before our eyes the
glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of (...) our Lord and savi^ur
Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness of the King's Maj. and his posterity,
and the true public liberty, saiftie and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every
ones private condition is included* sure all this is a public good, and a
public national good, to be endeavored by the Kingdom of Scotland in all
future generations: and again it is added (for preservation of our selves and
our religion, from utter ruin and destruction. So in the first article there
are these words. That we and our posterity after us, may as brethren live in
faith and l^ve, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of (...). And
in the second article there are these words. That (...) Lord may be one and his
name one in the three Kingdoms: and in the fifth article there are these words
we shall each one of us according to our place and interest endeavor that
these Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm^ peace and union to all
posterity: So that it is beyond all question, that the scope and intent of the
covenant is public and national. (...) Consider the matter of the covenant
and this will yet further appear: The very matter shows this, for as was
said, it is about moral duties; and so, though it were true that juramenti
obligatio personam tantum obstringeret: Yet ipsa promiss^ haeredes obligaret
for in ipsa promissione satis est efficaciae such a promissorie oath is of
^orce to bind the posterity. So then this being a public, real, national,
covenant, It must be a hai^ous offense to transgress it, and such an offense,
as their posterity after them, were bound to mourn for, when they renewed (as
they were bound in conscience to do) the same, after the example of those
mentioned Ezra. 9: and 10. and Neh. 9: and 10.

10. It will be the breach, of covenants obligeing perpetually, by the very
persons who did solemnly swear and enter into these covenants. This cannot
but be a great aggravation of this crime. If it would be a sin for their
posterity some (...) of years after this, to transgress these covenants, will
it not be a greater sin for them, to beak them, in their own dayes's How
unspeakably heinous must it be that the very persons who lifted up their hands
and swore as they should answer to God in the great day, do run counter their
own oath, and transgress that Covenant? Was it so great a sin for Saul to
break that Covenant made with the Gibeonits as did provoke the Lord to send
Three years famine, and his anger to burn sore against the land, till Seven of
Readiness posterity were hanged up before the sun, when this was Three hundred
years, or more, after the Covenant was made, would it not have been a greater
sin if in Iosua's days, he and the very princes who made the Covenant had
broken it? Sure the posterity after some hundereds of years might have said
more for themselves, and have pretended ignorance or forgetsulnesse of the
thing, or some one thing or other, which, for shame, the self same persons who
entered into Covenant could not once mention: So then it is beyond all
question, that this does aggraige the guilt of this generation, that it is the
same generation (for the most part) which did swear these Covenants that does
now break them; seeing they cannot yet be ignorant or forgetful of the many
evident demonstrations which God gave of his owneing of these Covenants both at
the swearing of them and afterward, so long as people made any conscience of
standing by them.

11. It would be the breach of Covenants sworn with the greatest solemnities
imaginable: whether or not that be true That quanto crescunt etc. as the
solemnities do grow so grows the oath: Shall not be now debated, though it
seem a truth that solenne juramentum non magis obligat exse and natura sua quam
simplex, that an oath accompanied with solemnities has no stronger obligation
of it self, and in its own nature, then a simple oath wanting such solemnities:
Yet as Doct. Sanders. says de jur. Prom. obl. Prael. 5:. 12. The solemnities
of the oath do aggraige the sin of perjurie necessaryly and inseparably for
which he gives two reasons. 1. Because of the greater deliberation; for these
external rites and solcmnities are used of purpose to strike into the mind a
greater reverence of the Action and a greater sense of religion, that so the
man might go about the Action with greater attention, and deliberation, and
every sin caeteris paribus, is the greater that it is done against a deliberat
Act of the will. 2. Because of the greater scandal for the more solemnly any
thing (...) done it is the more observed, and bymoe, and therefore the scandal
is the more notorious and pernicious. Scripture is likewise clear for this, as
may be seen, Ezekiel. 17. where the perjurie of that King is aggravated from this,
among other things: v. 18. when l^ he had given the hand, that is, when he had
solemnly engadged himself, by this rite and ceremony of giving his hand. So
(...). 34: 19. when the sin of the breach of Covenant is spoken of, this is
mentioned that they passed between the parts of the calfe, a rite used in
making of solemn Covenants it was to have some beast or other divided in two,
and the Covenanters were to pass through betwixt these parts. And therefore the
breach of those Covenants must be a horrible provocation; for in them, they
gave, as it were, their hand to God, when they lifted it up and swore: and what
more solemnity can be used about the making of a Covenant then was used at the
making of these? was there not here, as may appear to any who will but look
back to what is said upon this subject in the second Section, a swearing unto
the Lord with a loud voice and with shouting and with trumpets and with
cornets? (as it were) as 2. Chron. 15: 14. The transgressing of those Covenants
must then be a sin unparallelable.

12. Add to these. That it would be the breach of such Covenants against which
there is no just exception why they are not of bindeing force; and this shall
be made to appear in the 22 and 23 Sections following: And this will further
aggravat the heinousness of this sin of breaking these Covenants.

SECTION XXI.
The great and dreadful hazard of perjury, or Covenant breaking, is
demonstrated.

HAving shown how sinful and heinous a crime it is to break Covenant, It
follows in the next place, that it be shown how God's curse and wrath cannot
but be expected to follow the breach of Covenants. (though Matchiavell would
make his admirers believe that such as broke Covenants did prosper thereby.)
Very heathens can preach ^orth this doctrine. That God will be avenged on false
and perfidious Covenant breakers. Hesiodus speaking of oaths said, as Claudian
translateth him. Clades mort alibus unde
Adveniunt? quoties fallaci pectore jurant Whence may not men destruction fear:
Who with deceitful hearts do swear.




Cicero pro Roscio Comoedo says [whatsoever punishment is appointed by the
immortal Gods unto perjured persons, the same is appointed unto liars, for The
Gods are wroth for the perfidy and malice whereby snares are laid for others in
these covenants and again in his book de legibus, Llb. 2. he says that the
punishment with which God punishes perjury is destruction, and man punishes
it with disgrace.] And Hesiod, as paraphrased by Claudian, says.

In prolem dilata ruunt perjuria patris
Et poenam merito filius ore legit,
Et quas fallacis collegit lingu parentis
Has eadem n^ti lingua refundit opes.
Though perjuries God does not visit
On parents; but them long do'th spaire:
The children sure shall them inherit
Their punishments deferred bear,
Parents false tongues do riches gain
Children them vomit up again.
Homer Il^ad. 4. Shows how Agamemnon inveigheth against the perjury of the
Trojans thus, as he is paraphrased by one.

Etsiperjuros violato foedere Troas
Jupiter e coelis praesenti haud puniat ira
At quandoque graves magno cum f^enere poen^
Hi cum conjugibus tum (...) a stirpe rependent,
Though perjured Trojans Covenant who break
Jov' does not plague from heaven, with present ire:
Yet sometime shall he on them vengeance take
Pay them and theirs, with increase of their hyre.
And again ^bid.

contemni numen olympi
Haud impune sinunt Superi; sceira impia quanquam
Distulerunt; culpas hominum gravior a morantu^
Supplicia i. e.
The Gods they do not pass unpunished those
Who with contempt, the heavenly powers oppose:
Deserved punishments, though they delay,
For greater crimes, plagues greater waiting stay.
And I^venall could say that such should not escape fore punishment, Sa^yr 13.

Nullane perjuri capitis, fraudisque nefandae
Poena erit? abreptum creed hunc graviore catena
Protini^s; and nosiro (quid plus veli^ ira) ne^ari
Arbitrio, i. e.
Shall to a false and perjured head
Of fraud and treachery all made,
No punishment appointed be?
Believe me thon may this man see
In weighty chains and setters bound;
In triumph led, cast to the ground
Then have him killed at will and pleasure
Can all our wrath wish harder measure?
Hence their fictions of Jupiter's fountane of Tyana: the watters in Sardinta
and Bythynia; and the A^dine well, which had several malignant influences upon
perfidious persons; all speaking out what judgments they expected should follow
the perfidious breach of Covenants. This same is held forth by their way of
Entering into Covenant, such as their throwing away a stone, and saying per
jovem lapidem thereby imprecating (and so expecting) that if they did wittingly
and willingly break that Covenant Jupiter might cast them away, as that stone
was cast away: And their throwing of pieces of red hot iron into the sea, did
import that they expected the Gods might and would so extinguish Covenant
breakers: So also their wishing that God would so strike the Covenant breakers,
as the public officer did strik or cut the beast; as Live. has it Lib. 9.
shows what they did look for, if they did break the Covenant.

Beside that which natures light might teach Christians to expect from God as
the due punishment of Covenant breakers. Scripture does plainly hold forth that
Covenant breakers shall not escape the judgment of God. He will not hold the
guiltless that take his name in vame. The judgment which followed the perd^e
of Saul in breaking the Covenant which was made with the (...), some hundereds
of years after it was made, may make Christians to tremble. So these sad
threatenings against Zedekiah, Ezck. 17: 15, 16, 17, 19, 20. Shall he prosper?
shall he escape, that does such things? Or shall he break the Covenant and be
delivered? as (...) live, say eth the Lord, in the place where the King
dwells that made him King -- he shall di^ -- he shall not escape. Therefore
thus says the Lord God, as I live surely mine oath that he has despised, and
my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I re^perse upon his own head, and
I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will
bring him to ^abilon and will plead with him there. Such as break their
Covenant and are bloody and deceitful men shall be brought down into the pit
of destruction, and shall not live out half their days; Psalm. 55: 20. Compared
with, v. 23. That is a dreadful word, Neh. 5: 13. Also I shoke my lap and
said, so God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that
performs not this promise even thus be he shaken out and emptied. Covenant
breakers need expect no less then to be shaken out of God's house, for the Man
that shall ascend into the hill of the Lord is that man who has not sworn
decei^fully, Ps. 24: 3, 4. And he that shall ab^de in the tabernacle of God, is
the man who though he swear to his own hurt, yet he changes not, Psalm 15: 1,
4. That is a dreadful word, Zech: 5: 2, 4. [the flying roll, the length
whereof is Twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof Ten cubits -- shall enter
into the house of him that swears falsely, and shall remain in the midst of
his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones
thereof.] And Ier. 34: 17. -- [behold I proclaim a liberty for you says the
Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and will make you to
be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth. v. 12. And I will give the men
that have transgressed my Covenant -- which they have made before me, when they
cut the calfe in twain and passed between the parts thereof. v. 20. I will
even give them into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of them that
seek their life, and their dead bodies shall be meat unto the souls of heaven,
and to the beasts of the earth.] Does not the Lord Mal. 3: 5. Say; That he will
be a swift witness against falls swearers? And Livit. 26: 15, 16. he says [He
will appoint, terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume
the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart] to such as will break Covenant. and again
v. 25 he says I will send a sword that shall avenge the quarrel of my
Covenant. Yea perjury occasioned the ruin and destruction of the Kingdom of
Judah for Zedekah the last King thereof was perjured and therefore was pursued
by God, and sold into the hands of the Caldeans. So did it occasion the ruin
of the Kingdom of Israel, for Hoshea the last King of that state, was a
Covenant breaker also. 2. King. 17: 3, 4. He became a servant to Salmaneser
King of Assiria, and gave him presents, and yet thereafter he dealt falsely; for
the King of A^ria found a conspiracy in him, and he and his people in the ninth
year of his reign were carried away to Assyria: and so both those Kingdoms of
Israel and Judah were ruined and brought to an end by the perjurie of these two
last Kings. So likewise the rites used at making of Covenants mentioned in
scripture as, the passing betwixt the parts of the cutted calfe Ier. 34: 18.
and Genesis 15: 17. say, that they wished (and so looked for) the like dissection
to the breaker of the Covenant.

As thus it is seen out of the scriptures of truth, how certanely sore
judgments have followed, and will follow that sin of perfidie: So Profane
histories abound with instances of God's pursueing this sin with sad and
fearful judgments. And Florus says Lib. 51: 52. That perfidie occasioned the
destruction of the famous city of Carthage which did strive with Rome it self,
in point of grandour, as also that it occasioned the destruction of Corinth of
Thebas. and of Chalc^s three famous cities of Greece. Hanniball was notoriously
persidious and (as Live. says Lib. 39.) he got a meeting; For though he had
fled to prusiae for his life, and sheltered himself in a house having seven
entries, and some of them under the ground; yet he could not escape, but seeing
himself ready to be taken, he drank the poison which he had prepared, and so
ended his days. So is it reported of Virius Campanus the senator, and Twenty
seven others who having broken Covenant did expect no pardon, and therefore
killed themselves, Live. in his 29 and 30 book shows how Syphax King of
Numidia through perfidy lost both his Kingdom and his life: after he had made a
league with the Romans, he Covenanteth with the Carthaginians their enemies,
being seduced by the affection of Sophonisba daughter to Asdrubal and so went
with them to battle against Scipio and being taken prisoner by Scipio he
confessed he had done madly in waging war against the Romans and had broken
Covenant: and by this means his Kingdom came under the power of the Romans. So
Live. shows lib. 21, Carthaginians were overcome by the Romans, after they had
basely broken Covenant, which Asdrubal, in their name, made with the Romans and
had been observed all his days: And of this victory obtained by the Romans
Ha^no (...) Carthaginian has these expressions Mox Carthaginem ^um sidebunt
Romanae legiones, ducibus iisdem dlis, per quos priore bells rupta foedera sunt
ulti -- vicerunt ^rgo dii hominesque and id de quo verbis Ambigebatur, uter
populus foedus rupisse^, eventus belli, velut (...) judex, unde jus staba^, ^i
victoriam dedit i. e. [The Roman legions shall besiege Carthage having the same
Gods to be their leaders who in the la^t war did avenge a brocken Covenant --
Gods and men did overcome, and the event of the war, as a just judge, giving
victory to them who had the best right, did decide the controversy, viz. which
of the parties had broken Covenant before.] Herodotus relates a story of one
Cydias an inn keeper with whom one Archetimus left some gold to keep till he
had returned from doing some business; When Archetimus required his money
again, he denied that he had it, at length the matter is referred to his oath,
and a day is appointed for that end, against which day Cydias prepares a
hollow staff wherein he puts all the gold, and feigneing himself to be
sick, he takes the staff in his hand, and comes to the Church where he was
to swear, and when he comes thither, he gives Archetimus the staff to hold,
until he had given his oath: And when he did swear that he had given back
all the gold which he got to ke^p, Archetimus was so offended that he did cast
the staff to the ground in his anger, with such force as that thereby it broke
in two, and the gold appeared, and the deceit of Cydias was discovered; Now
what came of this Cydias? Malum vitae exi^um habuisse dicitur says our
Author; It was reported he made an ill end. The same Herodotus Lib. 6. relates
another story of one Glaucus in Sparta, with whom Milesius left some
considerable sum of money, and when after Milesius's death his Children came
to seek the money, he denied that he had any money, and after they went from
him, he went and consulted the oracle at Delphos, and there had this oracle, as
our author rendereth the words of Pythias.

Ast juramenti sine nomine ^ilius, idem.
Et manibus p. dibusque carens, subito advenit, usque,
Dum omne^ corripiat perdens prolemque domumque,
Oaths have an issue without name,
Which has no hands, of feet is lame,
Yet it with force and speed does post,
Roots house and offspring from their coast.
Glaucus hearing this gave again the money; and yet shortly thereafter he and
all his family was utterly extinct: And therefore juvenall (...) Sa^ir. 13.
closes this history thus.

Has patitur poenas peccandi sola volunt as,
Nam scelus intra se ^citum qui cogitat ullum,
Facti crimen habet.
Thus was he plagued who never did commit
The fact, only his will was bent to it;
For who contriveth evil secretly,
He of the fact is guilty really.
Memorable is thehistorie of the persidious dealing which John Husse did meet
with (as it it recorded by Sleidan in his comment: Fol. 43. Edit 1559.) who in
October An. 1414. Was called by Sigismund unto the Council at Constance having
the public faith engadged for his security, or a saife conduct granted to
him, and within three weeks after he came thither, was made prisoner, with
which Sigismund was offended, it being done in his absence: But being informed
how there was no faith to be kept unto heretics, he not only misregarded the
petitions of the Bohemians requesting him to keep his promise; but also
condemned the said John Husse to be burnt, and his ashes to be scattered on the
river of Rhine: Thus did that Emperor make shipewrack of his good name, who in
another case said facilius rerum quam famae jacturam subibo. i. e. I shall lose
all before I lose my credit: And moreover there was a canon made that no
promise should be kept unto heretics, or to such as were suspected of
heresy notwithstanding that the Emperor should engadge his public faith, for
their saiftie, when called to any Council: But what followed upon this
perfidious dealing? When the report of the execution of John Husse and Jerome
of prague spreads through Bohemia, there arises great tumults which draw to a
war under the valient and renouned Johannes Zischa, which was so bloody and
cruel that Sigismund was forced to implore help of the Empire.

Memorable is that passage in the Turk's history, concerning the Covenant
betwixt Vladislaus King of Hungary and Amurath for Ten years peace, and the
consequences of the breach thereof. This Vladislaus was moved by great Kings
and princes, as well Mahumetans as Christians, and also by John Palaeologus of
Constantinople, and by Francis the Cardinal of florence general of the
Christian fleet, who showed him, how low Amurath was brought, and what fair
advantages the Christians had; and Especially by Julian the Cardinal, who had
a long speech to this end, pressing him to break that Covenant, and having
ended his discourse, in name of the Pope he disannulled the league and absolved
Vladislus and all whom it might concern; Whereupon the war was renewed against
the Turks and when battle was joined, near to Varna, the victory began to
incline to the Christians, so that Amurath was thinking to flee, but was stayed
by a private soldier* and when he saw the great slaughter of his men, beholding
the picture of a crucifix in the displayed banner of the Christians, he plucked
the paper out of his bosom which did contain the late league, and holding it
up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to heaven, said. Behold thou crucified
Christ, this is the league, which thy Christians, in thy name, made with me;
Which they have without cause violated: Now if thou be a God, as they say thou
art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy name, and me; and
show thy power upon thy perjurious people, who in deeds deny thee their God. A
little thereafter Vladislaus is killed, and his head is stuck up upon the point
of a spear, his army is broken, Julian the Cardinal is found mortally wounded
by the way side in a desert; Scarce the third part of the Christian army
escapes: And long after this the war with the Turks had very ill success.

It is reported of Rodolphus duke of Suevia that being instigated by the Pope,
he waged ware against Henry the 4th Emperor of Germany, contrary to his oath,
having a crown sen^ to him with this Motto. Petradedit Petro Petrus diadema
Rodolpho,
The rock gave't Peter, Peter so,
On Rodolph, does this crown bestow,


But in fight Rodolphus lost his right hand, and falling sick he called for it,
and said ^ehold this my right hand which has suffered a just judgment, which
through your Importunity contrary to all equity broke that oath which was given
to Henry my Lord and master.

Fuller in his history of the holy war speaking of the causes of the many
losses which the Christians had in that undertaking says [How could saiftie
it self save this people (...) bless this project so blackly blasted with
perjurie, a sin so repugnant to moral honesty, so injurious to the peace and
quiet of the world, so odious in it self, so scandalous to all men* to break a
league, when confirmed by oath (the strongest bond of conscience, the end of
particular strife, the soldier of public peace, the assurance of amity
betwixt diverse nations) is a sin so heinous that God cannot but most severely
punish it -- no wonder then that the Christians had no longer abideing in the
holy hill of Palestine, driveing that trade wherewith none ever yet thrived,
the breaking of promises wherewith one may for a while fairly spread his
train, but will melt his feathers soon after. The fabric must needs come
tumbling down whose foundation is laid in perjury.

In the history of Scotland there are several memorable passages to this
purpose, When Durstus the eleventh King was pursued by the Nobles for his
wickedness, and had promised to amend his manners: He did solemnly swear to
pass in oblivion all by-gones, but thereafter he treacherously killed the
nobles, at a feast unto which he had invited them. But what followed upon this?
The body of the Land rose up in arms against him, and he was killed in
battle. Thus did God pursue him for his perfidy. It is recorded by Buchan: on
the life of Gregorius that the Britans after they had made a peace with the
Scots, did break their Covenant, and invaded the Scots; But divine vengeance
pursued them for this; for they were broken and defate by Gregory at L^maban
and their King Constantin was killed. Memorable is that story of Balliol who to
get the Kingdom promised and swore subjection unto the King of England, and
thereafter having received some ^ussle at the court of England, (for being
accused by one McDuff, he was constrained to stand at the bar, and there to
defend himself) he renews the old league with France, and casts off England
contrare to his oath; alleging that he was forced to give that oath, and that
albeit he had done it willingly, it could not stand, because he had not the
consent of Parliament, without whose consent the King might do nothing in
matters belonging to the whole Kingdom: But these shifts could not clear him
from perjury, nor free the land from wrath, because of that sin; for war was
raised, and at Berwick above 7000 of the Scots were killed, even the flower of
the nobility of Lothian and ^ife. The castles of Dumbar Sterline and Edinbrugh
were taken, Balliol himself was at length apprehended and sent prisoner to
London, all the nobles were called by King Edward to Ber^ick, and there were
forced to swear subjection to him: And thus was the Kingdom kept at under a
long time by the Englishes, save what liberty was obtained by renowned Sr
William Wallace, but this did not last long; for Scotland was again subdued,
and King Edward called a Parliament at St Andrews, where again, all the nobles
(except Sr William Wallace) did swear alleagiance unto him, and this was the
sad fruit of perjury which made the land mourn many a day.

When Cumin and Bruce made a compact together at London for to endeavor the
liberating and delivering of the Kingdom out of the hands of the Englishes, and
had given an oath of secrecy and faithfulness to other; Cumin perfidiously did
reveal the matter unto King Edward, but for his treachery God pursues him,
for ere long he is killed by Bruce in the Church of Drumfries. About the year,
1447. England breaks their promise of truce unto Scotland and uses some
incursions to spoil Scotland, But being paid home by the Scots, it draws to
a war on the south borders, and there England is foiled, and loses 3000,
beside many prisoners, and the Scots obtain a great booty; for the English did
certanely expect the victory, and therefore came forth, more for pomp and
glory then for fighting.

About the year, 1535, the King of England sent to Scotland to commune with the
King, about some solid peace and agreement for the time to come, and offered
to K. James. 5. Then unmarried his daughter, and to make him King of great
Britane after his death, and in the mean time to give him the style of the Duk
of york: King James pleasing these proffers, assenteth and c^descendeth on a
day, on which he should meet with the King of England, and accord upon all
matters. But at the instigation of the popish-Church men and other courtiers,
who were driveing on their own d^signe, he breakeh his promise, with the King
of England: And when, Anno 1540. Ambassadors were sent again from England to
desire that the King would go to York, and there treat with the King of
England, conform to the last agreement. The priests stood in the way here
also, with which the King of England was offended, and resolved to raise wars
against Scotland. The result of which war, was, that at length the scottish
forces were all scattered and broken, at the report of which defeat, the King
was so grieved and vexed that within few days he died.

Again when King James 5. Dies, the King of England, communeth with the
Scottish prisoners, whom he had taken at the last battle, concerning the
marrying of his sone, with the young Queen King James his daughter, and when
they promised to do what they could, without wronging either the public good,
or their own credit, he sent them home, appoynting them to leave some pledges
in their room at New castle. This was in the end of the year 1542. when the
Parl. conveened in March next the business was concluded, and thereafter the
contract was signed by both Kingdoms and solemnly subscribed in the abbay of
Halirood house, and the sacrament was broken, (as the form was) betwixt the
Governor of Scotland, and Mr Sadler Ambassador from England. But the old
Queen and the Cardinal, being against the match, stir up all to a breach,
and persuade those who had been prisoners in England, not to return thither, to
relieve their pledges; only the Earl of Cassiles (from whose constancy and
faithfulness the Earl who now is, is not degenerated, but as his predecessor
was sole in keeping Covenant, so is he singular) went, according to his promise
and relieved his own pledges, and being approven by Henry for his constancy
and faithfulness was freely set at liberty and sent home. But what followed
upon this breach of Covenant? Many sad intestine broiles and commotions,
tending to the weakening and breaking of the Kingdom, and at length King Henry
took occasion to avenge this breach of Covenant, and sent his Navy toward
Scotland landing ten thousand men at Leth who did burn Edinb. and many places
thereabout; and again his army did enter the borders and waste and burn all
about Kelso and jedburgh and thereafter they spoil and waste all the Mers,
Teviotdale, and Lauderdale and some years thereafter, viz. Anno 1547. He
sends, a great army again into Scotland, and when it lay about Pinckie,
there was a letter sent unto the scottish forces, showing the ground of the war
not to be avarice, hatred, or envy; but a desire of a firm and ^asting peace
which could not otherwise be had then by the marriage which was proposed and
assented unto, by the Estates, and an agreement thereupon sworn and
subscribed; But the scottish army would not hear of this but resolve on
battle, and at length were overcome and suffered great lose; For almost all
the young nobleman of Scotland with their friends and followers were killed.
This 10. of September. 1547. may yet preach unto Scotland, how God will avenge
perfidy, and all the nobles and others of Scotland who have now broken Covenant
may remember pinckie field.

The french History shows us what way the Lord avenged the bloody
perfidiousnesse of Charles 9. who had broken five or six several pacifications
and conclusions of peace, solemnly made and ratified, betwixt him, and the
protestants: For he was smitten with a vehement desease causeing him to wallow
in his own blood, which he vomited out in great abundance, by all the conduits
of his body, for diverse hours, till he died. And how Henry the 3. Who had been
perfidious in breaking the articles of peace, concluded with the protestants,
first about the year 1576. (where among other things he avowed by solemn
declaration that the Massacre committed Anno 1572. was against all right and
law of arms) and then again An. 1580. Was stabbed in the belly with a knife,
by James Clement a Iacobin Friar, in the very chamber where the former King
contrived that Barbarous massacre on S. Bartholomew's day Anno 1572.

Any who is well versed in History may fill up many pages with such sad and
lamentable Histories, concerning Gods avengeing Covenant breaking: these which
have been mentioned, may suffice for a taste.

SECTION XXII.
The solemn league and Covenant vindicated: And the author of the seasonable
case, and caet Answered.

THe last thing which remains, is to show the vanity of their pretensions who
plead the nullity or non obligation of those Covenants. It is matter both of
admiration, and of grief and sorrow, that there should be any found within the
Church of Scotland, who had so far forgotten themselves, as now to turn not
only enemies to piety and Christianity, but enemies also to very humanity, and
not only break Covenanttyes themselves, but also teach others to do the fame,
and that without any fear of punishment either from God or man. But God who is
Jealous will not be mocked, let men dream of exemption as they please and by
sophistical chifts think to blind their own eyes and the eyes of others,
God, who will not hold them guilt less that take his name in vain, will, no
doubt, by sad answers from heaven, discover the impiety and folly of these
patrons of prophanity and inhumanity. Several in the Kingdom of Engl. have
vented their skill in that blake art of looseing the bonds of sacred Covenants.
But their principles tending to all prophanity have been sufficiently
discovered and answered by Ms Crofton and Timorcus. and there is one in
Scotland who in a late pamphlet entitled, The seasonable case of submission to
the Church Government, etc. tries how far his skill will reach in this art. O
how fitly may that of Plautus be applied to this generation Nostra ^t as non
mul^um fidei g^rst.
Tabulaeotani^r, adsunt (...) d^odecim.
Tempus ^cumque s^bit actuarius.
Tamen inven^r Rh^r qui factum negat. This age wherein we live is void of faith
For writes are signed, twelve witnesses before,
The notar writt'th both time and place, what more?
Yet come'th a man of words who all deny'th.




But who the author is, who can tell; For though the pamphlet be published by
order^, and so countenanced by authority; Yet he puts not to his name, being
(as would appear) ashamed to patronize such a bad cause: and least of all can
he be known by the description he gives of himself in the frontispiece, (...)
lover of the peace of this Church and Kingdom unless he mean such a peace, as
is the plague of God upon the heart, filling it with senslesnesse and
stupidity, and lulling it asleep in his just judgment, because of the palpable
breach of a Covenant: Or such a peace as is very consistent with the curse and
vengeance of God pursueing the quarrel of a broken Covenent. But whoever he be
he tries his skill and strength in pulling down both the solemn league and
Covenant (with which he both begins and ends) and the national Covenant
(which he fights against on the bye) and his strength in this matter must be
tried.

In dealing with the Solemue league and covenant he lays down three maine
grounds.

The first is this page 22. That an oath howsoever in it self lawful yet the
case may be such, that by something following after, it may cease to bind, yea
the case may be such that it can not lawfully be kept. It will not be
necessary to examine this, at any length, as it is here set down; but it will
be sufficient to examine it, in so far as it makes for the purpose in hand,
and that will be, by examineing Whether the cases wherein he alleges this
holds good, will suite the Covenant now under consideration.

He mentions three cases. The first is this When the matter of an oath is
such as does belong unto a superior to determine in then the oath of the
inferior cease to ^blige when the superior consents not to what is
sworn. This is both agreeable to reason; because no deed of the inferior can
prejudge the right of the superior, and also sound divines do acknowledge
this, upon the common equity of that law Numb. 30: 4. Unto which these things
may be replied. 1. Whether the relation betwixt subjects and Magistrates be so
strait, as is the relation betwixt parents and Children and betwixt hu^band and
wife, may be some what questioned, as to the matter in hand, the one being
natural, the other but political; the one such as cannot be changed at will,
the other such as may; A man may Choose to live under what Magistrate he will,
but a woman cannot cast off her parents, and her husband when she will, and
take others: and therefore there may be a greater latitude allowed in the one
case, then in the other, and whether Magistrates and subjects come within the
compass of that text Numb. 30 May be questioned also, seeing there is nothing
in the text hinting at this; Yea though Moses be speaking to the heads of the
tribes, concerning the Children of Israel, yet he makes no mention of this
case, nor of any other except of two, viz. a woman under a husband, and a woman
not sorisfamiliat: and though analogies may be allowed in some cases, yet there
ought to be a clear ground out of the word, for such analogies as will found
an argument against the obligeing force of oaths; such analogies, as will
warrant consciences in this case had need to be very clear and undoubted. 2.
Though this analogy were ganted; yet this case will speak nothing to the point
in hand, unless it were proved that there were no civil Magistrates in Scotland
beside the King, and that all, Even the Estates of Parliament conv^ened in
Parliament were subjects, and nothing else but subjects; and so though the
Parliament, and all the land at the command of the Parliament should take an
oath, it should not bind, if the King dissented therefrom. But there is enough
said above to show that supreme soveragnitie, did never so reside in the Kings
of Scotland, as that Parliaments even in their Parliamentary capacity were no
sharers thereof, And this one thing is enough to disprove this fancy, viz.
That the legislative power, which is an eminent part of severaignitie, did
always (in part at least) belong unto the Parliament of Scotland; for they
statute and ordain, together with their sovereign Lord; and therefore they
are called the Acts of Parliament: Yea without a Parliament the King can make
no laws, yea nor can he make a law without all the Estates of Parliament. But
of the power of the Parliaments of Scotland in making laws, yea and over the
King himself, enough has been said: and therefore this case does not concern
the matter in hand. 3. Let this be given, though it cannot be granted: Yet this
case will not help his cause; because it can hold good in no other things, but
such, in which the inferior is subordinat to the superior, and is by the law
of God subject unto him, as the daughter, in the matter of her marriage, or the
like, is subjected unto her parents; and the married wife, in the disposal of
domestic goods and affairs, is subjected unto her husband: but in matters of
religion and in moral duties, no wife is so subjected unto her husband nor
daughter unto her parents, as that they can loose the obligation of their vows
and promises; Yea in this case it will be easily ganted that inferiors may vow
and Covenant, not only without, but even against the command of superiors, for
it is always better to obey God then men; Now it has been shown above that
these Covenants are about moral duties and matters of religion wherein
inferiors are not to wait upon their superiors, But must advance whether
they will or not.

But to this he replyeth Page ^3. That such as plead the obligation of the
Covenant in the matter of Episcopacy must suppone that it is indifferent or not
unlawful, for if by God's word (...) be found unlawful, then whether there
had been a Covenant against it or not, it cannot be allowed. It is Answered. 1.
It will not be a fit place here to lanch forth into the disput concerning
Episcopacy, and more is already said against it by many famous and worthy
divines, then is, or in haste will be, Answered, and as for what this Author is
pleased to say for it, and against presbytery else where in his pamphlet, it
is but that which has been said and said over again, by others before him,
who knew to put their arguments, in a better dress then he does, and is
sufficiently answered by others: but if he had brought any new arguments forth
to the field, it had then been fit to have taken some notice of them. But 2
whereas he thinks that such as plead the Covenant obligation, must suppon
that Episcopacy is a thing indifferent, and that presbytery is nothing else, he
runeth alone without the company of any casuist or divine, for all do grant
that an oath may be de re l^cita and possibili concerning a matter lawful and
possible, and particularly that it may b^ about a matter morally good, and that
in things morally good, an oath has an obligeing force: ad quae praestanda
says D: Sander s^n de jur, pr^m: obl: p^ael. 3.. 6) vel injurati tenemur,
jurati multo tenemur magis, accedente scilice^ ei quaepraefuit, ex praecepto,
nova obligatione, ex jure^urando, i,e. for the doing of those things which we
are bound to do though not under an oath, being under an oath we are much more
bound, for to the former obligation ariseing from the command, there is a new
obligation added, ariseing from the oath Had not the Covenants and oaths which
the children of Israel swore, concerning moral duties, the law and the
worshipe of God, an additionall tie and obligation? Ier. 50: 5. Ios. 24. Deuteronomy.
29: 3. By this means this author would take away this piece of God's worship
and service, of vowing and swearing unto him, for it must either be about
things necessary or about things indifferent: But he will have no oath or vow
made about things necessary, because (says he) that is needless; nor will he
have any oath or vow made about things indifferent, as shall be seen afterward;
and so if he speak truth, there ought to be no vows or oaths, at all. 4. But
why may not people look even to the Covenant obligation, in things determined
by the word? Does not God lay the breach of Covenant oftentimes unto the charge
of his people? and does not this say that they were bound to look to their
promises and obligations? It is true that oaths and Covenants should not be the
only ground upon which to plead the lawfulness of such or such things; yet
these promises vows and Covenants, ought to have their own secondary place. So
then, it is a poor thing to say that such as plead, for the standing force and
obligation of the Covenant, must suppone that Episcopacy is a thing
indifferent; for by this same reason, they must suppone also that the other
great duties, which are engadged to, in that Covenant, relating to true
religion and a holy life, from which (himself says, Page 37.) no power on
earth can loose, and to which they are indispensably tied, are of an
indifferent nature; which were most reasonlesse and absurd. 5. This is a hard
case unto which this author would bring the Covenanters, viz. That either they
must quite the obligation of the Covenant, or else say that all those
particulars sworn to, in the second article: (which is the article he mainely
instanceth) are but matters of indifferency and consequently say, that not only
prelacy in it is height, as Hierarchicall, but popery heresy, schism, and
every thing which is contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness,
are matters of indifferency. But would he say so in his own case. If one who
had taken the oath of alleagiance, or fidelity, to his lawful prince, or the
oath de fideli administratione, in some office or other, should afterward
allege that these bonds did not bind him, for either the matter there
obliged to, was a thing indifferent, and if so, he was not bound to wrong his
liberty, or else duties antecedent to the oath, and then the oath, has no
force on him, and he is no way perjured, though he cross a hundred of those
oaths: Now what will this author reply in this case; has he not (as it is
usual for such as plea^d for error) in seeking to wound the Covenanters,
killed himself, and what evasions he finds out for subjects to reject all the
bonds of oaths imposed by superiors, every one sees: And whether in so doing
he does his Maj. good service, and Acts the part of a loyal subject, and
faithful casuist, any may judge.

But to proceed in the examination of the case set down 4. Let this also be
given unto this Author, though it may not be granted, he will not gain his
cause for let it be supponed that Episcopacy is a thing indifferent, will it
thence follow that the Church may not determine, in a matter of indifferency,
concerning Church government, without the supreme Magistrat's express consent?
Whether is the Church or the Magistrate, the fittest judge of that government,
which best suiteth the Church, and tends most to edification, and is most
expedient? whether are the Churches that live under the Turk, more able to
judge of the most expedient edifying way of Church government, or the Turk
himself? If he reply That he speaks of Christian Magistrates. It is answered
That heathens are as essentially Magistrates, as Christians are, and that text
Numb. 30. groundeth no more an analogy for Christian Magistrates, then for
heathens: And if that be a law, then he would remember that non est
distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, and that Christians may be subjects unto
heathen Magistrates, is beyond all question: And therefore if this argueing hold
good, a Christian Church living under the Turk, might not vow to maintain and
follow such a form of Church government, as they judged most agreeable to the
word of God, most advantageous for the ends of government, because, forsooth,
it were a prejudging of the right of the great Turk their superior. If he
reply that the case is altered because of the Turk's granting liberty unto
these Churches, to do in these things as they think meet Ans. Then the Turk is
a better friend unto the Church, then the Christian Magistrate; and it were
better for the Church to be under the Turk then under a Christian Magistrate. 5.
Let all this be yet granted, by way of supposition, he will not gain his
point, for their oath in this Covenant does not prejudge the right of the
superior; because they swear only to endeavor, in their several places and
callings, such and such alterations, and what incroachment can this make upon
the superiors right? May not a wife or a daughter swear, in their places, and
according to their callings, to endeavor the alteration of such or such a
thing in the family, and yet never attempt it, without the consent of the
parent or husband? May not here oath be lawful, and bind h^re to use all
fair and lawful means to move and incline the parent or husband there unto?
So that what ever he be pleased to say, of the way of Scotland their carrying
on that business (in which how sowlely he erreth, may be shown hereafter)
were it granted to him, will make nothing against the Covenant, concerning the
obligation of which, is the difference now. Till then he make it appear that
the Covenant, as worded, did directly prejudge the right of the superior, his
alledgiance is frivolous. and groundless. 6. This might be granted to him also
(which yet cannot be done) and his cause gain no advantage, and that for this
reason; Because that place Numb. 30. Exponed accordto his own gloss and
commentary, makes for the Covenanters every way: For. 1. They had no open
dissent declared: It is true there is mention made of a proclamation declareing
it unlawful to enter into that Covenant but Mr Crofton in his Analepsis
Analephthe. Page 120. says that it was not regular, being done without the
advice of his Council, who are veiled by the session of Parliament, and
shows also how it was a breach of privilege. But as to that, this may
satisfy. That as that proclamation did not anull the act, but only prohibit
it, so it did not concern them in Scotland. Now if the parent or husband hold
his peace, the oath is confirmed requiritur (says doct Sanders. de jur. prom.
obl. prael. 4.. 6. It is required that there be a clear intimation of this
dissent, for it is not enough for the father to say he is not well pleased with
such a vow, but he must openly contradict the same, in refuseing he must refuse
it, and in taking it away, he must quite take it away, as if he had said he
must constantly in very deed refuse and prohibit the same; by his full power
and authority. 2. Doct. Sanders. ubi supra prael. 4.. 5. says that a tacit
consent will suffice, that is to say (says he) When he who swears may in
probability presume that the superior, would not refuse it, his consent were
asked. Now had not Scotland this tacit consent, when some years before, the
King had ratified Acts of Parliament, discharging Church government by
prelates? yea more, they had a formal and express consent (having an Act of
Parliament made by King and Parliament against the prelates) unto the thing
which they did then vow and promise. 3. This dissent must be presently
testified in the very day he hears thereof; if one day pass, the oath is
ratified; for (says the forcited Doct. Sanders. ubi supra) he who signifies
his dissent too late, may be thought for some space of time to have consented.
Now this proclamation was not before the 9. of October. 4. This dissent must be
constant (as says the forecited author) for if at any time thereafter he
yield, the oath stands in force; for his former dissenting did not make the
oath no oath, nor loosed its obligation; But only hindered the execution, and
so now the impediment being removed, the oath should be followed forth; and
what is promised therein should be performed: And the Covenanters have this to
say, That the King gave his after consent unto the oath when he said in his
soliloquies. That good men should least offend God and him in keeping of it.
But to put this out of all doubt, The King who now is (as was shown above) did
solemnly own this Covenant, and approve of all that was done in carrying on
the ends of it, and promised that he would look upon the friends of the
Covenant, as his only friends; and the enemies thereof as his enemies. And now,
quod semel placuit amplius displicere non debet, that which once pleased cannot
again displease him.

But to this the author replyeth thus. It would be considered if it was the
Lord's mind in that law, That if Children or wiver having vowed, should by
some means drive their parents or husbands out of the house, -- and bargane
with them either to ratify their vows, or never to enjoy these comforts, that
then the consent so obtained should be irrevocable. Ans. 1. He can be in no
worse case as to this matter of giving hi^ consent, then he would be, as to his
swearing of an oath: Now it is granted by Casuists that an oath, unto which a
man is forced, does bind, if the matter be lawful, otherwise, all oaths might
be evited, by alleging that force const^ined to it: Even the oath of
alleagiance might be question^ upon this account; For it has a penalty annexed
to it, and so the swearers thereof may pretend that they were forced thereunto
by the penalty: Was no^ Zedeki^h's oath to Nebuchadnezzer forced? Doct. Sa^d.
his determination in this may satisfy. He ^bi supra Pr^l, 4. 5. says. 2. If
the matter required by force or sad fear, be not unlawful nor injurious to
any, but only some what disadvantagious to the s^er, as if one travailing
should fall among robers that with drawn swords, would thre^ten his life
unlesse^e would promise them such a sum of money, with an oath: In this case
it is lawful both to promise the money, and to confirm the promise with an
oath. 3. I say such an oath does oblige. And he gives these reasons why the
oath obliges. 1. Because ^e swears a thing lawful and possible. 2. He did
choose that which seemed best for that instant. 3. What is promised for a
certane end should be performed when the end is attained. Yea which is more, an
oath into which one is cheated (in which there is less real will then in an
extorted oath) obliges, as that to the ^ibeonites. So then if an oath into
which one is forced does oblige, much more will a consent to an oath stand,
though exto^ted by fear, especially seeing the text makes no such exception.
But 2. how can he say that such as were for the Covenant did deprive the King
of all his worldly comforts, seeing it was conscience to that Covenant that
moved Scotland to call home the King, after that the Covenant breakers had
taken away his fathers life, and had banished himself: And how can this
shameless man say (as he does page 24.) That the Covenant was contrived and
carried on, as if the design had been laid to extirpat episcopacy, whether the
King would consent, (...) not, or whatever course should be taken to force his
consent vi and armis. When he cannot but know that before ever there was a word
of this league and Covenant (of which he is now speak ing) prelacy was rooted
out of Scotland.

But he will reply. That Scotia d did suspend this King from the exercise of
his royal power until he consented, which was an unparalled way of usage
from subjects to their sovereign. Ans. This Gentleman would speak sparingly,
lest he run himself into a praemunire; for the Estates of Scotland did nothing
but what the laws of the land allowed them to do. There was an act of Parl.
Parl. 1. Act. 8. K. Iam 6. enjoining the King at his coronation to swear to
maintain the true religion of Christ Jesus, and to rule the people according
to the loveable laws and co^stitutions received in this rea^me, and to procure
to the uttermost of his power, to the K^K and Christian people true and perfect
peace. And this oath King Charles the first did swear, and what wrong did the
Estates of Scotl. when they caused King Charles the II. swear the same? It is
true that both the national and solemn league and Covenant, were tendered to
him also. But what was there in either of those different from this oath? all
the question is about Episcopacy, and was not Episcopacy abolished fully by act
of Parliament, and by an act of Parliament ratified and opproved by King
Charles the first himself, being personally present Anno 1641? and so, was not
this a received and an approved law, as full and formal, as ever any law made
by any Parliament in Scotland was? And what wrong was it then to put this King
to swear to rule them by their own approved and allowed laws? By this, it
may be seen that Reverend and learned Mr Crofton and the authors of the
Covenanters plea, are mistaken through misinformation, when indirecly, at
least, they allege, or take it for granted that the Scots dealt uncivilly and
disloyally with their prince in this business? and the reader must be
entreated to look on that escape, as flowing from no ill will which they carry
unto the Estates of Scotland, but merely from want of information, though it
had been wished that they had forborne to have vented in publik any such
reflection, until they had been better informed. But further, to go on in
speaking to the author now under examination: At that time, when the King was
crowned, it became him and all, to have construed otherwise of his majesty and
to have said with Cicero de officis lib. 3. Quasi vero, fort^ viro vispossit
adhiber^ as if a slout and constant man could be forced unto any such thing:
and with Doct Sander s^pius esse nequit qui non est fortis, he who is not thus
stout and constant can not be a godly man. But now seeing it has pleased his
Maj. to declare unto the world in print, that he did swear that Covenant
against his will, all are bound to give him credit: But withal this must be
said; That Scotland is at a great loss, not knowing how they shall be secured
in any thing, or how they shall know when Kings at their coronation do swear
willingly, and when not: and on what ground they now stand who can know? for it
may be as well said that he swore that oath, which was enjoined to be sworn by
the 1. Parl. of King Iam. 6. against his will: and upon this ground it may be
alleged, that he is not now bound to maintain the true reformed religion, not
yet, to rule the land, by the laudable laws thereof, but only according to his
own will and pleasure.

But this author goes on and says. It would be considered whether this be de
jure naturali, that a consent of a superior once given to the vow of an
inferior, he has no power to revoke his consent upon reasonable causes, and
to make void the vow: Lessius thinks the precept is eatenus judicial Ans. He
would gladly put to his Amen unto this if he did not fear to be hissed at:
What Lessius or any of his stamp say, is not very material: But whereas he
thinks that that part of it is judicial, he had done better if he had given
one word of reason for it: But if he thinks that that part of it is
judicial, what if others think that the rest of it is judicial also, and so
it be wholly laid aside as judicial? But who ever these great scholars are
who think that the superior may revoke his consent, it is too too apparent
that they are not great divines, who would teach people thus to falsify their
oaths and promises, nor are they good royalists, who with Matchiavell (who
says Princes should not have virtue, piety, faith, religion or integrity; yea
that it is dangerous to them to use those always, and that it is necessary
sometimes for them to do contrary to their faith and promise and turn with the
wind) would teach Kings to take their word again when as. nudo jus and
reverentia verbo
Regis inesse solet quovis juramine major. King's words have weight and great
respect,
More then all oaths which men exact.


and undertake to maintain that maxim, that [principi ^ihilest injustum quod
fructu^sum. That a prince can do no wrong whatever he does, if it be for his
own gaine] seeing Solomon that wise, King says Prove. 17: 7. That [lying lips
become not a prince, and the emperor Charles 5. when questioned by ^udovick
palatine of Rhine why he would not break his promi^e to Luther, said, That
though faith in keeping of promises should be b^shed out of all the world; yet
it should remain with the Emperour] But Doct Sanders a better casuist then
this author, resolves the case otherwise ubi supra pr^l. 7. 6. saying 3. if
the super^ has once confirmed the promise by his express consent ^edent or
subsequent he cannot afterward make that promise void and null, or loose its
obligation] Now it was shown before, That the Scottish Covenanters had more
then his Maj. consent; They had him swearing the same thing, so that there can
be no power of revokeing, or of doing, or of putting his inferiors to do any
thing, contrary to the oath: and what says this author unto this? He says
for sooth [That it is granted, unless upon some other ground there be a clear
looseing of the superi^urs oath, and a ceasing of the obligatii^ of it] Ans.
Spect^um admissi, r^sum teneatis amies. Seeing he had a mind to say this why
has he troubled his reader all this while? What these other grounds are he
has not yet shown, and this is a fair consession, that he has been beating
the wind; and therefore this first case is sent away with disgrace; for now at
length he is ashamed of it, and it may be, he shall have cause likewise to be
ashamed of the rest, ere all be done; for it is malum om^n in ^mine cespitare.

The second case which he mentions shall be thus summed up [when the matter
abides not in the same state, but something in providence occureth, before the
accomplishment of the oath, which makes the performance either sinful, as the
delivering of the sword into the owners hand, when turned mad; or importing
some turpitude, or something against moral honesty, as marrying of a woman,
after oath discovered to be with child to my brother, or anyother man, then
the obligation of the cath cease and so is the case here, (says, he) some
thing occurreth now, which makes that without sin we cannot perform that
oath, for (suppo^ing the indifferency of prelacy we cannot perform that has
without disobedience to the Magistrate in a matter wherein he has power to
command; no oath can bind, says Perkines, against the wholesome laws of the
common wealth, neither is it material whether the laws be made before, or
after the oath, b^th ways the matter of the oath becomes impossible de jure,
and though in indifferent things of private cocernment, an oath may take away
liberty: Yet a subjects oath cannot take away the power of the Magistrate in
things not unlawful, nor binder subjects from obedience; otherwise subjects
might find away to plead themselves free from obedience in all things
indifferent] This is the sum of his discourse unto which it is Ans, 1. The
ground of this is yet questioned; for it is shown that as to the 2 Article,
about which most of the contest is, the Covenant is not about things
indifferent, but things morally evil, as is uncontroverted in all points save
that of prelacy, and to take it for granted that prelacy, as there abjured, is
a thing indifferent, is more then any adversary will yield to him. 2. Be it
granted that such a government as is there abju^ed, is not expressly against the
word of God; yet a thing indifferent, may become inconvenient and inexpedient,
and an oath made concerning those things, may be undoubtedly good and lawful.
3. If this doctrine of his hold good, It shall be hard to know what matter it
should be, about which, an oath should be taken; for he said before, that an
oath has no force in matters morally good; and it is granted by all, that an
oath has no force in matters sinful, for it cannot be vinculum iniquitatis;
and here he says a man may not swear in things indifferent, if they be such
as come under the compass of legislators, and thus he does much to banish all
religious oaths out of the world, 4. Will no oath bind, which is against the
laws of the land? then what if a man in strait for money, shall borrow and
promise with an oath, to give more annual-rent therefore, then the law of the
land will allow; will not his oath bind him? What if the law of the land be
against the giving of any money unto robbers; Shall not a man who is taken with
robbers, and who to save his life promises with an oath to give them such a
sum of money, perform his oath, merely because it is against the law of the
Land? But as to this controversy let the reader consult such casuists as have
spoken of it, whose names are set down by Timorcus in his Covenanters plea cap.
6. or if he please let him consult Doct Sanders. who de jur pro. oblg. prael.
4.. 17. proves it lawful enough, and whatever be said of this: That which
Doct. Sa^ders. says ubi supra Prael. 3.. 9. may be noticed. It may be (says
he) that some cases may be given, in which, an oath which seems contrary to
some law of a community, or calling, though it ought not to have been taken,
yet being taken, may oblige; as for example, in a law whereunto a penalty is
annexed disjunctively, and in this case he thinks the oath should be kept
and the law should not be obeyed, but the penalty should be paid, and this is
enough for those who stand for the Cov. 5. If oaths made against the wholesome
laws of the common wealth bind not, oaths made against the ^unwholsome laws
of the common wealth will bind, and in that case, without all doubt, people
are bound to stand to their oath, and resolve upon suffering before they yield
obedience: And whether any law made about prelacy be wholesome or unwholesome, is
sufficiently determined in the premises, and by the grounds upon which the
legislators did go, when they reseinded all acts made in favors of prelates
and their power 6. This oath (even as to the 2. Article which ^is most
controverted) was not against, but conform unto the wholesome laws of the
land; for before that the league and cov. was sworn there were standing laws
against prelacy, and acts ratified and approved with all formalities, and
published with all usual solemnities, according to the King's own command and
warrant; and therefore this case does not come home to the case in hand. But he
says it is not material whether the laws be made before, or after the oath.
And that is a very strange thing; for a law not yet made, is no law, and an
oat^ taken in a particular about which there is no law yet made, can not be an
oath against a wholesome law of the land: And to' say that a law made afterward
may loose the obligation of an oath, is a very ready way for opening the door
to all perjury, and to cast all oaths loose; for when once a man has sworn to
his own hurt, and would gladly be rid of his oath he has no more to do, but
acquant his superior, and he will make a law for the contrary, and so he is at
liberty; But will such sigleaves cover the nakedness of perjurie? Or will such
shifts satisfy in the day of reckoning? Dream of those things who will, God
will not be mocked? Doct. Sanders. a better casuist then he, ubi supra Prael.
3.. 18. gives a better resolution, saying if after the oath, the statute
should be abrogated, or antiquated, the oath, as to that statute cease, so
that he is not bound by the oath to observe that law any more, ^lesse (N. B.)
the very thing contained in the oath be sworn to, expressly; in that case
though the statute, be removed: the obligation of the oath stands fast. And
that is enough for the Covenanters. 7. Though it were granted (which will not
be) that inferiors could not take an oath in those matters that fall under the
power of legislators to enact laws about, or if they did swear, were not
obliged to perform, what they swore; yet if legislators themselves swear that
such a thing (suppon it be but indifferent) shall never be enacted in a law,
will not this oath bind those legislators? What will this advocat invente in
this case, as an open door at which, both King and Parl, may escape, for both
King and Parl. in their kingly and parliamentary capacity have abjured prelacy?
8. Why may not inferiors swear when they find any law grievous and
burdensome, to endeavor according to their place and power to have such a law
or Act altered? and why may not such an oath oblige? This is not an oath
properly against a law: and because here the dominion of superiors over
inferiors is sufficiently reserved, this cannot be condemned. 9. He mistaketh
that case of casuists quando res non permanet in eodem statu. When he applies
it to the purpose in hand; for prelacy is the same now which it was when first
abjured, there is no convenience or law fullness seen in it now which was not
seen before; Yea on the contrary it appears worse then ever: So that if he
would stand to that rule, quando res non permanet in eodem statu: when the
state of the matter is changed. Though they had sworn to maintain prelacy (as
now they have abjured it) their oath could not bind them now to own it;
Because it appears now so deforme and abominable a monster and a cockatrice
seeking the ruin and destruction of all which comes with in its reach. 10.
what does this author think of the oath made to the Gibeonites? Was there not a
change of the Estate of affairs there, when within three days they were
discovered to be liars, and that they were not a people that dwelt a far off,
but such as did dwell among them, and yet the oath must stand valid and firm:
Yea was there not an express prohibition to make any league with these
Canaanits? Exodus 23, 32: 33. and 34: 10. Deuteronomy. 7: 2. and 20: 16. and was not
this a wholesome law? And yet the oath must be kept, this law being a
particular command, and so far only, to bind the conscience, as it might be
obeyed without any breach of the moral law; as in Rachab's case it is evident
(as says, Mr Iackson in his annotations on Ios. 9: 18.) How will this advocat
reply to these things? If he stand to his principles, he must condemn Joshua
for keeping that oath. Moreover was not the oath of Zedekiah against the
fundamental laws of the land, seeing it was tendered to him, that the Kingdom
might be base, Ezekiel. 17: 14. and yet being taken it must be kept. So then his
second case will not make much for him.

The third is, in short, this [When it hinders a greater good, if the
standing to it, be found impeditive of a greater good to which we are bound by
a prior obligation, then the oath cease to bind; and so is it here; for
supponing the indifferency of episcopacy, by adhereing to the oath, we hinder
our own obedience to the Magistrate in things not against God's law, unto which
we are pre-obliged; as also it hinders the great duty of preaching the
Gospel, unto which Ministers were bound, before the taking of Covenant] Ans, 1.
This man would disput strongly if he had his will, and if men would yield him
all which he demands, he would fight wonderfully. Grant him once that
Episcopacy is a thing indifferent, and you see how he will disput to
admiration, for the looseing of all Covenants; but i^ that be not yielded, what
will he do then? He has no more to say, for all his arguments run on this
supposition, and when this ground fails, all is wrong with him. But to
discover his weakness yet more, let this once again be granted, and let it be
supponed that Episcopacy is not against God's law, yet it is Ans. 2. If this
ground hold good, men shall have a door opened for looseing of (...) from all
their oaths and vows. Himself con^esseth that by this means, a wide gap may
be opened to all perjury, and what course takes he to prevent this? Does he
limit (...) this position in any thing? No not to all, for all this hazard
which he cannot but see. May not any at their pleasure loose themselves from
the oath of alleagiance, by alleging that the keeping thereof does hinder a
greater good to which they are bound by a prior obligation, viz. the
liberating, and freeing of the country from oppression and tyranny? 3. Had not
Joshua more to say for looseing of his oath, seeing the keeping of the oath made
to the ^ibeonits did hinder obedien ce unto a particular command which God had
given unto his people, and yet God would dispense with that particular command
in this case, when it could not be obeyed without perjury, which is directly
against the law and light of nature, and when the obeying thereof would have
give^ the heathens great occasion of blaspheming the name of the Lord; though
he will not dispense with the breach of any moral law upon that account. 4.
Had not Zedekia^ as much to say, for the looseing of himself from his oath?
viz. that the keeping of the oath did hinder him from performing that duty to
his Kingdom and country, unto which he was pre-obliged' But this new coined
divinity was not of force in those days, and his bare word will not make it
pass now with tender consciences. 5. What is the greater good which it will
hinder? It will hinder (as he thinks) their obedience to the civil
Magistrate. But are all bound to obey the Magistrate in all things that are
indifferent? Does every law of the Magistrate bind the conscience? subjection,
it is true, is necessary: but not obedience Active, and subjection may consist
with obedience passive, that is, in suffering the penalty, when Active
obedience cannot be given to the command: passive obedience is consistent with
the public peace, and does no way hurt the majesty, honor or credit of the
ruler. So that though standing to this oath, may now hinder Active obedience
unto that command of the Magistrate, enjoining, a countenanceing of, and a
concurring with the abjured prelacy; yet it will not hinder subjection or
passive obedience, and this is all, which in those positive indifferent things
they can be said to be obliged unto, unless he would say (which yet he darre
not) that the prelacy which was abjured, is a government commanded of God to be
perpetually practiced in the Church. 6. It would be considered also that their
standing to this oath does no way hinder their obedience to the Magistrate, in
any thing commanded of God, or in any indifferent positive thing, save in this
one particular (if so be this must go under that name of indifferent things)
and then the true question is not; whether is it a greater good to disobey
Magistrates, then to keep an oath? But whether is it a greater good to obey the
Magist. in this one particular of imoraceing that prelacy which was abjured, or
to stand to the oath? And that will come to this, whether is it a greater good
for Church or common wealth to have prelates, then to want them? and if this
advocat will make this the question, there will be some found who shall
willingly undertake the disput. But if what is past, and what is present be
called in to give judgment in this matter, the question will quickly be
decided, yea and appear to indifferent beholders, to be already determined: If
the persecution of godly faithful Ministers of the Gospel; If the laying of
countreysides waste and desolate; If the feeding of people with wind and lies;
If the great increase of atheism, arminianisme, popery, ignorance, and
prophanity of all sorts: If the persecuting of the godly and of godliness; If
the hindering of the exercise of religion and Christian duties, and the like,
may have any weight in casting the scale. 7. As for the preaching of the
Gospel, it is true, it is the duty of Ministers to be mindeing that; But God
has need of no man's sin to work his work, he calls no man to preach the
Gospel, by the way of perjury; yea their suffering now for truth tenddeth to
the furtherance of the Gospel, as, phil. 1: 12. and is much more edifying then
all their preaching could be, after they had proclaimed their perjury unto the
would. 2. Whose fault is it, that Ministers cannot have liberty to preach the
Gospel? Is their keeping of the oath the thing which stands in the way? Is
there no other way for one to have liberty to preach the Gospel, but by
breaking his oath? what influence has the conscientions observing of the oath
upon non-preaching? What if that iniquity, which is established for a law, were
taken out of the way? Would there not be preaching of the Gospel,
notwithstanding of a conscientious observation of the oath? there is no doubt
of this. So that it is not the observation of the oath, which hinders the
preaching of the Gospel, otherwise it would always have done it, and will
always do it, which is false: But some other thing* and now let the blame of
not preaching the Gospel, lie where it should lie, for there it will lie,
whether he will or not. Yea the conscientious observation of this oath is so
far from lying in the way of preaching the Gospel, that on the contrary, the
breach of the oath does incapacitate a man for preaching of the Gospel both
before God and men: perjury is no qualification of a minister before the Lord,
and who can trust or commit their soulls unto a perjured man? How can such an
one who has once so palpably perjured himself presume ever to set his feet
within a pulpit again? And thus it is clear that this case makes nothing
against the Covenanters, and so the first assault which he has made upon the
Covenant is repulsed very easily.

The next ground which he lays down is this. That if the Covenant be not
rigidly interpreted and strained, it will not hinder a complying with the
present prelacy, and that upon these two grounds. 1. At the time of the taking
of the Covenant there was no such Church officers in Scotland, as are mentioned
in the 2. Article; and therefore Scotland did not need to swear to endeavor
their extirpation. And 2. The Parliament of England the giver of this oath,
intended nothing less then the extirpation of all kinds of prelacy and
Bishops in the Church, and for this he brings in the authors of the
Covenanters plea, Mr Baxter, Mr Gataker, and Mr Vines as confirming this notion
of his. Unto all which a short answer may suffice, for though it might be
easily demonstrated that those men mentioned by him, do not approve of that
species of Episcopacy which is no^ set up in Scotland, and that they have said
nothing which will speak out their judgment of the compliance of the. 2.
Article of the league and Covenant with the Scottish Episcopacy, yet it does
not much concern these in Scotland, to search and to try narrowly what is the
judgment of any particular divine how eminent soever in England, concerning
prelacy. Nor what sense or gloss they put upon the Covenant, or upon any
particular article thereof; Though it is very probable that they will not put
such a favorable interpretation upon that article, as shall make it an
interpretation, not aequitate temperatam, but Gratia corruptam. Yea nor is it
of much concernment to these of Scotland, to search after the sense or gloss,
which the Parliament of England did put upon it (though no difference can be
apprehended betwixt their sense, and the sense of the Kingdom of Scotland)
seeing they did not tender that oath unto Scotl. but they are to look rather
unto the sense and gloss which the Church and state of Scotland in their
public meetings did put upon it, and it is clear that they intended no
compliance betwixt the Covenant and this prelacy. Though, it is true, at the
taking of the Covenant, there was no such officers as are there named, in
Scotland. (Which is all the weak ground he goes upon as to this particular)
yet, albeit Scotland had gotten those unhallowed plants plucked up and cas^en
out, they were not out of all fear of them. The dangerous Estate of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland at that time, said they were not without fears that
these plants might again take rooting, if the popish prelaticall and malignant
faction had prevailed in the Kingdoms. And therefore they were called to
fortify themselves against those plagues and evils, by a solemn league and
Covenant. But moreover does not the very words of the second article expressly
exclude the prelacy which is now in Scotland? Is not the Church of Scotland at
present governed by two Archbishops and by tuelue other bishops? Have not those
bishops their deanes, their arch deacons, etc. And is not the 2d. article
expressly against such a government by such officers? Who that has eyes in
their heads can doubt of these things? Moreover will he suppose that the Church
and state of the Kingdom of Scotland were such ignoramuses, as to set down
contradictories in the Covenant, and that when they had sworn to maintain the
discipline and government of the Church of Scotland (which himself will
confess was presbyterian) in the first article, and in the second article had
abjured a government in the Church, inconsistent with presbyterian government;
should be thought with all to consent and yield unto such an episcopacy, as
should be inconsistent with presbyterian government? Which were in effect to
say, They swore to maintain presbyterian government and yet might receive
another government distinct from, and inconsistent with presbyterian
government: And though they abjured prelacy; yet not every prelacy, for they
might for all that, accept of one sort of prelacy which yet should be
inconsistent with presbyterian government. But possibly this advocat saw he
would be ashamed of such things, and therefore went to England to seek such
help as he could find, but all the help he has gotten there, has made little
to his purpose. Finally this author would do well to follow D. Sand. his advice
ubi sup. prael. 2 9. where he discourses thus when I say an oath is stricti
juris that is to b^ understood thus, that the meaning of the oath is to be
kept when the same is clear from the words. And is not the sense of the 2d
article of the Covenant as clear as can be? But put the case it be dubious,
hear what he says further [But when the meaning is doubtful, every one is
carefully to take heed that they indulge not their own affections, and
inclinations, or give way unto toolax and large a license of glosseing, to the
end they may with more ease loose themselves from the obligation of the oaths
with which they are bound, or give such a sense unto the oath or to any part
thereof for their own profit and advantage, as no wise and prudent man, who is
not concerned in the matter (and so having no interest is at greater freedom to
determine) can be able to gather from the words themselves; and the reason is
twofold, one in respect of others, and for fear of scandal, lest any other who
is weak b^ moved to think he may lawfully do what he sees us do, being
ignorant of those subtil^es with which alone we think to defend ourselvs from
perjury. The other in respect of our selves, for fear of perjury, which is a
most grievous crime, and which undoubtedly we bring upon ourselves if that more
favorable interpretation deceive us, This reason depends upon that general
and most profitable rule, in matters doubtful follow that which is saifest
thus he solidely and judicously.

What he adds here against the national Covenant shall be considered fully
in the next Section.

When thus he has spent his master pieces, against this Covenant, he comes,
in end, to try what his third and last device will do, and that is, to muster
up some straggling faults which he espieth either as to matter or manner; which
though granted to him, would not much advantage his cause, or say much for
looseing the obligation of the oath, now after it is taken: Yet because he
vapoureth much in his expressions here, and would gladly deceive the simple,
who are not well acquanted with the nature of oaths, but are ready to think
that the least escape in the manner of entering into an oath, is enough to
dissolve its obligation, after it is taken, not knowing that quod sicri non
debuit factum valet, nor knowing well how to guaird against this deceit, which
he hides with a multitude of words; his challenges must be answered.

All which he says on this head, is some thing to these three particulars. 1.
The want of authority, in the imposeing. 2. The generality of the terms in
which it is conceived. and 3. Some incongruitie in the 3d article.

The sum of what he says unto the first of these is this [To carry on a
public oath without the sovereign power, is without any example among jews
or Christians. It is a special royalty of the King, to have power of imposeing
an oath on all his subjects, especially where the oath has a direct aim for
raiseing arms: Such leagues are inhibited by the laws of the land Ia. 6^
Parl. 10. Act. 12. Mary Parl. 9. Act. 75. Now this Covenant was carried on in
England by a meeting of Parliament excludeing one of the Estates, and in
Scotland by a committee of Estates] Ans. what if all this be granted? Will it
therefore follow, that the obligation of the Covenant is loosed? Nay himself
dar not say so, for he adds [Now although this could not nullify the
obligation of the Covenant, were the matter of it undoubtedly lawful, and
otherwise still obligeing; yet it were well if unlawfulness in regaird of this
defect were acknowledged. So that all which he would have of the Covenanters
now for proof of their sincerity is that they would give, as public testimony
against the sinful way of entering into that bond, as against that si^ (as
they suppose) of breaking it. But what would this advantage his cause? And
seeing he saw that it would not advantage his cause why did he spend time and
pains in vain? He is at a weak pass now, when he can bring no arguments, but
such as himself must needs answer, and discover the weakness of. But it is
like out of a desire to have it going well with the Covenanters he would have
them repenting of the miss which was made. But by his favor they must first
be convinced of the error ere they can say that they have erred, and ere they
be convinced of an error in that Particular, they must see more cogent
arguments then any which he has yet brought: For as for that committee of
Estates which he says did carry on that Covenant in Scotland, it had power
for that effect from the convention of Estates, and their deed was approven in
all points by the next meeting of Parliament, Anno 1644. the lawfulness of
which convention and Parliament has been shown above (and as for the
Parliament of England, Mr Croften and Timorcus have sufficiently spoken to
that) and as for Scotlands entering into a league with England without the
King's consent, it has been vindicated before: So has it been shown how the
Parliaments of Scotland do partake of the soveraignity with the King and have
power of war, and so all which he here says is answered already: Only
because he desires some examples of the like among Jews or Christians, though
there be no great necessity for this business, yet some few instances shall be
brought and first among the Jews there are two eminent examples: one in the
days of Asa King of Judah. 2. Chron. 15. where many strangers of Ephraim
manass^h and Simeon, fell to Asa; out of Israel in abundance, when they saw
that the Lord his God was with him, v. 9. And entered into a Covenant to seek
the Lord God of their fathers with great solemnity, v. 12, 14. and that without
the consent of their own King. Another in the days of Hezekiah: when he came
to the throne which was in the third year of Hoshea King of Israel. 2. King.
18: 1. In the first year of his reign. 2. Chron. 29. 3. (and this was six
years before the Kingdom of Israel was wasted and destroyed by Salmanass^r
King of Assyria. 2. King. 17: 6.) begins a work of reformation, and said it
was was in his heart to ma^e a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel. 2 Chronicles
29: 10. And he sent to Israel writting letters to Ephraim and Manasseh,
desireing them to come up to the house of the Lord, and accordingly diverse of
Asher Manasseh and Zebulon. 2. Chron. 30: 1, 11. joined with him, in that
Covenanted work of reformation: here are some of the subjects of Basha and
Hoshea, without their consent or approbation joining in a Covenant or bond with
another King and Kingdom (which would seem more treasonable like, then for the
subjects of one King to join together in Covenant for the good of King and
Kingdom) to carry on a work of reformation, and no doubt this advocat darre
not condemn this deed of those subjects of Hoshea or Basha. As for such
Covenants among Christians, instances in abundance may be given, and some have
already been named, as that betwixt the first reformers of Scotland, and the
Queen of England, and these in France, Germany, the Low countries, Helvetia,
piemont, etc. and so a few more shall suffice. If he had read the History of the
reformation of the Church of Scotland, he had seen there several examples of
Covenants entered into by Christians, without the consent of the supreme
Magistrate viz. one Anno 1557 subscribed by Argile, Glencarne, Morton, Lorn and
others. Another at Perth, Anno 1559. subscribed by Argile, John Stuart,
Glencarn, Boid, Vchiltree, etc. A third at Sterlin that same year, subscribed
by many A fourth at Leth, Anno 1560. subscribed by all the nobilite barons,
gentlemen and others professing Christ Jesus in Scotland. and a fifth at Air
Anno 1562. subscribed by several noblemen and gentlemen. In Sleidan's
commentaries, Lib 7. Anno 1529. there is a Covenant betwixt the city
Strausbrugh (which was under the command and jurisdiction of the Emperor) and
three of the cities of Helvetia viz. Tigurum Berna, and Basil about assisting
and dese^ding one another in the cause of religion; and this was without the
consent and approbation of the emperor, as appears by the letter written to
Strausbrugh from the diet of the Empire: again, An. 1530. there was a Covenant
betwixt the La^dgrave of Hesse, and those three cities Tigur or Zurich, Basil
and Strausburg anent mutual defencein the cause of religion. That same year
the protestants meet at Smalcald and draw up a Covenant for mutual defense in
religion and it was subscribed by Albert and Gebert of Mansfeldt by the cities
of Magdeburgh, and Breme. Sleidan, shows also lib. 19. That in February 1547.
the nobles of Boheme meeting at Prague entered into a Covenant among themselves
for the defense of their liberty, whether Ferdinand would or not.

The second particular is about the generality of the terms wherein the
Covenant is expressed. The sum of what he says here is this. The Covenant
was purposely framed in general and homonymous terms that all the sects might
lurck under it; And so the Sectarian army when they invaded Scotland did
pretend the Covenant; And presbyterian Government was no way secured, it not
being once named, but wrapped up in general, under the reformation in
doctrine, worship, discipline and Government, unto which independents and
separatists might assent, purposeing to preserve the same against the common
enemy, yea even such as entered into the Covenant could not agree in its sense
as may be seen in the Parliament of England's baffling the Scottish
Commissioner's declaration; Anno 1647. and other papers. Ans. 1. To say that
the Covenant was purposely framed in general terms, that several parties
might be fast united against prelacy, is a base and slanderous imputation, But
suteth him well who pleads for such a cause; If the Covenant, for the most
part, be thus conceived in general and ambiguous terms, how comes it to
pass, that he produces not instances thereof, no not so much as one? Was it
not as clear as the sun shines at noon day, that the reformed government of
the Church of Scotland, at that time, was presbyteriall* And did not himself
say a little before, that at that time there was no such officers in the Church
of Scotl. as are mentioned in the second article of the league and Covenant?
And whereas he says that several sects did lurk under the lap thereof, does
^he think this a cogent argument to prove it is ambiguity? What sect is it which
does not plead scripture? Shall scripture therefore be accounted ambiguous
(...) No not at all. Let men of corrupt minds and principles wrest words in
the Covenant as they please, the Covenant, to any who shall read it, is plain
and clear enough, and he who will wink, may wander at noon day: let men imagine
and put what glosses they will on scripture, It is plain, and has but one
sense. But what will all this make to the business? Will the obligation of a
Covenant, in which some men think there lies some ambiguities, be loosed upon
that account? This must be proved ere it be received off his hand, as a truth:
neither he, nor any of his party has hit hertill* attempted any such thing.
Lastly is there any ambiguity in the second article? Yet (says he) were it
not better to lay aside (when now it is disclamed, by King and Parliament and
all persons of trust in the land) a human for me which in respect of the
composure of it, is apt to be, has been, and is like to be a seminary of
variety of parties, and worse evils then prelacy is imagined to be. When he
has made it to appear that this composure is apt of its own nature, to be such
a seminary of worse evils then prelacy, his advice may be taken to
consideration, but till then (which will be, ad Calendas gracas) he must excuse
the Covenanters; for neither King nor Parliament, though they had the pope with
them, can give a dispensation in a matter of an oath, And King and Parliament
with all the persons of trust, will have enough to do to hold the broad roll
and the curse off themselves, their houses, and their posterity, and to keep
themselves out of his hands, Who will be a swift witness against false
swearers, though they undertake not to protect others from the wrath and
vengeance of God.

The last particular which he exaggerateth is the limited or conditional
preservation of the King's Maj. person and authority, viz. in the preservation
and defense of the true religion, etc. He enquireth whether this was right or
not? And if difference in religion loose a people from their duty to the King?
To which a short reply will suffice. 1. Though it were granted that there were
some thing wrong here, this will not ground the non-obligation of the Covenant
in other particulars, and what has he gained then? 2. What ever wrong may be
in wording this article thus, The blame is not be laid upon the first authors
of this league and Covenant; For in the national Covenant (which was
subscribed at first by King James and his household, Anno 1580. And in obedience
to an act of Council together with an Act of the General Assembly, by persons
of all ranks, Anno 1581. And again subscribed by all sorts of persons, Anno
1590. 1591.) The Covenanters duty toward the King is so qualified in these
words. We protest and promise with our hearts under the same oath, hand write,
and pains, that we shall defend his person and authority, with our gear,
bodies and lives, in the defense of Christ's evangell, liberties of our
country, ministration of justice; and punishment of iniquity, against all
enemies within the realm or without. So that if he annull the league and
Covenant upon this account, he must much more annull the national Covenant,
whereof King James was the author: For in that there is more add^d to the
qualification of their duty to the King, viz. his minisiration of justice and
punishment of juiquity. So then this clause in the league being consonant unto
that in the national Covenant needs not be so much quarrelled at. 3. It is
like he is displeased with any such qualification, but his reason is not very
forceable viz. because it would insinuat that they were no otherwise bound to
defend him, for it will only insinuat that the Covenanters are to prefer,
that which is of greater moment unto that which is of lesser concernment, and
that they are to prefer the end unto the mean leading to the end; That is,
when the King is in direct opposition, unto the cause and work of God, it
becomes them to prefer the interest of Christ before man's, and not to help
the mighty against the Lord, but the Lord against the mighty: And when
defending, promoveing, or any way advanceing the authority of the King, shall
directly tend to the ruin of the interest of Christ, and religion, no
Christian is bound to concur: And this was granted even by the Parliament,
Anno 1648. So that the question betwixt the Parliament and the Church, at that
time, was not whether religion, and the interests of Christ should be preferred
to the interest of the King; or not: But whether the Engadgement, which was
then carried on, was not a preferring of Man's interests to Christ's* for as to
the thes^s or major proposition, it was granted by the Parliament viz. That
Christ's interest should be sought before man's, and the King's interests, only
in a subordination to Christ's. Thus they did profess openly their owneing of
the Covenant, and their resolution to prosecute the ends of the covenant, and
to seek to secure and establish the King's interests only in subordination to
the interests of Christ, for in their letter to the presbyteries (Printed in
their records) May. 11. They show that they were resolved to proceed for the
preservation and defense of religion, before all other worldly interests
whatsoever, and to carry on sincerely really and constantly the Covenant, and
all the ends of it. And again, in their answer to the supplications from
Synods and presbyteries Iun. 10. (insert likewise in their Printed records.)
They declare that in their undertakings they should prefer no earthly
consideration to their dut^es for preserving of religion in Scotland in
doctrine worshipe discipline and government, as it is already established, and
to endeavvour to setle it in England and Ireland according to the Covenant. and
also, in their answer to some committees of Shires they declare that [they had
nothing before their eyes in that undertaking, but the preservation and good of
religion, and the endeavoring the settling of it in England and Ireland
according to the Covenant, in the first place and before all worldly respects:
and his Maj. rescue from ^his base imprisonment his re-establishment upon his
throne, in all his just powers: the saiftie of this Kingdom from danger on all
hands, and the preservation of the union and brotherly correspondence betwixt
the Kingdoms, under the government of his Maj. and of his royal posterity
according to the Covenant.] So that the gentleman the author of this pamphlet,
publishes his mistakes to the world, when he would infer thus [was this
right that (where our alleagiance binds us to duty to a greater latitude) this
should be held out to people, as the only standard of their loyally and duty to
the King? Was it found Doctrine to insinuat (to the sense of intelligent men)
that we were not otherwise bound to defend him? Was it well by such a clause to
give occasion to wicked men to think they were no further obliged to him then he
should desend that which they accounted religion.] And that the folly of his
consequencesmay further appear, it would be considered that there is a clear
difference betwixt these two: Owneing of the King, and defending his authority,
never, but when he is actually owneing, and active for the cause and interest
of Christ: And owneing of the King, and defending his authority, always, but
when he is in actual opposition, and in a stated contradiction to the work and
interest of Christ, So is there a difference betwixt these two. Non-concurrence
in defending and promoveing of the King's authority, when he is opposeing the
work of God: And actual anulling, diminishing, or utter overthrowing of his
power and authority when he is so stated: And so when the Covenanters say That
they are not bound to contribute their power in their places and capacities, to
promove or defend his Maj. power, and authority; when he is in a stated
opposition to the work of God, and when the advanceing of him to his full power
and authority, would cetanely tend to the ruin and desruction of the cause and
people of God: yet they do not say, that they are never bound to defend him,
but when he is actually promoveing and advanceing the work of God, according to
his full power and place; Nor do they say, that when he opposes the work of
God, they are at liberty to destroy his person, or to spoil and rob him of all
his just power and authority: And therefore both that clause in the Covenant,
and their proceedings may be abundantly justified without laying down any
ground for the taking away of the late King's life; and without clashing with,
or contradicting the confessions of protestant Churches, or of their own; so^
still they acknowledge that difference in Religion does not make void the
Magistrat's just and legal Authority, not free the people from subjection: But
that this may be a little more clear, let this example be considered: A Father
turns phrenticke and mad, and seeks to destroy the whole family, calling
for a sword, and liberty to execute his cruelty; His sons rise up and bind
his hands, and withhold the sword from him, and withal swear to stand
together in their own defense, and to defend their Father's just right and
power in the defense of the family: Now, in this case, can any say that they
were undutifull children; or that their covenanting so, and adding that clause
in the Covenant, says, they were free to cast off the relation that is
betwixt him and them, except he guide the family, in all points as they would
have him doing? No in no ways. Here then it is clear that their refuseing to
put the sword in their Father's hand, while under this distemper, is no act of
undutifulnesse; It is no lessening of the Father's just power over the family,
nor does it say that they think themselves not bound to own him as a Father,
except when he is actively, promoveing the good of the family, and far less
does it say, that they think, because of this distemper, they may destroy him,
or that the relation betwixt them and him is broken up for ever. So then,
though this Advocat thought he had a fair sield to walk upon, and a fair
occasion to vent his anger against that Church, and to make her odious to all
Churches about, yet wise men, who easily see that there is no such strong
relation betwixt King and subjects, as betwixt Parents and Children, will
acknowledge that his ranting is without real ground; And that Scotland in
their treaties with the King at the Hage, and at Breda, and in their actions at
home did nothing but what they may hold up their faces for, both before God and
Man, doing nothing herein; which either contradicts their own confession of
faith, or the confession of faith of other Churches. Not their own confession
of faith; For if the large confession of faith be viewed (which was approved by
the Parliament and insert in their registres.) In that head of the civil
Magistrate these words shall be found, We confess and avow, that such at
resist the supreme power doing that thing which appertains to his charge, do
resist God's ordinance, and therefore cannot be guiltless: and further we
affirm that whosoever deny unto them their aid counsel and comfort, whiles
the Princes and rulers vigilantly travel in execution of their office, that
the same men deny their help support and counsel to God, who by the presence
of his lifetenant does crave it of them. So that all the resisting which is
there condemned, is resisting of him while doing his duty and executing his
office, and not, while he is seaking to destroy Religion, and the interests of
Christ. Nor the confession of other Churches, for in the former confession of
Helvetia, upon that head of the civil Magistrate, they say (as it is in the
English edition) We know that though we be free, we ought wholly in a true
faith, holily to submit ourselves, to the Magistrate, both with our body and
with all our goods, and endeavor of mind also, to perform faithfulness, and
the oath which we made to him, so far forth (N. B.) as his government is not
evidently repugnant to him for whose sake we do reverence the Magistrate. So
the French in their confession Art. 40. say, (...) must willingly suffer the
yocke of subjection, although the Magistrates be infidels, so that (N. B.) the
sovereign Authority of God do remain whole and entire and nothing diminished.
And, which is worth the noticeing, the practice of Scotland in this, is
consonant to the profession of the Parliament Anno 1648. (which did Act most
for the King and his interest, preferring it to the interest of Christ) who in
their declaration Aprile 29. insert in their Registres, Act 17. say, [That they
resolve not to put in his Maj. hands, or any others whatsoever, any such power
whereby the forsaid ends of the Covenant, or any of them, may be obstructed or
opposed, Religion, or Presbyterian government endangered; But on the contrary,
before any agreement or condition be made with his Maj. (having found his late
concessions and offers concerning religion not satisfactory) that he give
assurance by his solemn oath under his hand and seal, that he shall for
himself and his Successors give his Royal assent and agree to such act or
acts of Parliament, or bills, as shall be presented to him, by his Parliaments
of both, or either Kingdoms respective? for enjoining the League and Covenant,
and fully establishing presbyteriall government, directory of worship
confession of faith in all his Maj. Dominions: And that his Maj. shall never
make any opposition to any of these, nor endeavor any change thereof.]

What this Author says more in the three last Pages of his pamphlet is but
partly a repetition of what he said before, and so is answered, and partly
obviated by the preceding discourse.

SECTION XXIII.
The national Covenant vindicated from the exceptions of the author of the
seasonable case and caet.

HIs plea against the Solemn league and Covenant being thus examined; In the
next place, his exceptions against the national Covenant page 30: 31. etc.
must be considered.

This Covenant is not abjured in the declaration simply and in it self; but as
it was sworn and explained in the year 1638. and thereafter: And so the maine
ground whereupon this Covenant is cast off, is because of that explication
which was then added, in which therewas mention made of some things, which were
referred unto the General assembly, in these words [forbearing the practice of
all novations already introduced in the matters of the worshipe of God, or
approbation of the corruptions of the public government of the kirk, or civil
places or power of kirkmen, till they be tried and allowed in free general
assemblies, and in parliaments.] And then after the general assembly had
examined these particulars, and explained the true sense and meaning of the
Covenant, this conclusion was added. [The article of this Covenant, which was
at the first subscription referred to the determination of the general
Assembly, being determined; And thereby the five Articles of Perth, the
government of the Kirk by Bishops, the civil place and power of Kirk-men --
upon the reasons and grounds, contained in the Acts of the general Assembly;
declared to be unlawful within this Kirk, we subscribe according to the
determination foresaid.] Theforesaid pleader for Eaal, when he is produceing
his grounds against the validity of this oath, pitcheth only upon one of these
three particulars mentioned, viz. the government of the Church by Bishops, and
in reference to this, he attempteth two things, in his confused discourse. 1.
He would (if he could) prove, that by this oath, as it was at first conceived,
Anno 1580. and 1581, and renewed Anno 1590. the government of the Church by
Bishops, was not abjured; And 2. That the Assembly Anno 1638. did wrong, in
giving such a gloss and sense, as they did.

But he must be followed (...) lest any thing should escape; and first what he
brings to prove that Prelacy was not abjured by this Covenant, must be
examined.

He says, That if the Ministers who reasoned with the Doctors of Ab^rdeen be
to be believed (and they were the prime promotters of the Covenant, and carried
with them the sense of the body of the Covenanters) they who subscribed that
Covenant, knight, with great liberty, voice in an Assembly, concerning
Episcopacy, without prejudice, notwithstanding their ^ath; and upon this ground
would persuade the Doctors to subscribe the Covenant, because in so doing they
should not be taken, as abjureing Episcopacy, as the Doctors thought; And he
refers his reader unto their answer unto the 4. and 10. demands.

Unto which it is Ans. 1. That this is but the old answer brought on the field
again; for it was alleged by the Prelates in a pamphlet ^n. 1638. emitted
under the name of his Maj. commissioner (as most, if not all, which he here
alleges is borrowed out of that pamphlet) and what answers were then given,
may now suffice. Viz. That these Ministers who reasoned with the Doctors of
Aberdeen, denied indeed, that Episcopacy was expressly and specifically abjured,
in the later part of the Covenant, which was the addition containeing the
application unto the present times; But did never say that it was not abjured
in the negative confession, or national Covenant: Now it was about that
application and addition, that the debate arose betwixt these Ministers and the
Doctors; The Doctors never refused to subscribe the negative confession, as it
was called, or the Covenant drawn up Anno 1580, and 1581. for when the privy
Council did emit a declaration, enjoining all to take the Covenant, as it was
taken Anno 1580, 1581, and 1590, and 1591. as others did not, so neither would
they have scrupled at the same: But they always refused to subscribe to that
part which was added, and one of the grounds, why they did scruple at the
subscribeing of that, was this. They thought that by that addition, they should
be bound expressly, directly, and specifically to abjure Episcopacy, and the
ceremonies of Perth, which (as they said) they could not in conscience do;
Because then they should not have liberty to vote freely, according to their
judgments, Concerning those things, in the General Assembly: And unto this the
Ministers answered: that the words of that addition were purposely so contrived
as none might scruple upon that account; And indeed as to Prelacy the words run
thus that they should forbear the approbation of the corruptions of the public
Government of the Kirk. And the reason was, because there were several honest
and well minded people in the land, who could not distinctly and clearly see,
that the ceremonies, and the Government of the Church by prelates, were
directly, contrary to the confession of faith, and abjured therein; But were
waiting for light in those matters, from the ensueing General assembly, who,
they knew, could give most clearness in the matter of fact; And could best
show what was the Government of the Church, at that time when the national
Covenant was first subscribed; And also what was the meaning of the reformers
as to several particulars in that Covenant. So then, though it be true, that
by taking of the oath, or swearing that additionall explication, Anno 1638, No
man was bound up from reasoning and debateing, nor from free voteing in the
matter of prelacy in the national Assembly: Yet it will not follow that
prelacy was not abjured, by the negative confession or national Covenant; for
though the sense and meaning of the oath Anno 1581, Was not alike clear unto
all, Anno 1638. Either as concerning prelacy or ceremonies: Yet the Covenant
did strick against those as was afterward cleared. The Covenant has still one
sense and meaning, though such as did live fifty and eight years after it was
first drawn up, could not alike see it and discern it. It was but little
wonder that at such a distance of time, after so many revolutions, the true
sense and meaning thereof could not be so obvious unto all, As to overcome all
doubts and scruples; And therefore it was prudently resolved, to suspend their
approbation of those particulars, till they were tried in free assemblies: And
indeed so soon as the Assembly 1638 Did search into the business, and clear
the true meaning of the Covenant, according to the sense of the reformers all
scruples were loosed, and the people did cheerfully assent unto the Assemblies
determination; For then they saw that by that Covenant, The Ceremonies of Perth
Assembly, and the Government of the Church by prelates, were abjured. And it may
be supposed, that this author will not be so bold as to say that ever after
that assembly, wherein that business was cleared, any said that such as took
that Covenant, were left at liberty to vote for prelacy, or for the ceremonies.
So then this author bewrays much ignorance or maliciousness, or both; when
he thus argues as he does: Let him read the answers of those Ministers in
these places cited by himself, and he shall be able, if he will, to see his
mistakes.

One of the grounds whereupon the Assembly 1638. did determine that Episcopacy
was abjured by the Covenant which was sworn, Anno 1580. etc. was taken from
these words in the Covenant his wicked hierarchy, as may be seen at the end of
their act sess. 16. And to this he answers, thus. This imports not the
abjuration of the office of a Bishop, more then the office of a presbyter, or
deacon, which are parts of the hierarchy, as well as Bishops; but only the
abjuration of the hierarchy so far as it was the pop's; as it abjureth the five
bastard sacraments, So far at he makes them sacraments: So then the dependence
of these offices on him as the head of the Church under Christ, is abjured, and
also the corruption adhereing to these offices, and as they flow from him and
are his, as is his blasphemous priesthood: And not the offices themselves: And
therefore the office of a Bishop among protestants (Bishops being now loosed
from that dependence upon the sea of Rome) is no part of the pope's hierarchy.
This is the sum of his long discourse, and it may be shortly answered thus.
That if the abjureing the hierarchy import the abjureing of the offices which
are parts of the hierarchy, in so far as they depend on him, and are corrupted
by him, then it will fully import the abjureing of prelates; Because prelates
depend on him, as well in esse as in operari, and therefore they must be
abjured with this wicked hierarchy. It is well known that at the Council of
Trent the Pope would not suffer it to be debated, whether Bishops were juris
divini or not, and the Historian Peter Suave, adds the reason, viz. lest if
it should be determined that they were juris Divini they should not so depend
upon him, as they did, and he would have them continueing to do: So that hence
it is clear, that the Pope acknowledges that they depend upon himself alone,
even in their being, and have no other ground to stand upon, and therefore when
his hierarchy is abjured, they in their essence and being are abjured. It is
true, if he, or any of his fraternity, had ever demonstrated out of the word of
God, that Christ or his Apostles did ever institute such an officer, distinct
from a preaching presbyter, as in the prelate, as may be done concerning the
Presbyter etc the deacon, and as himself will readily grant; Then indeed it
would follow that the abjureing of the pope's hierarchy would import no more
then the abjureing of those corruptions which Attend those officers, as these
which attend presbyters and deacons, as they depend on him, as the abjureing of
his five bastard sacraments, imports not the abjureing of marriage in it self
being an ordinance of God, but only as it was abused by him, to be a (...). But
seeing it is not yet proved nor undertaken, by this author, to be proved, nor
was ever asserted by the reformers o^ that Church, no not by Mr Craig the
penner of the Covenant, That Prelates, as superior unto, and distinct from
preaching presbyters, are officers of God's appointment; certanely when they
are abjured, they are simply abjured. So that, till he demonstratively clear,
That Christ or his Apostles did institute Bishops distinct from preaching
presbyters, he must acknowledge a difference betwixt them and presbyters and
deacons, as to the matter of abjureing them: And so when all those three are
abjured, they cannot be abjured after one and the same manner: But the office
of presbyters and deacons are abjured in respect of their abuse, that is, the
abuse and corruption which adhereth to these officers, as they are made parts
of the hierarchy, is abjured: But when prelates are abjured, not only is their
abuse, or the corruption adhereing to them, abjured; but the very use is
abjured; for the use of an officer not appointed of Christ, is an abuse, and
Prelates, as to their being, depend only on the pope.

But (says he) Bishops now being loosed from that dependence from the sea of
Rome, and the Pope, who as head of the Church, claimed a plenitude of power
over the whole Church, and made all Christian Bishops and Ministers, but as his
slaves and vassels, portioning out to them such measure of jurisdiction, as he
thought sit, as their styles in this country imported of old. Ego N. Dei,
Apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopus: the office of a Bishop is no part of the
wicked hierarchy, Ans. This was sufficiently answered by the national
assembly, 1638. in the forecited Act, where they said [And howbeit this
hierarchy be called the antichrists hierarchy: yet it is not to distinguish
betwixt the hierarchy, in the popish kirk, and any other as lawful, but the
hierarchy wherever it is, is called his, as the rest of the popish corruptions,
are called his viz. Invocation of saints, canonization of saints, dedication of
altars, etc. are called his, not that there is another la^full (...) and
canonization of saints, or dedication of Altars So that the Bishops their
casting off the Pope as the head of the Church, will not bring them out from
among the officers, and parts of that wicked hierarchy. In so far as protestant
Churches admit of prelates, in so far they are unreformed from popery, this
being one (...) betwixt papists and protestants. It was the prelates their
depending on the Pope that made the scottish reformers condemn them, as his
Hierarchy, otherwise they should have condemned all the other articles of
popery, only in so far as they did depend on him, and no otherwise: And so
should have yielded, that if the King, by virtue of his headshipe over the
Church, should command, and enjoin the practice of any of those articles
condemned in the Covenant, they might be done in obedience unto him, if they
were abjured, only as they had dependence on the Pope and came from him. But
this is false, for they are condemned as being a part of a contrary religion
and doctrine, damned and confuted by the word of God and Kirk of Scotland: and
so, upon the same account, are the Prelates abjured, whether they depend upon an
ecclesiastic Pope, or upon a civil Pope, whether they be Apostolicae sedis
gratia Episcopi, or Iacobi, or Car ligratia Episcopi, they are damned and
confuted by the word of God, and are not Christigratia Episcopi: And so are
abjured as unwarranted officers in the house of God; even as ordination and
marriage are degraded from being sacraments; so are they from being Church
officers.

But to put a close to this second particular, it would be considered, that in
the Covenant, the office of prelates is abjured, when the hierarchy is abjured,
the same way that confirmation and extreme unction are abjured, when the five
bastard sacraments are abjured; that is to say, both the use and the abuse is
abjured; for they both want warrant in the word, and therefore ought not to be:
and to maintain either, is to maintain false Doctrine, and points of Popery
condemned in the word. Might not a Papist pleading for extreme unction and for
orders (includeing their septem sacramentula, or inferior orders, as their
^stiarii, Le^ores, (...), Ac^, (...), Diaconi, Sacerdotes. (which they mean by
their sacrament of order (and not mere ordination, as this author seems to
take for their meaning) if judicious Calvin hit right, in his institutions,)
say that when the Pope's five bastard Sacraments were abjured, the use and
being of all these officers (there is no disput about two of them upon the
matter) was not abjured; But only in so far as they were Sacraments: And extrem
unction only in so far as it was a Sacrament: And what this author would reply
in this case, for defense of the protestant reformers, (and though it may be,
this author would swallow down all those points of Popery and many more; Yet
he will not have the boldness to say, that such officers as to their esse and
being were not abjured by the reformers) the same may now be answered in the
case under consideration.

But he goes on page 32. and would make his reader believe. That King James
the enjoyner of that Covenant did never intend the abjuration of the office of
Episcopacy, and that for these reasons. 1. Mr John Craig who penned the same
did but nine years before, viz. Jan. 12. 1571. consent at Leth, that
commissioners might be appointed, to join with these whom the Council should
appoint, for settling of the policy of the Church, whereof he was one. The
resolution of which meeting was that some of the most eminent Ministers should
be chosen, by the chapters of the cathedral Churches, to whom vacand
Archbishopricks may be disponed, and they to have power of ordination and to
exerce spiritual jurisdiction, in their several dioecies; and at the
ordination of ministers, to exact an oath of them, for acknowledging his Maj.
authority, and for obedience to their ordinary, in all things lawful: and
accordingly it was done: Against which the next assembly at St Andrews, March.
1571. take no exceptions, and at the next Assembly 1572. These articles are
received with a protestation, that it was only for the Interim. So then the
learned penner allowed of Bishops, a few years before, and we see no evidence
of the change of ^is mind. How could he the^ mean protestant Bishops in that
draught.

Ans. These are pretty demonstrations to prove the (...) of a thing to say
first Mr John Craig was for Bishops Anno 1571. Ergo he was for Bishops Anno
1580. as if a man's mind could not change in Nine or Ten Years time, specially
it being a time of reformation, when light was breaking up more clear daily.
But next this is a more pregnant demonstration, to say King James intended no
such thing Anno 1580. because Mr John Craig had no such intention Nine Years
before. Is not this well argued? But to the matter: It is true there were such
things concluded at that meeting, but whether, with the unanimous consent of
all, or not, who can tell? But be it so, that this honest man was oversweyed
with the rest, by the violence of the court, and some nobles who designed the
Tulchan Bishope (a^ they were called) yet it is very improbable, that he did
persist in that judgment full Nine Years thereafter considering how much all
that time the honest Ministers were setting themselves to oppose that act: For
the Assembly which did meet at S. Andrews two months thereafter, took notice
of these articles and did appoint some of their number to examine them, so
great was the exception which they took at them. And Anno 1572. there was a
protestation against these innovations. and 1573. the Assembly determined, that
whatever Bishops there were, they should have no more power then the former
superintendents had, and censured some as the Bishops of Dunkell and Galloway:
And to this same purpose were there acts made Anno 1574. And Anno 1575, the
office both of Bishops and of superintendents came to be questioned, and
debated, and a little thereafter they signified to the Regent, that they would
not agree unto that polity condescended on at Leth, but some of their number
were appointed to draw up the second* book of discipline which book Anno 1577.
and 1578. Was fully approved: and having proceeded thus far they caused
several of the Bishops subscribe several articles denudeing themselves of
their episcopal power. Now when the Church is at all this work* shall it be
thought that this honest man (even supposeing he had been of that judgment,
which cannot be proved) was still of a judgment contrary to the judgment of
the Church: And did not all this time alter his mind, especially seeing the
Church did look upon him as a faithful friend for presbyterian government, and
therefore did appoint him with other five to consult with, Mr Alexander Hay
about the model or plot of presbyteries? But it is not much matter to debate
what was the penman's judgment at the time: the Covenant it self, and the words
thereof are to be considered, and the meaning of the land, in taking that oath,
is much to be regairded, and what that was, shall be shown by and by.

But. 2. He says, page 33. as to King James. It could not be his intention to
put away Bishops, Because at that time Anno 1580. there was no other Government
known (...) the Church, all ordination and jurisdiction being exercised by
Bishops or superintendenss or commissioners; And these, Though the assembly
quarrelled them, were real Bishops: And would the King, by his oath abjure
that Church Government which was not rejected by the Church, till July 12.
1580. And in the year 1581. Though the King and Council had presented the
confession to the Assembly to be subscribed by them, and by the people, in
their paris^es: yet that very same year, within six months thereafter, there
is an act of council confirming expressly the agreement at Leth 1571. And this
act of Council the King did openly avow in the business of Montgomery. Now it
is not probable that the King and Council, if they intended to abjure
episcopacy by the confession, would within six moneshs confirm that agreement
at Leth. Ans. 1. It has been shown but just now, that several years, before
the year 1580, The General assemblies of that Church were declareing
themselves against prelates, and their power, and were acting so far as lay in
their power, (and that was much, considering what opposition they did meet
with) for presbyterian government. 2. It is certain that Church Government by
prelates, was never approved by any of the general assemblies, in those days.
3. Though before the year 1580. The Assembly did not formally pass an act
against Episcopacy: Yet was it not equivalent when Anno 1577. and 1578. The
second book of discipline, which overturneth the Government of the Church by
Bishops, was approved? 4. This same act of the General Assembly at Dundee was
before the subscribeing of the Covenant; For it was in July, and the Command
for subscribeing of the Covenant, came not forth till the 2 March thereafter,
and that 2d. of march was said to be, Anno 1580. as well as July before,
because at that time, the denomination of the new year did not begin in
Scotland, until the 25 of March and so it is his mistake to think that the
Covenant was enjoined to be subscribed, six months before the Act at Dundee.
5. Whereas he says that, An. 1580. there was no such thing in Scotland as
government by presbyteries, if he mean that that government was not settled
through the whole Kingdom, he speaks truth; but nothing to the purpose; but if
he mean, that in no part of the country there was any such government, he is
mistaken; for at the assembly, Anno 1578. there was mention made of
presbyteries, for amongst the articles which this assembly drew up, to be
subscribed by those prelates, whom they had caused cite before them; this was
one, viz the 6. that they should not Empire over elderships but be subject to
them and the 7. was that they should not usurp the power of presbyteries: So
that there were presbyteries in the land, at that time: Yea the narrative of
the 131. Act, parl. 8. King* Jam. 6. Anno 1584. makes mention of sindry forms
of judgments and jurisdictions, as well in spiritual a^ temporal causes,
entered in practice, and custom, and that dureing 24. years by past; and those
forms of judgments and jurisdictions in spiritual causes, were assemblies
Synodall, presbyteriall, and parochial, all which were discharged by that Act:
And hence it is clear that there were such judicatories in the land before the
year, 1580. Moreover at the Assembly, 1579. there was a motion made about a
general order to be taken, for erecting of presbyteries in places where
public exercise was used, until the policy of the Church were established by
law: and it was answered that the exercise may be judged to be a presbytery. So
that the Kingdom at that time was not without presbyteries: Yea their frequent
national assemblies, show that the Church was governed presbyterially. 6. This
is certane, That there was some government of the Church sworn to, in that
Covenant; for there are these word in it [That we join ourselves to this
reformed kirk in doctrine faith, religion, and discipline, promiseing, and
swearing by the great name of God, that we shall continue in the doctrine and
discipline of thi^ Kirk and defend the same according to our vocation and
power, all the days of ourlife] Now, all the difficulty is to know what this
government was, And it is certane, That either it was the government by
presbyteries or the government by prelates. It could not be the government by
prelates. 1. because that was not the government and discipline of the Kirk, but
the government and discipline against which the Church had been striveing with
all he^ might. 2. It is not imaginable that the Ministry of the land, would
swear to defend the government of the Church by prelates, all the days of their
lives, when they were us^ing all means, to have the Church free of that yoke.
3. When the confession of faith was presented unto the genesis assembly to be
subscribed by them, An. 1581. would they have ass^nted unto the same if thereby
they had been bound to maintain prelacy, seeing at their very last meeting,
they had made such an express* Act against prelates? 4. When the Lord of
Caprinton, his Maj. commissioner, did present unto the general Assembly, the
confession of faith; or national Covenant, he presented withal from his Maj.
a plot of the several presbyteries to be erected in the Kingdom, mentioning
the presbyteriall meeting places, and designeing the several parishes, which
should belong to such and such presbyteries: As also a letter from his Maj. to
the noblemen and gentlemen of the country, for the erection of presbyteries,
consisting of Ministers and elders, and for dissolution of prelacies: may not
any hence argue, after the author's manner, and say, is it any way probable,
that the King and Council, if they intended to establish prelacy by the
confession of faith, would in that self same day (which is a shorter tim^ then
half a year) wherein ^he conf^ssion was presented as subscribed by the King,
and his household, and to be subscribed by the assemby, present such a plot for
presbyteries: through the whole Kingdom, etc? Let this advocat answer this if
he can. It must then be an undoubted truth, That the government, sworn to in
that national Cov^nant was presbyterian government. 7. And whereas he says
the King within Six months thereafter did stand to the agreement at Leth, and
avowed it in the business concerning Montgomery, it will not say much, if it
be considered how at that time Aubignee grew great at count, and (as was shown
above, Sect 1.) Obtained the superiority of Glasgow, and made a paction with
Montgomery. And when the Church judicatures were examineing the carriage of
this Montgomery first and last, he stirred up the King against them: and what
will all this say, But that Kings had need of faithful and constant
counselors about them, lest they be made to undo their own works, in a
short time. There was many a change at court, and as contrary parties got up,
so was the King sweyed.

He adds. That neither did the assembly or any Minister speak of that deed of
the King's and (...), as contrary t^ (...) Covenant (albeit in these days they
^ad a way of useing liberty enough, and more then was fitting.) Ans. It would
^come this gentleman to speak spareingly or these zealous and stedf^st
worthies, who lived in those days, and whose name for their piety, constancy
and zeal, shall smell most fragrantly, when his may be rotting above the
ground. It is like he would suffer sin to be upon King and court, and sell his
soul and conscience, by sinful silence in a day of defection, and thus
declare, himself a priest of Baal, and none of the messengers of the Lord of
hosts, who should set the trumpet unto their mouth. But to the purpose. Whether
the ass^mblies and Ministers, did, at that time, speak of the deed of the King,
and of the Council, as contrary to the Covenant, or not, who can tell? This is
known, that both assemblies and Ministers understood, that King and court and
all the land, were bound to own presbyterian government, by virtue of that
Covenant, several times thereafter* There is a letter which Mr Andrew Melvin
(who no doubt knew the mind of the assemblies) wrote unto divines abroad* An.
1584. in which, speaking of the discipline of the Church he fayeth (as reverend
Mr Petree cites in his history Page 448.) And three years since was approved*
sealed and confirmed, with profession of faith, subscription of hand, and
religion of oath, by the King and every subject ^f every state particularly. Mr
Petree also says Page 570. That An. 1604. when Mr John Spottisw^d and Mr
James law, were accused by the Synod of Lothian for overturning the discipline
of the Church, and had denied the same: The Synod did present the con^ssion of
faith to be subscribed by them, and so, in the judgment of the Synod, this
confession did contain an abjuration of prelacy, and a promise of maintaining
of presbyterian government. And again when the ministers were impannelled at
L^gow for treason and sedition, for meeting at Aberdeen 1605. Mr forbes (who
was one of them) had a discourse to the gentlemen who were on^ the assise, and
showed that they were bound by the national Covenant to maintain the
discipline of the Church, and having read the same unto them, he infered that
they should be guilty of perjury, if for fear or pleasure, they should decerne
that to be treason which themselves had sworn and subscribed: and he desired
the Earl of Dumbar to report unto the King, in their names, what punishment
followed upon the breach of the oath made unto the Gibconites, and how it was
feared that the like should follow upon his Maj. and his posterity. Yea this
author himself says Page 13. that Ministers then accounted themselves, as
really bound against the allowa^ce of Episcopal government, both by the
Covenant and by the word of God, as any do judge themselves engadged against it
by late bonds, whether they did mistake in this or not, we say nothing, but
that they did s^ judge, is out ^f all question, But. 2. This author cannot with
any good ground say that assemblies and Ministers did not then speak of that
which King and Council did, as contrary to the Covenant; for a negative
testimony from humane history is the weakest of all arguments. Moreover, this
is certane, that the courts of Christ both national, provincial, and
classical, were, at this time, going on faithfully in their work, keeping
their meetings, and censureing that perverse man Mr Montgomery who Pr^us like
changed often and licked up his own vomit, notwithstanding of all the
prohibitions or inhibitions they got from his Maj. They openly protested
before the King and his Council, for the liberties of the Church, and
supplicated, and exhorted his Maj. that as a chief member of the Church, he
would have a chief care thereof, and they complained that he was playing the
Pope, usurping both swords: all which will speak some thing equivalent unto
that which this author alleges they did not speak.

But in the next place, as touching the assembly 1638. their declaration of the
sense of the Covenant, he has some what to say as. 1. That it seems strange
that any assembly should take upon them to declare, what was the sense of the
Church in taking a Covenant, when few or no^e of the men were living, who took
that Covenant or if living, few or none of t^em were members of that assembly
1638. as, juramentum est vinculum p^rsonale; so, no man or company of men can
take upon them to define, what was the sense of dead men, in taking an oath,
unless they can produce some authentic express evidence that such was their
meaning in taking the oath. Ans. 1. By this argueing, the sense and meaning of
a Covenant perishes with the Covenant^rs. 2. It is true juramentum or foedus
personale est vinculum personale; but there is another Covenant that is called
foedus reale (of which kind this national Covenant was) and the vinculum of
this, is more then personale, it obliges more then such as did personally take
it. 3. Therefore this Covenant being a national real Covenant, obligeing the
land in all time coming, posterity is called to search and to see very exactly
and narrowly into the sense and meaning of the Covenant, they are obliged to
know the nature of that Covenant by which themselves stand bound before God. 4.
Who is more fit to give the sense of the Church in taking a Covenant, then a
General assembly of the Church? 5. It was shown before, what was the constant
judgment of the honest Ministers concerning the sense of this Covenant, even
in the time when prelates were heighly advanced, out of this same author; and so
the true sense of the national Covenant, has come down from father to son,
amongst the honest party, even in the most corrupt times: and then, the
Assembly at Glasgow was so much the more in tuto. 6. The Assembly at Glasgow
did produce authentic express evidences, that such was the meaning and sense
of those, who first entered into Covenant.

To this, he is pleased to say. That all that which they produced amounts to
nothing more then this, that before; July 1580. The Church had been laboring
against Bishops, who notwithstanding countinued till thereafter, but all their
citations prove not that Episcopacy was abjured by the Covenant or any words in
it. Ans. 1. This is certain, that in that Covenant, some Government or
discipline was sworn to be continued in, and defended, as the expre^e words,
before cited, do show. 2. It is certane, that this discipline or government of
the Church, was either prelacy, or presbyterian Government (there not being a
third competitour) and if it was prelacy, presbyterian government, was
abjured, and if it was presbyterian government, then prelacy was abjured. 3.
It is certane, that if it were once cleared, what that government was, which
the Church of Scotland, in and about that time, did own, as the only
government of the Church, it would soon be cleared what that government was,
which by this covenant they were bound to own and to continue in; and
consequently what government was abjured thereby. Therefore all the difficulty
is to know what that government was, which the Church did own; and yet there
is no difficulty here, for it is as clear, as the sun at noonday, that it was
Church government by presbyteries, Synods, and assemblies, which they, both
before, at, and after that time did own and defend, till it was violently
taken away: And if the citations of the assembly 1638, will amount to this,
they will sufficiently declare that Episcopacy was abjured, at that time: And
whether their citations shall do so or not, the indifferent reader may judge,
when he has considered and laid together these two and twenty particulars,
into which, the citations shall be branched forth. 1. When the Church had been
wre^ing and could not prevail against Bishops, from the year 1571 unto the
year 1575, and being continually wearied with complaints given in against them,
they entered at last into a search of the office it self, and did agree in
this, that the name Bishop was common to every one, who had a particular flock,
to which he preached and administrated the sacraments; and so it could not
design a distinct officer. 2. Anno 1576. the assembly did censure such
prelates, as had not betaken themselves to some particular flocks. 3. In the
assembly 1578 the second book of discipline was unanimously agreed upon. 4, At
another assembly, that same year, the moderator told Montrose, Chanceler
Seaton, and Lindsay. That they had drawn up, out of the pure fountain of God's
word such a discipline as was meet to remain in this kirk. 5. At that same
assembly, it was ordained that such as were called Bishops, should be content
to be pastors of one flock; should usurp no criminal jurisdiction; should not
vote in Parliament without a commission from the kirk; should not Empire over
their particular elderships; and should not usurp the power of presbyteries.
6. An. 1579 The assembly judges that every meeting for exercise might be
accounted a presbytery. 7. An. 1580. after deliberation, it was found that the
office of prelates was pretended, and had no warrant in the word: And they
ordained that such should dimit, and Leave the samine, as an office, unto which
they were not called of God, and this was before (as was said above,) the
subscription of the Covenant. 8. The same assembly sends some commissioners
to his Maj. desireing that the book of policy might be established by an Act of
Council, until the meeting of a Parliament. 9. In the assembly 1581. At
Glasgow the Act of the former assembly at Dundee was explained, and i^ was
shown that thereby the Church did condemn the whole state of Bishops, as they
were then in Scotland. 10. At this assembly the confession of faith was
presented, and the plot of presbyteries, with the King's letter to the noblemen
and gentlemen of the country, for furthering the erection of presbyteries: and
thus at the very presenting of the confession to the assembly, to be
subscribed, the King and the assembly agree in one judgment, as to the
government of the Church, viz. That it should be presbyteriall, and according
to this harmonious desire, presbyteries were erected in several places. 11. In
that same assembly, The second book of discipline was insert in the registres
of the Church, and immediately after, the Covenant was insert; That all
posterity might see that the government, which they swore to maintain and
own in the confession or Covenant, was the same which was contained in the
book of discipline, and thus that book of discipline and the confession or
Covenant did harmoniously accord, 12. Anno 1581. The assembly would not suffer
Mr Montgomery Minister at Sterlin to become bishop of Glasgow, but commanded
him to waire on his Ministry at Sterlin under the pain of excommunication.
13. In the same assembly, it was acknowledged that the Estate of Bishops was
condemned by the kirk, a commission for erecting of more presbyteries, was
granted, and a new ordinance made for subscribeing the Covenant; can any man
now doubt, what that government was which the Church in those days owned by
that Covenant? 14. Anno 1582. a new commission was granted, for erecting of more
presbyteries, and Mr Montgomery for usurping the place of a bishop, was
ordained to be excommunicated; for presbytery and prelacy are incompatible. 15,
In another assembly that same year, commission was given to some presbyteries
to try and censure such as were called bishops, and some were sent unto the
Council to desire their approbation of an Act, for establishing of
presbyteries, Synods and assemblies; did the Church incline any thing to
prelacy then? 16. Anno 1586. It was determined at an assembly that there are no
other Church officers set down in the scripture, beside Pastors, Doctors;
Elders and Deacons that should be in the Church now. 17. Anno 1587. It was
ordained at an Assembly, that the admission of Mr Montgomery, suppose but to
the temporality of the bishopric of Glasgow, should be annulled with all
possible diligence, that slander might be removed from the Church. 18. In the
same Assembly, there was a letter drawn up unto his Maj. showing that they
found the office of bishops not agreeable to the word of God, but damned in
diverse assemblies, 19. Anno 1590. when the confession or Covenant was
subscribed universally of new, the assembly desired a ratification of the
liberties of the Kirk, in her jurisdiction and discipline in presbyteries,
Synods, and general assemblies. 20. It was ordained also, that all intrants
should subscribe the book of discipline, especially the heads controverted, and
also all who were presently in office, under the pain of excommunication. 21.
In the assembly, 1591. the forementioned Act was renewed. 22. Anno 1592.
commissioners were sent to attend the Parliament, and to desire a rescindeing
of the Acts of Parliament, Anno 1584. made in prejudice of of the Church, and a
ratifying of the discipline of the Church, both which were granted: now the
reader may judge from these particulars, what was the sense of the Church of
Scotland, at that time, of the confession or Covenant; and whether these
citations amount to any thing or not; And whether or not, this author had any
reason to slight, and undervalue, so far as he does, the pains taken by that
reverend Assembly* to clear the oath, according to the sense of those who
first took it.

But he adds That Episcopacy was not accounted unlawful, even in the
judgment of the assembly of the Church, within Six years after, where it was
declared. That the name bishop, has a special charge and function thereto
annexed, by the word of God; and that such may be admitted to a benefi^e Ans.
It is true, Anno 1586. there was a conference drawn on at Haly rude house by
the King, betwixt some Ministers, and some whom he did commissionat, which did
conclude that the Bishop should have a care of one flock; That he should have
some choice brethren added, without whose counsel he should do nothing, under
the pain of deposition. That his doctrine should be examined by the meeting,
and if it were sound unsound, he should lose his place. That his power should
only be the power of order and not of jurisdiction. That withal, he should
have insp^ction over more parishes, and that every Minister who was to enter,
should have his approbation, and the approbation of those Ministers who were to
be joined with him, etc. But when the assembly did meet in May thereafter,
these were not assented unto. But it was only concluded That the, bishop, being
a pastor, as other ordinary Ministers, should be tried by the presbytery and
Synod, in matter of doctrine and conversation; And be subject unto the General
assemblies: and when the commissioners, who were sent from his Maj. did hear of
this, they dissented, and protested, that nothing concluded should stand in
force; seeing they had passed from the Articles. And this occasioned a ^w
conference, where that was concluded which this author mentions, and withal
they did proceed to set down the order of the presbyteries: Now, lest any
should stumble at this change in the Assembly, let it be considered, That two
years before this, there was a strange change at court; for Arran ruled all,
nobles were banished and ministers were forced to flee, others imprisoned, and
then the Prelates got up their heads, Montgomerie was made Bishop of Glasgow,
and one Mr Adamsone made Bishop of Saint Andrews: And Ministers were compelled
to promise, under their subscription, obedience unto them, and to consent unto
many other acts of iniquity, under the pain of banishment, confinement,
imprisonm^nt, deposition, and sequestration of stipends, and this course
continued till near the end of the year 1585. When the exiled nobles returned,
though a new Parliament was called, the King would not repeal any act, which
was made in prejudice of the Church, the year before; Yet at length he
professed some desires to have the Church settled and called for that
conference at Halirudhouse. Now what wonder was it, that when all was
overturned, and Prelates established by Parl. in their full power, that the
Church should take little ere she wanted all, and should condescend to some
things, of purpose to get the power of prelates hemmed in, hopeing when this
furious tempest was fully blown over, that she should be in a better capacity
to promove her work; And withal it may be seen, that she holds as much as
she can and minds the work of the presbyteries, notwithstanding of the laws
of the land, as yet unrepealed, standing against her. So that, hence it
appears, that they never once thought of retracting the act at Dundee (as he
would make his reader believe.). And it would be considered likewise, that at
this Assembly there were several of these Ministers present, who Anno 1584.
had subscribed unto the prelates: And further it is considerable, That for as
great a length as they went: Yet Sess. 6. They declared that there were only
these Church officers, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons; And that the name
Bishop should not be taken as in the time of popery, but is a name common to
all pastors: and Sess. 10. and 11. They declared that by a Bishop they mean
only such as the Apostle does describe.

The last thing which he says is this. No Assembly can pu^ an obligation upon
persons who have taken an oath personally, to accept of the sense which they
put upon it. It is true the assembly at Glasgow could declare their sense of
the oath taken by themselves, but could not impose their sense upon the takers
of the oath before, that sense not hav^g been given to the takers of the oath
by the imposers of the same, and ^e takers of the oath not having empowered
these commissioners at Glasgow to declare their sense of that oath they had
taken. So then whatever was done (...) Glasgow, after the Covenant was taken by
the body of the land, could not oblige all the takers of it, to own their
declaration of the sense of the Covenant, which was not at first imposeing the
oath, declared unto them. To let pass his bitter refl^ctions, not worth the
transcribeing, upon that venerable assembly at Glasgow 1638. The like where of
would make him and all his fraternity to tremble. Ans. 1. The Assembly at
Glasgow did impose no sense of theirs, upon any man, either who took the
Covenant before, or thereafter; only because to them, as the representative of
the Church, the public and judicial interpretation of the Covenant or
confession of ^aith, did properly belong, they made search after the true sense
and meaning of the oath, and did declare and make it appear to all, by
undeniable arguments (as has been shown)* that they had found out the true
sense and meaning thereof, and what was the sense of the Church of Scotland
when it was first imposed: And was there any wrong here? 2. Such as had renewed
that Covenant at that time, and had taken it with the explicatory addition, did
swear to forbear the approbation of Church Government by prelates, until the
General Assembly should try whether that Government was abjured by the
Covenant or not: And was not that a sufficient impowering of the Assembly, to
declare the true sense thereof? But what would this author gather from all
thi^? He concludes that, Whatever the Assembly at Glasgow did after the
Covenant was taken by the body of the land, could not oblige all the takers
thereof, to own their declaration of the sense of the Covenan^, Ans. Though
their deed could not oblige the body of the land to own their sense, yet the
Covenant it self did oblige them, and the body of the land did then see
themselves obliged, by the declaration of the true sense of the Covenant, which
they gave: And what necessity was there for more? The Assembly never offered to
give a sense of their own, which had not been heard of before; For that had
been intolerable, but according to their place and duty, they, for the good of
theland and satisfaction of the Covenanters, search, out of the ^hentick
records of the Church, what was the sense and meaning of the Church, at that
time, when the Covenant was first taken, which every private person could not be
so able to do, and which necessity did require to be done; because of several
doubts which were raised there about.

He adds, and the body of the land has not indeed abjured Episcopacy by that
national Covenant. Neither the Covenant nor added interpretation, does import
any such thing. Ans. This is a strange thing: how can this be seeing the body of
the people of the land, took that Covenant, by which (when first taken by the
body of the land) prelacy was abjured? It is true, some who took the Covenant
then, being unclear in a matter of fact (which had been done some fifty or
sixty years before, and in trying and searching out of which, there was some
difficulty) whereby one article was unclear to them, at that time, could not
think that prelacy was undoubtedly abjured: Yet others did, and those same who
at first did doubt, received light by the assemblies declaration, and then saw,
that by the Covenant, when first taken by the Church, prelacy was abjured: And
that by their taking of the Covenant, according to its true, genuine, native,
and first sense now discovered and made plain (though before, as to this
particular, unclear) they had also abjured the same government of the Church
by prelates. 2. How the Covenant it self imports the abjuration of prelacy,
has been shown above, and the added interpretation needed not import any such
thing.

Next he says Nor has the body of the people of the land, by any after deeds,
owned that assemblies senseing of the Covenant. Ans. Neither was it necessary
that they should do so; seeing by taking of it, they did own it in its true
sense, and the Assembly did no more but declare which was its true sense,
against which when declared, the body of the land did not protest, and
therefore by their silence, did sufficiently declare their owneing of that
sense as the only true sense. And further the after Actings of the body of the
land, in prosecuteing the ends of that Covenant, did abundantly show their
owneing of that sense, and of none else.

Nor (says he) was there any Act of that assembly ordaineing that all should
own their determination of the sense thereof. Ans. And that, because there was
no necessity for such an Act, their clearing of the true meaning of the oath,
and showing how it could be understood in no other sense, was sufficient. All
such as took the Covenant, by a native undeniable consequence, beloved to take
it, in this sense, and to own the assemblies determination; because they
behoved to take it, in its own sense, and the assembly did no more but show
what that was. 2. There is an Act enjoining all, in time coming (for avoiding
any further doubt or disput) to take it according to their determination, in
the points then debated. And an other Act discharging any to take it, in any
other sense. True (says he) but few did so and if any did so they are to
consider whether they have been too rashly carried on, in the current of that
time, without (...) just examination of matters. Ans. whether there were few or
many that did so, all is one, since he thinks it rashness in any to do it.
But why was it rashness to take a Covenant, and a lawful Covenant, in its true
sense? Can this be an Act of rashness, o^ is it, not rather an Act of wisdom
and deliberation? But moreover was it rashness to obey an Act of Council made
A^st. 3. 1^39 Conc^ng (...) is: and an Act of a general ass^bly having the
comfort of, and civil ^arction add^ by his Maj. c^missioner? Agust. 17. 1639.
sure, he will not be able to make this good.

Thus, is all which this a^or does al^dge against the obligeing force of the
national Covenant answered. And now the reader may judge whether or not by
virtue of that Covenant which was imposed by lawful authority, both by Church
and state; and against which no exceptions of any force can be brought; the
whole land stands obliged against the government of the Church by prelates:
And whether there can be any clear ground or warrant, for abjureing of that
Covenant, taken from any deed of the Assembly 1638, seeing that assembly did
nothing but clear up the true sense and meaning of the Covenant, out of the
authentic records of the Church, and their sense was approved by his Maj.
commissioner and by an act of the privy Council. And then An. 1640, all this
was confirmed and ratified by Act of Parliament: So that it must be the height
of impiety, to subscribe a declaration for abjuration of this Covenant.

Now may the world wonder at the boldness of men; who dar^upon such slender
grounds encourage others unto such horrid Acts of iniquity, at the hearing of
which, heathens may stand astonished.

Yea, which is yet more wonderful, it was publicly debated and concluded in
Parliament. That no Covenant or promise made by the King to his subjects in the
time of a civil war is obligeing, but that so soon ever as occasion is
offered he is at liberty to break the same (though even Grot^ connot but say de
jur. bell. and Pac. Lib. 2: c. 14,, 6. that from a promise or a Covenant made by
a King unto his subjects there arises a true and proper obligation, which
gives right unto the subjects.) A resolution which may make all protestants in
(Europe, it may be, at least in) Germany, Fran^ Piedmont, and the Low
countries, to tremble; for all the security which they have, for their
liberties, and freedom of religion in peace and quietness, is upon a Covenant
(...) promise, which was made to them in a civil war. And if Neighbor princes
and Kings have this principle in their head^ and heart, protestants have need
to be upon the guaird; For now they may see their neck and all i^ hazard, when
ever any occasion is offered, and they need trust their Kings, and princes, no
longer, then they see them out of a capacity to hur^. Must not those be bloody
men whose hearts do thus thirst for Christian blood, who have such bloody
conclusions and resolutions. No faith is to be kept to ^ereticks say papists:
and no faith is to be kept unto subjects say they. But what if this bloody
resolution, which they did intend against others, shall recurre upon
themselves? Reader, think not this impossible. Yea by this resolution they have
laid down that ground, which in end, may prove the most destructive conclusion
to the throne, that ever was hatched out of hell; for let it be but supponed
(and what has been, may be again, and is not impossible) that there were a
civil war betwixt King and subjects, how shall it end? For now they shall
never once come to a treaty, no Covenant, no agreement, no promise will ever be
heard of, because there is no security in those, by their own confession: the
war then must never end, till the one party do utterly destroy the other; and
if the King shall utterly destroy his subjects, where shall his Kingdom be? And
what glorious advantage will he have in that victory; And if the people prevail
(and the manifold bypast experiences through the world has made this appear to
be the most probable of the two), and root out the King and all his posterity,
and so overturn the throne. Let the world judge, who is most to be blamed. The
Duchess of Parma gave such an answer at the first unto the nobles of the
Netherlands when they desired her to mind her promise; That she was not bound
to do so, further then she saw it for he^ advantage, and the world now sees,
where and how that war ended. Euchan: records in his annalls, lib. 16. That
when Alex: Earl of Glencarne and Hugh Campbel sheriff of Air were sent unto
the Queen regent, in name of the congregation, to deprecat her anger that was
going out against them, and among other things they requeested her to mind her
promises: But she answered [That princes should perform their promises no
further then they see it for their own advantage.] Unto which they replied,
that if so, They would pass from their alleagiance and obedience, and
acknowledge her no more for Queen. It was such a thing as this, which did
animate the congregation, to with stand the Queen regent and the fenches;
because (as says (...)* (...)) they had to fight with an ^iable and cruel
adversary, which made light of all equity, right, law, promises, faith and
oaths, so that upon every small gale of hope of advantage, they annull both
their words and their deeds, and therefore there is no agreement to be made
with them, nor no peace, till one of the parties be quite destroyed and
overthrown, or else all the strangers be put out of the land: So that they must
resolve either to overcome, or to die. And hence it was that a little,
thereafter, when there was a treaty, there could be no peace concluded, because
the reformed congregation, being so often deceived, could not believe their
promises any more.

The CONCLUSION.
THus reader, thou have a clear view of the present state and condition of the
Church of Scotland, and the true grounds upon which, she is now suffering: Thou
see, how the ways of Zion do mourn, and how the Lord has covered her with a
cloud, in his anger: how he has violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it
were of a garden, he has destroyed his places of the assembly, and caused the
solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotton in Zion: how he has cast off his
altar, abhorred his sanctuary. and given up into the hand of her enemies the
walls of her palaces; so that she is now made to cry out; is it nothing to
you'all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day
of his fierce anger; All who pass by, clap their hands at her, they hiss and
wag their head saying is this the city that men call the perfection of beauty,
the joy of the whole earth; all her enemies have opened their mouth against
her, they hiss and gnash their teeth, they say we have, swallowed her up,
certanely this is the day that we looked for, we have found, we have seen it:)
And therefore they are consulting to cut her off, that she may; no more be a
nation. But which is worse, The anger of God is gone out against her; he hides
his face, and testifies his displeasure, against her, and her c^s; And in so
doing just and righteous is he; for she has rebelled against him. It is the
Lord who has given her to the spoil and to the robbers, even he against whom
she has sinned, for she would not walk in his ways, neither be obedient unto
his law, therefore has he poured upon her the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle, and it has set her on fire round about, yet she knew it
not, and it burned her, yet she laid it not to heart. Therefore let no man
think, whatever apology any make in her behalf, that she or they do intend to
quarrel with the most high, for any of his dispensations toward her; Nay he
is just and righteous in all his ways, yea, though he should punish her yet
Seven times more, it would become her to put her mouth in the dust, to be
silent, and to bear the indignation of the Lord, because she has sinned
against him, And as yet, she must say, that whatever wrongs her enemies are
doing to her, and how ever unjustly she be suffering at their hands, yet the
righteous God is doing her no wrong, but punishing her less then her
iniquities do deserve; so that as to his dealing with her, she has no cause to
complain, for it is of the Lord's mercy that she is not consumed, because his
compassions fail not.

And yet it cannot but be expected, that such as have tasted of the cup of
affliction themselves, and have resisted unto blood striveing against sin, etc
have known by experience what refreshing has been in the known sympathy of
neighbor Churches, in the day of their trial and temptation, will mind and
make conscience of this Christian duty of sympathy toward the poor Church of
Scotland, now when her enemies are the chief and prosper, and have spread out
their hands, upon all her pleasant things, when her gates are desolat and her
priests sighe. It cannot be thought, that such Churches as own Christ for
their head and husband, can look upon a poor bleeding sister Church which was
once decked with ornaments, when her head and King took pleasure in her
habitations; but now is striped naked and exposed to shame, and to the scorn
and contempt of her enemies, and not have their eyes affecting their heart.
Shall it be thought that there are any of the reformed Churches who Esau-like
can look on the day of their sister, in the day that she is become a stranger,
that can rejoice over her in the day of her destruction, or speak proudly in
the day of her distress, or look on her affliction in the day of her calamity,
or lay hands on her substance in the day of her calamity, or stand in the
cross way to cut off these of hers that escape, or deliver up those of hers
that did remain in the day of distress? Nay, it is hoped, that as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, they have put on bowels of mercies and kindness,
and have learned to have compassion, and to love as brethren, and to be
pitiful, and so cannot forget the afflictions of his people in those Islands,
but do bear them on their heart when they have access unto the throne of
grace, and say, spare thy people o Lord and give not thine heritage to
reproach, that the heathen should rule over them, wherefore should they say
among the people, where is their God? Seeing it is the desire of that poor
afflicted Church, that all would cry unto their God and her God, that he would
turn from his hot wrath and displeasure, and turn to her with healing under
his wings: That he would heal her backslideings, and love her freely: and that
until he be pleased to turn from the fierceness of his anger, his people may
be blessed with Christian patience and submission under the mighty hand of God,
and helped to hear the voice of the rode, and who has appointed it, and to
turn unto him who smites, that he may bind up and heal that which he has
broken^: That the iniquity of Jacob may be purged, and the finite of all this
may be, to take away sin: and at length his heart may turn within him and his
repentings may be kindled together; that he may not execute the fierceness of
his anger, nor return to destroy Ephraim, seeing he is God, and not man; For he
is a God who is gracious, and long suffering, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil, who knows if he will return and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him?

That poor Church will be very far disappoynted of ^et expectation, if in stead
of Christian sympathy, pity and compassion, she shall meet with unbrotherly and
unchristian dealing at the hands of any, and if there shall be any such as will
be ready to condemn her, as suffering upon very slender and inconsiderable
grounds, as it will be no small matter of grief and sorrow unto the already
sorrowful mourning Church, yea an addition unto her affliction, so it will
yield these little comfort in the day when the cup shall pass over unto them,
to reflect upon their unchristian thoughts, and sharp censures of a poor
member of Christ's body, while lying under the feet of oppressors, and such as
said to her soul, bow down that we may goeover. It is true, the infinitely wise
God has thought fit to try that Church with more searching trials then he did
England and Irland, and it was the policy of her adversaries to begin with
such small things, to the end, they might get such as they desired, drawn into
their net, and then they weresure piece and piece to get them brought alongs,
to countenance them in all their courses, as sad experience has proved; For
some, who at the first resolved to go some length for peace cause, having no
purpose to move one foot further, to whom if it had been then said, that, ere
all were done, they would go such a length as now they have gone, with Hazael,
they would have replied are we dogs to do such things, are now going all the
length desired, scrupleing at nothing which is a warning to all, to beware of
the beginnings of a defection: And indeed for as great as the defection and
apostasy in that Church, is at present, and for as great a conspiracy as is
found among her prophets; If the trial had been nothing more searching, then
that wherewith the Neigh bour Churches were tried, there would not have been so
many that would have depairted from their former principles, as there are, this
day: And therefore it was a mercy unto many in these Neighbor Churches, that
their sieve was not more narrow and searching: it is no small mercy unto
particular persons, when they see their enemies in their own colors, and the
bait is not able to cover the hook, wherewith their adversaries think to catch
them: And it is likewise a mercy (and will be so found and acknowledged in end)
unto the Church of Scotl, that God has followed such a way with her as shall
prove most discovering and consequently most purging, by making her dross to
appear, and bringing to light in a short time, more corruption and
^aughtinesse, then, in all probability, would have been found out, many a year,
if God had not taken this course. But now, let none blame those who have
desired to keep their garments clean, and to adhere zealously and constantly
unto their former principles, and therefore have refused compliance in the
least, and would not willingly quite with a hoof, or sell a bit of the precious
truth of God: There is a time when such things are very momentous and
considerable, which at other times seem not to be of much concernment: Armies
may yield more unto their enemies at another time and place, then when they are
keeping a considerable pass, the loseing of which would prove of great
disadvantage unto themselves, and an inlet unto all the enemies forces: There
is a time when such things must be stood at, which if abstracted from that time
and place, would signify little or nothing, whether done or not done: The
giving of a book or of a piece of paper out of the hands of the martyrs, was
at that time, and as so circumstantiated, a maine business, when they were
upon the point of avouching truth for God: A little matter when it becomes
Casus confessionis is of great moment: Mordecay's beck is no small matter:
Daniel's closeing of his windows, is a great business, as it was then
circumstantiated: And doolfull experience, in all ages, has made it appear
what mischief has followed upon yielding unto the adversaries in small-like
matters, in the beginning of a defection, what through inadvertancy, what
otherwise: by little and little the pope came to his throne, and not in one
day* by little and little came prelates formerly to their height, in that
Church; and therefore as before, so now the honest party thought themselves
called of God, to withstand beginnings and not to cede in the smallest-like
matters, when they saw that the opening of never so small a passage, would be
enough to occasion the drowning of all; as (according to the proverb) the brunt
child does scar the fire, so that Church cannot be blamed for keeping such a
distance from that plague of prelacy, which formerly had brunt up and consumed
all the vitals of religion, and the whole power of Godliness, and had made
that Church to look like an harlot, and not like the spouse of Christ;
Especially after God had wrought such wonderful deliverances unto her, and had
graciously delivered her from that iron furnace, and with his outstretched
arm had brought down all her enemies, Should they again break his
commandments, and join in affinity with the people of those abominations,
would not God be angry with them till he had consumed them, so that there
should be no remnant nor escapeing? And it is very remarkable, that there are
none who have hitherto rued their suffering upon that account, but rather they
are all blessing the name of the Lord, for that he has kept them from
yielding in the least; And though their adversaries the prelates, be useing
barbarous and inhumane, let be unchristian, ways, to afflict them still more
and more, by procureing acts to be made, dischargeing any Charity to be
extended, to them or their families, who are now suffering for the cause of
God; Yet they have no cause to compleane; God, for whose sake they are
suffering, is provideing for them, and with all is comforting them with the
consolations of the Holy ghost, supporting their spirits, keeping them from
fainting, and encourageing them, so that they resolve, through his grace, never
to comply with these workers of iniquity, lest they partake of their judgments.
Yea they are persuaded that if any members of the Christian Churches abroad who
had the root of the matter within them, were in their souls stead, they would
no more comply with this present course of defection, then they have done, or
desire to do; So that, what ever can be looked for from men of corrupt minds,
and such as are enemies to the truth and to the power of godliness; Yet they
are sure that such as know what it is to walk with God, to have a tender
conscience, and to make this their exercise to keep a good conscience both
toward God and man, will be loath to condemn them in the least. Yea or if
they saw what a deluge of prophanity, is now broken in upon these lands, what
unparalleled wickedness is there perpetrated, what abomination of all sorts
reigns since this course of defection was begun; Their hearts would tremble,
and they would scar at such a course, as is so destructive to the Kingdom of
God within, and so advantageous for the promoveing of the maine interest of
Satan, and never acknowledge that to be a divine truth which is not after
Godliness. Sure, there is a principle in all the godly which will incline them
to affect that course best, which is most for promoveing the work of grace in
souls, and abhore that which opens a gap to all prophanity and
licentiousness: And though they could disput none against such a course, this
were enough to make their gracious souls abhore it. Let none say that such
preciseness, and refuseing to cede in a little will prove destructive to the
Church, by incenseing the civil Magistrate the more; For God's way is always
the best, both for particular persons and for Churches; and an instance cannot
be shown where a Church by her faithful adhereing to the truth of God,
standing to her principles, and refuseing to go back in the least, has ruined
herself; But upon the other hand it has frequently been seen, how a Church by
her yielding unto the snares of her adversaries, through fear or prudence
(falsely so called) has brought ruin and destruction insensibly upon herself:
The yielding unto a little in the beginning of a defection, has proven the
bane and neck-break of Churches, cedeing to little forms at first, has
brought in the mass, at last.

But now it is hoped that such as shall duly and Christianly ponder the
premises, shall not account the grounds of the sufferings of that Church and
people, punctilioes, or inconsiderable triffles whatever such as do not weigh^
matters in the balance of the sanctuary, but according to their own phancies,
may judge: And therefore it may be thought that strangers who shall judge of
matters according to the truth, shall rather stand astonished and wonder at the
pusilanimity, and fainting of heart, which has there appeared, at this time;
and enquire what ^s become of that Spirit of boldness, zeal, and courage, for
the cause and truth of God, which formerly did act the faithful ministers and
professors of the Land? And where are all those worthies, who set their faces
against greater storms, then any that has appeared of late? And how is it
that so many have out lived their own zeal, and faithfulness, and by silence
at such a time, when God, in his dispensations, did call upon the to cry aloud
and not to spare, have betrayed the precious interests of Christ, which their
predecessors valued beyond their lives? And how is it, that this generation
has degenerated, so far as their predecessors might be ignorant of them and
not acknowledge them, and have forgotten their former zeal? May not the world
wonder at this? But what wonder is it, that it be so, when now their rock has
sold them, and the Lord has shut them up, when now the Lord has been
displeased and has made them to drink the wine of astonishment, and for their
provocations, has taken spirit and courage from them, that they may know at
length how evil and bitter a thing it is, that they have forsaken the Lord
their God?

And therefore this dispensation of the Lord unto that Church, may and ought to
be improved by other protestant neighbor Churches, as a warning from the Lord
to repent, and return unto him; for because of her backslideings has the Lord
brought all this upon her, and he is a jealous God who will spar^ none, but the
greater their enjoyments have been, when these are abused to licentiousness,
and not improved for the glory of God, and the advancement of the work of
reformation of Churches, and of particular persons, the sor^ will the plagues
and judgments be, with which he will visit such: It concerns all about, and
all who hear of the Lord's dealing with her, to repent, and remember from
whence they are fallen, and to do their first works; for because of her
departing from the love of her espousals, and the kindness of her youth, the
Lord is now visiteing her with sore and sharp rodes: Professions, yea large
professions will not save in the day of God's anger: He searches the hearts*
and the reins, and he loves truth in the inward parts, and therefore the
fair flourishes of outward professions will not satisfy, if there be not
more. Covenanting with the Lord will not hold off judgments, when conscience is
not made of these covenants. And now it has not been Scotland's Covenanting
with God that has brought all this upon her: But Scotlands dealing deceitfully
in the Covenant; For so long as she was with some singleness of heart, aimeing
honestly at the promoveing of the ends of the Covenant, the Lord made her
^errible unto all her adversaries, and made one chase an hundereth; But so soon
as this vow was forgotten, and the ends thereof not sincerely minded and sought
after, then the Lord departed from her, and she could not shake her self as
before.

Finally, it would become all neighbor reformed Churches to be upon their
guaird, for the same Spirit that troubles that Church now; is the Spirit of
Antichrist seeking to re-enter there after he has been cast out, with all his
appurtenances, in a most universal and solemn manner, and the door bar^ed
with solemn Covenants and oaths made unto the most high: And indeed has
gained great footing already; for there is more pop^ry openly professed this
day, then has been openly avowed almost these hundred of years. And if
Antichrist shall again get possession there, any may judge what hazard other
Churches are into, and what cause they have to withstand the same, and if they
can do no more, for that effect, to pray to him, who will hear at length, that
he would hasten that day, in his own time, wherein it might be said. Babylon
the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils and the
hold of every foul Spirit -- so that the Kings of the earth who have Committed
(...), and lived deliciously with her, may bewail her, and lament for her,
when they shall see the smoke of her burnings, for he will at length judge the
great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornications, and will avenge
the blood of his servants at her hand and then shall that Church (being fully
freed from the yoke of prelacy and other abominations) with others, be glade
and rejoice, when that wicked, with all his appurtenances, shall be consumed
with the Spirit of his mouth and shall be destroyed with the brightness of his
coming. Even so come Lord Jesus.

AMEN.
The Contents
THe INTRODUCTION. Page 1. Shows
The grounds and ends of this undertaking.

SECTION 1. Page 5. Shows
When the Christian religion began first in Scotland: That Palladius was the
first prelate in Scotland: No prelates among the Culdees: How and when
reformation from popery began: Superintendents no prelates: National Assemblies
from the beginning of the reformation. How the Tulchan Bishops came in over the
Church her belly: The Church wrestleth till these be put away, and presbyterian
Government be settled in all her judicatories, Anno 1592. The King thereafter
incroacheth upon the privileges of the Church: Prevails with some of the
Ministers who betray the Church, and yield to Parliament-Bishops, and hinder
the Church from enjoying her privileges and liberties in her free Assemblies:
The faithful and Zealous are persecuted: Parliaments carry on the King's
design with violence; Corrupt Assemblies are convocated to further his Maj.
design, and to give Church power unto these Parliamentary Prelates: Parliaments
ratify all. The Church protests, and striveth against all this, what she
can: The prelates being now inthroned tyrannize over and oppress the faithful,
labor to have ceremonies imposed upon the Church with force, and acts made in
Parliament for bringing in the surplice and Corner cap, unto which some worthy
nobles could not assent, Anno 1633. Who, are therefore accounted rebels and
traitors; And Balmerino is condemned. The prelates rage without all law, draw
up a service book, book of canans, etc.

SECT. 2. Page 44. Shows
How the use of the service book was hindered in Edinburgh: Ministers and
people from all parts of the Kingdom petitioned against it. The King favors
not the petitioners: They not withstanding continue in petitioning against the
service book, high Commission, prelates, etc. Renew the national Covenant
through the whole land: The King intends a war: An Assembly is indicted at
Glasgow, Nov. 21. And opened up: This Assembly condemns, and anulleth
several pretended Assemblies, the book of common prayer, the book of canons,
the book of consecration and ordination, the high commission court, and the
ceremonies: and excommunicateth some, and deposes all the prelates: War is
prepared against them: They defend themselves: A pacification is concluded:
another Assembly promised and a Parliament thereafter* The Assembly is opened
up; The Parliament is convocated but quickly adjourned: Commissioners are sent
to London and imprisoned: A new war is raised by the King: Scotland prepares
for defense: A new pacification: The Parliament meets and ratifieth all,
which the Covenanters had done, Those acts are again ratified: The Parl. of
Engl. begins a work of reformation, enters into a Covenant with Scotland,
and the two nations jointly proceed in the begun work of reformation: A party
in England strengthen themselves: alter the judicatures: take away the King's
life: Scotland brings home the prince, who swears the Covenants, and is
overcome by the Englishes in battle, and kept in bondage ten years, till the
exiled King returned Anno 1660.

SECT. 3. Page 69. Shows
Why these Ministers and others, who met Agust. 23. 1660 were incarcerated:
what their supplication was; And how unjustly they suffered upon that account.

SECT. 4. Page 77. Shows
What were the grounds upon which the Marquise of Argil^ suffered, and how
insufficient in point of law, from several considerations.

SECT. 5. Page 83. Shows
What were the grounds, upon which the life of precious* Mr Guthry, was taken.
and how insufficient, Either in law or conscience.

SECT. 6. Page 86. Shows
Upon what account other Ministers were persecuted: And how unjustly: Some
banished for righteousness sake, and some indicta causa: An extract of the
sentence was refused to thos^ and to all others.

SECT. 7. Page 88. Shows
The grounds why conscientious Ministers could not observe the anniversary day.

SECT. 8. Page 91. Shows
The reasons why Ministers could not observe the prelat^ meetings. The author
of the seasonable case, etc. Answered.

SECT. 9. Page 101. Shows
The reasons why ministers could not seek presentations from patrons, nor
collations from prelates: The author of the seasonable case, answered.

SECT. 10. Page 114. Shows
The true sense of the oath of alleagiance which was tendered Anno 1661. etc.
Compared with the former: how it holds forth a great civil supremacy in the
King, cleared by the act. 11: parl. 1661. Which (at least) is much to be
questioned, from nine several grounds: And cannot lawfully be acknowledged
because of ten dreadful consequences which shall necessarily follow thereupon:
The former proceedings of the Church and state of Scotland vindicated and
cleared.

SECT. 11. Page 140. Shows
The lawfulness of Scotlands defensive war, first from the former practices of
Scotland, other Kingdoms, King James, and King Charles, and confessions of
adversaries: next from a true clearing of the state of that war, in Six
Particulars, which obviat all the objections of adversaries: And lastly from
lawyers, adversaries, the law of nature, the law of nations, the law of God,
and sound reason.

SECT. 12. Page 169. Shows
What is the meaning of the oath of alleagiance, as to its Ecclesiastical
part: What way the King's supremacy over Church persons, and in Church causes
began and was carried on in England: How the same was advanced to a great
height in Scotland: What sense this King and the late Parliament did put upon
the oath of alleagianee, by their Acts and Actings: How it were sinful to
acknowledge, by taking the oath, That so much Church power belongs unto the
civil Magistrate, cleared by Nineteen particulars.

SECT. 13. Page 200. Shows
The groundlesnesse of Mr Stilling fleet's notion concerning the divine right
of forms of Church government, by making it appear how he overturneth his
own grounds, how he misstateth the question, the practice of the Apostles
ground a jus divinum here: Christ's institution and the institution of the
Apostles is for a particular species: Christ's faithfulness in his office,
speaks much for this: The hazard is great in leaving the species
undetermined: The confession of the faith of several Churches for a Species:
How he misseth his pretended end and arm. And how unseasonable his book is at
this time: and useless so long as the league and Covenant stands in force,
though his notion were true in thesi.

SECT. 14. Page 254. Shows
How weak the Reasons are, which plead for the taking of the oath of
alleagiance, by answereing Sixteen of them.

SECT. 15. Page 270: Shows
How unlawful it is, to own and acknowledge the curats for lawful Ministers,
by fourteen reasons: Four objections answered.

SECT. 16. Page 298. Shows
That it is lawful for Ministers, banished from their own flocks by a
sentence of the civil Magistrate, to preach in public or private, as God
calls, by Eight reasons: Thr^ objections are answered.

SECT. 17. Page, 305. Shows
That it is lawful for Ministers, though censured by the pretended prelate, to
preach, as God gives a call, whether in public, or in private, by Six
reasons: Four objections are answered.

SECT. 18. Page 310. Shows
That it is lawful for people to meet together, for hearing honest Ministers
preach, publicly or privately; And for other Christian duties, notwithstanding
of Acts made against it, by several reasons: One objection answered.

SECT. 19. Page 316. Shows
How unlawful it is to acknowledge the high commission court, by compeering
before it, by Eleven reasons: Four or five objections are answered.

SECT. 20. Page 327. Shows
How dreadful a sin it is to abjure the Covenant: a sin aggravated by twelve
particulars.

SECT. 21. Page 347. Shows
What judgments, perjury has brought on, in all ages, out of history sacred,
and profane.

SECT. 22. Page 359. Shows
The lawfulness and binding force of the solemn league and Covenant,
notwithstanding of all which the author of the seasonable case etc. has said
against it.

SECT. 23. Page 391. Shows
The lawfulness of the national Covenant, as it was sworn and subscribed,
Anno 1638, 1639, etc. Notwithstanding of all which the author of the seasonable
case, etc. Has said to the contrary.

The CONCLUSION Page 416. Shows
What the now afflicted Church of Scotland expects from strangers: and what
use they should make of this sad dispensation, etc.

FINIS.

