A Congratulatory POEM ON HIS MAJESTY's Happy Return FROM HOLLAND.

Written by Mr. BROWN.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones, at the White Horse without Temple Bar.
MDCXCI.

To the Honorable Sir Thomas Alyen. Knight. and Bar.
RIght Honored Sir, vouchsafe to cast your Eye
On this Essay of Heroic Poesy,
Which for unmerited Favors, as it is meet,
I Humbly prostrate at your Worthy Feet;
Beseeching that it may so happy be
To share a Blessing in your Courtesy,
And be protected by your Loyal Name
From all the Blasts that may it else Defame:
Pray entertain it, for ( Dear Sir) it sings
The very best of Warlike Valiant Kings;
That Monarch, Sir, by you so greatly loved,
Even HE, that Heaven kind for us approved:
It Is HE, I say, whom You so much adore,
And long have Prayed to see Return once more
Happy and Safe to England's Happy Shore.
Now, Sir, He Is come, my Muse his Welcome sings,
And in your Ears his Matchless Praises rings:
The which ( Good Sir) when you vouchsafe to read,
Charity's Mantle over my Failings spread;
My Eyes often dazzled with Excess of Light,
My Muse but dull, and narrower my Sight:
I might have left this weighty Task to them
Whose nobler Thoughts direct a loftier Pen;
But yet, I hope, I am to be excused,
Because 'twas Love and Zeal acted my Muse.
I write, but it is, alas, with trembling Hand,
The Praise of him that Rules blessed Albion's Land,
And sing his Welcome to his wished for Strand:
It Is Wholesome Foot, tho it is but homely dressed,
Yet something here, I hope, may please each Guest.
High are my Strains, my Buskined Mistress sings,
The very best of Men, the best of Kings,
In Verse Heroic tells his Heroic Deeds,
Whose Worth all Commentary still exceeds.
Nor can a Muse, Imp't with the Noblest Wing,
Sound half the Praise of William our Great King:
So high is Virtue, in her Native Glory,
Advanced in Him, above the Reach of Story;
Bright as the brightest Star that ere did flame,
A shining Monument to Caesar's Name,
A Prince in Fame's great Catalogue more bright
Than all the Sons of Honor ere could light,
A Prince in Prudence, and in Arms more Great
Than ever yet ruled in Albion's State;
Who lesser Sparks of Honor does out-flame,
And swallows all their Titles in his Name:
HE far exceeds the Trophies of the Pen,
A Prince above the Characters of Men,
Wise as the wisest, as the boldest bold,
In Dangers, only, and Success grown old:
On whom no Barbarous Enemy can confer
Less than an High Immortal Character.
Sir, here I must abruptly take my Leave,
Because the Printer tells me he shall have
More than he can conveniently dispose
Within his Page; he bids me therefore close.
And so I will, Praying, Right Worthy Sir,
That God may still his Blessings on you pour;
Your Lady long preserve, you Heirs with Blessing crown,
And give you lasting Joys, when you this Life lay down.
This comes (Good Sir) from the unworthy Hand

A Congratulatory Poem, etc.
Rouse, rouse, my Muse, and drein the from the dregs
Of Vulgar Thoughts, skrew up thy highest Pegs,
Contemn the World, soar, soar aloft, and let
Thy Thoughts Despise to take a vulgar Flight;
Imp, imp thy Wings with Zeal, thy Strains with Fire,
Let nothing sway thee, but most pure Desire;
Snatch thee a Quill from the spread Eagle's Wing,
And like the towering Lark, mount up and sing,
To welcome home WILLIAM our Sovereign King.
Tune thy sublime Theorboe four Notes higher;
And higher yet; so that the shril-mouth'd Quire
Of swift-wing'd Seraphims, come down and join,
To make thy Consort more than half Divine;
Strein higher still, what if I crack a String
In venturing nobly higher for to Sing?
Reach Heavens, Ela then, and undecline
Till with a deep-mouthed Gam-ut sound again
From Pole to Pole, it will not reach his Worth;
Nor find a Note to set his Praises forth.
Hail, hail Great Monarch, of Renowned Fame,
We'll wreath the Laurels, celebrate thy Name,
In Songs transcending we'll rehearse thy Story.
Let Heavens also crown thy Brows with everlasting Glory.
Shall Dutchmen, when of thy Approach they hear,
Triumphal Arches for thy Welcome rear?
Shall their loud Cannons echo forth thy Fame?
And shall their Fireworks likewise the same?
Shall they with Voices, Hearts and all agree
To spread thy Praise; and eke to honor thee?
And shall not Englishmen for Shame arise?
Come, Countrymen, let us echo through the Skies
The lasting Worth of William, our great King:
And make his Glorious Acts through Europe ring:
A Pyramid of Gold then let us rear,
And on it 'grave, in Characters most fair,
The worthy Deeds of our Third William 's Name,
That after time it lively may remain
To his Eternal, Matchless, worthy Fame,
So following Ages, and Generations all
Shall justly Thee poor England's Savior call;
When they shall read, ( Great Sir) how that you gave
Your Worthy Self three Nations for to save,
Thought naught too dear, so that you might obtain
For us, our Dear-bought Liberties again;
And free us from the Yoke of Slavery;
And likewise from Cursed Popish Tyranny.
When this is told, O who will not love a King!
So Great, so Good, so Just in every thing?
By many Wonders YOU were hither brought;
Which strangely too by their Concurrence wrought
Our whole Redemption in so short a Space,
As did the Slothe of Human Aids Disgrace:
Those who do hold Success the Cast of Chance,
And Providence the Dream of Ignorance,
Might in those Miracles Design discern,
And from wild Fortune's Looks Religion learn.
Tell us no more of Julius Caesar's Fame,
Who, when he only looked, he overcame:
Nor yet of Alexander's great Renown;
Nor Hector's Glory, blazed from Town to Town;
Pompey avaunt, thy trifling Glories glance;
To our Great VVilliam's, they are but Ignorance:
And Scanderbeg, that Great Renowned Man,
Who from so many Wars Victorious came,
Must Phoebus like, when Sol does show his Face,
Resign his Glory, it is Bright VVilliam's Place:
No, it is not these can bear away the Bell,
For still our Conquering William does excel;
Victorious still he grows, prevail he shall,
Until his Foes become Poor Quakers all.
Hail, once again, ( Great Sir) and let the Hail
Through England, Scotland, Ireland prevail.
I cannot forbear, nor can I hold my Hand,
My Pen will still pursue my Wills Command;
Then blame me not ( Great Sir) I must Repeat,
The Loyalty I bear to you the Great,
Victorious William, my Dear Sovereign Lord,
Naught can I think enough to spread abroad,
Your VVorth and Virtue, which so much excel,
All which Rehearsed would many Volumns fill.
The Time alas would Fail if I should speak,
Of all thy Virtues and thy Glories great,
But some ( Illustrious Sir) I must Repeat.
Clap Hands, rejoice O happy British Clime,
Thrice happy if thou did but know thy Time,
Wherein you are blessed with Blessings from above,
A God of War a Queen made up of Love;
A King so Virtuous, Wise, so Good and Just,
A King so Pious, Great and Valorous.
And eke a Queen, composed of Grace and Love,
Wise as a Serpent, harmless as a Dove;
So Loving Lovly, of a Soul so Great,
That whosoever Loves her not, deserves the greatest Hate.
You Are Blessed, indeed you are Blessed, had thou a Heart
But to improve these Blessings 'yond Desert.
Religious Freedom now we all enjoy,
We live secure, and naught does us annoy;
Under our Vines most safely sit we may,
And no Distractions more shall us dismay;
No more shall Frantic Zeal our Peace disturb,
Nor Popish Thraldom more, our Conscience curb;
Within our Temples, Hymns and Anthems Ring
Of thanks to God, and praises to our King:
Our happy Roses, and our Thistles blow,
Our Fields with Milk and Honey overflow.
As yet we hear no Drums and Trumpets sound,
Nor Carcasses of Dead or'e-spread the Ground;
From which God save our happy English Land,
And strengthen much the Man of his Right Hand:
And Lord preserve in perfect Union still,
The little World of this our Albion Isle.
Enlarge his Life who does enlarge our Peace,
And let his Glory with his Life increase;
That being mounted on the Wings of Fame,
This Age may see his Worth, the next admire his Name.
And whilst we thus our weighty Work pursue,
Let Us once more pay our Hails, Great Sir, to You.
Hail mighty Monarch of the Warlike Race,
Whose nimble Conquests Time wants Speed to Trace.
Behold our Angel comes, by whose bright Ray
Darkness is fled, and Light salutes the Day;
Welcome, Thrice Welcome, to the old Whitehall;
Thy Gracious Presence make us happy all.
As the Sun's heat replenisheth the Earth,
Purges the Blood, and gives to Seasons Birth:
So your Blessed Ray diffused within our Sphere,
Gives vital Warmth to every Creature there,
To Providence and Thee we still shall raise
Altars for Thanks, and Pyramids for Praise.
The Church shall Triumph, and the State Rejoice,
And sing Te Deums with united Voice.
So shall you be Beloved by Wholes, not Parts,
And ever live the Regent King of Hearts.
O that my Low-bred Strains were yet raised Higher,
That I might still bright William's Worth admire.
Reach then a soaring Quill that I might write,
As with a Jacob's Staff to take the height.
Now come aloft, come, come, and breath a Vein,
And give some vent unto thy dareing Strain;
Come Mars, Minerva, ay and Juno too,
Mount, Mount, Parnassus, William's Praise pursue.
The chiefest Gods in their best Royal State,
Thy matchless Praises now do celebrate;
Jove that shakes Heaven with his angry Brows,
Presents thee Harmony, to be thy Spouse;
Whose Father famed, is Mars the God of War,
Whose Mother bright, is Venus Morning Star:
Minerva too presents her Golden Chain,
And lovely Ceres will make thee Rich in Grain*
Jove's mighty Daughters with their Beardless King,
From famous Helicon their Music bring;
Each one with Flowers and Laurels rarely Crowned,
Whilst Aroa's pleasant Harp does sweetly sound.
Thus, Thus, the Gods in all their best Array,
With Songs and Dances Crown this happy Day:
It Is VVilliam's Praise, it is VVilliam's Praise alone,
That Is thus by all that is Good and Great made known:
Metals may Blazen Common Beauties, he
Makes Pearl and Planets humble Herauldry:
But whether am I fled? a Poets Song,
When Love directs, his Praise, is ever long.
Awake, it is shame, our Lions Dormant lie,
And all our Spirits in a Lethargy.
Rouse Countrymen, take hold of Shield and Spear,
Make William's Foes Tremble and Quake for fear.
Let Us make those Monsters that Invade our Land,
Throw down their Arms, and turn their trembling Hand,
Against those that Disobey our King's Command.
We Will ransack Europe, find out England's Foes,
And such as dare our Sovereign Lord Oppose:
Let Us find those Hell Hounds that so much annoy,
And seek our Native Land for to destroy:
And eke those Vultures, that corrode the heart
Of their own Mother, make her sorely smart;
That watch a Season, for to give her up
For to be Butchered, by a Damned Pope;
Or else to humble her to Lewis fell,
That Cursed Monster who rose up from Hell,
To be a Plague, and Scourge to Christendom:
To this most Christian Turk, they would fain become
Vassals; and likewise Slaves to Hell and Rome.
Let Us find, let us find, I say those Traitors out,
And let them to Condign Shame be brought:
That thus the King defy, and do adore,
The Filthy Carcass of a Rotten Whore.
Look up, you Sons of mighty Ancestors!
Who never bounded were by their own Shores:
Your Fighting Fathers were abroad renowned,
Their Kings in France, and distant Jewry Crowned.
Now give me Vine! and let my Fury rise,
That what my ravished Soul's Immortal Eyes
With Joy and Wonder saw, I may Rehearse,
To curious Ears in high Immortal Verse.
Forgive ( Great Sir) that this Aspiring Flame,
(First kindled as a Light to show thy Fame)
Consumes so fast, and is mis-pent too long,
E're my Chief Vision is become my Song.
Thy Self I saw quite tired with Victory,
As weary grown to Kill, as they to Die:
Whilst some at last, thy Mercy did enjoy,
'Cause 'twas less pains to Pardon, than destroy;
And thy Compassion did thy Army please,
In mere Belief, it gave thy Valor ease.
Lo! in a Calm began thy Regal Sway,
Which with most Cheerful Hearts all do obey;
As if no Law were Juster than thy Word,
Thy Scepter still were safe, without a Sword.
And let Chronologers pronounce thy Style,
The first True Monarch of the Golden Isle:
An Isle so seated for Predominance
And Naval Strength, it is Power can so advance,
That it may Tribute take, of what the East,
Shall ever send in Traffic to the West.
Advance Great Sir, still let your Fame be spread,
As for as where the Morning Clouds look red:
Go on, go on, let lofty Lewis feel,
The mighty Force of thy revenging Steel,
Make, make, his Flowers fade and Courage reel;
Nay reel he must at last, and tumble down,
France is thy Right, he shall resign his Crown
To you ( Illustrious Sir) you shall enjoy your own.
It Is not the Tide of many reeling Years,
Can wash the Fields of Gossey and Poictiers;
A conscious Horror strikes their Bosoms still,
When they survey that famous fatal Hill,
Where our third Edward's Host Spectators stood,
Wading to Honor 'bove the Knees in Blood,
And left the Prince to make the Conquest good.
Where will they sculk when they the Banners view
Of a Third Edward, and a William too?
O what cannot England do if she awake!
Give Laws to Europe, and make Empires shake;
Keep Mistress of the undisputed Main,
And hold the Balance just 'twixt France and Spain;
And once more make her useless Cannons roar,
Through both the Indies, and bring back their Oar;
Search out new Worlds, and conquer old ones too,
Bomb Mexico and subjugate Peru.
Beard the Proud Sophy and the Grand Mogul,
These are the Rays would make thy Glories full.
What though the Spaniards have surrendered Mons,
And left it unto the Tyrant of France,
'Twas 'cause they wanted Thee for their Defense.
For doubtless had you but near them advanced,
You Would made them all toth' Tune of Teague to dance,
And back again in have return to France.
But this will no ways stain thy Matchless Glory,
Thy Name shall still be Crowned in English Story;
For we are Resolved ( Great Sir) to reunite,
And with our Lives and Fortunes pay their spite.
Come, come, you Foolish Iacobitish Crew,
Lay by your Malice, lest there worse ensue:
Oh! never Plot against your Prince and State,
Lest Vengeance fell repay it on your Pate;
No never think that God will suffer such,
His Dear ANOINTED ever for to touch:
Leave off, leave off, your Dagon cannot stand,
Whilst the Blessed ARK remains within our Land;
Join, join with us, for God is on our side,
Even so shall Blessings still to you betide;
Yet know proud Foes, if you do this disdain,
We will e're long your Pride and Glory stain,
For we are Resolved advancc Great Williams Fame.
Sure Heaven has thee designed to wound the Whore,
To tear her Flesh, and lay her in her Gore;
To ruin Rome, the Pope to undermine,
And work his fatal Downfall in due time.
Jehovah Spirit Thee for thy Great Work,
Make Thee a Terror unto Pope and Turk:
So by you then shall Tyrants be undone,
And all the force of Hell and Rome or'thrown.
When God appointed Kings with his own Voice,
And joyful People blessed him for the Choice;
Then Kingly Virtues set the Monarch forth,
And not Succession Crowned him, but his Worth.
Such is thy fate blessed Isle, and may thou be,
A Blessing to thy King as He Is to Thee:
Thou never were so happy yet till now,
Blessed with a King, before whose Feet shall bow
All those that hate Thee, and the Truths of God,
If they will not kiss the Son, shall feel the Rod.
Too boldly ( Awful Monarch) am I gone,
Through all your Guards, to gaze about your Throne;
Yet it is the use of Greatness to excufe,
The daring Progress of the Sacred Muse:
She taught the Lover, Love; the Warrior, War;
And is the Guide when Honor would go far.
Heroic Prince, may still thy Acts and Name,
Become the VVonder, and Discourse of Fame;
May every Laurel, every Myrtle Bough
Be stripped, for VVreaths t'adorn, and load thy Brow;
Triumphant VVreaths, which 'cause they never fade,
Wise elder times, for Kings and Poets made;
Let me deserve a little sprig of Bay,
To wear Great Sir, on your blessed Holy Day.
Stay, speak ( O Fame!) what Triumph thou would sound;
In all thy boasted Flights, thou scarce have found
One Theme like mine. Ascend and strait disperse,
(As far as ever thou were led by Verse,
Or Light e're flew) my Sov'reigns full Renown,
Then rest thy VVings, and lay thy Trumpet down.
Now Thanks to Heaven, that did our King Protect,
And him in all his Councils did Direct;
Gave Laws to Winds, and made the Seas obey,
And safely home our Sovereign Lord Convey:
Thanks to those Barks, that brought his Person over,
From the fair Belgic, to the British Shore,
Let Heavens Prosper them with Blessings store.
May Heavens still Protect your Majesty,
And Crown you with Success, by Land and Sea;
And after Death with Immortality.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, Printed for, and sold by T. Jones, at the White Horse,
without Temple Bar.
A Dialogue between two Oxon Scholars, 4 to.

A Dialogue between the Confederate Princes, etc. Concerning the Present
Affairs of Europe.

In the Press, and will be Published this Easter Term, A Choice Collection of
AIRS, for two and three Treble Flutes, Composed by the best Masters of Music,
and all Engraved upon Copper Plates, price, 2 s. 6. d.


