TWO CONFERENCES BETWEEN Some of those that are called Separatists and
Independents, Concerning their different TENANTS: ONE Whereof, was appointed
with Mr. BURTON, and a number of his Church, and the other, with Mr. John
Goodwin, and some of his Church; which was occasioned by a Gentlewoman being a
Member thereof, whose Husband is one of the Separation: with a Letter written
to that purpose.

NOW Published by D. B. for resolution of those who are doubtful, in all or
any of the matters here controverted; chiefly concerning the High places, which
are usually called Churches, and now of late by the Soldiers, Steeple Houses.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, and are to be sold at the Blew-Anchor in
Cornehill, 1650.

To the impartial Reader.
THere being a meeting appointed between Mr. Burton, with some of his
Congregation, and some of my judgment in matters of Religion, that both they
and we might confer together, and the better know the difference of our
professions and practices, and so endeavor (if possible) to be of our mind,
concerning the truth; at which meeting, we expected accordingly to have had all
matters in controversy between us, fully and lovingly, debated; but the issue
did not prove, as we could have wished.

Again, upon an other occasion of some difference also, in certain points of
Religion, between a Sea Captain and his wife, he being one of our Members, and
she of Mr. John Goodwins: a meeting likewise was appointed between him, with
some of his Church, and some of ours, at which meeting those matters were
discussed at large, though many lets (as in the former) were cast in the way,
to hinder both the progress and conclusion thereof.

Now, seeing the first of these conferences was above six years ago, and the
last about one year ago, and both of them written when they were recent in the
memory, it may thereby appear, how unwilling all or any of us (though having
the better part, as we hope) have been, to divulge them or any of them to
public view.

But now upon further consideration, and weighing the matter more seriously,
(as in aballance) I find that in the one scale, all the prejudice and
discontent, which the other party may possibly take without any just cause, in
that we thus show here to the world, both their parts and ours, to be all very
light; in comparison of the generality of the peoples great ignorance, and
manifold doubts in the other scale; who are still captivated in Babel, and both
misled and blindfolded, not only by the Clergy in general, who succeed their
Lords and Masters, the Bishops, (howbeit the Servant be not a-above his Lord)
but even still for sinister ends, by the most smooth and subtle sort of them,
who make a greater show of godliness, and reformation then the rest, such us
this Mr. Goodwin is, and Mr. Burton was.

This ignorance and doubting does consist in diverse particulars concerning the
sacred worship of God, chiefly the high places, otherwise called Churches and
Steeple Houses, here in both conferences controverted: although their national
Church-worship, worshippers, Ministry, Covernment, and maintenance, are there
by the scope of all to be observed: in which and many other, most of the people
are also very ignorant and doubtful.

And considering, as on the one side, that no man ought to hide his Talent, nor
be a self-lover; but every Christian especially, is to dispense whatsoever
measure of gift he has received, to the good of others; so on the other side,
what great need there is still (as was said) both of information and resolution
in the aforesaid matters, (notwithstanding all the floods of books now a days,
concerning other subjects.

And although Mr. Chidley (my yoak-fellow in the first, and both for himself
and me in the last,) was somewhat averse to the publishing of the business, yet
since we are of one mind in the particulars thereof, the rest of us have thus
brought both Conferences to public observation, chiefly concerning the
high places, for though we have often heard, that howbeit Rome was not built in
one day, (as the proverb is) yet a greater number of Romish houses, such as the
Monasteries, Abbeys and Nunries both in Scotland and England, were demolished
in one day formerly, then there have been Crosses pulled down, either on
Steeples or Streets, in a hundred of these days, now wherein we live,
notwithstanding there were both far more letts, and fewer pretenses of
reformation, in those days then in these.

Thus, having no further occasion here, to hinder thee from this good occasion
it self, I refer thee to take hold thereof, and of all things else, which may
add to thy knowledge and sanctification, as I wish to do my-self, whiles there
is any time or opportunity yet remaining: only at present, I entreat thee,
that what degree of profit soever thou reapest hereby, thou will give unto God
(as the only true owner) the whole praise: and as for me his weak instrument
in this behalf, if I incur no just dispraise, I shall rest fully and gladly
contented,

Thine, as thou both desire and endeavourest, not to follow any man
whosoever, further then that Man follows Christ. DAVID BROWN.

Two Conferences, between some of those that are called Separatists and
Independents, concerning their different Tenants.
THere being a Conference in London, appointed between some of those
Christians, usually called the Separation, and Mr. Burton, a Pastor of an
Independent Church, concerning some differences between them, and diverse
Separatists coming to his house in Fryday-street, for that purpose, upon the
17. day of the 4. month, 1645. being the 5. day of the week, after
Church-exercise, and only three of them having occasion to speak, viz. Mr.
Brown, Mr. Duppa, and Mr. Chidley; and the said Mr. Brown, immediately after the
Conference, writing the sum of what he and the said Mr. Burton spoke, which to
this time he has kept secret, and it might be he would have done still, were
it not that by the entreaty of certain friends, and to give them and others
some satisfaction, concerning the high places of England, lately debated again
between the said Mr. Chidley and Mr. John Goodwin, he has now divulged the
same to public view: together with that other Conference of late, which was
occasioned by a Member of our Congregation, whose wife was a Member of Mr.
Goodwins Church, and desired to be satisfied, whether her Husband or she was in
the truest Church State.

The first Question was, whether Mr. Burton and his Church were in the order of
the Gospel, that the Separation might know certainly how to esteem them,
entitle them, and have fellowship with them; and whether they were so indeed,
as they professed to be in word, and Mr. Burton answering affirmatively: it was
in the next place demanded, how then did his practice and theirs so much
differ, both their professions and Covenants seeming to be alike, and therefore
desiring to have his practice compared with his Covenant or profession, or any
of them, with theirs of the Separation, which he absolutely refused, saying, he
and his Church were a free and Independent body or Corporation, and therefore
not bound to make account to any other Church or people in the world, although
never so famous, and one of his elders added, that the very (avaliers or
Malignants themselves, gave them the Title of Separatists.

But it being objected to Mr. Burton, that he was bound both by precept and
example of the immediate Apostles, to give a reason of his faith, stop the
mouths of gainsayers, yea and approve himself to those that are without, far
more to those that are within, even to be indeed as he professes himself and
the rather, in that he is a teacher and guide to others; as the first Church of
the Gentiles at Antiochia, thought it rather an honor then any disparagement,
to ask resolution of some doubts at the Church of the Jews, who were before
them in the faith and order of the Gospel at Jerusalem, though some of the
Apostles were present at both; and the rather, we hope you will do, said Mr.
Brown, because we come to you in love, esteeming more of you then hundreds of
your breeding, (I mean at the Universities) in regard both of your sufferings
and writings, far beyond what they have either acted or suffered, especially
for that public Sermon, you made in the Pillary-Pulpit at Westminster, three
hours long, even resisting unto blood against the evil of the times, unto
which I was a witness, and is a motive of my coming to you at this time. He
answered that his profession and practice were agreeable, and that he and his
people entered, according to the rules prescribed in the Gospel, and so walked
for ought he knew, as many can bear witness, and we also may, if we will come
and hear him.

To the which or the like words, one of his Elders added that John Baptist sent
two of his Disciples to ask our Savior, whether he was the Messiah, or if they
should look for another, and our Savior not answering them directly, bids them
tell their Master what they heard and saw, yea, and reckons up diverse
excellent particulars, which he only expressed without either inference or
application; so his meaning (to our apprehension) was, that if we were not
pleased with what they professed or practiced, concerning the worship of God,
we might rather come and see, and hear and observe, their works of conversion,
and manner of conversation, then to reason the matter; but we desiring first to
confer some few times, to see if we could possibly agree in the truth,
perceiving their unwillingness, by some harsh speeches and carriages, did
apprehend it would be to small purpose.

Upon the hearing of these or words to that purpose, Mr. Burton said, that he
had renounced his Ministry and Orders which he had of the Church of England,
and that he witnessed by his suffering, against the Ministry, constitution,
worship, Government, and high places of that national Church, and that there
was no holiness in those places.

And upon his justifying himself and his people in all things, by our Saviors
practice and his Apostles, it was demanded by Mr. Brown; what means then the
blearing of those sheep, and the lowing of them Oxen daily in our ears if you
do, and obey all things so well (as both Saul and the Angel of Laodicea, and
many others spoke of themselves) what means then (I say) both your preaching,
and all your Members hearing in those Parish-Assemblies; is it not a halting
between two opinions, and that ye show your selves, neither to be hot nor could
in so doing?

He answered that our Savior and his Apostles, resorted to the Synagogues of
the Jews, and why might not they go as well to the Parish-Assemblies?

But says Mr. Brown, you must neither compare the Jewish Church with the
English; nor yet the Synagogues of the one, with the high places of the other;
but rather the high places of England, with those in Judah, in that they have
both an unlawful dedication and foundation; so it appears by your practice,
whatsoever by your words you profess, that you are still in Babel, absolving
the wicked (sparing as it were the fatt) by your presence, and condemning the
just in Sion, (whom ye esteem to be lean) by your absence, though ye know
obedience to be better then sacrifice.

He and another of his Elders answered, that neither did he preach, nor they
hear in every common Parish Church, but such as they chused above others,
neither did they hear in those high places, as men were in discharge of their
Ministerial function, but only in the exercise of their gifts, and not so much
for edification, as that they might get some matter of accusation against them
by hearing them, and thereof make some profitable use, when they saw a
convenient occasion.

Then it was demanded, how he and other Independents could justify their
unequal yoking, with those in the Parish-Assemblies, whom they judge to be
only of the world, and not of the Church, as themselves profess to be; and
though they partake in the word and prayer with them, in the public high
places, yet they are not so thankful, as to admit those of the Assemblies to
partake with them at their private administering the seals, as if that private
separation at that time, or in that place, would alter the national Church
constitution of them and all the root together in one.

Whereas, they should have no spiritual fellowship at all, with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them, and witness against them, as both
Iddo the Prophet did at Bethel, and as the Jews were commanded of God, not to
go to Bethaven, Beersheba, Bethel, nor Gilgal, yea and we find it recorded, as
a But or Exception, even against some of the Kings of Judah, for not abolishing
those high places; whereby not only evil it self, but all the appearances and
occasions of evil might be removed; so that whatsoever place has an Idolatrous
institution or dedication, cannot by any means be purged, but in altering the
form thereof, by utter demolition, and scarce applying the same to a civil use,
or to be a common habitation.

To which was answered, that those places might still be well used by Gods
people, though they have been abused by Heathens and Papists.

Whereupon occasion was taken by Mr. Brown, (seeing them so unwilling to
confess the truth) to clear those two points, both of a Church State; and place
of meeting, expecting a satisfactory answer of them, at least for the hearers
sake.

He affirmed, that in regard the Temple of Jerusalem, was built according to
Gods own direction, and therefore a holy work, always capable to be purged,
and reduced to the first principle of integrity, if ever it should be abused by
Idolatry; as it was polluted, purged, and reduced diverse times, according as
the Magistrates and people following their example, were disposed to good or
evil, as upon divine record, in the books of the Kings and Chronicles does
appear.

So the Churches constituted by the immediate Apostles, according to Christ's
institution, consisting all of faithful people, according to visibility,
(referring secret things to God) and therefore, all proceeding from a true and
holy original, whenever they should be corrupted either by sinful matter, or
corrupt practices, as in Corinth by that incestuous person, or in Galatia by
that false Doctrine, they were still purgeable, and were indeed purged. for
otherwise a little leaven, would have sowred the whole lump.

And according both to the Temple and Churches purifying, Adam the first man,
being created holy and unblameable, if he should fall, (as he did indeed) to
sin and Apostacy, he was (by means of his original holiness by creation)
restored by the second Adam Christ, to his former integrity.

But neither material Temples, built by the man of sin and child of pardition,
nor by the Heathens, and dedicated to Idolatry, and entitled by the name of
Saints departed, although otherwise used to the worship of God, as the Jews
did sacrifice still in the high places of Judah, after King Manasses conversion
and reformation, 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. nor yet assemblies gathered or constituted by
humane invention, contrary to the pattern of the Churches mentioned in the
Gospel, can be reduced to any purity or integrity, because they never had any,
but must needs still continue in Apostasy and Idolatry, (as they were made
thereof at the first, until there be a visitation or dissolution) as we have
woeful experience, even yet in these days: which were pretended to be days of
reformation, and might be yet so indeed, if it should please God to honor
those whom he has set in Authority, with so excellent, worthy, and glorious a
work, beyond all other works; as he did that worthy young King Josiah.

To those grounds thus, or to this effect laid, Mr. Burton and his
congregation, in stead of answering, opposing, applying, or any wise clearing
themselves, (in a harsh and angry manner) propounded three questions to the
Separatists.

First, who built the Synagogues of the Jews? To which he answered, In that
the Scripture is silent, who built the Synagogues (except only a Centurion, who
loved the Jewish Nation built one) it does not become any man to demand the
question; neither is it necessary to edification or salvation; but we neither
read nor hear of any dedication of them to Idolatry, which the Scottish
Covenant abjureth, as well as they do the Romish Hierarchy, worldly monarchy,
blasphemous liturgy, canonizing of Saints, and baptizing of bells; And it
suffices us, that the Synagogues were lawful meeting places, for the more
frequent and convenient practice of the Jewish Religion, except what was
appropriated to the Temple, at certain times of the year, or else neither our
Savior nor his Apostles would have countenanced those places with their
presence; nor King David in the Psalms complained of the desolation thereof.

His second Question was, Might no meeting houses be built, to the Churches of
the Saints now under the Gospel? To which the Separatists answered, that there
both have been, and still are many lawful meeting-places, built by lawful
Authority for the Churches of the Saints under the Gospel, for keeping them
both from the injury of weather, and for their more quiet and peaceable
practicing of the Ordinances, being sheltered and hidden, both from the open
and secret enemies of God and his truth, besides the dwelling, houses of
Members and wel-willers, and wherein also are Churches, both habiting and
conversing, and all without either dedication, consecration, or any kind of
superstition.

And his third question was, Whether were those which we call high places, and
he still comparing to the Synagogues, consecrated before, in, or after they
were built? The Separatists answered, that Mr. Burton himself knew better, who
built and dedicated those shops of Antichrist (wherein he has lived all his
days) then the Separatists, who were mere strangers to such things, and unto
which, both he and his Congregation do still bring all their Tithes,
Sacrifices, Gifts, and Oblations; but for the hearers sake, the Separatists
said, (according as they understood) that the full dedication of the house,
(whatsoever be of the ground) must be at the accomplishing: but in regard both
of intention, earnest, and beginning of action, are completed at the first
stone laying, as the Bishops usually laid the first stone, and made the blessed
(or rather cursed) beginning, and so they and the workmen proceeding and ending
equally, the one with the other, by Masses, mattens, letanies, or such like
abominations, whereby the Popish Clergy (still strengthened with civil Authority)
do practice their devotions in all their consecrations.

And in end, after Mr. Burton did withdraw to refresh himself, he being in
exercise with his congregation before this appointed disputation, amongst some
other speeches had with the Elders and other Members of his Church in his
absence, they alleged, that if we should look so narrowly and precisely, to
Antichristian or Heathenish dedication of places, why do we offer any service
or sacrifice to God at all, either in England, Scotland, France or Ireland; for
they were all four dedicated to Saints departed, such as St. George, St.
Andrew, St. Denis, and St. Patrick?

It was answered, that those Nations and all others, were created and built by
the great CREATOR, builder, and maker of all things, and ordained for his
people to live in, yea even the wicked as well as the godly, all having equal
right by the benefit of Creation, even the tares as well as the wheat in the
field of the world, until the Havest of the great day; but he never ordained
any Idolatrous places which are built and dedicated by man, (or by that man of
sin, and child of perdition) to be worshipped in, but has destinated such
works, yea and (workers also (except repentance intervene,) to destruction, and
accounts all kind of Sacrifices, upon whatsoever pretense there offered, to
be like King Jeroboams practice at Dan and Bethel, (who made Israel to sin)
even abominations of desolation.

Some of those Scriptures which concern these matters.
Hos. 4. 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not ^udah offend, and
come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven, nor swear, The Lord
lives.

Amos 4. 4. 5. Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply
transgressions; and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your Tithes after
three years. And offer a Sacrifice of thanks giving with leaven, and proclaim
and publish the free offerings; for this likes you, O ye Children of Israel,
says the Lord God.

2 Chronicles. 14. 2. 3, 4, 5. And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes
of the Lord his God. For he took away the Altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, he brake down the Images, and cut down the Groves. And he took
away out of all the Cities of Judah, the high places and the Images: and the
Kingdom was quiet before him.

Levit. 26. 29, 30. And ye shall eat the flesh of your Sons, and the flesh of
your Daughters shall ye eat. And I will destroy your high places, and cut down
your Images, and cast your Carcases, upon the Carcases of your Idols, and my
soul shall abhor you.

2 Chronicles. 34. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Kings, 13. 2. 2 Kings 23. 13. 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.

Mr. Chidleys Letter to Mr. Goodwin, And the sum of the Conference which
followed thereupon.
Mr. GOODWIN.
THese are to certify you, that Mrs. Goodsone who is one of your Congregation
is wife to one who is a Member with us of the Separation, and she finds her
self agrieved that her Husband is not free to communicate with her in
spiritual worship, now she would willingly know wherein the difference lies
that we cannot communicate with you.

Therefore we have occasion to inquire into the matter, form, ministry,
worship and government of your Church, and shall desire satisfaction therein,
that it is according to the rule, before we can join in Communion therewith,
or with any of the Members thereof, knowing that our Lord Christ requires
separation in Worship, not in part, but wholly, both from persons and things
polluted with diabolical uncleanness, and to cleanse our selves from all
filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in his fear,
which is the desire of the soul of him who is

Your true friend, ready to receive your manifestation when you shall appoint
that I may come to you, or you to me, SAMUEL CHIDLEY.
13th day of the 6th month, 1648.

Upon the 22. of August, 1648. the meeting was appointed to be, unto which
diverse persons came, at which Mr. Chidley would have insisted upon the matter
and form, etc.

And first upon the matter, but Mr. Goodwin would not debate that, nor other
things there desired to be handled, but said, he would go a readier way to
work, and make an end of the business without that; for says he, suppose it
be granted, that all our matter be so corrupt, as you presuppose it is, yet it
is lawful for your Members to communicate with ours; for says he, it is
lawful for a man to communicate with one whom he doubts whether he be a
Believer or not, but this was denied by Mr. Chidley, from two considerations.

First, That whatsoever is doubtful is not to be practiced, though it be a
thing indifferent, because it is not of faith, and therefore a sin, because
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Secondly, much more is he to forbear that which is contrary to the word of
God, as to communicate with one of whom we have not good testimony of his life
and conversation, and that the work of grace is wrought upon him, that he is
effectually called, and separated from Idolatry, and cleaves unto the Way of
Christ in purity. Now said he, we know you not, ye are strangers to us.

We are not come to accuse, but to hear your manifestation for our
satisfaction, that ye are fit matter for the Church of Christ, and we hope we
shall not break Communion for every circumstance of difference amongst us, if
it do not make against the abosolute being of a Saint.

Then Mr. Goodwin said, I grant that a man is not to practice a thing if he be
doubtful of it, but howsoever, he that is doubtful is to give good reason of
his doubt.

Then the Gentleman that doubted, was called upon to give his Reasons, why he
could not communicate with his wife, who told them that the Lord had showed him
the evil of the Church of England, and that he was joined to a separated
Congregation, and thought that he should not be fit matter for the Church to
communicate with, if he should hold Communion with the Members of Mr. Goodwins
Church, because Mr. Goodwins Peoples practice was to preach and hear in the
Parrish-Churches of England, and to Worship in the Idols Temples, and to
Baptize the Children of unbelievers, and such like.

Then after some further discourse, they showed themselves to be willing to
debate the business concerning the high places; whereupon the question was
stated.

Whether it were lawful to worship in the Idols Temples? The sum of the
Conference briefly follows. Mr. John Goodwin.
The Apostle to Timothy, (Tim. 2. 8.) says, I will therefore that men pray
every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. And thereupon
Mr. Goodwin argued, that Gods word had made no restriction, and therefore that
we are not to restrain it, and that therefore this word: (every where) in this
place is to be taken for all manner of places without exception.

To which Mr. Chidley answered, that God himself had made restrictions, showing
that we are not to worship him in Idols Temples, for he has commanded them to
be quite pulled down, Numb. 33. 52. and that command is not taken away, but
remains in full force to this day; This word every in this place is to be
restrained, as in other places, where its said, Children obey your Parents in
all things, Col. 3. 20. Servants obey your Masters in all things; and every
Creature of God is good, and all things are lawful: In all which we are to
know, how far such words are restrained, and how far not; it extends, and
is to be restrained to lawful things, and so this place where he says, pray
every where, that is, in every place which is not prohibited by Gods Law, but
its prohibited by Gods Law for the Saints to worship in Idols Temples, for he
has commanded, they should be quite plucked down, saying ye shall quite pluck
down all their high places, Numb. 33. 52. because they are polluted with
diabolical uncleanness, now this Command was never abrogated, as I said
before: But Mr. Goodwin said there is no Guilt of sin upon the high places,
neither is there any sin imputed to them, but its a sin to hold restriction of
places for Gods worship

To which Mr. Chidley answered, That God accounts them diabolically unclean,
and calls them by the name of sin it self. as he calls the high places of
Aven, the sin of Israel, Hosea 10. 8. And if it be a sin to hold restriction of
places for the worship of God, then it is a sin to uphold that restriction, by
worshipping God in those places that are so restrained.

Its you that uphold distinction of places said Mr. Goodwin, not we who meet in
them; we hold all places alike.

Mr. Chidley answered again, we uphold not the distinction of places, but its
you by your worshipping, and pleading for those places that are restrained by
men.

Says Mr. Goodwin, even now you would maintain distinction of places, and now
you say, you uphold no distinction of places. Mr. Chidley said, its true in a
sense, we uphold them not at all; but when they have set up Idols Temples, we
do hold that those places are made diabolical by them, because wicked men have
dedicated them to their Idols: no more does God himself in the first place make
such distinctions of places as they make, but when once they have put a
diabolical uncleanness upon the same, God declares then that they are
unclean, and calls them sin, and commands them to be pulled down, and so
we distinguish not in the first place, but they make the places to be distinct
diabolically by their dedication of those places to Idols, and so the
distinction is theirs, not ours. God himself made all things good at the first,
and made no Devil, but made Angels, and they made themselves Devils, so he
made all things good, and made no Temple of Idols, or Temple of Devils, so
concerning men he professes, that he desires not the death of a sixner, and
why will ye die O House of Israel? to show them that their damnation is of
themselves, and yet elsewhere he shows in respect of the evil of punishment,
there is no evil in the City but he does it; but they bring it upon themselves
in the first place. Therefore when they have made Idols, or Idols Temples, God
owneth them not, but in his just judgment punishes them, and commands them to
be demolished; and we would have them to be destroyed, according to Gods
Commands, and the example of King Josiah, 2. Chron. 34. and other holymen of
God, and therefore we are far from upholding them: yet hold them the Temples
of Devils, till they are pulled down. Its impossible said Mr. Goodwin, to
prove that all the Temples in the Land are dedicated to Idols; but what if
they were, is it unlawful to worship in them therefore?

2. These Steeple Houses here, were not dedicated to Devils, but some to
Christ, others of them are dedicated to God, himself, even to the Trinity, and
most of them are dedicated to Saints, etc.

3. Christ came into the World to take away the distinction between places and
places, and to make all places alike; and to deny this, tends to deny that
Christ Jesus is come into the world, and to establish Jewishme.

4. When he came into the world, he dissolved the uncleannes which God had made
and put upon the Creatures, how much more then the uncleanness which men had
put on those places of theirs built of stone.

5. By the same grounds we may refuse to worship God in any part of the land:
suppose this whole Kingdom be dedicated to St. George, as France to St. Dennis,
and all the houses dedicated all over the Kingdom, as once its said to be
wholly dedicated to St. George; must we not worship God in the Kingdom, because
of that.

6. In John the 4. its clear that Jesus Christ speaking to the woman of
Samaria, shows that all places are now alike, and as there is no place unto
which the worship of God is bound, so there is no place, though an Idols
Temple, but that men may lawfully worship and serve God in; for when the woman
questioned, saying v. 20. Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. 21. Jesus said unto
the woman, believe me the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem Worship the Father. As if he should say, the hour is
coming, that all places shall be left free for to worship in, both this
mountain, and all others, not one place above another, but all alike, no place
more holy, no place more unholy, though in the Mountain of Samaria, where was
an Idols Temple, and so takes away the distinction of places, which was under
the Law. And the reason why the Idols Temples were prohibited under the Law,
was because God had branded them then.

7. Upon the same ground that we must not worship in these places, because
dedicated by Idolaters, it is not lawful for men to worship in their houses,
because Idolatry has been committed theer.

Unto all which Mr. Chidley made answer as follows.

1. It is not impossible to prove these Temples in the Land which the Idolators
frequent to be dedicated to Idols. And the way to try them is as a Thief or
Murderer is tried when he is arraigned before the Judge, if he confess it with
his own mouth, he is out of his own mouth condemned; even so, if the founders
of these places, have confessed out of their own mouths, that they have
dedicated them to such uses, as the Records of the Realm testify, the said
places are condemned, and ought to be executed, but for these things, I refer
unto the records of the Realm, and unto those plain and manifest proofs
openly known formerly.

2. Whereas its alleged that they were not dedicated unto Devils, I say
Temples dedicated to Idols, are dedicated to Devils, and so the Apostle Paul
speaks of the Idols Sacrifices, when he says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.
20. That the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils,
and not to God, and I would not that they should have fellowship with Devils;
The Scripture calls Idols by the name of Devils, so the two calves which
Jeroboam set up at Dan and Bethel were called Devils, for in setting up and
worshipping Idols, men set up and worship Devils: therefore the Temples of
Idols are the Temples of Devils, (and not the Temples of God) no more are
these.

And whereas it is said some are dedicated to Christ, what is their Christ?
their Christ is not he that stands at the right hand of God, but it is a
piece of bread, which they fall down and worship, calling it their God, and eat
it when they have done, O ridiculous horrible impiety, worse then Jeroboams!
and they do not say, its a figure of the body of Christ, and the wine a figure
of the blood of Christ, but (say they) it is really the Body and Blood of
Christ, and to this Christ do they dedicate their Temples which they call
Christ's Chruch.

And so their Trinity is not the eternal God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, but their Trinity which they worship is the picture (painted upon a
wall) of an old man (sitting) in (that which they picture) for heaven, and
there is the Picture of what they call the Son: and the Holy Ghost, they have
also (painted out) in the likeness of a Dove; this is their Trinity which they
fall down and worship, and dedicate their Temples unto And admit that most of
them were dedicated to Saints and Angels, it is to be considered, whether it be
not Idolatry to dedicate any Places to Saints or Angels; but what are your
Saints or Angels which they dedicate their Temples unto new Images which they
make of them, that are no more like unto them, then my Pictur is like Mr.
Goodwins, and they fall down before these Images, saying, St. Peter save me,
St. Paul save me, etc. These their impieties far exceed the Abominations of the
Heathens, and so are their Idols Temples abominable places, and ought not to be
worshipped in, of the Saints. Besides diverse Temples in England are builded and
dedicated to the Heathen Gods, as well as these are to the Christian or rather
Antichristian Gods.

Then Mr. Goodwin began to commend what he had read of the Papists works,
concerning the nature and essence of God, saying, We should not belie the
Devil.

Mr. Chidley answered, do you think that Jeroboam and Jesus was not acquainted
with such things? but the Papists impiety far exceeds his, he made Calves in
imitation of those at Jerusalem. These make a breaden God, and eat it when they
have done, besides their other Abominations, by which they provoke the Lord to
anger.

Therefore friends, Mr. Chidley applying his Speech to the People present.
I desire as you tender the salvation of your souls, to labor to know that
iniquity is in a mystery, and to discover the same; and also learn to know the
mystery of godliness, and how it differs from the mystery of iniquity, though
in some sort the mystery of iniquity resembles it, which makes it the harder
to be discerned, which causes so many souls to be blinded to their
condemnation; for God is not their God, but these are, these are their Gods,
let them pretend what ever they will, they worship these Images.

3. Where its said that Christ came into the world to take away the distinction
of places and places, and to make all places alike, and that to deny this,
tends to deny that Jesus Christ is come into the World, and to establish
Jewishme.

I answer, That Christ came not into the world to take away the diabolical
uncleanness of Idols Temples: no more then of Idols themselves: to affirm that
he did, tends not only to deny Christ, but also to acknowledge Antichrist,
and to establish Idolatry. But he has said, Little Children, keep your selves
from Idols.

4. Whereas it is said, that when he came he dissolved the uncleanness which
God had made, and put upon the Creatures; how much more then the uncleanness
which men had put upon those places, but of lime and stone? Mr. Chidley
answered, that it follows not: That because Christ did take away the
ceremonial uncleanness which was put upon the Creatures by God, that therefore
he took away the diabolical uncleanness which was put upon the Creatures by
men, unless to demolish, and abolish them. As at his coming its said, the Idols
he will utterly abolish; Its a maxim in divinity, amongst the Separation, that
Christ dyed not for Temples made of lime and stone, but for his Church, which
consists of living stones, he died not then for Idols Temples, no more then
for Idols: and though I am verily persuaded, that nothing is unclean of it
self, so it was in the time of the Law, but institution caused the difference,
and it is considerable, that in the time of the Law the Badgers The Original
has it Tachas Skins, whether there be a defect in the common Translation, its
questionable, and it seems somewhat doubtful. But that Idols Temples are
hated by God is out of doubt.
Skins were made use of to cover the Lord Sanctuary, but when did the Lord
ever take that which belonged to any Idol, or Idols Temple, to cover his
Sanctuary? never; it argues therefore, that there is a great deal of
difference between those Creatures, that were ceremonially unclean, and those
diabolically unclean, and Christ might well take away the uncleannes of the
one, but not of the other; we are bidden in the Gospel, to keep our selves from
Idols, and from the pollutions of Idols: Therefore Jesus Christ has not
cleansed them, though he has made the ceremonial things common.

5. Whereas it was said, by the same ground, as we refuse to worship God in
these dedicated places; we may refuse to Worship God in any place of the Land.

Mr. Chidley answered, that it follows not; for though some be Idols Temples,
yet all the house are not.

I know said he, that as the Heathen Nations had their great Gods besides their
petty Gods, so these Nations besides there petty abominable Idols, they have
for every Nation a God; as St. George for England, St. Patricke for Ireland,
St. Denis for France, St. David for wales; and to that God St. George are
Temples dedicated, which are called Saint Georges Churches: these are therefore
Idols Temples, and ought not to be worshipped in, it cannot be proved so of
all the houses in the Land; but if any man will prove his house to be an Idols
Temple when the Parl. sets forth an edict that all the Idols Temples in the
Land shall be thrown down, those shall be demolished as well as the other. As
King Hen: the 8th. did demolish diverse of the Monasteries.

King Henry 8th. did somewhat like to Jehu. Jehu though he destroyed the House
of Baal, yet the Idols Temples of Jereboam he destroyed not: so King Henry the
8th. destroyed diverse of the great high places, but the lesser high places he
did not demolish; though they were all one in respect of pollution; save that
which has most deceit in it, is most to be hated.

And as for the Land it self, if it be possible to Dedicate the whole earth to
St. George, then its possible to dedicate the whole world to an Idol: but it
is not in their power to dedicate it no more then to dedicate the Sun and Moon
and Stars etc. Now the Sun and Moon and Stars have been worshipped as Gods,
yet were not to be demolished; because they were not their only propriety, all
men have their propriety in them; and therefore though God commanded the Idols
Temples, built upon Mountains and Hills to be demolished, yet he did not
require the Mountains and Hills to be pulled down, they were of Gods making,
as the earth: the Idols Temples were of men's framing and erecting, And in this
distinction about propriety the Parliament bears more out in their declaration,
where they reason concerning the Propriety of the King and of the people.
Moreover Lands are the Propriety of Posterity even of the after-Generations
which cannot properly be given to Idols as Temples that are of their making, no
more then the Sun and Moon, which were worshipped, and are common to all; for
God causes the Sun to shine upon the evil and upon the good, and upon the
just and unjust. And concerning houses, The Lord did command in Israel, that
the high places should be pulled down, when he allowed the dwelling houses to
stand, except some house, upon whose roofes they burned incense to other Gods.

6. Concerning Christ's speeches to the woman of Samaria, nothing can be
gathered thence for Idols Temples, true it is that it shows that a time
should come, when the people should not be limited to this place or to that,
and this makes against those who limit men to places, and also against those
that uphold such limited places, by worshipping in them. But that Christ
allows men to worship in Idols Temples, and declares them to be no more
polluted, then any other place (which you affirm) cannot be gathered, neither
by the express words of Christ, nor necessary consequence; for the matter in
question between Christ and the woman was, which was the place of worship, not
about the places of worship, but the place of worship, whether it was at that
Mountain, or at Jerusalem. Our Fathers (says he) worshipped in this Mountain,
and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place of worship. He does not say [a]
place, but [the] place, whereby it appears that her question was about [the]
place, where men ought to worship; whether it was at that Mountain, or at
Jerusalem, for then God bound his public worship to one place.

Now Jesus said unto her, Woman, believe me the hour comes when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. Now Christ
by this speech does not allow them to worship in Idols Temples though in a
sense, all places are free to do it, all places of Gods Creation; but places of
men's limitation, erection, and dedication to Idols, ought to be pulled down;
and this by way of application, may appear in the 22. and 23. verses of the
same Chapter, where Christ deals plainly with her saying, Ye worship ye know
not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of Jews: but the hour
comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him: As if he should say,
think not that though the time be, that the true worshippers shall not be
limited to worship in a place, that therefore this is any justification of you
Samaritans who worship in Idols Temples, and worship Idols. Ye worship you know
not what: we know (says he) what we worship, and alleges this reason, for
salvation is of the Jews; intimating, that salvation was not of the
Samaritans, who worshipped Idols, and in Idols Temples; so that if they would
have salvation, they must turn from such vanities: Therefore he would have them
to worship the Father in spirit and truth. Now the spirit and truth are
distinct, though all one in purity. The spirit is the spirit of God, and the
truth is the word of God, as it is written, Thy word is truth, now the word of
truth does speak against Idols Temples, and therefore, we are not to worship
God in Idols Temples, but in spirit and truth: The spirit of God is a pure
spirit, but Idols and Idols Temples, are unclean and diabolical, and contrary
to the nature of the spirit, the Father seeks such to worship him, that
worship him in spirit and truth: and therefore if you would be found of him,
worship not in Idols Temples, but in spirit and truth. And by all this
Scripture, here is not the least color for; but rather against Idols Temples.
Christ never shed his blood to uphold and purge Idols Temples, from their
diabolical uncleanness, which uncleanness proceeded not from any institution
of God, but from the Devil.

And whereas it is said, that the reason why Idols Temples were prohibited
under the Law, was because God had branded them then.

Mr. Chidley answered, That they made them Idols Temples, God branded them, and
to this day, that brand is not taken off them, but remains still upon them:
The blood of Christ has not cleansed them, the brand is still upon them, as
well as upon the Idols themselves to this day: Therefore as the Saints are to
keep themselves from Idols, so are they to keep themselves from worshipping in
Idols Temples, because the brand is upon them.

Neither do we say that a place is an Idols Temple, because Idolatry is
committed there, as if a Papist should cross himself, and fall down and
worship in his Idolatrous manner, in this or in another man's house, this does
not make it an Idols Temple; but if he build and dedicate, and consecrate a
place of his own proper goods, to an Idol: this is now an Idolatrous place,
and God in the time of the Law commanded Israel to pluck down all the
Idolatrous high places, but not all the houses, therefore the houses may stand,
when the high places are quite plucked down.

Then Mr. Goodwin returned to his former sense, of that place in the 4. of
John, but it was denied that Jesus Christ, does in the least allow or
countenance the woman of Samaria, or any Samaritan or any Idolater else, or any
man whatever, to worship in Idols Temples. Then Mr. Goodwin to back it,
returned to the first Scripture in 1 Timothy 2. 10. concerning the word (every
where) but it was told him, that that was restrained by God himself, and that
by every where is meant, all places of Gods Creation, but not of Man's
limitation and dedication to an Idol, and therefore not the Temple of Samaria,
as he alleged, from John 4. which says, The hour comes; when ye shall
neither at this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father.

Then said Mr. Goodwin, it is very clear from John 4. Christ's speech to the
woman of Samaria, that he came to loose the bands wherewith men were bound, to
come to worship at the Temple of Jerusalem, and in saying, neither at this
Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, he does not justify the worship in the one
place more then the other.

And if by spirit you mean the directions of the spirit, its true; and by the
spirit may be meant the spirit of a man, as Paul says, whom I serve in my
spirit.

To which Mr. Chidley answered. That Christ came to loose the bands which tied
men to the Temple of Jerusalem, is true; but it follows not therefore, that
he has left us free to worship in Idols Temples: he justified the worship in
his own Temple; but not in Idols Temples; neither does the saying of Christ
import any such thing; Christ says afterward to the woman, ye worship ye know
not what, as if he should say, do not think that I do in the least justify
your practices, or your abominable Idols, or Idols Temples, because I have
said, neither at this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem shall ye worship the Father;
but I would have you know, that ye Samaritans worship ye know not what, we
[Jewes] know what we worship, for salvation is not of you Samaritans, but of
the Jews, and Christ shows that the Father must be worshipped in spirit and
truth: now there is not the least word of truth to justify worshipping in the
Idols Temples.

And concerning the Allegations, that by the spirit is to be understood the
directions thereof, and is meant of a Man's spirit, and the truth therein, as
Paul said, God whom I serve in my spirit.

Mr. Chidley answered, I grant that we are to serve God by the directions of
his spirit, and that is by his holy word, which directs us not to worship in
Idols Temples, but shows that they are sin, and to be quite pulled down: And
though Paul says, he served God in his spirit, it may be taken, that he served
God who was in his spirit, for God is said to dwell in the Saints by his
spirit, and the Saints are exhorted to pray in the Holy Ghost which is the
spirit of God, who directs us by his word of truth, to which we are left for
direction, which does not allow any to worship him in Idols Temples, and
therefore this place in John 4. 22. 23. by application makes against them.
That Scripture says Mr. Goodwin, does not include by truth the circumstance of
place.

But it does (said Mr. Chidley) for the word is truth, which witnesses against
the Idols Temples, and lays that brand upon them, which the blood of Christ
takes not off.

And whereas it is called a Circumstance, it is more, its a material substance;
seeing Gods Commands are so directly against Idols Temples, I cannot believe
(said Mr. Goodwin) that stones are capable of pollution, there is no place holy
now; and therefore there is no place unholy or polluted, but as all Creatures
are clean, so are all places.

Mr. Chidley replied, why may not stones be capable of pollution, as well as a
piece of bread? which bread and wine consecrated by an Idolatrous Priest, is
the Table of Devils; and the Cup, the Cup of Devils: as contrariwise the bread
and wine given in the Lords Supper, is the Table and Cup of the Lord. And I
desire you Sir, to take what has been spoken into consideration, and before
you depart, Mr. Goodwin was about to depart now.
take along with you this distinction which I once proposed to diverse honest
men, Mr. Buroughs; Mr. Burton, M. Sal^marsh, M. Knowles, and Dr. Holmes, and
diverse others; for in pleading about the high places, they all unanimously
concurred, that now in the time of the Gospel, there is nothing holy nor
unholy; and this they said was Gospel-liberty, and that to affirm contrary to
this, was a taking away of the liberty of the Gospel. And they were so
enamoured with this point, that they repeated it diverse times, which when I
heard, I stood up and said, whereas it has bin concluded, that there is
nothing holy nor unholy, and that to affirm there is, is to takeaway the
liberty of the Gospel; I say, that now in the time of the Gospel, some things
are holy, even the bread of the Lord, and the Cup of the Lord, other things are
unholy, even the table and cup of Devils; and other things are merely common;
and this Divinity I learned of the Apostle Paul, who was not inferior to the
chiefest Apostles, who when he speaks to the Corinthians, calls the bread
and wine in the Lords Supper, the Table and Cup of the Lord, which none were to
eat and drink but holy persons. That meat and drink which was in the Idols
Temples, he calls it the Table and Cup of Devils, and there is that which is
merely natural and common, which words of mine they took into consideration,
and I think Mr. Buroughs had more sight in it, then any of them all; and so
likewise, I desire you, to take these things into consideration. And whereas it
is objected, that because there is no place holy now, that therefore there is
no place unholy. Sir, it will not follow, that because there is no material
place, which is the Temple of the Lord, as the Temple of Jerusalem in former
time, that therefore there is no Idols Temple, or Temple of Devils; for then
by that account, because there is no flesh of Beasts now to be offered,
according to the saying, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, therefore
the flesh in the Idols Temple is not unclean; but the Apostle calls it The
Table of Devils, as really as he calls the holy bread and wine, the Table
and Cup of the Lord: Therefore as Sacrifices of Beasts, are not now holy, yet
the meat sacrificed to Idols, is the Table of Devils; so though there is no
Temple holy now, yet the Temples dedicated to Idols, are the Temples of Idols,
the Temples of Devils.

I do believe Sir, that there is nothing unclean of itself, nor holy of it
self, but institution whether divine or diabolical, makes the same otherwise
then it was before, though it is in a manner common, as David said of the
shewbread, and so it has been under the Law, and so it is under the Gospel.

FINIS.

