THE Privy Key OF HEAVEN; OR, Twenty Arguments for CLOSET-PRAYER: IN A Select
Discourse on that Subject: With the resolution of several considerable
Questions; the main Objections also against Closet-Prayer, are here answered;
Cautions propounded, and the Point improved; with several other things of no
small importance, in respect of the internal and eternal welfare of the
Christian Reader. Twenty special Lessons (in the Epistle Dedicatory to some
afflicted Friends) that we are to learn by that severe rod, the PESTILENCE,
that now rages in the midst of us.

By THOMAS BROOKS, Minister of the Gospel.

O my Dove that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is lovely, Cant. 2. 14.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhil. 1665.

TO My Worthy and Esteemed FRIENDS, Mrs. Elizabeth Drinkwater. Mrs. Susan Bell.
Mrs. Hannah Bourne. Mrs. Mary Tailor. Mrs. Anne White. Mrs. Elizabeth Juxon.
Mrs. Rebecah Juxon. Mrs. Mary Baxter. Mrs. Deborah Shepherd. Mrs. Anne Clemons.
Mrs. Mary Sionior. Mrs. Anne Snell. Mrs. Anne Ellis. Mrs. Margaret Cutler. Mrs.
Patience Cartwrigh. Mrs. Mary Shaw. Mrs. Phillip Garret. Mrs. Margaret
Winfield. Mrs. Hannah Pippet. Mrs. Mary Chanlor. Mrs. Mary Scot. Mrs. Katherine
Usher. with their Husbands. etc. All Happiness both here, and hereafter:
Honored and Beloved in our Dear Lord Jesus.
I HAVE crowded your names together in one Epistle, not from any want of
respect unto you, for I owe to each of you more than an Epistle; nor because
you are in one particular Fellowship, for so you are not; but partly because
the Lord has made you one with himself, in the Son of his love; and partly
because the Lord at several times, and in several ways has exercised you all
in the Furnace of Affliction; and partly because this Epistle may reach you
all, and speak to you all, when I cannot, or when I may not, or which is more,
when I am not.

Dear Friends, many and great have been the breaches that the Lord has made
upon your persons, upon your near and dear Relations, and upon your sweetest
comforts and contentments: There is not one of you but may truly say with Job,
He breaks me with breach upon breach, Job. 16. 14. God has chastised you all
round with various Rods; and O that the Lord would help you all to hear the
Rod, and him who has appointed it.

Now that you may, give me leave a little to open and apply to your particulars
that

Mic. 6. 9.

The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall hear thy
Name: Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. The matter that I shall offer
to your consideration from this Scripture, will be not only of special
concernment to your selves, but also of high concernment to all sorts and ranks
of men and women, in this sad Day, when the Sword devours on the one hand, and
the Pestilence rages on the other hand.

The Lords voice cries unto the City. Tremelius turns it thus, The voice of
the Lord does preach unto this City (for what the matter is, thy Name sees)
Hear ye the Rod, etc. This City, viz. Jerusalem, and so consequently to all the
Israelites; for in this City all Offices and duties of godliness and humanity
were more religiously performed, or to be performed, than in any other place,
because of the presence and majesty of God that was amongst them: But thy
Majesty sees what wickedness is practiced amongst them, as is evident in the
Verses following.

Cries, The word is from Kara, which signifies, First, To Cry aloud, or, to
make a noise, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, there is Kara: The word signifies to Cry
so loud, as that all may hear, that have ears to hear. Secondly, The word
signifies, Openly to proclaim, preach, or publish a thing, Exodus 33. 19. I will
Proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee: Here is the word Kara. Thirdly, The
word signifies, To Cry out, Genesis 39. 15. I lifted up my voice and cried: Here
is Kara. The Hebrew word (...) has nine other significations in Scripture; but
because they are not pertinent to what is in my eye, I shall pass them by at
this time.

And the man of Wisdom shall see thy name. Vethushiia properly signifies
Essence; and therefore according to the Hebrew, the words should be read thus,
And the man of Essence shall see thy Name, etc. that is, he that is a man
indeed, he that is not a sot, astock, a stone. Most men are men of folly, and
so not worthy of the name of men; but as for such as are truly wise, they shall
see thy Name. There is a great measure of spiritual Art, of Holy and Heavenly
Wisdom required, both to enable a man to hear the voice of the Rod, and to
understand the language of the Rod: This Wisdom is too high for a fool, Prove.
24. 7.

Shall see thy Name. Now the Hebrew word here used (...) may be better derived
from Jare, which signifies to fear, than from Raah, that signifies to see, and
so the words will run smoothly thus, The man of wisdom, or of essence, shall
fear thy Name, considering that, it is majesty it self that cries, and that he
is immediately to deal with God himself, and not with a poor, weak, mortal worm.

Hear ye the Rod. The word Hear, is from (...) Shamang, which signifies, First,
To mark, observe, and attend, to what is said, Genesis 29. 33. The Lord has heard
that I was hated; that is, he has marked it, he has observed it. So here, O
mark the Rod, O observe the Rod, O attend to what is spoken by the Rod.
Secondly, The word signifies, to understand what is spoken, so Genesis 42. 23.
They knew not that Joseph understood them: In the Hebrew it is, that Joseph
heard them. Now to hear the Rod, is to understand what is spoken to us by the
Rod. Thirdly, The word signifies, to believe a thing reported to be true, so
Exodus 6. 9. They hearkened not unto Moses, that is, they did not believe the
report that Moses made. Hear the Rod, that is, believe the report the Rod
makes. The Rod reports, that of all evils, Sin is the greatest evil; and that
of all bitters, Sin is the greatest bitter; O believe the report of the Rod.
The Rod reports that God is angry, that God is displeased; Oh believe its
report. The Rod reports the creatures to be mere vanity and vexation of Spirit;
O believe its report. The Rod reports our nearest and dearest comforts,
contentments, and enjoyments to be mixed, mutable, and momentary; O believe its
report. The Rod reports Sin to be vile, and the world to be vain, and Heaven to
be glorious, and Christ to be most precious; O believe its report. The Hebrew
word has three other significations, but being that they are not proper to our
purpose I shall pass them by.

The Rod. The Hebrew word Matte that is here rendered Rod, has these three
significations. First, It denotes Power and strength, Psalm. 2. 9. A Rod of
Iron. Secondly, It denotes Rigid and harsh Government, Isa. 14. 5. The Lord
has broken the staff, or Rod of the wicked, that is, their rigorous and cruel
Government. Nebuchadnezzar sorely afflicted the Children of Judah, he was a Rod
that brake them in pieces, and ruled over them with much rigor in Babylon.
Thirdly, It denotes sore afflictions, and heavy Judgments, Psalm. 89. 32. I
will visit your transgressions with a Rod. And thus you are to understand the
word Rod in the Text.

And him that has appointed it. It Is God that appoints the Rod, and ordaines
it for the revenge of the quarrel of his Covenant. The Hebrew word Jegnadah
signifies properly to appoint, or constitute. It Is God who appoints the Rod,
and who constitutes it to do what service he pleases. It Is God that has not
only a permissive, but also an active hand, in all the afflictions that come
upon his People.

And let thus much suffice for the opening of the words.

Now though this choice Garden affords many sweet Flowers, yet I shall only
present you with one, which is this, viz.

That all the Afflictions, troubles, and trials, etc. that God lays upon his
People, are his Rod, and that it is their highest and greatest concernment, to
hear the voice of the Rod, and to take out those Lessons that God would have
them learn by the Rod. For the opening and clearing up of this important Point,
I shall endeavor these two things.

First, To show you in what respects Afflictions are like unto a Rod.

Secondly, To show you what those special Lessons are, that you are to learn by
the Rod.

For the First, In what respects are afflictions like unto a Rod?

I Answer, In these seven respects Afflictions are like unto a Rod.

First, The Rod is never made use of, but when no fair means will prevail with
the Child. It Is so here, God never takes up the Rod, he never afflicts his
People, till he 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, -- ult. Mat. 23. 37, 38.
has tried all fair ways and means to humble them, and reform them: And when
none of the offers of grace, the tenders of mercy, the wooings of Christ, the
strivings of the Spirit, north smart debates of Conscience will awaken them,
nor work upon them, then God takes up the Rod, and sometimes whips them till
the blood comes. But,

Secondly, Parents choose what Rods they please to correct their Children with.
The Child shall not choose what Rod he pleases to be corrected with, O no:
It Is the prerogative of the Father to choose the Rod; the Father may choose and
use either a great Rod or a little Rod, a long Rod or a short Rod, a Rod made
up of Rosemary branches, or a Rod made up of green Birch: It Is so here, God
chooses what Rod, what Affliction he pleases to exercise his people with. You
Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Lament. 3. 9, -- 18.
read in the Scripture of very many Rods, but they are all of Gods choosing,
Amos 3. 6. Is there any evil in the City and has not the Lord done it? Though
there be many Rods to be found in the City, yet there is not one of them, but
is of Gods choosing, Ruth. 1. 13. It grieveth me much for your sakes, that the
hand of the Lord is gone out against me. verse. 21. I went out full, and the
Lord has brought me home again empty; why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the
Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me? Isa. 45. 7.
I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord
do all these things. Mic. 1. 12. For the inhabitants of Maroth, waited
carefully for good; but evil came down from the Lord unto the Gates of
Jerusalem. David was whipped with many Rods, Psalm. 39. 9. Job. 1
but they were all of Gods own choosing. And Job was whipped with many Rods, but
they were all of Gods own choosing. But,

Thirdly, Parents take no pleasure, they take no delight to use the Rod. Every
lash the Father gives the Child, fetches blood from his own heart: The Father
corrects the Child, and sighs over the Child; he whips the Child, and at the
same time weeps over the Child. Nothing goes more against the Parents heart,
nor against their hair, than the bringing of their Children under the Rod of
Correction; It Is so here, Lament. 3. 3. For he does not afflict willingly (or
as the Hebrew runs, he does not afflict, Millibbo, from his heart) nor grieve
the Children of men. You often read, that he delights in mercy; but Mich. 7. 15.
where do you once read, that he delights in severity, or in dealing roughly
with his People? God very rarely takes 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Jer. 5. 19.
up the Rod, but when our sins have put a force upon him. It Is grievous to God,
to be a grieving his People; it is a pain unto him, to be a punishing of them,
Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. My Justice,
says God, calls upon me to rain Hell out of Heaven upon thee, as once I did
upon Sodom and Gomorah; but then Mercy interposeth her four several hows, how,
how, how, how, how shall I give thee up? God puts these four pathetical
interrogations to himself, because none else in Heaven or Earth could answer
them. The Prophet brings in God speaking after the manner of men, who being
provoked a thousand thousand ways, by the vanities and follies of their
Children, think to give them up to take their own courses, and to look no more
after them; but then their bowels begin to work, and their hearts begin to
melt, and they begin to interrogate themselves thus, How shall we give up these
Children? for though they be disobedient Children, yet they are Children; how
can we turn them out of doors? how can we disown them? how can we disinherit
them? for though they are rebellious Children, yet they are Children, etc.
Afflictions are called Gods work, yea, his strange work; his Isa. 28. 21.
act, yea, his strange act, as if God were out of his element, when he is
afflicting or chastising his People. But.

Fourthly, The Rod is smarting, grievous, and troublesome; and so are
afflictions to our natures, Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastening for the present
seems to be joyous but grievous. Flesh and blood startles, and is troubled at
the least trouble. Affliction is a sort of Physic, that makes most sick. Some
write that Tygres will grow mad, and tear their own flesh, Plutarch lib. de
superstition^.
and rend themselves in pieces, if they do but hear Drums or Tabours sound
about them. Were not Job and Jeremiah Job. 3. Jer. 20.
such Tygres, who in the day of their afflictions did more than curse the Day
of their birth? O what a bitter cup, what a heavy burden was affliction to
them! Job 10. 1. My Soul is weary of my life. Job 7. 15. My Soul chooses
strangling and death rather than life. Psalm. 6. 6. I am weary with my groaning.
Psalm. 69. 1, 2, 3. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my Soul. I
sink in deep mire, where there is no standing. I am come into deep waters,
where the floods overflow me. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried: mine
eyes fail, while I wait for my God. Doubtless many good men have sat under
Elias 1 Kings 19. 4.
his Juniper, wishing themselves out of the World (if it might stand with
Divine pleasure) that they might rest from their sins and sorrows, and be rid
of their many burdens and bondages, looking upon life little better than a
Hell, were it not for the hopes of a Heaven hereafter. But,

Fifthly, When Parents take up the Rod into their hands, they will not lay it
down, till Rodolphus the Emperors Motto was, (Omnia eoe voluntate Dei.) All
must be as God will have it. And this should be every Christians Motto under
the Rod.
they have subdued the spirits of their Children, and brought them to submit
and to kiss the Rod, and to sit still and quiet before them. It Is so here, when
God takes up the Rod, he will not lay it down, till he has brought us to lie
quietly at his feet, Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity,
and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass, which they have
trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary to me; And that
I also have walked contrary unto them, and brought them into the Land of their
enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of
the punishment of their iniquity, Then Will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I
remember: and I will remember the Land. When God takes up the Rod, his Children
must either bow or break; they must say, the Jer. 5. 3, 6.
Lord is righteous, they must kiss the Rod of Correction, or else destruction
will come like a Whirlwind upon them.

It Is reported of the Lion, that he spares those creatures, that fall down
before him, and submit unto him; but as for those that endeavor to run from
him, or to contend with him, those he tears in pieces. It Is just so with the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as you may see in that Hos. 5. 14, 15.

King Edward riding furiously Acts and Mon. in Edward I.
after a servant of his, that had highly displeased him, with a drawn Sword in
his hand as purposing to kill him; seeing him submit, and on bended knee suing
for his life, did not only put up his Sword, but also spared him, and received
him into his favor. The King of Kings will never put up his sword when once he
has drawn it, till his People fall on their knees, and submit unto him. God
never left chastising of Ephraim Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
till he had brought him to his bow, till he had made him submit and kiss the
Rod. But,

Sixthly, Afflictions are called a Rod, in respect of the hand that lays them
on. Though Affliction be a Rod, it is a Rod in a Fathers hand. John 18. 11.
The Sword is in the Judges hand, and the Cudgel is in the Masters hand, but
the Rod is in the fathers hand, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9. When Balaams Ass Number. 22.
29.
offended him, he wished for a sword to slay him: But so does not God; when we
do most highly provoke him, he does not take up a Sword to slay us, but only a
Rod to scourge us and chastise us, as indulgent Fathers do their dearest
Children. But,

Seventhly and Lastly, Afflictions are called a Rod, in regard of the ends to
which they serve. A Rod is not to kill, but to cure; it is not for destruction,
but for correction. When David gave a full commission to his Soldiers against
Absalom, 'Twas not to slay him, but to restrain him; 'twas not to ruin him,
but to reduce him to his former obedience. The Application is easy. We can as
well live without our daily bread, as without our daily Rod. Now the ends of
taking up the Rod are these.

First and more generally, It Is for the good of the child, and not for his
hurt: It Is so here, God takes up the Rod, but it is for the good of his People,
Genesis 50. 20. But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto
good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. Divine
goodness did so over-master the plotted malignity of Joseph's Brethren, as that
it made a blessed medicine of a most deadly poison. Jer. 24. 5. Thus says the
Lord the God of Israel, like these good Figs, so will I acknowledge them that
are carried away Captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place, into the
Land of the Chaldeans for their good. When Israel was dismissed out of Egypt,
'Twas with Exodus 11.
Gold and Earrings. And when Judah was dismissed out of Babylon, 'twas with
great gifts, Jewels, and all necessary Utensils. So Romans 8. 28. And Ezra 1.
we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them
who are the Called according to his purpose. This Text like Moses his Tree,
cast into the bitter waters of Affliction, may make them sweet and wholesome to
drink of. But,

Secondly, and more particularly, The Rod is to make the Child sensible of his
folly and vanity, Pro. 10. 13. In the lips of him that has understanding
wisdom is found: but the Rod is for the back of him that is void of
understanding. So it is here, God takes up the Rod, but it is to make his People
sensible of their folly and vanity, it is to make them look up to him, and to
look into Conscience, and to look out to their Conversations. Schola Crucis, is
Schola Lucis. Gods house of correction is his school of instruction; his lashes
are our lessons, his scourges are our Schoolmasters, and his chastisements are
our advertisements. Isa. 26. 9. Psalm. 94. 12 Pro. 3. 12, 13. Job. 36. 8, 9, 10.
Hence both the Hebrews and Greeks express chastening and teaching by one and
the same word (Musar Paideia) because the latter is the true end of the former,
according to that in the Proverb, Smart makes Wit, and vexation gives
understanding. Afflictions are a Christians Looking-Glass, by which he may see
how to dress his own Oculos quos peccatum claudit, paena apperit. Greg. The eye
that sin shuts, afflictions open.
Soul, and to mend whatsoever is amiss: They are Pills made up by a heavenly
hand, on purpose to clear our eyesight. 1 Kings 17. 18. And she said unto
Elijah, what have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me
to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? If God had not taken away
her Son, her sin had not been brought to remembrance. It was the Speech of an
holy man in his sickness, In this Disease (said he) I have learned how great
God is, and what the evil of sin is; I never knew to purpose, what God was
before, nor what sin was before. The Cross opens men's eyes, as the tasting of
Honey did Jonathans. Here (as that Martyr phrased it) we are still a learning
our A B C, and our lesson is never past Christ's Cross, and our walking is still
home by weeping Cross. But,

Thirdly, The Rod is used to prevent further folly, mischief, and misery, Prove.
23. 13, 14, Withold not correction from the Child; for if thou beatest him
with the Rod, he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall
deliver his Soul from Hell. It is said of the Ape, that she huggeth her young
ones to death, so many fond Parents by not correcting their Children, they come
to slay their Children. The best way to prevent their being scourged with
Scorpions in Hell, is to chastise them with the Rod here: So God takes up the
Rod, he afflicts and chastises his dearest Children, but it is to prevent
soul-mischief and misery, it is to prevent pride, self-love, worldliness, etc.
Paul was 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
one of the holiest men that ever lived on earth, he was called by some, an
earthly Angel, and yet he needed the Rod, he needed a thorn in the flesh to
prevent pride, witness the doubling of those words in one verse, least I should
be exalted above measure, least I should be exalted above measure. If Paul had
not been buffetted, who knows how highly he might have been exalted in his own
conceit? Prudent Physicians do often give their Patients Physic to prevent
Diseases; and so does the Physician of souls by his dearest Servants, Job 33.
17, 19. Job 40. 4, 5. Hos. 2. 6, 7.
He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones
with strong pain. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride
from man. Afflictions are the Lords Drawing-Playsters, by which he draws out
the core of pride, earthliness, self-love, covetousness, etc. Pride was one of
man's first sins, and is still the root and source of all other sins. Now to
prevent it, God many times chastens man with pain, yea, with strong pain upon
his bed, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. The burnt Child dreads the fire.
Sin is but a bitter sweet; it is an evil worse than Hell it self. Look as Salt
brine preserves things from, putrefying and as salt Marshes keep the Sheep from
rotting; so sanctified Rods, sanctified Afflictions, preserves and keeps the
People of God from sinning. But,

Fourthly, The Rod is to purge out that vanity and folly that is bound up in
the heart of the Child, Prove. 22. 15 Foolishness is bound in the heart of a
Child, but the Rod of correction shall drive it far from him. The Rod is an
Ordinance, as well as the Word; and such Parents that use it as an Ordinance
(praying and weeping over it) shall find it effectual, for the chasing away of
evil out of their Childrens heart. Eli and David were two very choice men, and
yet by their fondness on one hand, and neglect of this Ordinance on the other
hand, they ruined their sons, and whether they did not undo their souls, I
shall not at this time stand to enquire. When Moses cast away his Rod, it
became a Serpent; Exodus 4. 3.
and so when Parents cast away the Rod of correction, it is ten to one but that
their Children become the brood of the Serpent. Prove. 13. 24. He that spares
his Rod hates his son; but he that loves him chasteneth him betimes. Not only
the care, but also the cure of the Child, so far as the Rod will reach, lies
upon the hands of the Parent.

Now Afflictions are like a Rod in this respect also, for as they are
sanctified, they cleans and purge away the dross, the filth, and the scumb of
the daughter of Zion, Isa. 1. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tinn. Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin. Dan. 11. 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall (that is,
into great Afflictions) to try them, and to purge them, and to make them white,
even to the time of the end. All the harm the Dan. 3. 23, 24.
fire did the three Children (or rather the three Champions) was to burn off
their cords. Our lusts are cords of vanity, but the fire of Affliction shall
burn them up. Zech. 13. 9. And I will bring the third part through the fire,
and will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried:
they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, it is my People,
and they shall say, the Lord is my God. Sharp Afflictions are a fire to purge
out our dross, and to make our graces shine; they are a potion to carry away
ill humors, they are cold frosts to destroy the vermin, they are a
tempestuous Sen, to purge the Wine from its lees; they are like the North Wind,
that dries up the vapors, that purges the blood, and quickens the spirits;
they are a sharp Corrosive to eat out the dead flesh. Afflictions are compared
to Baptizing and washing, that takes away the filth of the Soul, as water does
the filth of the body, Mat. 10. 38, 39. God would not rub so hard, were it not
to fetch out the dirt and spots that be in his Peoples hearts.

Fifthly, The Rod serves to improve that good that is in the Child, Prove. 29.
15. The Rod and reproof gives wisdom, but a Child left to himself brings his
Mother to shame. So Afflictions they serve to improve our graces, Heb. 12. 10.
For they verily for a few days ehastened us after their own pleasure, but he
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness, that is, that we
might more and more be partakers of his holiness. Verse. 11. Now no chastening
for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them that are exercised
thereby. Hence it is that the Saints glory in tribulation, Romans 5. 3, 4. And not
only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope. Grace always thrives
most when Saints are under the Rod. When Christians are under the Rod, then
their graces do not only bud, but blossom, and bring forth fruit as Aarons Rod
did. The Mum. 17. 8,
snuffing of the Candle, makes it burn the brighter. God beats and bruises his
links, to make them burn the brighter; he bruises his spices, to make them send
forth the greater Aromatical savor.

Bernard compares Afflictictions to the Tezel, which though it be starp and
scratching, it is to make the Cloth more pure and fine. The Jews were always
best, when they were in an afflicted condition. Well-waters arising from deep
springs, are hotter in the winter, than they are in the summer. Stars shine
brightest in the darkest nights. Vines grow the better for bleeding; and Gold
looks the brighter for scowring. Juniper smells sweetest, when in the fire.
Cammomile the more you tread it, the more you spread it. O Sirs, this is a
real, and a rare truth, but seldom thought on, viz. that God will sometimes
more carry on the growth and improvement of grace by a cross, by an affliction,
than by an ordinance, James 1. 3, 4. James 4. 8, 9. Afflictions ripen the
Saints graces, 2 Cor. 1. 5. First or last God will make every Rod, yea, every
twig in every Rod, to be an Ordinance to every afflicted Saint. By Afflictions
God many times revives, quickens, and recovers, the decayed graces of his
People. By Afflictions God many times enflames that love that is cold, and he
strengthens that faith that is failing, and he puts life into those hopes that
are languishing, and new spirits into those joys and comforts that are
withering and dying. Musk (say some) when it has lost its sweetness, if it be
put into the sink amongst filth, it recovers its sweetn^^^ again: So does smart
afflictions recover and revive our decayed graces.

I have read a story of a Sexton, that went into the Church at night, to rob a
woman, who had been buried the day before with a Gold ring upon her finger
(according to her desire); now when he had opened the Grave and Coffin, and
loosed the sheet, he fell a rubbing and chafing her finger to get off the Gold
Ring, and with rubbing and chafing of it, her spirits returned (she having been
but in a swoon before) and she revived, and lived many years after. Smart
Afflictions are but the rubbing and chafing of our graces. The smarting Rod
abaseth the loveliness of the world, that might entice us, it abates the
Iustiness* of the flesh within, that might incite us to vanity and folly, and
it abets the spirit in his quarrel to the two former: All which tend much to
the recovering and reviving of decayed graces. But,

The Sixth end to which the Rod serves, and that is, to try the child, to make
a discovery of the spirit of the child. Some Parents never see so much of the
badness of the spirits of their Children, as they do when they bring them under
the Rod; and other Parents never see so much of the goodness of the spirits of
their Children, as they do when they chastise them with the Rod: It Is so here,
when God afflicts some, O the pride, the stoutness, the crosness, the hardness,
the peevishness and stubborness of spirit that they Exodus 5. 2. Jer. 44. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19.
discover! Isa. 1. 5. Jer. 5. 3. When he afflicts others, O the murmuring, the
roaring, the complaining, the howling, the fretting, the vexing, and the Amos
4. 6, -- 13.
quarrelling spirit that they discover! Number. 14. 27, 29, 36. Deuteronomy. 1. 27. Isa.
58. 3, 4. Isa. 59. 11. Hos. 7. 14, 15. Jon. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9. Sometimes
when God afflicts his dearest People, O what a spirit of Faith, what a spirit
of Prayer, what a spirit of Love, what a spirit of Patience, what a spirit of
meekness, what a spirit of humbleness, what a spirit of submissiveness do they
discover! Job 13. 15. 2 Chronicles. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12. Isa. 26. 16, 17. Hos. 5.
14, 15. Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Kings 20. 16, 17,
18, 19. And at other times when God afflicts his poor People, O what a spirit
of unbelief, what a spirit of slavish fear, what a spirit of impaciency, what a
spirit of displeasedness, etc. do they discover! Genesis 15. 2, 3. Genesis 12. 13,
19. Genesis 20. 2, 5. Genesis 26. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 31. 22. Psalm. 116, 11. 1 Samuel 21. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Job. 3. 3, -- 13. Jer. 20. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
By smart Afflictions God tryes the graces of his People, and discovers what is
in the spirits of his People, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Psalm. 66. 10, 11. Rev. 3. 18. 1 Pet
1. 6, 7. The fire tryes the Gold, as well as the Touchstone. Diseases try the
Art of the Physician, and Tempests try the skill of the Pilot. Every smarting
Rod is a Touchstone, both to try our graces, and to discover our spirits.
Prudent Fathers will sometimes cross their Children, to try, to discover, the
dispositions of their Children: Heb. 12. 5, -- 21.
And so does the Father of Spirits deal sometimes with his Children.

The manner of the Psylli (which are a kind of People Plin. lib. 28
of that temper and constitution, that no Venom will hurt them) is this, if
they suspect any Child to be none of their own, they set an Adder upon it to
sting it, and if it cry, and the flesh swell, they cast it away as a spurious
issue, but if it do not quatch nor cry, nor is never the worse for it, then
they account it for they own, and make very much of it. The Application is
easy. But,

The seventh and last end of the Rod, Is to prepare and fit the Isa. 48. 10.
chastised for greater services, favors and mercies. Many a Child, and many a
servant had never been so fit for eminent services as they are, had they not
been under a smarting Rod. It Is very usual with God, to cast men into very
great Afflictions, and to lay them under grievous smarting Rods, that so he may
prepare and fit them for some high and eminent services in this world. Joseph
had never been so fit to be Governor Genesis 41. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.
of Egypt, and to preserve the visible Church of God alive in the World, if he
had not been sold into Egypt, if his feet had not been hurt in the Genesis 45. 7,
8.
stocks, and if the Irons had not entered into his soul. Nor Moses had never
been so fit to be a Leader, and a Deliverer of Israel as he was, if he had Genesis
50. 20.
not been banished Forty Years in the Wilderness before. Nor David's Crown had
never sat so well, nor so close, nor so long on his head, as it did, had he not
for some years before been hunted, as a Partridge in the Wilderness. Nor the
Three Children (or rather, the Three Champions) would never have been fit for
so high a Rule, had Dan. 3. 29, 30.
they not been first cast into the fiery Furnace. Nor Daniel, for that
exceeding high honor, and glory, and greatness, to which he was exalted, had
he Dan. 6. 25, -- ult.
not been first cast among the Lions. And so had Esther never been a poor
Captive-Maid, she had never been a Queen, and so had never been instrumental in
the preservation of the Church of God in her day. Heman was one of the best and
wisest men in 1 Kings 4. 31.
the World (in his day), and this God brought him to, by training of him up in
the School of Affliction, as you may evidently, see in that 88. Psalm. That of
the Apostle in 2 Cor. 1. 4. deserves to be written in letters of gold, Who
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of
God. Mark that word, able. O it is one of the hardest and noblest works in all
Christianity, to be able divinely to comfort others that are in troubles; and
yet by sufferings God fits and prepares his People, for this noble and
difficult service.

Luther was of Opinion, that to comfort a distressed Conscience, was a greater
work, than to raise the dead to life. And yet by inward and outward sufferings,
God fits his People for this great work.

And thus you see, in what respects Afflictions are compared to a Rod.

The second thing I am to do, is to show you those special Lessons, that you
are to learn by the Rod, (or if you please,) by the raging Pestilence.

Now they are these,

The first Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, or by the raging
Pestilence, is to know, what the particular message or errand is, which the Rod
has to deliver to you in the day of your distress and trouble. Your first
work is to do as David did, in that 2 Samuel 21. 1. He humbly enquires of the
Lord, to know the particular reason why he sent a Famine amongst them. You must
do as Job does, Job 10. 2. Show me, O Lord, wherefore thou contendest with me.
Job would fain know the reasons of the controversy between God and him. One
well observes on the Text, that Job was very destrous to know, whether God did
afflict him for sin, or for trial, not to satisfy his curiosity but, his
Conscience. Elihu's counsel to Job must here take place, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely
it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any
more. That which I see not teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. Job it seems was yet in the dark, as to the particular cause or reason,
why the Lord had so grievously afflicted him; and therefore he is very
importunate with God, that he would graciously point out the sin, for which he
had so sorely smitten him. Thy proceedings, says Job, to my understanding,
seem to be very strange and severe; I am more heavily afflicted than others,
and yet I do not know wherein I have sinned more than others: Why I should be
condemned and cast, without a Trial, why thou art so hot against me, and why
thou have multiplied so many unheard of miseries upon me, and why thou have so
greatly subjected me to the saddest and sourest censures of others, as if I
were the worst of sinners, and the basest of hypocrites, I know not: And
therefore O Lord, I humbly desire, that thou would not deal with me
according to thy absolute Power, but let me know the true grounds and causes of
all my heavy sorrows and miseries. And so he is at it again, in that Job 13.
23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and
my sin. My plagues, O Lord, are unparalleled; if my sins are such let me know
it, says Job. My calamities transcend the calamities of all others; if my sins
do so, let them not be hid from mine eyes, O Lord. My load, O Lord is heavier
than others; and therefore if my sins are greater than others, let me see them,
let me understand them: Infirmities and weaknesses, I confess, do hang upon
me, they are inherent in me, and they do too often issue and flow from me; but
as for enormities or wickednesses, neither my censorious Friends, nor yet my
worst enemies, no, nor yet my own Conscience, will ever be able to make any
just, or clear proof against me: O Lord, I have many spots upon me, but if
there be any upon me that are not the spots of thy People, let me see them, let
me know them, that I may abhor my self, and justify thee, and that I may say,
my Friends are righteous in their censures, and I have done wickedly before the
Lord. Sometimes Afflictions are sent only for trial and instruction, and not at
all for sin; this is evident in the case of Job, and in the case of the Blind
man, whose afflictions, though they were very great and grievous, John 3. 9.
yet were they not for sin, but for trial.

Now though this be true, yet it must be granted, that Mic. 1. 5, -- 10.
commonly sin is the meritorious cause, the procuring cause of all Afflictions.
Sin ordinarily is the Original and Foundation of all our troubles Amos 2. 4, 5,
6.
and chastisements, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. If his Children forsake my Law, and
walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: Then will I visit their transgression with the Rod, and their
iniquity with stripes. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and
thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see, that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that thou have for saken the Lord thy God, and that my
fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. Amos 3. 2. You only have I
known of all the Families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities.

Quest. But what course must we take? what means must we use, to find out that
particular sin, for which God corrects us, or, which has brought the Rod upon
us?

Answ. 1. Observe what that sin is, that thy Conscience does most upbraid thee
with, and check thee for. Conscience is Gods Preacher in the Genesis 42. 21. Chap.
50. 15, 16, 17.
bosom. Now observe what that particular sin is, that Conscience does most
smartly and roundly correct, and chastise thee for, for it is ten to one but
that is the sin, that has brought the Rod upon thee. The voice of Conscience,
and the voice of the Rod, do usually echo one to another. It Is very rare to
find a difference between the language of Conscience, and the language of the
Rod. Conscience is Gods Deputy, Gods Spy, Gods Notary, Gods Viceroy; and
therefore do not despise the voice of Conscience, do not turn off Conscience,
as Felix turned off Paul. If the secret Acts 24. 25
cry of Conscience be, O this is for thy Pride, or this is for thy Passion, or
this is for thy Self-love, or this is for thy earthliness, or this is for thy
carnalness, or this is for thy hypocrisy, or this is for thy formality, etc.
it will be thy wisdom to subscribe to the secret cry of Conscience. But,

Secondly, Seriously observe what that sin is, that thy soul would have spared
above all, that thy soul is most unwilling to leave, and bid an everlasting
farewell to. Observe what thy right hand sin, thy Mic. 6. 6, 7. Est. 5. 13.
bosom sin, thy constitution sin, thy complexion sin is, for it is a hundred to
one, but that God has sent the Rod; for the subduing of that very sin.
Commonly by the Rod God points at the mortifying of that particular sin, to
which the heart stands most strongly inclined. But,

Thirdly, Observe what that sin is, that does most maim and mar thy confidence
and 1 John 3. 20, 21.
boldness, in all thy addresses and approaches to God; for doubtless that is
the sin, that God would subdue and bring under by the Rod. But,

Fourthly, Observe what the affliction, what the pain, what the disease, what
the punishment is, that you are under; for sometimes a person may run and read
his sin in his very punishment, Judges 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings having
their thumbs and their great toes cut off gathered their meat under my Table:
as I have done, so God has requited me. Now shall Adonibezek, a Heathen Prince
run and read his sin in his punishment; and shall not a Christian much more?
shall not grace do as much as blind nature? Look as a man may sometimes guess
at the disease of the Patient, by the prudent observing of the Physicians Bill;
so may he sometimes guess at the particular sin that God would have destroyed,
by the punishment that is inflicted. God usually, first or last, meets with
men, and pays them home in their own coin: Is the Judgment shame? then the sin
was pride; is the Judgment want, famine? Hos. 2. 8, 9.
then the sin was abuse of abundance; is the Judgment oppression? then the sin
was unmercifulness; is the Judgment loss of Children? then the sin was
inordinate love to them. Eli and David were too indulgent to their Children;
and therefore they were punished in them and by them: Is the Judgment sickness,
or want of health? then the sin was, either the abuse of health, or the
non-improvement of health: Is the Judgment a famine of the Word? then the sin
was, slighting and loathing of the word: Is the Judgment War? then the sin was
abuse of peace: Is the Judgment a blind, cold, carnal, profane, formal,
drunken, superstitious Clergy? then the sin has been slighting, neglecting,
undervaluing, and despising, an able, knowing, zealous, spiritual, and powerful
ministry: Is the Judgment, a worshipping of God in a lazy, dry, dull, dead,
formal, customary way, according to the inventions and traditions of the
Elders? then the sin has been men's not worshipping of John 4. 23, 24.
God in spirit and in truth, and with that zeal, spirit, life, warmth, and
fervency, as he requires: Is the Judgment, the breaking of the communion Romans
12. 11.
of Gods People, and scattering of them into holes and corners, as it was in
Ahabs, Judge. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and Jezabels, and Gideons days? then doubtless the sin has been a slighting,
undervaluing, neglecting, or forsaking of Christian Communion, or else a
non-improvement of Christian Communion. But,

Fifthly, Observe whether you have not been very faulty toward others, in the
very things you now suffer your selves. Do others wrong you in your names,
estates, relations, callings, dealings? etc. lay your hands upon your hearts,
and ask them, whether you have never wronged others, as others now wrong you.
Do others rashly judge Isa. 33. 1. Rev. 13. 10. J^mes ^. 13 Genesis 50 15, 16, 17.
you, and bitterly censure you, and falsely accuse you, and unjustly condemn
you? if they do, reflect upon your former carriages toward others; and if you
must plead guilty, throw the first stone at your Mat. 7. 1, 2.
selves, and say with Adonibezek, As I have done, so God has requited me. Let
every lash of God upon you, put you in mind of your deportment toward others,
when God has given them Gall and Wormwood to drink. But,

Sixthly, Observe what that sin is, that thou can not endure Prove. 1. 25, 30.
Prove. 12. 1. Pro. 17. 10. Prove. 9. 8. Pro. 15. 12.
should be touched, or reproved, or spoken against. Ah how proud, how
impatient, how passionate, how mad are many, when you come to touch their
right-eye-sin. When you come to touch them in the tender part, O then they
fume, and swell, and rage, and take on like men and women out of their wits, as
you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who were so angry and mad with
Christ, that they sought his death; and all because he was still a pointing at
the Toads in their bosoms, viz. pride, vainglory, hypocrisy, and
self-righteousness: O they could not endure that the sharp Rasor of reproof
should come near their sorest part. Certainly that Christian must be under a
very high distemper, that cannot but smite a righteous man with reproach, for
smiting him with a reproof. Though gracious reproofs are choice Physic, yet
few stomachs can tell how to bear them. Most Christians are for lenitives, few
for are corrosives. David was glad of a healing reproof; but there are Psalm.
141. 5.
but few David's alive. Who is angry with the Physician for prescribing a bitter
potion? and yet, ah how angry are many Christians, when they come to fall under
holy reproofs, especially if there be any of that sharpness and cuttingness in
them, that the Apostle exhorts to, in that Tit. 1. 13. Now doubtless the voice
of the Rod is this, Soul take heed of that sin, that thou can not endure
should be touched Labor mightily with God to get that particular sin
mortified, that thou can not endure should be reproved. But,

Seventhly, Observe what sin that is, that does most hinder Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
thee from closing with the precious promises, and from living upon precious
promises, and from improving of precious promises, and from treasuring up of
precious promises, and from appropiating of precious promises to thine own
soul; and it is very probable, that for the subduing of that sin, the Lord has
visited thee with his fatherly Rod. But,

Eighthly, Observe what sin that is, that did most sting and terrefie thee in
an evil day, as when thou have been Genesis 42. 21
under some loathsome disease, or tormenting pain, be it stone, gout, or
burning feavour, or when thou have been in some eminent danger, or when thou
have had a sentence of death upon thee, and there has been but a short step
between thee and eternity. Doubtless that sin, which has lain as a heavy load
upon thy Conscience in the days of thy former distress, that is the sin that
God would have effectually conquered, and brought under by his present Rod. But,

Ninthly, Observe what particular sin that is, that does most hinder thee in
holy duties and services, and that does most interrupt thee in thy Communion
with God, enquire what particular sin that is, that thy Eze. 33. 31.
heart is most apt to run after, when thou art on the Mount of holy duties.
Whilst the Disciples were healing diseases, and casting Devils out of other
men's bodies, the proud white Devil was stirring in their own souls, as is
evident by that gentle rebuke that our Savior gives them in Luke 10. 20. In
this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice
because your names are written in Heaven. There is no Duty that a Christian
performs, but one white Devil or another, one lust or another, will be still
dogging and following of him to that Duty. There is no public Duty, there is
no family duty, there is no private duty, that a Christian performs, but either
that white Devil, Pride, or that white Devil, Hypocrisy, or that white Devil,
vainglory, or else some one or another white Devil will follow the Soul, hard
at heel to it. Now mark what that particular sin is, that most haunts thy soul,
when thou art in Religious duties and services, and it may be that is the very
sin that God would have subdued by the Rod. But,

Tenthly, Observe what sin that is, that the rest of your corruptions are most
serviceable to, and that they most attend upon: Mark what sin that is, that all
other sins do most bow the knee to: Mark that sin that has a commanding power
over all other sins, that says to one, go, and he goes, and to another, come,
and he comes: Mark what sin that is, that is still uppermost, and that all
other sins do most minister to. You know when a man has a great wound in his
body, all the ill humors will run thither. Observe what sin that is, that all
the ill humors of the soul do most run after, for it is very likely that that
is the very sin that God would have brought under by the Rod. But,

Eleventhly, Observe what that sin is, that your hearts are most apt to hide,
and cloak, and cover over with the most spetious, and fair pretenses. Saul had
a covetous desire, and he 1 Samuel 15. 20, 21.
covers it over with fair pretenses, as that the people would have it so, and
that what was spared was for sacrifice. Caesar's favor was the great Mat. 27.
24.
darling in Pilates eyes, but he covers all over with washing his hands. The
Scribes and Pharisees were exceeding covetous, but their long prayers, Mat. 23.
as a cloak, must cover all. Judas also was a man of the same mind and mettle
with them, What need this wast, why was not Mat. 26. 8, 9. John 12. 5, 6.
this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor? This he
said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the
bag, and bare what was put therein. Judas (as Tertullian thinks) was pretty
honest till he carried the bag; but no sooner was he in office, but he puts
Conscience out of office, but all must be covered over with a cloak of
charity. Observe what sin that is, that you are most apt to cast the Silk, or
the Satin mantle over, and it is ten to one, but that is the sin that God would
have brought under by the Rod. But,

Twelfthly and lastly, Observe what that sin is, that thou art most easily
overcome by. Dalilah could easily overcome Sampson, when all the world besides
could make no conquest upon him. The Apostle Heb 12. 1.
bids us, lay aside the sin that does so easily beset us. There are some sins
that find more easy approaches to us, and more easy acceptance with us, and
accordingly they do more easily captivate us. Observe what that sin is, that
you do most readily and easily open the door to, and doubtless that is the
sin that God would have mortified and subdued by the Rod.

The Second Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by Pray turn to these
Scriptures 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. Jer. 8. 6. Ezekiel, 7. 15, 16.
the raging Pestilence,) is deeply to judge your selves, and greatly to humble
your souls, for that sin or sins that has brought the Rod upon you, thus David
did in that 2 Samuel 24. 10, 17. When you have found out the Achan that has
brought the Rod upon you, stone him to death, and lie humble and low under the
Rod, and then the Allmighty will be graciously pacified, and sweetly reconciled
unto you.

The Third Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is to view the Rod on every side; if there be briars on one side
of the Rod, there is Rosemary on the other side of the Rod; if there be
wormwood and gall at one end of the Rod, there is sweet honey at the other end
of the Rod, as there was at the top of Jonathan's 1 Samuel 14. 43.
Rod.

If we should come into a Painters or a Limners shop, and see a Picture half
drawn, it might trouble us and startle us, if it did not fright us and amaze
us; but yet when the Picture is perfected, completed, and finished, it may
prove a very beauteous, lovely, taking piece. The Application is easy. Look as
every Judgment, every Affliction, every Rod has its black, dark side; so every
Judgment, every affliction has its bright side to. Mow it is the wisdom of a
Christian to look on the bright side of the Rod, the Cloud; as well as it is his
work, to look on the dark side of the Rod, the Cloud: When a Christian looks
upon the dark side of the Cloud, he should be humbled and abased; but when he
looks upon the bright side of the Cloud, he should be comforted and cheered. He
James 5. 11.
that is still a looking on the briery side of the Rod, will be very apt to
fret and faint under the Rod; but he that looks on the Rosemary side of the
Rod, as well as the briery side of the Rod, he will bear up patiently,
gallantly, and cheerfully under the Rod. The voice of the Rod is Look on both
sides, Look on both sides. But,

The fourth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is to look on the Rod, not abstractly, from the hand that holds
it; but conjunctively, with the hand that holds it, thus Hezekiah did, 2 Kings
20. 16, 10, 18, 19. Thus Aaron did, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. Thus Eli did, 1 Samuel 3.
11, -- 19. Thus David did, Psalm. 39. 9. Thus Job did, Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Yea,
and thus Jesus did, John 18. 11. Shall I not drink the Cup that my Father has
given me to drink. Though the Cup was a bitter Cup, a bloody Cup, yet seeing it
was put into his hand by his Father, he drinks it off, with a Father I thank
thee. The Rod in its self sounds nothing but smart and blood to the Child; but
the Rod in the hand of a Father sounds nothing but love, kindness, and
sweetness, Rev. 3. 19. Whom he loves he chastens. You should never look upon
the Rod, but as it is in the hand of your heavenly Father, and then you will
rather kiss it, than murmur under it. But,

The Fifth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is to cleave and cling close to God under the Rod. O how does the
Child cling and hang upon his Father when he takes up the Rod; let such a
Child-like Spirit be found in you, when the Father of Spirits takes up up the
Rod. When the Rod was upon David's back, O how does he cleave to God, even as
the Wife cleaves to her Husband; for so much the Hebrew word Dabak in that
Psalm. 63. 8. imports. So when Job was under the Rod, O how does he cling about
God! Job. 13. 21. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Job will hang
upon a killing God. So the Church in that Psalm. 48. 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. So
those hundred forty and four thousand that had their Fathers names written in
their foreheads, Rev. 14. 1, -- 6. O Friends, you never show so much Child-like
love, nor so much Child-like ingenuity, nor so much Child-like integrity, as
you do show when under the smarting Rod, you are found clinging about the Lord,
and hanging upon the Lord by an exercise of grace. When Antistenes held up his
Staff, as if he intended to beat on of his Scholars out of his School, the
Scholar told him, that he might strike him if he pleased, but he should never
find a staff of so hard wood, as should ever be able to beat him him from him.
When no Staff, no Rod, no Affliction, can drive us from Christ, it is a sure
argument that we have profited much in the School of Christ. But,

The Sixth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is to prepare to meet the Lord whilst the Rod is in his hand, Am.
4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Now there is a twofold
preparation.

The First is a Negative preparation, and this lies in taking heed of sinning
against Light and Conscience; for those sins that are against a clear Light,
and an awakened Conscience, are most wounding, wasting, terrifying, and damning.

Secondly, There is a Positive preparation, and that consists in repentance and
returning to the Lord, and in abasing and humbling your selves before 2 Chronicles.
7. 14.
the Allmighty. As there is no running from God, so there is no contending with
God; for what is the chaff to the Whirlwind, or the stubble to a consuming
fire? And therefore the voice of the Rod is, Prepare to meet the Lord in a way
of faith, and repentance; prepare to meet the Lord in an exercise of grace;
prepare to meet the Lord with prayers, and tears, and strong cries. But,

The Seventh Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is to acknowledge Gods sovereign power and authority over the Rod,
to bow it, or break it, or burn it, or take it off, or lay it more or less on,
as he pleases. Mic. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59, 60, 61.
All diseases and sicknesses are under the command of God, they are all his
Sergeants, his servants, to execute his pleasure: That Mat. 8. 5. is an
observable Text; Christ tells the Centurion, that he would come and heal his
servant; the Centurion tells him, that he was not worthy that he should come
under his roof, only if he would but speak the word, his servant should be
healed; For (says he verse. 9.) I am a man under Authority, having Soldiers
under me: and I say to this man go, and he goes; and to another come, and he
comes; and to my servant do this and he does it. Now when Jesus heard this, he
marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily, I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith, no not in Israel, verse. 10. But wherein did the greatness
of the Centurions faith appear? why, in this very acknowledgment, that all
diseases were to Christ as servants, and that they were as much under the
command of Jesus Christ, as any servant under heaven is under the command of
his Master: When Christ bids them go and afflict such a man, they go; and
torment such a man, they go; and kill such a man, they go; and so when he calls
them off, they come off at his call. Dear Friends, it is a very great point of
faith to believe these five things.

First, that God is the author of all the diseases, malladies, and sicknesses,
that be in the World, and that he sets them on and call them off at his own
good will and pleasure, Amos Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
3. 6. Is there any evil in the City, and has not the Lord done it? He speaks
of the evil of punishment, and not of the evil of sin. It was a mad Principle
among the Manichees, who referred all calamities to the Devil for their author,
as if there could be evil in the City, and the Lord have no hand in it.

Secondly, It is a great point of Faith to believe, that all diseases and
sicknesses are limited by God, in respect of places. God sent diseases of all
sorts into Egypt, but he forbad them Goshen, Exodus 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. Chap. 9,
23, 24, 25, 26. Ponder seriously upon these Scriptures. Gods shooting his
arrows into one Town, and not into another, into one City, and not into
another, into one Kingdom, and not into another, into one family, and not into
another, does sufficiently evidence, that all diseases, and sicknesses, are
limited by the Holy One of Israel, in respect of places.

Thirdly, It is a very great point of Faith, to believe that all sicknesses,
and diseases, are limited by God in respect of persons; that they are so, is
evident in that Psalm. 91. 3, -- 8. Isa 65. 12. But who lives in the faith of
this truth? Sometimes in the same house one is infected, and the other is not;
sometimes in the same bed, the one is smitten, and the other is not; sometimes
at the same table, the one is taken away, and the other is left, etc. and this
does roundly evidence and witness, that all sicknesses and diseases are limited
by God in respect of persons, as well as in respect of places. But,

Fourthly, It is a great point of Faith, to believe that all diseases and
sicknesses are limited by God in respect of the degrees to which they shall
arise. That God that sets bounds to the raging Sea, and that says unto it,
Thus far shall thou go, and no further; that God sets bounds to all raging
diseases and sicknesses, and says unto them, thus far you shall go, and no
further: He sets bounds to the Fever; he says to it, go and scorch and burn
up such a body so much, and no more; and to the Dropsy, go and drown such a
body so much, and no more; and to the raging Pestilence, go and weaken such a
body so much, and no more; and to the Stone, go and torment such a body so
much, and no more. But,

Fifthly, It is a very great point of Faith, to believe that all diseases and
sicknesses are limited by God, as to their continuance: God says to one
disease, go hang upon such a man, so many years; to another, go hang up such a
man but a few years; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a year; and to
another, go hang upon such a man but a few months; and to another, go hang upon
such a man but a few weeks; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few
days; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few hours, etc. and
accordingly it comes to pass. But,

The eighth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, to Gal. 5. 24. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Eccl. 1. 2. Prove. 23. 5.
Jer. 45. 4, 5
get more weaned, and more mortified affections to all worldly comforts,
contentments, and enjoyments. A man never comes to experience so much of the
emptiness, the nothingness, the uselesness, the vanity, the mutability, the
impotency, the insufficiency, and the uncertainty of all worldly comforts, and
enjoyments, as when he comes to fall under the Rod. The constant cry of the Rod
is, Be dead to the profits, pleasures, honors, and applauses of the world, be
dead to relations, be dead to friends, be dead to every thing below a living
Jesus. But,

The ninth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, to get assurance of greater, and better things, than any this
world does afford. That saying Heb. 10. 33, 34.
is as true, as it is old, viz. That the assurance of an eternal life, is the
life of this temporal life: But having spoke so much of this particular in my
Treatise on Assurance, which is now in your hands, I shall satisfy my self
with this hint at present. But,

The tenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is, not to despise the Rod, Heb. 12. 5. My Son, despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord. The Greek Word (...) that is translated despise,
signifies the littling of a thing: O do not little the Rod, do not lessen it,
do not slight it, do not make a tush at it, do not set light by it, do not say,
I will not regard it, he that does, shows himself, rather to be a Roman, than a
Christian. Now because there is such a desperate aptness and proness in many to
make light of the Rod, it will be your wisdom seriously to lay to heart these
four particulars.

First, That it is an immediate hand of God; and therefore not to be despised:
It Is a Am. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59, 60, 61.
sad and sinful thing to despise the mediate hand of God; but it is more sad and
sinful to despise the immediate hand of God. But,

Secondly, It Is a mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. Certainly Am. 4. 10. 11.
Ez. 38. 22, 23.
that heart must be mightily wicked, that dares despise the mighty hand of God.
But,

Thirdly, It Is an angry hand of God; and therefore do not despise it, Psalm. 90.
7. For we are consumed by thy anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. Verse.
11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
Number. 16. 46. Ez. 33. 27, 28. 29, Deuteronomy 29. 22. 23, 24. 25
wrath. Shall Devils tremble under his angry hand? Yea shall they roar, as the
Sea under his (...) wrathful hand, as that Greek word (...). imports, in that
James 2. 19. And will you presume to despise his angry hand? the Lord forbid.
but,

Fourthly and lastly, Consider, that it is a holy hand, it is a just and
righteous hand, it is a faithful hand of God; and therefore do not despise it,
Jer. 29. 17, 18, 19. Lev. 26. 25. Jer 14. 12, 13, 14. 15. 16
Psalm. 119. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgmentt are right, (or
righteousness) and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. Verse. 137.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments. Certainly none but
unholy persons will be so impudent, as to despise Gods holy hand. Well,

The Eleventh Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence,) is, not to be discouraged under the Rod, Heb. ^2. Nor Jer. 27. 13.
2 Samuel 24. 10, 17.
faint when thou art rebuked of him. First, It is a Rod in a fathers hand; and
therefore do not faint under it. Secondly, God will do much good by the Rod;
and therefore do not faint under the Rod. Thirdly, You could not have been
without the Rod; and therefore do not faint under the Rod.

Fourthly, The Rod that is now upon, is not according to the greatness of Gods
anger, nor according to to the greatness of his power, nor according to the
strictness of his Justice, nor according to the demerits of your sins, nor
according to the malicious desires of Satan, nor according to the designs,
plots, and contrivances, of wicked and unreasonable men, nor according to the
extensiveness of your fears, for you have feared worse things than you feel,
nor according to that Rod that has been upon the Primitive Saints, nor
according to that Rod, that many thousands of the precious sons and daughters
of Zion are under in other parts of the world, and therefore do not faint under
the Rod, do not be discouraged under the Rod.

Fifthly, by fainting under the Rod, you will gratify Satan, reproach
religion, render your selves unserviceable, and make work for future
Repentance; and therefore do not faint under the Rod. But,

The Twelfth Lesson that you 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 26. Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. Mic. 7.
9. Lam. 3. 30. Luke 21. 10.
are to learn under the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, humbly to kiss
the Rod, and patiently and quietly to lie under the Rod, till the Lord shall
either give you a gracious or a glorious deliverance from it. What is the Rod,
and what is the raging Pestilence, to the horrors of Conscience, to the flames
of hell, or to an everlasting separation from the presence of the Lord, and 2
These. 1. ^ 8, 9.
from the glory of his power? And therefore put your mouths in the dust, and be
silent before the Lord. He that has deserved a hanging, if he escape with a
whipping, has no cause to murmur or complain; and we that have deserved a
damning, have little cause to murmur or complain of a whipping, yea, though it
should be with a Pestilential-Rod. But,

The thirteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod or by the raging
Pestilence) is, highly, fully, freely, and signally to justify the Lord, and
to think well of the Lord, and to speak well of the Lord, under the Rod; to
that purpose consult these Scriptures, Psalm. 119. 75, 137. Neh. 9. 33. Ezr. 9.
13. Lam. 1. 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 4, 15, 18. Dan. 9. 12. 14. 2 Kings 20. 16, 17, 18,
19. Jer. 12. 1, 2. Psalm. 129. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Psalm 22. 1, 2, 3. Psalm.
97. 2. But,

The fourteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, personal reformation. When the Rod smarts, and the Pestilence
rages, God expects that every man should smite upon his thigh, and turn from
the evil of his doings, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up heaven, that there be
no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the Land, or if I send
Pestilence among my people: If my people which are called by my name, shall
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal
their Land; that is, I will remove the judgments that are upon the Land, and I
will confer upon my reforming people all those favors and blessings that they
stand in need of. Consult these Scriptures, Ezr. 10. 14, 19. 2 Chronicles. 30. 8, 9.
And chap. 29. 8, 10, 15, 16. But,

The Fifteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, to make God your habitation, your shelter, your refuge. Ponder
seriously upon these Scriptures, Psalm. 91. 2, 9, 10. Psalm. 90. 1. Psalm. 71. 3.
Psalm. 57. 1. They dwell most safely, most securely, most nobly, who dwell in
God, who live under the shadow of the Allmighty, and who every day lodge their
souls in the bosom of eternal loves. But,

The Sixteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or the raging
Pestilence) is, to set up God as the great object of your fear, Psalm. 119. 119,
120. Isa. 8. 7, 8, 13, 14. compared. When the Judgments of God are either
threatened or executed, feared or felt, it highly concerns us to lift up God, as
the main object of our fear; we should fear the hand that lays on the Rod,
more than Job 13. 11. Jer. 36. 24.
the Rod it self. When God takes up the Rod, when he draws his sword, and when
he shoots his Pestilential arrows amongst us, O how highly does it concern us
to fear before him with a child-like fear, with a reverential fear, with a fear
that fortifies the heart against sin, and with a fear that fits the Soul for
duty, and that draws, yea drives the soul to duty. But,

The seventeenth lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, to expect Gods singular presence with you, and his admirable
protection over you. Consult these Scriptures, Isa. 43. 2. Dan. 3. 24, 25. Genesis
39. 39, 40. Psalm. 23. 4, 5. Psalm. 91. Isa. 63. 9. Isa. 26. 20, 21. Ezekiel. 9. 4,
6. God is above his people, and beneth them, Deuteronomy. 33. 25, 26, 27. He is under
them, and over them, Cant. 2. 6. He is before them, and behind them, Isa. 52.
12. and chap. 58. 8. He is on the right hand of his people, and he is on the
left hand of his people, Psalm. 16. 8. Psalm. 121. 5. Ps. 118. 15, 16 Exodus 14.
22, 29. God is round about his people, Psalm. 34. 7. Psalm. 125. 2. And God is in
the midst of his people, Zech. 2. 5. Psalm. 46. 5. Psalm, 12. 6 O the safety, the
security of the poor people of God, for God is above his people and beneth
them, he is under them and over them, he is before them and behind them, he is
in the front, and in the rear, and he is round about them, and in the midst of
them. But,

The eighteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is to live every day in a fresh, choice, and frequent exercise of
grace. Consult these Scriptures, Psalm. 91. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 39. 17, 18. Mic. 7. 7,
8, 9. Psalm. 40. 1, 2. Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jer. 30. ^1. That man that lives
daily in an exercise of grace, that man lives every day in heaven on this side
heaven, whatever affliction or judgment he is under.

The Ninteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging
Pestilence) is, to quicken up your hearts to seek the Lord by extraordinary
ways and means, viz. by fasting and prayer. Consult these Scriptures, Number. 16.
46, -- ult. Psalm. 106. 23, 29, 30. Isa. 22. 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 13. Jon. 3. 5, --
ult. 2 Chronicles. 12. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Kings 21. 21, -- ult. Joel 2. 12, 13, 14,
15. 16, 17. But,

The Twentieth, and so the last Lesson, that you are to learn by the Rod (or by
the raging pestilence) is, To prepare for death, it is to be in actual
readiness to dye. Ah Friends, every ach, every pain, every disease, is one of
deaths warning pieces. There is not a headache, not a toothache, not a gripe,
not a grief, not a fall, not a wrench, not a plague sore; but is a divine
warning to man, to prepare to die. It Is a soleemn work to die, and therefore we
had need prepare to die. It Is a work that is to be done but once; and therefore
we had need prepare to do that work well, that is to be done but once. In this
world, we hear often, and pray often, and read often, and meditate often, and
eat often, and drink often, Job 14. 14. Heb. 9. 27.
and that which is worst, we sin often; but we must die but once. Death will
try all our graces, and all our experiences, and all our evidences, and all our
comforts, and all our seize, and all our He that would see more of this,
may read my String of Pearls, and the Funeral Sermon that is at the end of my
Book of Assurance.
enjoyments; and therefore we had need to prepare to die. Though there is
nothing more certain than death, yet there is nothing more uncertain than, 1.
The time when we shall die. 2. The place where we shall die. And 3. The manner
how we shall die; as whether we shall die a sudden death, or a lingering death,
or a violent death; or whether we shall fall by the sword abroad, or by famine
or pestilence at home, or whether we shall fall by this disease or that; and
therefore we had need be always in an actual readiness to die. No man shall
die the sooner, but much the easier, and the better, for preparing to die: And
therefore let us always have our loins girt, and our lamps burning. As death
leaves us so Judgment will find us; and there fore we have very great cause to
secure our interest in Christ, a changed nature, and a pardon in our bosoms;
that so we might have nothing to do, but to die. Except, we prepare to die, all
other preparations will do us no good. In a word, Death is a change, a great
change, it is the the last change till the resurrection, it is lasting, yea, an
everlasting change; for it puts a man into an eternal condition of happiness
or misery; it is an universal change, all persons must pass under this flaming
Sword. That Statute Law, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, will
Genesis 3. 18.
sooner or later take hold on all mortals; and therefore it highly concerns us
to prepare for death.

And thus I have shown you these Lessons that you are to learn by the Rod. The
Lord grant that your souls may fall under those fresh, those choice, those
full, and those constant influences and communications of his holy Spirit, as
may enable you to take out those twenty Lessons that I have laid open before
you. I confess the Epistle is large, but do but consider your own conditions,
and the present dispensations under which we are cast, and then I suppose you
will not call it by the name of, a tedious Epistle.

Dear Friends, the following discourse on Closet-prayer, I heartily recommend
to your serious perusal: I have many reasons to hope, that when you have once
read it over, you will be more in love with Closet-prayer than ever, and that
you will set a higher price upon Closet-prayer than ever, and that you will
make a better and fuller improvement of Closet-prayer, than ever yet you have
done. Consider what I say in my Epistle to the Reader, and labor so to manage
this little Treatise, that now I put into your hands, that God may be
glorified, your own souls edified, comfored and encouraged in the ways of the
Lord, and that you may be my Crown and joy, in the great day of our Lord Jesus.
So 1 These. 2. 19, 20.
wishing that the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, may abide upon you
and yours for ever, I take leave and rest,

Dear Friends, Your souls servant in our Dear Lord Jesus. THOMAS BROOKS.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe Epistle Dedicatory being (occasionally) so large, I shall do little more
than give thee the grounds and reasons of sending forth this little piece into
the World, especially in such a day as this is. Now my reasons are these,

First, Because God by his present dispensations calls more loudly for
Closet-prayer now, than he has done in those last twenty years that are now
past over our heads. See more of this in the 16. Argument for Closet-prayer,
page 103, to p. 108.

Secondly, Because I have several reasons to fear that many Christians do not
clearly nor fully understand the necessity, excellency, and usefulness of this
subject, and that many (O that I could not say any) live in too great a neglect
of this indispensible duty, and that more than a few, for want of light, err
in the very practice of it.

Thirdly, For the refreshing, support, and encouragement of all those Churches
of Christ that walk in the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy
Ghost, etc. especially that particular Church to whom I stand related.

Fourthly, To preserve and keep up the power of Religion and Godliness both in
men's houses, hearts, and lives. The power of Religion and Godliness lives,
thrives or dies as Closet-prayer lives, thrives, or dies. Godliness never rises
to a higher pitch than when men keep closest to their Closets, etc.

Fifthly, Because Closet-prayer is a most sovereign Remedy, a most precious
Antidote of Gods own prescribing against the Plague that now rages in the
midst of us, 1 Kings 8. 37, 38, 39, etc.

Sixthly, Because every man is that really, which he is secretly. Never tell
me, how handsomely, how neatly, how bravely, this or that man acts his part
before others; but tell me (if thou can) how he acts his part before God in
his Closet: for the man is that certainly, that he is secretly. There are many
that sweat upon the stage, that are key-cold in their Closets.

Seventhly, Though many worthies have done worthily upon all other parts of
prayer, yet there are none either of a former or later date, that have fallen
under my eye, that have written any Treatise on this Subject. I have not a
little wondered that so many eminent Writers should pass over this great and
princely duty of Closet-prayer, either with a few brief touches, or else in a
very great silence. If several Bodies of Divinity are consulted, you will find
that all they say clearly and distinctly as to Closet-prayer, may be brought
into a very narrow compass, if not into a nut-shell. I have also enquired of
several old Disciples, whether among all the thousand Sermons that they have
heard in their days, that ever they have heard one Sermon on Closet-prayer?
and they have answered No. I have also enquired of them, whether ever they had
read any Treatise on that Subject? and they have answered No. And truly this
has been no small encouragement to me, to make an offer of my mite, and if
this small attempt of mine shall be so blessed, as to provoke others that have
better heads, and hearts, and hands, than any I have, to do Christ and his
people more service, in the handling of this choice point in a more copious way
than what I have been able to reach unto: I shall therein rejoice.

Eighthly and lastly, That favor, that good acceptance, and fair quarter, that
my other poor labors have found, not only in this Nation, but in other
Countries also, has put me upon putting pen to paper once more: and I hope
that the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, will rest upon this, as it
has (to the glory of free grace) rested upon my former endeavers. I could add
other reasons, but let these suffice.

Good Reader, when thou art in thy Closet, pray hard for a poor weak, worthless
worm, that I may be found faithful and fruitful to the death, that so at last I
may receive a Crown of Life. So wishing thee all happiness both in this lower
and in that upper World; I rest

Thine in our Dear Lord Jesus, THOMAS BROOKS.

Books printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next to Cornhill.
NIne Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at St. Margarets New Fish-street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices: Or,

Salve for Believers and Unbelievers sores, being a Companion for those that
are in Christ, or out of Christ; that slight or neglect Ordinances, under
pretense of living above them that are growing in spirituals, or decaying; that
are tempted, or deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want
it; on 2 Cor. 2. 11.

2 Heaven on Earth: Or,

A serious Discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance of man's everlasting
happiness and blessedness, discovering the nature of assurance, the possibility
of attaining it, the Causes, Springs, and Degrees of it; with the resolution of
several weighty Questions, on the 8. of the Romans 32, 33, 34. verses.

3 The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or,

Meat for strong Men, and Milk for Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons,
from Ephesians. 3. 8. Preached on his Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women; And

A Crown of Glory for Old Men and Women; Or, the Happiness of being Good
betimes, and the Honor of being an Old Disciple; clearly and fully discovered,
and closely and faithfully applied. With the young man's objections answered,
and the old man's doubts resolved.

5 A String of Pearls; Or,

The best things reserved till last; delivered in a Sermon preached in London,
June 8. 1657. at the funeral of (that Triumphant Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, late
Wife to his worthy friend Mr. Nicholas Blake, Merchant.

6 The Silent Soul, with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or,

A Christian, with an Olive-leaf in his mouth when he is under the greatest
afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest and
darkest providence and changes: with Answers to diverse Questions and
Objections that are of greatest importance, to win and work souls to be still,
quiet, calm, and silent, under all changes, that have, or that may pass upon
them in this world, etc.

7 The Crown and glory of Christianity: Or,

Holiness the only way to happiness, discovered in 58. Sermons on Heb. 12. 14.

8 An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day;

Wherein is showed the transcendent excellency of a Believers portion; on Lam.
3. 24.

9 The Privy Key of Heaven: Or,

A Discourse of Closet-prayer, twenty Arguments for it, with the resolution of
several considerable Questions, etc.

Eight Treatises, lately published by Mr* Ralph Venning,

1 A Warning to back sliders, with means for the recovery of fallen ones; on Rev.
^. 5.

2 The way to Happiness, or way to Heaven opened; on Mat* 7. 21.

3 Mercies Memorial; or a thankful Remembrance for Gods merciful Deliverance on
the 5. of November, 1605. on Psalm. 1^6. 23.

4 Canaans Flowing, or Milk and Honey, being a Collation of many Christian
Experiences Savings* and Sentences, printed in an Alphabetical order* to which
is added 125. Heathen Speeches, spiritually improved.

5 His 543. Orthodox and Miscellanious Paradoxes, concerning God, Christ, the
Spirit, Election, the Scriptures, the Creation, Angels, Men, Sin, the Law,
Grace, the Sacraments, the Resurrection, Heaven and Hell.

6 The new Command renewed, or love one another.

7 Mysteries and Revelations; or the Explication of several Allusions and
Metaphors in the Scriptures.

8 Things worth thinking on, or Helps to Piety, being 412. Meditations, with a
Sermon, of The beauty of Holiness.

Several useful Treatises published by Mr. Nicholas Lockyer and others.

1 Christ's Communion* with his Church-Militant; on John 14. 18. 2 His Divine
Discovery of Sincerity, on 2 Cor. 1. 12. 3 His seasonable Instructions for
suffering Christians; on Col. 2. 11.
The Godly Man's Ark: Or,

City of Refuge, in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons; The
first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs E. Moor.

Whereunto are annexed Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected
by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness. By
Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

Helps to improve the Holy Scriptures.

For our spiritual Comfort and Benefit.

Viz. Scripture Prophesies. Promises. Precepts. Threatenings.

Drawn from their Stability, and inviolable Authority. By Robert Perrot,
Minister of Gods Word.

Dr. Thomas Tailor, his Treatise of Circumspect Walking; on Ephesians. 5. 15.

A Treatise on the Sabbath, by Mr. Thomas Shepherd.

Mr. Turners Breast Plate for the Heart.

Mr. Culverwels White stone of Assurance.

Mr. Fenor on Wilful Impenitency. And his four profitable Treatises.

Spiritual Experiences of sundry Believers, recommended to the Christian
Reader, by Vavasor Powel.

The wise Virgin, a Narration of Mrs. Martha Hatfield, a Child of a eleven
years old, how God enabled her to utter many glorious truths concerning Christ,
Faith, and other subjects.

The Diligent Schoolboys Directory: Being certain plain, and profitable Rules
and Directions for the better understanding of the English Orthography, by
Thomas Hunt, Master of Art, Schoolmaster at St. Saviors in Southwark.

The Expert Physician.

Learnedly treating of all Agues and Fevers essential, whether simple or
compound, confused, Erratick, and malignant, showing their different Nature,
Cause, Sign, and Cure; written Originally by that famous Doctor in Physic,
Bricius Bauderon, and translated into English by Dr. Wells, Licentiate in
Physic, by the University of Oxford.

A Book of Short-Writing, the most easy, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
fitted to the meanest capacity, composed by Mr. Theophylus Metcalf, Professor
of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said Book, with many new
additions, very useful.

Another Book of new Shorthand, by Tho. Cross.

A Copy-Book of the newest and most useful hands. All to be sold by John
Hancock, at the first shop in Popes-head-Alley, next to Cornhill.

FINIS.
THE PRIVY KEY OF HEAVEN, Or, a Discourse of CLOSET-PRAYER.
Matthew. 6. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet; and when thou
have shut thy Door, Pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret shall reward thee openly.
THese words of our Savior are plain, and to be taken literally, and not
Allegorically, for he speaks of shutting the Door of the Chamber. In this
chapter there is a manifest opposition between the Pharisees praying in the
Synagogues and corners of the streets, and others praying in secret.

In the Text you have a positive Precept for every Christian to pray alone; But
thou, when thou prayest: he says not, when (you) pray, but (thou) when (thou)
prayest, enter into thy closet, etc. as speaking not so much of a joint duty of
many praying together, as of a duty which each person is to do alone. The
command in the Text sends us as well to the Closet as to the Church; and he is
a hypocrite in grain that chooses the one and neglects the other; for thereby
he tells the world he cares for neither, he makes conscience of neither. He
that puts on a religious habit abroad, to gain himself a great Name among men,
and at the same time lives like an Atheist at home, shall at the last be
uncas't by God, and presented before all the world for a Bellarm. de Sanctis,
lib. 3. cap. 4. etc.
most egredious hypocrite.

Bellarmine, and some others, turn the Text into an Allegory; they say that in
these words there are two Allegories. First, the Chamber Door is the Sense:
Shut the Door, that is (say they) thy Sense, lest vain imaginations, and
worldly thoughts distract thy mind in praying. Secondly, The Door, say they, is
our Mouth. Shut thy Door, that is, thy Lips (say they) and let thy Prayer be
like the Prayer of Hannah, conceived in thy mind, but not uttered with thy
mouth. It Is usual with Papists, and other monkish men, that lie in wait to
deceive, to turn the blessed Scriptures into a Nose of Wax, under pretense of
Allegories and Mysteries. Origin was a great admirer Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 6.
chap. 8.
of Allegories; by the strength of his parts and wanton wit, he turned most of
the Scriptures into Allegories; and by the just Judgment of God upon him, he
foolishly understood and absurdly applied that Matthew. 19. 12. literally (Some
have made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven) and so gelded himself.
And indeed he might as well have plucked out one of his eyes upon the same
account, because Christ says, It is better to go to Heaven with one eye, than
having two eyes to be cast into Hell fire Matthew. 18. 9. In all Ages Heretics
have commonly defended their Heresies by translating of Scriptures into
Allegories. The Apostle speaks of such, as, denying the Resurrection of the
body, turn all the testimonies of the Resurrection into an Allegory; meaning
thereby only the spiritual Resurrection of the soul from sin; of which sort was
Hymeneus and Philetus, who destroyed the faith of some, saying the Resurrection
was past already, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. And are there not many among us that turn
the whole History of the Bible into an Allegory; and that turn Christ, and Sin,
and Death, and the Soul, and Hell, and Heaven, and all into an Allegory? Many
have and many do miserably pervert the Scriptures, by turning them into vain
and groundless Allegories. Some wanton wits have expounded Paradise Philo*
Judaeus, and others of a later date.
to be the Soul, Man to be the Mind, the Woman to be the Sense, the Serpent to
be Delight, the Tree of knowledge of good and evil to be Wisdom, and the rest
of the Trees to be the Virtues and Endowments of the Mind. O friends it is
dangerous to bring in Allegories, where the Scripture does not clearly and
plainly warrant them; and to take those words Figuratively, which should be
taken properly.

The word (...), that is in the Text rendered Closet, has only three most usual
significations amongst Greek Authors. First, it may be taken for a secret
Chamber, or close and locked Parlour. Secondly, for a Safe or Cupbord, to lay
Victuals in. Thirdly, for a locked Chest or Cupbord, wherein Treasure usually
is reserved.

The best and most judicious Interpreters that I have cast mine eye upon, both
of a former and later date, do all expound my Text of Private Prayer in retired
places, and with them I close: And so the main Doctrine that I shall gather
from the words is this:

That Closet-Prayer (or Private-Prayer) is an indispensible duty, that Doct.
Christ himself has laid upon all that are not willing to lie under the woeful
brand of being Hypocrites. I beseech you seriously to lay to heart these five
things.

First, If any Prayer be a duty, then secret Prayer must needs be a duty; for
secret Prayer is as much Prayer as any other Prayer is Prayer; and secret
Prayer prepares and fits the soul for Family Prayer, and for Publick-Prayer.
Secret-Prayer sweetly enclines, and strongly disposes a Christian to all other
religious duties and services. Ergo. But,

Secondly, If Secret Prayer be not an indispensible duty that lies upon thee,
by what authority does Conscience so upbraid thee, and so accuse thee, and so
condemn thee, and so terrify thee, as it often does for the neglect of this
duty? But,

Thirdly, Was it ever the way or method of God to promise again and again a
reward, an open reward for that work or service which himself never commanded?
Surely No. Now to this duty of Secret Prayer, the Lord has again and again
promised an open reward, Matthew. 6. 6. 18. And therefore without all
peradventure this is a duty incumbent upon all Christians.

Fourthly, Our Savior in the Text takes it for granted, that every child of
God, will be frequent in praying to his heavenly Father, and therefore he
encourages them so much the more in the work of Secret Prayer. When you Pray;
As if he had said, I know you can as well hear without ears, and live without
food, and fight without hands, and walk without feet, as you are able to live
without Prayer. And therefore when you go to wait on God, or to give your
heavenly Father a visit, Enter into your Closet, and shut your doors, etc.

Fifthly, If Closet Prayer be not an indispensible duty that Christ has laid
upon all his people, why does Satan so much oppose it, why does he so
industriously and so unweariedly labor to discourage Christians in it, and to
take off Christians from it? Certainly, Satan would never make such a fierce
and constant war, as he does upon private Prayer; were it not a necessary duty,
a real duty, and a soul-enriching duty. But more of this you will find in the
following discourse; and therefore let this touch suffice for the present, etc.

Now these five things do very clearly and evidently demonstrate that secretly
and solitarily to hold intercourse with God is the undoubted duty of every
Christian. But for a more full opening and confirmation of this great and
important Point, I shall lay down these Twenty Arguments or Considerations, etc.

First, The most eminent Saints, both in the Old and New Testament, have
applied themselves to Private-Prayer. Moses was alone in the Mount with God
forty days and forty nights, Exodus 34. 28. So Abraham fills his mouth with
Arguments, and reasons the case out alone with God in Prayer, to prevent Sodoms
desolation and destruction, and never leaves off pleading and praying till he
had brought God down from fifty to ten, Genesis 18. 22-32. and in Genesis 21. 33. you
have Abraham again at his private prayers, And Abraham planted a Grove in
Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God. Why
did Abraham plant a Grove, but that he might have a most private place to pray
and pour out his soul before the Lord in? So Isaac, Genesis 24. 63. And Isaac
went out to meditate in the field at eventide. The Hebrew word Lasuach, that is
here rendered Meditate, signifies to pray as well as to meditate, and so it is
often used. It Is a comprehensive word, that takes in both Prayer and
Meditation. So you shall find Jacob at his private-prayer, Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28. And Jacob was left alone: and there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day. When Jacob was all alone, and in a dark night, and when
his joints were out of joint, he so wrestles and weeps, and weeps and wrestles
in private Prayer, that as a Prince at last he prevails with God. Hos. 12. 3,
4. So David, Psalm. 55. 16, 17. As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord
shall save me. Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud,
and he shall hear my voice. So Daniel was three times a day in private prayer,
Dan. 6. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the Writing was signed, he went into his
house; and his Windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled
upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God,
as he did aforetime. Daniel had accustomed himself to private prayer; he went
to his closet, before he went to his public employment and State affairs: and
at his return to dinner, he turned first into his Chamber to serve his God, and
refresh his soul, before he set down to feast his body: and at the end of the
day, when he had dispatched his business with men, he made it his business to
wait upon God in his Chamber. So Jonah keeps up private prayer, when he was in
the Fishes belly, yea, when he was in the belly of Hell, Jonah 2. 1, 2, etc. So
we have Elias at prayer under the Juniper Tree, 1 Kings 19. 4. So Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 13. Now Hannah she speaks in her heart, only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard. The very soul of prayer lies in the pouring out of the
soul before God, as Hannah did, verse. 15. Neither was Rebecah a stranger to
this duty, who upon the Babes struggling in her womb, went to enquire of the
Lord, Genesis 25. 22. that is, she went to some secret place to pray, says
Calvin, Musculus, Mercer, and others. So Saul is no sooner converted, but
presently he falls upon private prayer, Acts 9. 11. And the Lord said unto him,
arise, and go into the street which is called Strait, and enquire in the house
of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold he prays. Though he was a
strict Pharisee, yet he never prayed to purpose before, nor never prayed in
private before. The Pharisees used to pray in the corners of the Streets, and
not in the corners of their houses. And after his conversion he was frequently
in private prayer, as you may see by comparing of these Scriptures together,
Romans 1. 9. Ephesians. 1. 15, 16. 1 Phil. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 1. 3. So Epaphras was a warm
man in closet prayer, Phil. 4. 12, 13. So Cornelius had devoted himself to
private prayer, Acts 10. 2, 4. And so Peter gets up to the house top to pray,
verse. 9. On the morrow as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the
City, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour. Peter got
up upon the Leads, not only to avoid destraction, but that he might be the more
secret in his private devotion. Eusebius tells us of James called Justus, that
his knees were grown hard and brawny with kneeling so much in private prayer.
And Nazianzen reports of his Sister Gorgonia, that her knees seemed to cleave
to the earth, by her often praying in private. And Gregory says of his Aunt
Trucilla, that her Elbows was as hard as horn by often leaning upon her Desk at
private prayer. I have read of a devout person, who when the set time for his
private devotion was come, whatever company he was in, he would break from them
with this neat and handsome come off, I have a friend that stays for me:
Farewell. And there was once a great Lady of this Land, who would frequently
withdraw from the company of Lords and Ladies of great quality (who came to
visit her) rather than she would lose her set times of waiting upon God in her
Closet; she would, as they called it, rudely take her leave of them, that so
she might in private attend the Lord of Lords. She would spare what time she
could, to express her favors, civilities, and courtesies, among her Relations
and Friends; but she would never suffer them to rob God of his time, nor her
soul of that comfort and communion which she used to enjoy, when she was with
God in her Closet. And indeed one hours communion with God in ones closet, is
to be preferred before the greatest and best company in the World. And there
was a child of a Christian Gentlewoman, that was so given to prayer from its
infancy, that before it could well speak, it would use to get alone and go to
prayer; and as it grew, it was more frequent in prayer, and retiring of it self
from company; and he would ask his Mother very strange questions, far above the
capacity of one of his years: but at last, when this child was but five years
old, and whipping of his top, on a sudden he flung away his Scourge-stick and
Top, and ran to his Mother, and with great joy said unto her, Mother, I must go
to God; will you go with me? She answered, My dear Child, how do thou know
thou shall go to God? he answered, God has told me so, for I love God and God
loves me. She answered, Dear Child, I must go when God pleases. But why will thou not stay with me? The Child answered, I will not stay, I must go to God.
And the Child did not live above a month after, but never cared for play more;
but falling sick he would always be saying, that he must go to God, he must go
to God. And thus sometimes, out of the Mat. 21. 16.
mouths of Babes and Sucklings God has perfected praise. Certainly such
persons will be ripe for Heaven betimes, who begin betimes to seek God in a
Closet, in a Corner. And Eusebius reports of Constantine the Emperor, that
every day he used to shut up himself in some secret place in his Palace, and
there on bended knees, did make his devout Prayers and Soliloquies to God. My
God and I are good company, said famous Dr. Sibbs. A man whose soul is
conversant with God in a Closer, in a Hole, behind the Door, or in a Desert, a
Den, a Dungeon, shall find more real pleasure, more choice delight, and more
full content, than in the Palace of a Prince. By all these famous Instances
you see that the People of God in all Ages have addicted themselves to private
prayer. O friends, these pious examples should be very awakning, very
convincing, and very encouraging to you. Certainly it is as much your duty as
it is your glory to follow these pious patterns that are now set before you:
Witness these following Scriptures, Prove. 2. 20. That thou may walk in the
way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye
followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Phil. 3. 17. Brethren, be
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
ensample. Phil. 4. 9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received,
and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. 1 Thessalonians.
1. 6. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word
in much affliction. Heb. 6. 12. That ye be not sloathful, but followers of
them, who through faith and patience inher it the Promises. So, 2 Timothy 3. 10,
11, 12, 14. Titus 2. 7. 'Twas an excellent Law that the Ephesians made, viz.
That men should propound to themselves the best patterns, and ever bear in mind
some eminent man. Bad men are wonderful in love with bad examples. Jer. 44. 16,
17. The Indian hearing Praecepto docent, Exempla movent.
that his Ancestors were gone to Hell, said, That then he would go thither too.
Some men have a mind to go to hell for company-sake. Oh that we were as much in
love with the Examples of good men, as others are in love with the examples of
bad men; and then we should be oftener in our closets than now we are. Oh that
our eyes were more fixed on the pious examples of all that have in them
(aliquid Christi) any thing of Christ, as Bucer spoke. Shall we love to look
upon the Pictures of our Friends? and shall we not love to look upon the pious
examples of those that are the lively and lovely Picture of Christ? The pious
examples of others should be the looking-glasses by which we should dress our
selves. He is the best and wisest Christian, that writes after the fairest
Scripture Copy, that imitates those Christians, that are most eminent in grace,
and that have been most exercised in Closet-prayer, and in the most secret
duties of Religion.

Hierome having read the Life and Death of Hilarion (one that lived most
Christianly, and died most comfortably) folded up the Book saying, Well,
Hilarion shall be the Champion that I will follow, his good life shall be my
example, and his godly death my president. It Is brave to live and die by the
examples of the most eminent Saints. But,

Secondly, consider, when Christ was on earth, he did much exercise himself in
secret prayer, he was often with God alone, as you may see in these famous
Scriptures. Matthew. 14. 23. And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up
into a mountain apart to pray; and when the evening was come, he was there
alone. Christ's choosing solitudes for private prayer does not only hint to us
the danger of distraction and deviation of thoughts in prayer, but how
necessary it is for us to choose the most convenient places we can for private
prayers. Our own fickleness and Satan's restlesness, calls upon us to get into
such corners, where we may most freely pour out our souls into the bosom of
God. Mark 1. 35. And in the morning rising up a great while before day, he went
out and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. As the morning time
is the fittest time for prayer, so solitary places are the fittest places for
prayer. Mark 6. 46. And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain
to pray. He that would pray to purpose had need be quiet when he is alone. Luke
5. 16. And he withdrew himself into the wilderness and prayed. (Gr. He was
departing and praying; to give us to understand that he did thus often) When
Christ was neither exercised in teaching nor in working of miracles, he was
then very intent on private prayer. Luke 6. 12. And it came to pass in those
days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in
prayer to God. Did Christ spend whole nights in private prayer to save our
souls; and shall we think it much to spend an hour or two in the day for the
furtherance of the internal and eternal welfare of our souls? Luke 21. 37. And
in the day time he was teaching in the Temple, and at night he went out, and
abode in the mount that is called the Mount of Olives. Christ frequently joins
praying and preaching together; and those whom Christ has joined together, let
no man presume to put asunder. Luke 22. 39, 41, 44, 45. And he came out, and
went as he was wont, to the Mount of Olives, and his Disciples also followed
him. And he was withdrawn from them about a stones cast, and kneeled down and
prayed. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it
were great drops of blood (clotted or congealed blood) falling down to the
ground (never was Garden watered before or since with blood as this was) And
when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them
sleeping for sorrow. Ah what sad pieces of vanity are the best of men in an
hour of trial and temptation. These very men that a little before did stoutly
profess and promise, that they would never leave him nor forsake him, and that
they would to prison for Christ, and die for Christ, yet when the day of trial
came, they could nor so much as watch with him one hour; they had neither eyes
to see, nor hands to wipe off Christ's bloody sweat. So John 6. 15, 16, 17. Thus
you see by all these famous Instances that Christ was frequent in private
prayer. Oh that we would daily propound to our selves this noble pattern for
our imitation and make it our business, our work, our heaven, to write after
this blessed Copy that Christ has set us, viz. To be much with God alone.
Certainly Christianity is nothing else but an imitation of the divine nature, a
reducing of a man's self to the Image of God, in which he was created, in
righteousness and true holiness. A Christians whole life should be nothing but
a visible representation of Christ. The Heathens had this notion amongst them
(as Lactantius reports) That the ways to honor their gods was to be like
them. Sure I am, that the highest ways of honoring Christ, is to be like to
Christ, 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to
walk, even as he walked. Oh that this blessed Scripture might always lie warm
upon our hearts. Christ is the Sun, and all the watches of our lives should be
set by the Dial of his motion. Christ is a pattern of patterns; his example
should be to us in stead of a thousand examples. It Is not only our liberty, but
our duty and glory to follow Christ in all his moral virtues absolutely: other
patterns be imperfect and defective, but Christ is a perfect pattern; and of
all his Children they are the happiest that come nearest to this perfect
pattern.

Heliogabalus loved his Children the better for resembling him in sin: But
Christ loves his children the more for resembling him in sanctity. I have read
of some Springs that change the color of the Cattle that drink of them, into
the color of their own waters, as Du Bartus sings.

Cerona, Xanth and Cephisus do make
The thirsty flocks, that of their waters take,
Black, Red and White, and near the Crimson deep,
The Arabian Fountain makes Crimson sheep.
Certainly, Jesus Christ is such a Fountain, in which whosoever bathes, and of
which whosoever drinks, shall be changed into the same likeness, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

But why was our Lord Jesus so much First, 'Twas to put a very high

Secondly, He was much in private prayer, he was often with God alone, that he
might not be seen of men, and that he might avoid all shows and appearances of
ostentation and popular applause. He that has commanded us to abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. would not himself, when he was in this
world, venture upon the least appearance of evil. Christ was very shie of every
thing that did but look like sin; he was very shie of the very show and shadow
of pride or vainglory.

Thirdly, To avoid interruptions in the duty. Secrecy is no small advantage to
the serious and lively carrying on of a private duty. Interruptions and
disturbances from without are oftentimes quench-coals to private prayer. The
best Christians do but bungle when they meet with interruptions in their
private devotions.

Fourthly, To set us such a blessed pattern and gracious example, that we
should never please nor content our selves with publick-prayers only, nor with
family-prayers only, but that we should also apply our selves to secret prayer,
to closet prayer. Christ was not always in public, nor always in his family,
but he was often in private with God alone, that by his own example he might
encourage us to be often with God in secret; and happy are they that tread in
his steps, and that write after his Copy.

Fifthly, That he might approve himself to our understandings and consciences
to be a most just and faithful High Priest. Christ was Heb. 2. 17. John 17. per
totum.
wonderful faithful and careful in both parts of his Priestly Office, viz
Satisfaction, and Intercession, he was his Peoples only Spokesman. Ah! how
earnest, how frequent was he in pouring out prayers, and tears, and sighs, and
groans for his people in secret, when he was in this world, Heb. 5. 7. And now
he is in Heaven, he is still a making Intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

Sixthly, To convince us that his Father hears and observes our private
prayers, and bottles up all our secret tears, and that he is not a stranger to
our closet desires, wrestlings, breathings, hungrings and thirstings.

Thirdly, Consider, that the ordinary exercising of your selves in secret
prayer, is that which will difference and distinguish you from hypocrites, who
do all they do to be seen of men, Matthew. 6. 1, 2. Take heed that you do not
your alms before men, to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your
Father which is in heaven. Therefore when thou do They say of the
Nightingale that when she is solitary in the woods she is careless of her note,
but composes her self more quaintly and elegantly, if she conceives there be
any auditors, or if she be near houses. Just so it is with hypocrites in
religious duties.
thine alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the
Synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily, I say
unto you, they have their reward. Self is the only oil that makes the
Chariot-wheels of the hypocrite move in all religious concernments. Verse. 5.
And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are, for they love
to stand praying in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that
they may be seen of men: Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Verse.
16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for
they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward. Thus you see that these hypocrites look more
at men, that at God in all their duties. When they give alms, the trumpet must
sound; when they pray, it must be in the Synagogues, and in the corner of the
streets; and when they fasted, they disfigured their faces, that they might
appear unto men to fast. Hypocrites live upon the praises and applauses of men.
Naturalists report of the Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its virtue no
longer than it is enclosed in gold. So hypocrites will keep up their duties no
longer than they are fed, and encouraged, and enclosed with the golden praises
and applauses of men. Hypocrites are like blazing Stars, which so long as they
are fed with Vapors, shine as if they were fixed Stars; but let the Vapors
dry up, and presently they vanish and disappear.

Closet duty speaks out most sincerity. He prays with a witness that prays
without a witness. The more sincere the soul is, the more in Closet duty the
soul will be, Job 31. 33. Where do you read in all the Scripture, that Pharaoh,
or Saul, or Judas, or Demas, or Simon Magus, or the Scribes and Pharisees, did
ever use to pour out their souls before the Lord in secret? Secret prayer is
not the Hypocrites ordinary walk, his ordinary work or trade. There is great
cause to fear that his heart was never right with God, whose whole devotion is
spent among men, or among many: Or else our Savior in drawing the hypocrites
picture, would never have made this to be the very cast of his countenance, as
he does in Mat. 6. 5. It Is very observable, that Christ commands his Disciples,
that they should not be as the hypocrites. It Is one thing to be hypocrites, and
it is another thing to be as the hypocrites. Christ would not have his people to
look like hypocrites, nor to be like to hypocrites. It Is only sincerity that
will enable a man to make a trade of private prayer. In praying with many,
there are many things that may bribe and provoke a carnal heart, as pride,
vainglory, love of applause, or to get a name. An hypocrite in all his duties
trades more for a good name, than for a good life, for a good report than for a
good conscience; like Fiddlers, that are more careful in tuning their
Instruments, than in composing their lives. But in private prayer, there is no
such trade to be driven. But,

Fourthly, Consider that in secret we may more freely and fully, and safely
unbosome our souls to God, than we can in the presence of many or a few. Hence
the Husband is to mourn apart, and the Wife apart, Zech. 12. 12, 13, 14. not
only to show the soundness of their sorrow, but also to show their sincerity by
their secrecy; they must mourn apart that their sins may not be disclosed nor
discovered one to another: Here they are severed to show that they wept not for
company sake, but for their own particular sins, by which they had pierced and
crucified the Lord of glory. In secret a Christian may descend into such
particulars, as in public or before others he will not, he may not, he ought
not to mention. Ah how many Christians are there who would blush and be ashamed
to walk in the streets, and to converse with sinners or saints, should but
those infirmities, enormities, and wickednesses, be written in their
foreheads, or known to others; which they freely and fully lay open to God in
secret? There are many sins which many men have fallen into before conversion
and since conversion, which should they be known to the world, would make
themselves to stink, and Religion to stink, and their profession to stink in
the nostrils of all that know them. Yea, should those weaknesses and
wickednesses be published upon the house tops, which many are guilty of before
grace received, or since grace received; how would weak Christians be
staggered, young comers on in the ways of God discouraged, and many mouths of
blasphemy opened, and many sinners hearts hardened against the Lord, his ways,
reproofs, and the things of their own peace; yea, how would Satan's banner be
displayed, and his kingdom strengthened, and himself infinitely pleased and
delighted? It Is an infinite mercy and condescension in God, to lay a Law of
restraint upon Satan, who else would be the greatest Blab in all the world: It
would be mirth and music to him to be still a laying open the follies and
weaknesses of the Saints.

Ambrose brings in the Devil boasting against Christ, and challenging Judas as
his own. He is not thine, Lord Jesus, he is mine, his thoughts beat for me; he
eats with thee, but is fed by me; he takes bread from thee, but money from me;
he drinks with thee, and sells thy blood to me. There is not a sin that a Saint
commits, but Satan would trumpet it out to all the world, if God would but give
him leave. No man that is in his right wits, will lay open to every one his
bodily infirmities, weaknesses, diseases, ailments griefs, etc. but to some
near relation, or bosom friend, or able Physician. So no man that is in his
right wits will lay open to every one his soul-infirmities, weaknesses,
diseases, ailments, griefs, etc. but to the Lord, or to some particular person
that is wise, faithful, and able to contribute something to his souls relief.
Should a Christian but lay open or rip up all his follies and vanities to the
world, how sadly would some deride him and scorn him? and how severely and
bitterly would others censure him and judge him? etc. When David was alone in
the Cave, then he poured out his complaint to God, and showed before him his
trouble, Psalm. 142. 2. And when Job was all alone, then his eyes poured out
tears to God Job. 20. 16. There is no hazard, no danger, in ripping up of all
before God in a corner, but there may be a great deal of hazard and danger
Eccl. 12. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 22. 12. Heb. 10. 6. Psalm. 126. 5. Luke 14. 14.
Matthew. 25. 34, 37.
in ripping up of all before men.

Fifthly, Secret duties shall have open rewards, Matthew. 6. 6. And thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. So Verse. 18. God will reward
his people here in part, and hereafter in all perfection: He is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him in a corner. They that sow in tears secretly,
shall reap in joy openly. Private prayer shall be rewarded before men and Angels
publicly. How openly did God reward Daniel for his secret prayer? Dan. 6. 10.
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Mordecai privately discovered a plot of treason against
the person of King Ahasuerus, and he is rewarded openly, Esther 2. 21, 22, 23.
with Chap. 6. Darius before he came to the kingdom, received privately a
garment for a gift of one Syloson; and when he came to be King, he rewarded him
openly with the command of his Country Samus. God in the great Day, will
recompense his people before all the world, for every secret prayer, and secret
tear, and secret sigh, and secret groan that has come from his people. God in
the great day will declare to men and Angels, how often his people have been in
pouring out their souls before him in such and such holes, corners, and secret
places, and accordingly he will reward them.

Ah Christians, did you really believe this, and seriously dwell on this, you
would

1. Walk more thankfully.

2. Work more cheerfully.

3. Suffer more patiently.

4. Fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil, more courageously.

5. Lay out your selves for God, his interest and glory, more freely.

6. Live with what Providence has cut out for your portion, more quietly and
contentedly. And,

7. You would be in private prayer more frequently, more abundantly.

Sixthly, Consider, that God has O Lord, I never come to thee but by thee; I
never go from thee without thee. Bern.
usually let out himself most to his people, when they have been in secret,
when they have been alone at the Throne of Grace. Oh the sweet meltings, the
heavenly warmings, the blessed cheerings, the glorious manifestations, and the
choice communion with God, that Christians have found when they have been alone
with God in a corner, in a closet, behind the door! When had Daniel that Vision
and comfortable Message, that blessed News (by the Angel) that he was greatly
beloved, but when he was all alone at prayer? Dan. 9. 20, 21, 22, 23. And while
I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God, for the holy
Mountain of my God; yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel,
whom I had seen in the Vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,
touched me about the time of the evening oblation: And he informed me, and
talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill, and
understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came
forth, and I am come to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved. Therefore
understand the matter, and consider the Vision. Whilst Daniel was at private
prayer, God by the Angel Gabriel reveals to him the secret of his Counsel,
concerning the Restoration of Jerusalem, and the duration thereof, even to the
Messiah; and whilst Daniel was at private prayer, the Lord appears to him, and
in an extraordinary way assures him that he was a man greatly beloved, or as
the Hebrew (Chumudoth) has it, a man of desires, that is, a man whom Gods
desires are toward, a man singularly beloved of God, and highly in favor with
God, a man that art very pleasing and delightful to God. God loves to lade the
wings of private prayer with the sweetest, choicest, and chiefest blessings. Ah
how often has God kissed a poor christian at the beginning of private prayer,
and spoke peace to him in the midst of private prayer, and filled him with
light, and joy, and assurance upon the close of private prayer? And so
Cornelius is highly commended and graciously rewarded upon the account of his
private prayer, Acts. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. There was a certain man in Cesarea called
Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band called the Italian Band, a devout man, and
one that feared God with all his house; which gave much Alms to the people, and
prayed to God always: He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of
the day, an Angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him; Cornelius. And
when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, what is it, Lord? and he said
unto him, thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.
Verse. 30. 31. And Cornelius said, four days ago I was fasting until this hour
(that is, until about three a clock in the afternoon, verse. 3.) and at the
ninth hour I prayed in my house, and behold a man stood before me in bright
clothing, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine Alms are had in
remembrance in the sight of God. Mark, as he was praying in his house, namely,
by himself alone, a man in bright clothing (that was an Angel in man's shape,
verse. 3.) appeared to him, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard; he does
not mean only that prayer which he made when he fasted and humbled himself
before the Lord, verse. 30. 31. but (as verse. 2, 3, 4. shows (His prayers) his
prayers which he made alone; for it seems, none else were with him then, for
he only saw that man in bright clothing, and to him alone the Angel addressed
his present speech, saying, Cornelius, thy prayers are heard, verse. 4, 31. Here
you see that Cornelius his private prayers are not only heard, but kindly
remembered, and graciously accepted, and gloriously rewarded. Praying Cornelius
is not only remembered by God, but he is also visited sensibly and evidently by
an Angel, and assured that his private prayers and good deeds are an odor, a
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God. And so when had
Peter his Vision, but when he was praying alone on the housetop? Acts 10. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh
unto the City, Peter went up unto the housetop to pray, about the sxith hour.
And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he
fell into a trance, and saw heaven opened, and a certain Vessel descending unto
him, as it had been a great sheet, knit at the four corners, and let down to
the earth, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to
him, Rise, Peter; kill and eat. When Peter was upon the housetop at prayer
alone, then he fell into a trance, and then he saw Heaven opened, and then he
had his spirit raised, his Mind clevated, and all the Faculties of his soul
filled with a Divine Revelation. And so when Pa^l was at prayer alone, he saw
in Acts 11 18.
a Vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, that he
might receive his sight. Paul had not been long at private prayer, before it
was revealed to him, that he was a chosen vessel, and before he was filled with
the gifts Graces, and Comforts of the Holy Ghost. And when John was alone in
the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ
(whither he was banished by Domitian, a most cruel Emperor) then he had a
glorious Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18. Rev. 1. 9, -- ult. Rev. 5. 1, to 9.
sight of the Son of man, and then the Lord discovered to him most deep and
profound Mysteries, both concerning the present and future state of the Church,
to the end of the world. And when John was weeping (in private prayer
doubtless) then the sealed book was opened to him. So when Daniel was at
private prayer, God dispatches a heavenly messenger to him, and his Errand was
to open more clearly and fully the blessed Scripture to him. Some comfortable
and encourraging knowledge this holy man Doctor Ames got his learning by private
prayer and so did Solomon his wisdom.
of God had attained unto before by his frequent and constant study in the
word, and this eggs him on to private prayer, and private prayer posts an
Angel from heaven to give him a clearer and fuller light. Private prayer is a
Golden-key to unlock the mysteries of the word unto us. The knowledge of many
choice and blessed Truths are but the returns of private prayer. The Word
dwells most richly in their hearts, who are most in pouring out of their hearts
before God in their Closets. When Bonaventure. (that seraphical Doctor, as some
call him) was asked by Aquinas, from what books and helps he derived such holy
and divine expressions and contemplations? He pointed to a Crucifix, and said
(Iste est liber, etc.) Prostrate in prayer at the feet of this Image, my soul
receives greater light from heaven, than from all study and disputation.
Though this be a Monkish tradition and superstitious Fiction, yet some
improvement may be made of it. Certainly that Christian, or that Minister, that
in private prayer lies most at the feet of Jesus Christ, he shall understand
most of the mind of Christ in the Gospel, and he shall have most of heaven and
the things of his own peace brought down into his heart.

There is no Service wherein christians have such a near, familiar, and
friendly intercourse with God, as in this of private prayer: neither is there
any Service wherein God does more delight to make known his truth and
faithfulness, his grace and goodness, his mercy and bounty, his beauty and
glory Been orasse, est been studuisse. Luther.
to poor Souls, than this of private prayer. Luther professes, That he
profited more in the knowledge of the Scripture by private prayer in a short
space, than he did by study in a longer space. As John by weeping in a corner
got the sealed book opened. Private prayer crowns God with the Honor and Glory
that is due to his Name, and God crowns private prayer with a discovery of
those blessed, weighty Truths to his servants, that are a sealed book to
others. Certainly, the soul usually enjoyes most communion with God Nunquam
minus solus, quam cum solus. Never less alone, than when alone, said the
Heathen. And may not a Saint say so much more that has communion with God?
Jer. 13. 1, 2.
in secret. When a christian is in a Wilderness (which is a very solitary
place) then God delights to speak friendly and comfortably to him. Hos. 2. 14.
Behold, I will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak friendly
or comfortably to her. Or as the Hebrew has it, I will speak to her heart.
When I have her alone, says. God, in a solitary wilderness, I will speak such
things to her heart, as shall exceedingly cheer her, and comfort her, and even
make her heart leap and dance within her. A Husband imparts his mind most
freely and fully to his wife when she is alone; and so does Christ to the
believing soul. O the secret kisses! the secret embraces! the secret visits!
the secret whispers! the secret chearings! the secret sealings! the secret
discoveries! etc* that God gives to his people when alone, when in a hole, when
under the stairs, when behind the door, when in a dungeon! When Jeremiah Jer.
33. 1, 2, 3.
was calling upon God alone in his dark dungeon, he had great and wonderful
things showed him that he knew not of.

Ambrose was wont to say, I am never less alone, than when I am all alone; for
then I can enjoy the presence of my God most freely, fully, and sweetly;
without interruption.

And 'twas a most sweet and divine saying of Bernard, O Saint, know thou not
(says he) that thy Husband Christ is bashful, and will not be familiar in
company: Retire thy self therefore by Prayer and Meditation into thy Closet, or
the Fields, and there thou shall have Christ's embraces.

A Gentlewoman being at private prayer and meditation in her Parlour, had such
sweet, choice, and full enjoyments of God, that she cried out, Oh that I might
ever enjoy this sweet communion with God, etc.

Christ loves to embrace his Spouse, not so much in the open street, as in a
closet: And certainly the gracious soul has never sweeter views of glory, than
when it is most out of the view of the world. Wise men give their best, their
choicest, and their richest gifts in secret; and so does Christ give his the
best of the best, when they are in a corner, when they are all alone. But, as
for such as cannot spare time to seek God in a Closet, to serve him in secret,
they sufficiently manifest that they have little fellowship or friendship with
God, whom they so seldom come at.

Seventhly, Consider, the time of this life is the only time for private
prayer. Heaven will admit of no secret prayer. In Heaven there will be no
secret sins to trouble us, nor no secret wants to pinch us, nor no secret
temptations to betray us, nor no secret snares to entangle us, nor no secret
enemies to supplant us. We had need live much in the practice of that duty here
on earth, that we shall never be exercised in after death. Some duties that are
incumbent upon us now, as praising of God, admiring of God, exalting and
lifting up of God joying and delighting in God, etc. will be for ever incumbent
upon us in Heaven; but this duty of private prayer, we must take our leaves of,
when we come to lay our heads in the dust.

Eighthly, Consider, the great prevalency of secret prayer. Private prayer is
(Porta Coeli, Clavis Paradisi) the Gate of Heaven, a Key to let us into
Paradise. Oh the great things that private prayer has done with God! Oh the
Psalm. 31. 22
great mercies that have been obtained by private prayer! And, oh Psalm. 38. 8.
the great threatenings that have been diverted by private prayer! And, oh the
great judgments that have been removed by private prayer! And, oh the great
judgments that have been prevented by private prayer! I have read of a
malicious woman who gave her self to the Devil, provided that he would do a
mischief to such a neighbor, whom she mortally hated: The Devil went again and
again to do his errand, but at last he returns and tells her, that he could do
no hurt to that man, for when ever he came, he found him either reading the
Scriptures, or at private prayer. Private prayers pierces the Heavens, and are
commonly blessed and loaded with gracious and glorious returns from thence.
Whilst Hezekiah was praying and weeping in private, God sent the Prophet Isaiah
to him to assure him, that his prayer was heard, and that his tears were seen,
and that he would add unto his days fifteen years. So when Isaac was all alone
meditating and praying, Isa. 38. 5.
and treating with God for a good wife in the fields, he meets Robckah. So
Jacob, Genesis 32. 24, 25, Genesis 24. 63 64.
26, 27, 28. And Jacob was left alone: and there wrestled a man with him,
until the breaking of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed not against
him he touched the hollow of his thigh: and the hollow of Jacobs thigh was out
of joint, as he wrestled with him. And he said, let me go, for the day
breaks; and he said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. And he
said unto him, what is thy name? and he said, Jacob. And he said, thy name
shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a Prince have thou power with
God and with men, and have prevailed. In this Scripture we have an elegant
description of a Duel fought between the Almighty and Jacob; and in it there
are these things most observable.

First, We have the Combatants or Duellists, Jacob and God, who appeared in the
shape or appearance of a man. He that is here said to be a man, was the Son of
God in humane shape, as it appears by the whole narration, and by Hosea 12.
3, 4, 5. Now that this man that wrestled with Jacob, was indeed God, and not
really man, is most evident by these Reasons.

First, Jacob desires a blessing from him; Verse. 26. Now it is Gods Prerogative
royal to bless, and not angels nor men's. Ergo.

Secondly, He calls him by the name of God; thou have power with God, Verse. 28.
And, says Jacob, I have seen God face to face, Verse. 30. Not that he saw the
Majesty and Essence of God, for no man can see the essential glory of God and
live, Exodus 33. 20, 23. but he saw God more apparently, more manifestly, more
gloriously than ever he had done before. Some created shape, some glimpse of
glory Jacob saw, whereby God was pleased for the present to testify his more
immediate presence; but not himself.

Thirdly, The same person that here Jacob wrestles with, is he whom Jacob
remembers (in his benediction) as his deliverer from all evil, Genesis 48. 16.
'Twas that God that appeared to him at Bethel, when he fled from the face of
his Brother, Genesis 35. 7. Ergo.

Fourthly, Jacob is reproved for his curious enquiring or asking after the
Angels name, verse. 29. which is a clear argument or demonstration of his
majesty and glory, God being above all notion and Name. God is a super
substantial substance, an understanding not to be understood, a word never to
be spoken. One being asked, What God was, Dionys. Areop. de Divin. Nom. cap. 1.
answered, That he must be God himself, before he could know* God fully. We are
as well able to comprehend the Sea in a Cockle-shel, as we are able to
comprehend the Almighty (or that Nomen Majestativum, as Tertullian phraseth
it.) In searching after God (says Chrysostom) I am like a man digging in a
deep spring; I stand here, and the water rises upon me; and I stand there, and
still the water rises upon me.

In this conflict you have not one man wrestling with another, nor one man
wrestling with a created Angel, but a poor weak mortal man wrestling with an
immortal God, weakness wrestling with Strength and a finite being with an
infinite Being. Though Jacob had no second though he was all alone, though he
was wonderfully overmatch't, yet he wrestles and keeps his hold; and all in the
strength of him he wrestles with.

Secondly, You have the place where they combated, and that was beside the Ford
Jabbok, verse. 22. (This is the name of a Brook or River, springing by Rabba,
the Metropolis of the Ammonites, and issuing into Jordan beneath the Sea of
Galilce, Numb. 21. 24. Deuteronomy. 2. 37. Judge. 11. 13, 15. Deuteronomy. 3. 16.) Jacob did
never enjoy so much of the presence of God, as when he had left the company of
men. O! the sweet communion that Jacob had with God when he was retired from
his family, and was all alone with his God by the Ford Jabbok. Certainly Jacob
was never less alone than at this time, when he was so alone. Saints often meet
with the best wine, and with the strongest cordials, when they are all alone
with God.

Thirdly, You have the time of the Combat, and that was the Night: At what
time of the night this wrestling, this duel began, we no where read; but it
lasted till break of day, it lasted till Jacob had the better of the Angel. How
many hours of the night this conflict lasted, no mortal man can tell. Gods
design was that none should be spectators nor witnesses of this combat, but
Jacob only, and therefore Jacob must be wrestling when others were sleeping.

Fourthly, You have the ground of the Quarrel, and that was Jacobs fear of
Esau, and his importunate desire for a blessing. Jacob flies to God that he
might not fall before man; he flies to God that he might not fly before men. In
a storm there is no shelter like to the wing of God. He is safest, and
happiest, and wisest, that lays himself under divine protection. This Jacob
knew, and therefore he runs to God, as to his only City of refuge. In this
conflict God would have given out; Let me go, for the day breaks, verse. 26.
but Jacob keeps his hold, and tells him boldly to his very face, that he would
not let him go unless he would bless him. O the power of private prayer! it
has a kind of omnipotency in it, it takes God captive, it holds him as a
prisoner, it binds the hands of the Almighty; yea, it will wring a mercy, a
blessing out of the hand of Heaven it self. O the power of that prayer that
makes a man victorious over the greatest, the highest Power. Jacob though a
man, a single man, a traveling man, a tired man, yea, though a worm (that is
easily crushed and trodden under Isa. 41. 14.
foot) and no man, yet in private prayer, he is so potent, that he overcomes
the Omnipotent God, he is so mighty that he overcomes the Almighty.

Fifthly, You have the nature or manner of the Combat; and that was both
outward and inward, both corporal and spiritual; 'Twas by might and slight;
'twas as well by the strength of his body, as 'twas by the force of his Faith.
He wrestled not only with spiritual struglings, tears and prayers, Hosea 12. 4.
but with corporal also, wherein God assailed him with one hand, and upheld him
with the other. In this conflict, Jacob and the Angel of the Covenant did
really lay arm on arm, and set shoulder to shoulder, and put foot to foot, and
used all other slights and ways as men do that wrestle one with another. The
Hebrew word (...) from (...) that is here rendered wrestled, signifies the
raising of the dust, because those which did wrestle of old, did not only
wrestle naked (as the manner then was) but did also use to cast dust one upon
another, that so they might take more sure hold one of another. Some from this
word Abak, do conclude that Jacob and the Angel did tug, and strive, and turn
each other till they sweat again; for so much the word imports. Jacob and the
Angel did not wrestle in jest, but in good earnest; they wrestled with their
might (as it were) for the Garland; they strove for victory as for life.

But as this wrestling was corporal, so 'twas spiritual also; Jacobs soul takes
hold of God, and Jacobs faith takes hold of God, and Jacobs prayers takes hold
of God, and Jacobs tears takes hold of God, Hosea 12. 4, 5. Certainly Jacobs
weapons in this warfare were mainly spiriritual, and so mighty through God.
There is no overcoming of God but in his own strength. Jacob did more by his
royal faith, than he did by his noble hands, and more by weeping than he did by
sweating, and more by praying than he did by all his bodily strivings.

Sixthly and lastly, You have the issue of the Combat, and that is Victory
over the Angel, verse. 28. Jacob wrestles in the Angels arms and armor, and so
overcomes him; as a Prince he over-powers the Angel, by that very power he had
from the Angel. The Angel was as freely and fully willing to be conquered by
Jacob, as Jacob was willing to be conqueror. When Lovers wrestle, the
strongest is willing enough to take a fall of the weakest; and so 'twas here.
The Father in wrestling with his Child is willing enough, for his child's
comfort and encouragement, to take a fall now and then; and so 'twas between
the Angel and Jacob in the present case. Now in this blessed story, as in a
Chrystal-glass, you may see the great power and prevalency of private prayer;
it conquers the great Conqueror; it is so omnipotent, that it overcomes an
omnipotent God.

Now this you may see more fully and sweetly cleared up in Hos. 12. 3, 4. He
took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he had power with
God: Yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made
supplication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. When
Jacob was all alone, and in a dark night, and but on one leg, yet then he
played the Prince with God (as the Hebrew has it) Jacob by prayers and tears
did so prince it with God, as that he carried the blessing* Jacobs wrestling
was by weeping, and his prevailing by praying. Prayers and tears are not only
very pleasing to God, but also very prevalent with God. And thus you see that
this great instance of Jacob, speaks out aloud the prevalency of private prayer.

See another instance of this in David, Psalm. 6. 6, 8, 9. I am weary groanings:
all the night make I my bed to swim: I water my couch with my tears. These are
all excessive figurative speeches, to set forth the greatness of his sorrow and
the multitude of his tears. David in his retirement makes the place of his sin
(viz. his Bed) to be the place of his repentance. David sins privately upon his
bed, and David mourns privately upon his bed. Every place which we have
polluted by sin, we should sanctify and water with our tears, Verse. 8. Depart
from me all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping. As blood has a voice, and as the rod has a voice, so tears have a
voice, tears have tongues, and tears can speak. There is no noise to that that
tears in secret make in the ears of God. A prudent and indulgent Father, can
better pick out the wants and necessities of his Children by their secret tears
than by their loud complaints, by their weeping than by their words; and do you
think that God cannot do as much. Tears are not always Mutes. Cry aloud (says
one) not with thy tongue, but with thy eyes; Lam. 2. 18.
not with thy words, but with thy tears; for that is the prayer that makes the
most forcible entry into the ears of the great God of Heaven. Penitent tears
are undeniable Ambassadors, that never return from the Throne of Grace, without
a gracious answer. Tears are a kind of silent prayers, which though they say
nothing, yet they obtain pardon; and though they plead not a man's cause, yet
they obtain mercy at the hands of God. As you see in that great instance of
Peter, who though he said nothing (that we read of) yet, weeping bitterly, he
obtained mercy. Mat. 26. 75.
I have read of Augustine who coming as a Visitant to the house of a sick man,
he saw the room full of friends and kindred, who were all silent, yet all
weeping; the Wife sobbing, the Children sighing, the Kinsfolk lamenting, all
mourning; whereupon Augustine uttered this short ejaculatory Prayer, Lord, What
prayer do thou hear if not these? Verse. 9. The Lord has heard my
supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer. God sometimes answers his people
before they pray, Isa. 65. 24. And it shall come to pass, that before they
call, I will answer. And sometimes while they are praying; so it follows in the
same verse, And while they are yet speaking, I will hear. So Isa. 30. 19. He
will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear
it, he will answer thee. And sometimes after they have prayed; as the
experiences of all Christians can testify. Sometimes God neither hears nor
receives a prayer; and this is the common case and lot of the wicked, Prove. 1.
28. Job 27. 9. Isa. 1. 15. Sometimes God hears the prayers of his people, but
does not presently answer them, as in that case of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
And sometimes God both hears and receives the prayers of his people, as here he
did David's. Now in this instance of David as in a glass, you may run and read
the prevalency of private prayer, and of secret tears.

You may take another instance of this in Jonah, Jonah 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10.
Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly, and said, I
cried by reason of my affliction, unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the
belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice. For thou had cast me into
the deep, into the midst of the seas, and the floods compassed me about, all
thy billows and thy waves passed over me. The waters compassed me about, even
to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my
head. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came
in unto thee, into thy holy Temple. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it
vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. When Jonah was all alone, and in the midst
of many dangers and deaths; when he was in the Whales belly, yea, in the belly
of Hell (so called because horrid and hideous, deep and dismal) yet then
private prayer fetches him from thence. Let a man's dangers be never so many,
nor never so great, yet secret prayer has a certain omnipotency in it, that
will deliver him out of them all. In multiplied afflictions private prayer is
most prevalent with God. In the very midst of drowning, secret prayer will keep
both head and heart above water. Upon Jonahs private prayer, God sends forth
his Mandamus, and the Fish serves Jonah for a ship to sail safe to shore. When
the case is even desperate, yet then private prayer can do much with God.
Private prayer is of that power that it can open the doors of Leviathan, as you
see in this great instance; which yet is reckoned as a thing not feasible, Job
41. 14.

Another instance of the prevalency of private prayer you have in that 2 Kings
4. 32, 33, 34, 35. And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child
was dead, and laid upon his bed. He went in therefore and shut the door upon
them twain, and prayer unto the Lord. Privacy is a good help to fervency in
prayer. And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his
mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and he
stretched himself upon the child, and the flesh of the child waxed warm. Then
he returned, and walked in the house to and fro, and went up, and stretched
himself upon him: and the child neesed seven times, and the child opened his
eyes. Oh the power, the prevalency, the omnipotency of private prayer, that
raises the dead to Life! And the same effect had the private prayer of Elijah
in raising the widows Son of Zarephath to life, 1 Kings 17. 18, -- ult. The
great prevalency of Moses his Private prayers you may read in the following
Scriptures. Number. 11. 1, 2. And when the people complained, it displeased the
Lord, and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the
Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of
the Camp. And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the Lord,
the fire was quenched. Moses by private prayer rules and overrules with God:
he was so potent with God in private prayer, that he could have what he would
of God. So Number. 21. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 106. 23. Exo. 32. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Exo. 14. 15, 16, 17. The same you may see in Nehemiah, Neh. 1. 11. compared
with Neh. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So Luther perceiving the Cause of God, and the work
of Reformation to be greatly straightened, and in danger, he went into his Closet,
and never left wrestling with God, till he had received a gracious answer from
Heaven; upon which he comes out of his closet to his friends leaping and
triumphing with Vicimus, vicimus, we have overcome, we have overcome, in his
mouth. At which time it is observed, that there came out a Proclamation from
Charles the Fifth, that none should be further molested for the Profession of
the gospel: At another time Luther being in private prayer, for a sick friend
of his (who was very comfortable and useful to him) had a particular answer for
his recovery: whereupon he was so confident, that he sent word to his friend,
that he should certainly recover; and so it fell out accordingly. And so
Latimer prayed with great zeal for three things. 1. That Queen Elizabeth might
come to the Crown. 2. That he might seal the truth with his heart blood. And
3. That the Gospel might be restored once again, once again;
which he expressed with great vehemence of spirit. All which three God heard
him in.

Constantine commanded that his Effigies should be engraven, not as other
Emperors, in their Armor leaning, but as in a posture of prayer, kneeling; to
manifest to the world, that he won more by secret prayer, than by open Battles.

Mr. Dod reports, that when many good people had often sought the Lord in the
behalf of a woman that was possessed with the Devil, and yet could not
prevail, at last they appointed a day for fasting and prayer; at which time
there came a poor woman to the chamber door, where the exercise was begun, and
craved entrance; but she being poor they would not admit her in: upon that the
poor woman kneeled down behind the door, and sought God by prayer. But she had
not prayed long, before the evil spirit raged, roared, and cried out in the
possessed woman, take away the old woman behind the door, for I must be gone;
take away the old woman behind the door, for I must be gone. And so by the old
woman's prayers behind the door he was cast out. Oh the prevalency of prayer
behind the door! And thus you see by all these great instances the great
prevalency of private prayer.

Private prayer like Saul's sword and Jonathans Bow (when duly qualified as to
the person and act) never returns empty, it hits the mark, it carries the day
with God, it pierces the walls of Heaven, though, like those of Gaza, made of
brass and Iron, Isa. 45. 2. O who can express the powerful oratory of private
prayer! etc.

Ninthly, consider that secret duties are the most soul-enriching duties. Look
as secret meals make fat bodies, so secret duties make fat souls: and as
secret Trades brings in great earthly riches, so secret prayers makes many rich
in spiritual blessings and in heavenly riches. Private prayer is that privy key
of heaven that unlocks all the Treasures of glory to the soul. The best riches
and the sweetest mercies, God usually gives to his people when they are in
their closets upon their knees. Look as the warmth the Chickens find by close
sitting under the Hens wings, cherishes them; so are the graces of the Saints
enlivened, and cherished, and strengthened, by the sweet secret influences,
which their souls fall under, when they are in their closet-communion with God.
Private prayer conscienciously performed, is the privy key of heaven that has
unlocked such treasures and such secrets as has past the skill of the
cunningest Devil to find out. Private prayer Midwifes the choicest mercies, and
the chiefest riches in upon us. Certainly there are none so rich in gracious
experiences, as those that are most exercised in closet duties, Ps. 34. 6. This
poor man cried (says David) and the Lord saved him out of all his troubles.
David, pointing to himself, tells us that he cried, that is, silently and
secretly, as Moses did at the red sea, and as Exodus 14. 15. Neh. 1. 11. and 2.
4.
Nehemiah did in the presence of the King of Persia: and the Lord saved him out
of all his troubles. And, O what additions were these deliverances to his
experiences! O my friends, look as the tender dew, that falls in the silent
night, makes the grass, and herbs, and flowers, to flourish and grow more
abundantly than great showrs of rain that fall in the day; so secret prayer
will more abundantly cause the sweet herbs of grace and holiness, to grow and
flourish in the soul, than all those more open, Public, and visible duties of
Religion, which too too often are mingled and mixed with the sun and wind of
pride and hypocrisy.

Beloved, you know that many times a Favorite at Court gets more by one secret
motion, by one private request to his Prince, than a Tradesman, or a Merchant
gets in twenty years labor and pains, etc. So a Christian many times gets
more by one secret motion, by one private request to the King of Kings, than
many others do by Trading long in the more public Duties of Religion. O Sirs,
remember that in private prayer we have a far greater advantage, as to the
exercise of our own gifts, and graces, and parts, than we have in Public; for
in Public we only hear others, exercise their parts and gifts, etc. in Public
duties we are more passive, but in private duties we are more active. Now the
more our gifts and parts, and graces are exercised, the more they are
strengthened and increased. All acts strengthen habits. The more sin is acted,
the more it is strengthened. And so it is with our gifts and graces; the more they
are acted, the more they are strengthened. But

Tenthly, Take many things together. All Christians have their secret Sins.
Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults. Secret not only to other men, but himself; even such secret sins as
grew from errors which he understood not. It Is incident to every man to err,
and then to be ignorant of his errors. Many sins I see in my self, says he,
and more there are which I cannot espy, which I cannot find out: nay, I think
says he, that every man's sins do arise beyond his accounts. There is not the
best, the wisest, nor the holiest man in the world, that can give a full and
entire list of his sins; Who can understand his errors? This interrogation has
the force of an affirmation; Who can? No man, no not the most perfect and
innocent man in the world. O friends, who can reckon up the secret sinful
imaginations, the secret sinful inclinations, or the secret pride, the secret
blasphemies, the secret hypocrisies, the secret Atheistical risings, the secret
murmurings, the secret repinings, the secret discontents, the secret
insolences, the secret filthynesses, the secret unbelievings, etc. that God
might every day charge upon his soul? Should the best and holiest man on earth,
have but his secret sins every day written in his forehead, it would not only
put him to a crimson blush, but it would make him pull his hat over his eyes,
or cover his face with a double scarf. So 1 Kings 8. 38. What prayer and
supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which
shall know every man the plague of his own heart, etc. Sin is the greatest
plague in the world; but never more dangerous, than when it reaches the heart.
Now secret sins commonly ly nearest the Heart, the Fountain from whence they
take a quick, immediate, and continual supply. Secret sins are as near to
original Sin, as the first droppings are to the spring head. And as every
secret sin lies nearest the heart, so every secret sin is the plague of the
heart. Now as secret diseases are not to be laid open to every one, but only to
the prudent Physician: So our secret sins which are the secret plagues, the
secret diseases of our souls, are not to belaid open to every one, but only to
the Physician of souls, that is only able both to cure them and pardon them.
And as all Christians have their secret sins, so all Christians have their
secret temptations, 2 Corin. 12. 8, 9. And as they have their secret
temptations, so they have their secret wants: Yea, many times they have such
particular and personal wants, that there is not one in the congregation, nor
one in the family, that has the like. And as they have their secret wants, so
they have their secret fears, and secret snares, and secret streights, and
secret troubles, and secret doubts, and secret jealousies, etc. And how do all
these things call aloud upon every Christian, to be frequent and constant in
secret prayer?

Eleventhly, Consider, Christ is very much affected and delighted in the secret
prayers of his people, Cant. 2. 14. O my dove that art in the clefts of the
Rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me
hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Christ
observes his Spouse when she is in the clefts of the rock; when she is gotten
into a Corner a praying, he looks upon her with singular delight, and with
special intimations of his love. Nothing is more sweet, delightful and welcome
to Christ, than the secret services of his people: Their secret breathings are
like lovely songs to him; their Mal. 3. 4.
secret prayers in the clefts of the rock, or under the stairs, are as sweet
incense to Jesus. The Spouse retires to the secret places of the stairs, not
only for security, but also for secrecy, that so she might the more freely,
without suspicion of hypocrisy, pour out her soul into the bosom of her
beloved. The great delight that Parents take in the secret lispings and
whisperings of their children, is no delight to that which Christ takes in the
secret prayers of his people. And therefore, as you would be friends and and
furtherers of Christ's delight, be much in secret prayer.

Twelfthly, Consider, you are the only persons in all the world that God has
made choice of to reveal his secrets to. John 15. 15. Henceforth I call you
not servants, for the Servant knows not what his Lord does: but I have called
you friends; for all things that I have heard of my father I have made known
unto you. Every thing that God the father had communicated to Christ as
Mediator to be revealed to his servants, he did make known to his disciples as
to his bosom friends. Christ loves his people as friends, and he uses them as
friends, and he opens his heart to them as friends. There is nothing in the
heart of Christ, that concerns the internal and eternal 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. John
1. 9. Romans 16. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Ephesians. 3. 3, 4, 9.
welfare of his friends, but he reveals it to them: he reveals himself, his
love, his eternal good will, the mysteries of Faith, and the secrets of his
Covenant, to his friends. Christ loves not to entertain his friends with
things that are commonly and vulgarly known. Christ will reveal the secrets of
his mind, the secrets of his love, the secrets of his thoughts, the secrets of
his heart, and the secrets of his purposes, to all his bosom friends. Sampson
could not hide his mind, his secrets from Dalilah, Judge. 16. 15, 16, 17.
though it cost him his life: and do you think that Christ can hide his mind,
his secrets from them for whom he has laid down his life? surely no. O sirs,
Christ is,

1. A universal friend.

2. An omnipotent friend, an Almighty friend: He is no less than thirty times
called Almighty in that book of Job; he can do above all expressions, and
beyond all apprehensions.

3. He is an omniscient friend.

4. He is an omnipresent friend.

5. He is an indeficient friend.

6. He is an independent friend.

7. He is an unchangable friend.

8. He is a watchful friend.

9. He is a tender and compassionate friend.

10. He is a close and faithful friend. And therefore he cannot but open and
unbosom himself to all his bosom friends. To be reserved and close is against
the very law of friendship. Faithful friends are very free in imparting their
thoughts, their minds, their secrets, one to another. A real friend accounts
nothing worth knowing, unless he makes it known to his friends: He rips up his
greatest and most inward secrets to his friends. Job calls Job 19. 19.
his friends inward friends, or, the men of his secrets. All Christ's friends
are inward friends, they are the men of his secrets, Prove. 3. 32. His secrets
are with the righteous, that is, his covenant and fatherly affection, which is
hid and secret from the world. He that is righteous in secret, where no man
sees him, he is the righteous man to whom God will communicate his closest
secrets, as to his dearest bosom friend. It is only a bosom friend to whom we
will unbosom our selves. So Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

Now there are three sorts of divine secrets.

First, There are secrets of Providence; Psalm. 107. ult. Hos. 14. 9.
and these he reveals to the righteous, and to them that fear him. The Prophet
Amos speaks of these secrets of Providence, Amos 3. 7. Surely, the Lord God
will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his servants the Prophets.
Micaiah knew the secret of the Lord touching Ahab, which neither Zedekiah 1
King. 2 4.
nor any other of the false Prophets knew. So Genesis 18. 17. And the Lord said,
shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? The destruction of Sodom was a
secret that lay in the bosom of God; but Abraham being a bosom friend, God
communicates this secret to him, Verse. 19, 20, 21. Abraham was a Jam. 2. 23.
friend, a faithful friend, a friend by a specialty, and therefore God makes
him both of his Court and Counsel. Oh how greatly does God condescend to his
People! he speaks to them as a man would speak to his friend; and there is no
secrets of Providence, which may be for their advantage, but he will reveal
them to his faithful servants. As all faithful friends have the same friends
and the same enemies, so they are mutual in the communication of their secrets
one to another; and so 'twas between God and Abraham.

Secondly, There are the secrets of his Kingdom, and these he reveals to his
people, Matthew. 13. 11. Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given. So Matthew. 11. 25. At that
time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto babes. Hierom. ad Ephesians. lib. 1.
Let us not think (says Hierom.) that the Gospel is in the words of Scripture,
but in the sense; not in the outside, but in the marrow; not in the leaves of
words, but in the root of reason. Augustine humbly begged of God, That if it
were his pleasure, he would send Moses to him, to interpret some more abstruce
and intricate passages in his Book of Genesis. There are many choice, secret,
hidden Joel 2. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 9, 16. Col. 1, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Ephesians. 4. 21.
and mysterious Truths and Doctrines in the Gospel, which Christ reveals to his
people, that this poor, blind, ignorant world are strangers to. There are many
secrets wrapped up in the plainest truths and doctrines of the Gospel, which none
can effectually open and reveal but the Spirit of the Lord, that searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God. There are many secrets and mysteries in
the Gospel, that all the learning and labor in the world can never give a man
insight into. There are many that know the Doctrine of the Gospel, the History
of the Gospel, that are mere strangers to the secrets of the Gospel. There is a
secret power, a secret authority, a secret efficacy, a secret prevalency, a
secret goodness, a secret sweetness in the Gospel, that none experience, but
those to whom the Lord is pleased to impart Gospel secrets to, Isa. 29. 11, 12.
Seal my law among my Disciples. The Law of God to wicked men is a sealed book,
that they cannot understand, Dan. 12. 9, 10. It Is as blotted paper, that they
cannot read. Look as a private letter to a friend contains secret matter that
no man else may read, because it is sealed. So the law of grace is sealed up
under the privy seal of Heaven, so that no man can open it or read it, but
Christ's faithful friends, to whom it is sent. The whole Scripture (says
Gregory) is but one entire letter dispatched from the Lord Christ, to his
beloved Spouse on earth. The Rabbis say that there are four keys that God has
under his Girdle.

1. The key of the Clouds. 2. The key of the Womb. 3. The key of the Grave. 4.
The key of Food.
And I may add a Fifth key that is under his Girdle, and that is the key of the
Word, the key of the Scripture, which key none can turn but he that has the
key of David, that opens and no man shuts, and that shuts and no man opens,
Revel. 3. 7.

O sirs, God reveals himself, and his mind, and will, and truth, to his people
in a more friendly and familiar way, than he does to others, Mark 4. 11. And he
said unto them, unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God:
but unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables. Luke 8.
10. And he said, unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of
God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing
they might not understand. Though great Doctors and profound Clerks, and deep
studied, but unsanctified Divines, may know much of the Doctrines of the
Gospel, and commend much the doctrines of the Gospel, and dispute much for the
doctrines of the Gospel, and glory much in the doctrines of the Gospel, and
take a great deal of pains to dress and trim up the doctrines of the Gospel,
with the flowers of Rhetoric or Eloquence; though it be much better to present
truth in her native plainness, than to hang her ears with counterfeit Pearls
(the Word, without humane adornments, is like the stone Garamantides, that has
drops of gold in it self, sufficient to enrich the believing soul) Yet the
special, spiritual, powerful, and saving Romans 16. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 7.
knowledge of the doctrines of the Gospel, is a secret, a mystery, yea, a
hidden mystery to them.

Chrysostom compares the mystery of Christ, in regard of the wicked, to a
written book, that the ignorant can neither read nor spell; he fees the cover,
the leaves, and the letters, but he understands not the meaning of what he
sees. He compares, the mystery of Grace to an indicted Epistle, which an
unskilful Idiot viewing, he cannot read it, he cannot understand it; he knows
it is paper and ink, but the sense, the matter, he knows not, he understands
not. So unsanctified persons, though they are never so learned, and though they
may perceive the bark of the mystery of Christ, yet they perceive not, they
understand not the mystery of grace, the inward sense of the spirit, in the
blessed Scriptures. Though the Devil be the greatest Scholar in the world, and
though he have more learning than all the men in the world have, yet there are
many thousand secrets and mysteries in the Gospel of grace, that he knows not
really, spiritually, feelingly, efficaciously, powerfully, thoroughly, savingly,
etc.

O but now Christ makes known himself, his mind, his grace, his truth, to his
people, in a more clear, full, familiar and friendly way, 2 Samuel 7. 27. For
thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant; so you read
it in your Books: but in the Hebrew it is thus, Lord, thou have revealed this
to the ear of thy servant. Now the emphasis lies in that word, to the ear,
which is left out in your Books. When God makes known himself to his people, he
reveals things to their ear, as we use to do to a friend, who is intimate
with us, we speak a thing to his ear. There is many a secret which Jesus Christ
speaks in the ears of his servants, which others never come to be acquainted
with. 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.

The six several gradations that are in this Scripture are worthy of our most
serious consideration. Here is,

First, Knowledge. And,

Secondly, The knowledge of the glory of God. And,

Thirdly, The light of the knowledge of the glory of God. And,

Fourthly, Shining. And,

Fifthly, Shining into our hearts. And,

Sixthly, Shining into our hearts in the face of Jesus Christ.

And thus you see that the Lord reveals the secrets of himself, his kingdom,
his truth, his grace, his glory to his saints. But.

Thirdly, There are the secrets of his favor, the secrets of his special love,
that he bears to them, the secret purposes of his heart to save them, and these
are those great secrets, those deep things of God, which none can reveal but
the Spirit of God. Now these great secrets, these deep things of God, God does
reveal to his people by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit; for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Now
what are the things that are freely given to us of God, but our election,
vocation, justification, sanctification, and glorification? And why has God
given us his Spirit, but that we should know the things that are freely given
to us of God. Some by secret, in that 25th. Psalm. 14. do understand a
particular assurance of Gods favor, whereby happiness is secured to us both
for the present and for the future; they understand by secret, the sealing of
the Spirit, the hidden Manna, the White Stone, and the New Name in it, which
none knows but he that has it. And so much those words, He will show them
his Covenant, seems to import; for what greater secret can God impart to his
people, than that of opening the Covenant of grace to them in its freeness,
fullness, sureness, sweetness, suitableness, everlastingness, and in sealing up
his good pleasure, and all the spiritual and eternal blessings of the Covenant
to them? Such as love and serve the Lord, shall be of his Cabinet Counsel, they
shall know his soul secrets, and be admitted into a very gracious familiarity
and friendship with himself, John 14. 21, 22, 23 He that has my commandments
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. Judas
says unto him, not Iscariot: Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self
unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto him, if any man
love me, he will keep my words, and my father will love him, and we will come
unto him and make our abode with him. God and Christ will keep house with them,
and manifest the secrets of their love to them that are observant of their
commands. And thus you see that the Saints are the only persons to whom God
will reveal the secrets of his Providence, the secrets of his Kingdom, and the
secrets of his Love unto. Christ came out of the bosom of his father, and he
opens all the secrets of his father only to his bosom friends. Now what an
exceeding high honor is it for God to open the secrets of his love, the
secrets of his promises, the secrets of his providence, the secrets of his
counsels, and the secrets of his covenant to his people.

Tiberius Caesar thought no man fit to know his secrets. And among the Persians
none but noble Men, Lords and Dukes, might be made partakers of State secrets;
they esteeming secrecy a Godhead, a Divine thing; as Ammianus Marcellinus
affirms. But now such honor God has put upon all his Saints, as to make them
Lords, and Nobles, and the only privy-statesmen in the Court of Heaven. The
highest honor and glory that earthly Princes can put upon their subjects is to
communicate to them their greatest secrets. Now this high honor and glory, the
King of kings has put upon his people; For his secrets are with them that fear
him, and he will show them his Covenant. 'Twas a high honor to Elisha, that he
could tell the secrets 2 Kings 6. 12.
that were spoken in the Kings bedchamber. O what an honor must it then be for
the Saints to know the secrets that are spoken in the presence chamber of the
King of Kings.

Now I appeal to the very consciences of all that fear the Lord, whether it be
not a just, equal, righteous, and necessary thing, that the people of God
should freely and fully lay open all the secrets of their hearts before the
Lord, who has thus highly honored them, as to reveal the secrets of his
providence, kingdom and favor to them? Yea, I appeal to all serious and
ingenious Christians, whether it be not against the light and law of nature,
and against the law of love, and law of friendship, to be reserved and close,
yea, to hide our secrets from him, who reveals his greatest and his choicest
secrets to us? And if it be, why then do not you in secret, lay open all your
secret sins, and secret wants, and secret desires, secret fears, etc. to him
that sees in secret? You know all secrets, are to be communicated only in
secret: none but fools in Folio will communicate secrets upon a stage, or
before many. But,

Thirdly, Consider, that in times of great straits and trials, in times of
great afflictions and persecutions, private prayer is the Christians meat and
drink; it is his chief city of refuge; it is his shelter and hiding place in a
stormy day. When the Saints have been driven by violent persecutions, into
holes, and Heb. 11. 37, 38. Rev. 12. 6. Psalm. 102. 6^. 14.
caves, and dens, and deserts, and howling wildernesses; private prayer has
been their meat and drink, and under Christ their only refuge. When Esau came
forth with hostil intentions against Jacob, secret prayer was Jacobs refuge,
Genesis 32. 6, 7, 8, 9, 11. And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, we came
to thy brother Esau, and also he comes to meet thee, and four hundred men with
him. All cut-throates. Then Jacab was greatly afraid, and distressed; and he
divided the people that was with him, and the flocks and herds, and the camels
into two bands. And said, if Esau come to the one company and smite it, then
the other company which is left shall escape. When all is at stake it is
christian prudence to save what we can, though we cannot save what we would.
And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham and God of my Father Isaac; the Lord
which said unto me, return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will
deal well with thee. Promises in private must be prayed over; God loves to
sued upon his own bond when he and his People are alone. Deliver me, I pray
thee, from the hand of my brother, front the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest
he will come and smite me, and the Mother with the children; or, upon the
children, meaning; he he will put all to death. Some look upon the words to be
a metaphor taken from Fowlers, who kill and take away the young and the Dams
together; contrary to that old law, Deuteronomy. 22. 6. Others say it is a Phrase that
does most lively represent the tenderness of a mother, who seeing her children
in distress; spares not her own body nor life, to hazard the same for her
childrens preservation, by interposing See Hos. 10. 14.
her self, even to be massacred together with and upon them. When Jacob, and
all that was near and dear unto him, were in eminent danger of being cut off by
Esau, and those men of blood that were with him, he betakes himself to private
prayer as his only City of refuge, against the rage and malice of the mighty.
And so when Jeremiah was in a solitary and loathsome Dungeon, Private prayer
was his meat and drink, it was his only City of refuge, Jer. 33. 1, 2, 3.
Moreover, the word of Lord came unto Jeremiah the second time (while he was yet
shut up in the Court of the prison) saying, Thus says the Lord the Maker
thereof, the Lord that formed it, to establish it, the Lord is his Name: Call
unto me, and I will answer thee, and I will show thee great and mighty (or
hidden) things, which thou know not. When Jeremiah was in a lonesome
loathsome. Prison, God encourages him by private prayer, to seek for further
discoveries and revelations of those choice and singular favors, which in
future times he purposed to confer upon his people. So 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13.
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of
Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters (or
chains) and carried him to Babylon. And when he was in affliction, he besought
the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers,
and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication,
and brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that
the Lord he was God. When Manasseh was in fetters, in his enemies country, when
he was stripped of all his Princely glory, and led captive into Babylon, he
betakes himself to Private prayer, as his only City of refuge; and by this
means he prevails with God for his restoration to his Crown and Kingdom.
Private prayer is a City of refuge that no power nor Policy, no craft nor
cruelty, no violence nor force is ever able to surprise. Though the joint
prayers of the People of God together were often obstructed and hindered in the
times of the ten Persecutions, yet they were never able to obstruct or hinder
secret prayer, Private prayer. When men and Devils have done their worst, every
Christian will be able to maintain his Private trade with Heaven. Private
prayer will shelter a christian against all the National, Domestical, and
Personal storms and tempests, that may threaten him. When a man is lying upon
a sick bed alone, or when a man is in prison alone, or when a man is with Job
left upon the Dunghill alone, or when a man is with John banished for the
Testimony of Jesus into this or that Island alone, O then private prayer will
be his meat and drink, his shelter, his hiding place, his Heaven. When all
other Trades fail, this Trade of private Prayer will hold good. But.

Fourteenthly, Consider, that Jer. 16. 17. Job 34. 21. Prove. 5. 21. Jer. 32.
19. Rev. 2. 23. Lam. 3 56.
God is omnipresent. We cannot get into any blind hole, or dark corner, or
secret place, but the Lord has an eye there, the Lord will keep us company
there, Math. 6. 6. And thy father which sees in secret shall reward the
openly. So v. 18. there is not the darkest durtiest hole in the world into
which a saint creeps, but God has a favorable eye there. God never wants an
eye to see our secret tears; nor an ear to hear our secret cries and groans,
nor a heart to grant our secret requests; and therefore we ought to pour out
our souls to him in secret. Psalm. 38. 9. Lord, all my desire is before thee;
and my groaning is not hide from thee. Though our private desires are never so
confused, though our private requests are never so broken, and though our
private groanings are never so much hidden from men, yet God eyes them all, God
records them all, and God puts them all upon the file of heaven, and will one
day crown them with glorious answers and returns. We cannot sigh out a prayer
in secret, but he sees us; we cannot lift up our eyes to him at midnight, but
he observes us. The eye that God has upon his people when they are in secret,
is such a special tender eye of love, as opens his ear, his heart, and his
hand, for their good, 1 Pet. 3. 12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, and his ears* are open unto their prayers; or, as the Greek has it,
his ears are unto their prayers. If their prayers are so faint, that they
cannot reach up as high as Heaven, then God will bow the heavens God is, totus
oculus, all eye.
and come down to their prayers. Gods eye is upon every secret sigh, and every
secret groan, and every secret tear, and every secret desire, and every secret
pant of love, and every secret breathing of soul, and every secret melting and
working of heart; all which should encourage us to be much in secret duties, in
closet-services. As a Christian is never out of the reach of Gods hand, so he
is never out of the view of Gods eye. If a Christian cannot hide himself from
the Sun, which is Gods Minister of light; how impossible will it be to hide
himself from him, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun? In
every private duty a christian is still under the eye of Gods omnisciency. When
we are in the darkest hole, God has windows into our breasts, and observes all
the secret actings of our inward man. The 1 Timothy 2. 8.
eye of God is not confined to this place, or that, to this company, or that;
God has an eye upon his people as well when they are alone, as when they are
among a multitude; as well when they are in a corner, as well as when they are
in a crowd. Diana's Temple was burnt down; when she was busy at Alexanders
birth, and could not be at two places together. But God is present both in
Paradise and in the wilderness, both in the family and in the closet, both in
public and in private, at the same time: God is an omnipresent God, he is Non
est ubi; ubi non est Deus?
every where: as he is included in no place, so he is excluded from no place,
Jer. 23. 24. Can any man hide himself in secret places that I shall not see
him, says the Lord? Pro. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good, or, contemplating the evil and the good, as
the Hebrew may be read. Now to contemplate is more than simply to behold, for
contemplation adds to a simple apprehension, a deeper degree of knowledge,
entering into the very inside of a matter; and so indeed does God discern the
very inward intentions of the heart, and the most secret motions of the spirit.
God is an infinite, and immense being, whose center is every where, and whose
circumference is no where. Now if our God be omnipresent, then wheresoever we
are, our God is present with us; if we are in prison alone, with Joseph, our
God is present with us there; or if we are in exile alone, with David, our God
is present with us there; or if we are alone in our closets, our God is present
with us there: God sees us in secret, and therefore let us seek his face in
secret. Though Heaven be Gods Palace, yet it is not his prison. But,

Fifteenthly, He that willingly neglects private prayer, shall certainly be
neglected in his public prayer; he that will not call upon God in secret,
shall find by sad experience, that God will neither hear him nor regard him in
public. Want of private duties is the great reason why the hearts of many are
so dead and dull, so formal and carnal, so barren and unfruitful under public
Ordinances. O that Christians would seriously lay this to heart. Certainly,
that man or woman's heart is best in public, who is most frequent in private.
They make most yearnings in public Ordinances, that are most conscientiously
exercised in closet duties. No man's graces rises so high, nor no man's
experiences rises so high, nor no man's communion with God rises so high, nor no
man's divine enjoyments rises so high, nor no man's springs of comfort rises so
high, nor no man's hopes rises so high, nor no man's parts and gifts rises so
high, etc. as theirs do, who conscientiously wait upon God in their Closets,
before they wait upon him in the Assembly of his people; and who, when they
return from public Ordinances, retire into their Closets, and look up to
Heaven for a blessing upon the public means. It Is certain, that private duties
fit the soul for public ordinances. He that makes conscience to wait upon God
in private, shall find by experience, that God will wonderfully bless public
Mic. 2. 7.
Ordinances to him. My design is not to set up one Ordinance of God above
another, nor to cause one ordinance of God to clash with another, the public
with the private, or the private with the public, but that every Ordinance may
have its proper place, and right: The desires of my soul being to prize every
Ordinance and to praise every ordinance, and to practice every Ordinance, and
to improve every ordinance, and to bless the Lord for every Ordinance. But as
ever you would see Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3.
the beauty and glory of God in his sanctuary, as ever you would have public
Ordinances to be lovely and lively to your souls; as ever you would have your
drooping spirits revived, and your languishing souls refreshed, and your weak
graces strengthened, and your strong corruptions weakened under public
Ordinances, be more careful and conscientious in the performance of Closet
duties. O how strong in grace! O how victorious over sin! O how dead to the
world! O how alive to Christ! O how fit to live! O how prepared to die, might
many a Christian have been, had they been but more frequent, serious, and
conscientious, in the discharge of Closet duties. Not but that I think there is
a truth in that saying of Bid (the word Church being rightly understood, viz.)
That he that comes not willingly to Church, shall one day go unwillingly to
Hell. But,

Sixteenthly, Consider, the times wherein we live call aloud for secret prayer.
Hell seems to be broke loose, and men turned into incarnate Devils;
Land-destroying, and Soul-damning wickednesses, walk up and down the streets,
with a Whores forehead, without the least check or control, Jer. 3. 3. Thou
had a Whores forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed. Jer. 6. 15. Were they
ashamed when they committed abomination? nay, they were not at allashamed,
neither could they blush (They had Curtius an heathen could say, That he was an
undone man that knows no shame.
sinned away shame, instead of being ashamed of sin. Custom in sin had quite
banished all sense of sin and all shame for sin, so that they would not suffer
nature to draw her vail of blushing before their great abominations. They were
like to Caligula a wicked Emperor, who used to say of himself, That he loved
nothing better in himself, than that he could not be ashamed.) The same words
are repeated in Chap. 8. 12. How applicable these Scriptures are to the present
times, I will leave the prudent reader to judge. But what does the Prophet do
now they were as bold in sin, and as shameless as so many harlots; that you may
see in Jer. 13. 17. But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret
places (or secresies) for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore (Heb.
weeping weep, or shedding tears shed tears; the doubling of the verb, notes the
bitter and grievous lamentation that he should make for them) and run down with
tears. Now they were grown up to that height of sin and wickedness, that they
were above all shame and blushing; now they were grown so proud so hardened, so
obstinate, so rebellious, so mad upon mischief, that no mercies could melt
them, or allure them; nor no threatenings, nor judgments could any ways
terrify them or stop them; the Prophet goes into a corner, he retires himself
into the most secret places, and there he weeps bitterly, there he weeps as if
he were resolved to drown himself in his own tears. When the springs of sorrow
rise high, a Christian turns his back upon company, and retires himself into
places of greatest privacy, that so he may the more freely, and the more fully
vent his sorrow and grief before the Lord. Ah, England, England, what pride,
luxury, lasciviousness, licentiousness, wantonness, drunkenness, cruelties,
injustice, oppressions, fornications, adulteries, falsehoods, hypocrisy,
bribery, atheism, horrid blasphemies, and hellish impieties are now to be
found rampant in the midst of thee! Ah England, England, how are the Lords
Sabbaths profaned, pure Ordinances despised. Scriptures rejected, the Spirit
resisted and derided, the righteous reviled, wickedness countenanced, and
Christ many thousand times in a day by these cursed practices a fresh
crucified! Ah England, England, were our forefathers alive, how sadly would
they blush to see such a horrid degenerate posterity, as is to be found in the
midst of thee! How is our forefathers hospitality converted into riot and
luxury, their frugallity into pride and prodigallity, their simplicity into
subtilty, their sincerity into hypocrisy, their charity into cruelty, their
chastity into chambring and wantonness, their sobriety into drunkenness, their
plain dealing into dissembling, their works of compassion into works of
oppression, and their love to the people of God, into an utter enmity against
the people of God! etc. And what is the voice of all these crying abominations,
but, every Christian to his closet, every Christian to his closet, and there
weep (with weeping Jeremiah) bitterly, for all these great abominations,
whereby God is dishonored openly. O weep in secret for their sins, who openly
glory in their sins, which should be their greatest shame. O blush in secret
for them that are past all blushing for their sins; for who knows but that the
whole land may fare the better for the sakes of a few that are mourners in
secret? But however it goes with the Nation, such as mourn in secret for the
abominations of the times may be confident, that when sweeping judgments shall
come upon the land, the Lord will hide them in the secret Chambers of his
providence; he will set a secret mark of deliverance upon their foreheads,
that mourn in secret for the crying sins of the present day, as he did upon
theirs in Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6.

Seventeenthly, Consider, That John 15. 14, 15.
the near and dear relations, that you stand in to the Lord, calls aloud for
secret prayer. You are his friends. Now a true friend loves to visit his friend
when he may find him alone, and enjoy privacy with him. A true friend loves to
pour out his heart into the bosom of his friend, when he has him in a corner,
or in the field, or under a hedge. You are his favorites: and 1 Samuel 20. Neh.
2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
what favorite is there that hides his secret from his prince? do not all
favorites open their hearts to their princes, when they are alone? You are his
Children: and what ingenious child is there, that does not delight to be much
with his father Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 These. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
when he is alone, when no body is by? O how free and open are children when
they have their parents alone, beyond what they are when company is present.
You are the Spouse of Christ: and what spouse, what wife is there that does not
love to be much with her husband when he is all alone? True lovers are always
best when they are most alone, Cant. 7. 10, 11, 12. I am my beloveds, and his
desire is toward me. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field: let us
lodge in the villages. Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the
vines flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud
forth: there will I give thee my loves. The Spouse of Christ is very desirous
to enjoy his company in the fields, that so having her beloved alone, she might
the more freely, and the more secretly open her heart to him. As wives, when
they are walking alone with their husbands in the fields, are more free to open
their minds, and the secrets of their hearts, than they are when in their
houses with their children and servants about them; so 'twas with the spouse.
Without all peradventure, they have very great cause to question, whether they
are Christ's real friends, favorites, children, spouse, who seldom or never
converse with Christ in their closets, who are shie of Christ when they are
alone, who never accustom themselves to give Christ secret visits? What
Dalilah said to Sampson, Judge. 16. 15. How can thou say, I love thee, when
thou have not told me, wherein thy great strength lies (the discovery of which
secret at last cost him his life) that Christ may say to very many in our
days; How can you say you love me, when you never acquaint me with your
secrets? how can you say you love me, when you never bestow any private visits
upon me? How can you say that you are my friends, my faithful friends, my bosom
friends, when you never in private unbosom your selves to me? How can you say
that you are my favorites, when you can spend one month after another, and
one quarter of a year after another, and yet not let me know one of all your
secrets, when every day you might have my ear in secret if you pleased? How can
you say that you are my children, and yet be so close and reserved as you are?
How can you say you are my spouse, and that you lie in my bosom, and yet never
take any delight to open your hearts, your secrets, to me when I am alone? What
Alexander said to one that was of his name, but a Coward, Either lay down the
name of Alexander, or fight like Alexander; that I say to you, Either be
frequent in closet duties, as becomes a Christian, or else lay down the name of
a Christian; either unbosom your selves in secret to Christ, as friends,
favorites, children, spouses, or else lay down these names, etc. But,

Eighteenthly, Consider, that God has set a special mark of favor, honor,
and observation, upon those that have prayed in secret. As you may see in
Moses, Exodus 34. 28. And in Abraham, Genesis 21. 33. And in Isaac, Genesis 24. 63.
And in Jacob, Genesis 32. 24-29. And in David, Psalm. 55. 16, 17. And in Daniel,
Chap. 6. 10. And in Paul, Acts, 9. 11. And in Cornelius Acts, 10. 2. 4. And in
Peter, Acts, 10. 9, 10, 11, 12. And in Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 18, 19. God has
put all these worthies that have exercised themselves in secret prayer, upon
record, to their everlasting fame and honor. The Persians seldom write their
Kings name but in characters of Gold. God has writ (as I may say) their names
in characters of Gold, who have made conscience of exercising themselves in
secret prayer. The precious names of those that have addicted themselves to
closet duties, are as Statues of gold, which the polluted breath of men can no
ways stain; they are like so many shining Suns that no clouds can darken; they
are like so many sparkling Diamonds that shine brightest in the darkest night.
A christian can never get into a hole, a corner, a closet, to pour out his soul
before the Lord, but the Lord makes an honorable observation of him, and sets
a secret mark of favor upon him, Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6. And how should this provoke
all christians to be much with God alone. The Romans* were very ambitious of
obtaining a great name, a great report in this world; and why should not
Christians be as divinely ambitious of obtaining a good name a good report in
the other Heb. 11. 39.
world. A good name is always better then a great name, and a name in heaven
is infinitely better then a thousand names on earth; and the way to both these
is to be much with God in secret. But,

19thly, Consider, that Satan is a very great enemy to secret prayer. Secret
prayer is a scourge, a hell, to Satan; every secret prayer adds to the Devils
torment, and every secret sigh adds to his torment, and every secret groan adds
to his torment, and every secret tear adds to his torment. When a child of God
is on his knees in his secret addresses There is no one thing that many hundred
Christians have more sadly lamented and bewailed, as many saithful Ministers
can witness, than the sad interruptions that they have met with from Satan,
when they have been with God alone in a room, in a corner. O! how often have
they been scared, affrighted, and amazed by noyses and strange apparitions, at
least to their fancies, when they have been alone with God in a corner.
to God, O the strange thoughts, the earthly thoughts, the wandering thoughts,
the distracted thoughts, the hideous thoughts, the blasphemous thoughts, that
Satan often injects into his soul! and all to wean him from secret prayer, and
to weary him of secret prayer. Sometimes he tells the soul, that it is in vain
to seek God in secret; and at other times he tells the soul it is too late to
seek God in secret, for the door of mercy is shut, and there is no hope, no
help for the soul: Sometimes he tells the soul, that it is enough to seek God in
Public; and at other times he tells the soul, that it is but a precise trick to
seek the Lord in private: Sometimes he tells the soul, that it is not elected,
and therefore all his secret prayers shall be rejected; and at other times he
tells the soul, that it is sealed up unto the day of wrath and therefore secret
prayer can never reverse that seal: and all this to dishearten and discourage a
poor Christian in his secret retirements. Sometimes Satan will object to a poor
Christian, the greatness of his sins; and at other times he will object against
a Christian, the greatness of his unworthyness: Sometimes he will object
against a Christian his want of grace; and at other times he will object
against a Christian his want of gifts to manage such a duty, as it should be
managed: Sometimes he will object against a Christian his former
streightnedness in secret prayer; and at other times he will object against a
Christian, the small yearnings that he makes of secret prayer: and all to work
the soul out of love with secret prayer, yea, to work the soul to loath secret
prayer; so deadly an enemy is Satan to secret prayer. O the strange fears
fancies, and conceits, that Satan often raises in the spirits of Christian,
when they are alone with God in a corner; and all to work them to cast off
private prayer. It Is none of Satan's least designs, to interrupt a Christian in
his private trade with God. Satan watches all a Christians motions; so that he
cannot turn into his closet, nor creep into any hole to converse privately with
his God, but he follows him hard at heels, and will be still injecting one
thing or another into the soul, or else objecting one thing or another against
the soul* A Christian is as well able to tell the stars of Heaven, and to
number the sands of the sea, as he is able to number up the several devices and
slights that Satan uses to obstruct the souls private addresses to God. Now
from that great opposition that Satan makes against private prayer, a Christian
may safely conclude these five things.

First, The excellency of private prayer. Certainly, If it were not an
excellent thing, for a man to be in secret with God, Satan would never make
such head against it.

Secondly, The necessity of this duty. The more necessary any duty is to the
internal and eternal welfare of a Christian, the more Satan will bestir
himself, to blunt a Christians Spirit in that duty.

Thirdly, The utility or profit that attends a conscientious discharge of this
duty. Where we are like to gain most, there Satan loves to oppose most.

Fourthly, The prevalency of private prayer. If there were not a kind of an
omnipotency in it, if it were not able to do wonders in heaven, and wonders on
earth, and wonders in the hearts and lives and ways of men, Satan would never
have such an akeing tooth against it, as he has.

Fifthly, That God is highly honored by this duty, or else Satan would never
be so greatly enraged against it. This is certain, The more Glory God has
from any service we do, the more Satan will strive by all his wiles and slights
to take us, either off from that service, or so to interrupt us in that
service, that God may have no honor, nor we no good, nor himself no hurt, by
our private retirements. But in the

Twentieth and last place, consider, that you are only the Lords secret ones,
his hidden ones; and therefore if you do not apply your selves to private
prayer, and to your secret retirements, that you may enjoy God in a corner,
none will. It Is only Gods hidden ones, his secret ones, that are spirited,
principled, and prepared to wait on God in secret, Exodus 19. 5. Then shall ye
be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people. The Hebrew word Segullah
signifies Gods special Jewels, Gods proper ones, or Gods secret ones, that he
keeps in store for himself, and for his own special service and use. Princes
lock up with their own hands in secret, their most precious and costly Jewels;
and so does God his, Psalm. 135. 4. For the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself,
and Israel for his peculiar treasure, or, for his secret Gem. Psalm. 83. 3. They
have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden
ones, or, thy secret ones; so called, partly, because God hides them in the
secret of his Tabernacle, and partly, because God sets Psalm. 31. 20.
as high a value upon them, as men do upon their hidden treasure, their secret
treasure; yea, he makes more reckoning of them than he does of all the world
besides: And so the world shall know, when God shall arise to revenge the
wrongs and injuries that has been done to his secret ones. Neither are there
any on earth that knows so much of the secrets of his love, of the secrets of
his counsels, of the secrets of his purposes, of the secrets of his heart, as
his secret ones do. Neither are there any in all the world, that are under
those secret influences, those secret assistances, those secret incomes, those
secret anointings of the Spirit, as his secret ones are under: And therefore no
wonder if God calls them again, and gain, and again, his secret ones. Now what
can be more comely or more desirable, than to see their natures and their
practices to answer to their names? They are the Lords secret ones, his hidden
ones, and therefore how highly does it concern them to be much with God in
secret, and to hide themselves with God in a corner! Shall Nabals nature and
practice answer to his name? 1 Samuel 25. 25. Let not my Lord, I pray thee,
regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is
his name, and folly is with him. Nabal signifies a fool, a sot, a Churl, it
notes one that is void of wisdom and goodness, it signifies one whose Mind,
Reason, Judgment and Understanding, is withered and decayed. Now if you look
into the story you shall find that as face answers to face, so Nabals nature
and practice did Echo and answer to his name. And why then should not our
natures and practices answer to our names also? We are called the Lords secret
ones, his hidden ones; and how highly therefore does it concern us to be much
with God in secret? Why should their be any jarring or discord between our
names and our practices? It is observable, that the practice and carriage of
other Saints have been answerable to their names. Isaac signifies laughter,
Genesis 18.
and Isaac was a gracious son, a dutiful son, a son that kept clear of those
abominations with which many of the Patriarchs had defiled themselves, a son
that proved matter of laughter to his Father and Mother all their days. So
Josiah signifies the fire of the Lord, and his practice did answerto his name;
witness the pulling down of Jeroboams 1 King. 13. 2.
Altar, and his burning of the Vessels that were made for Baal, and his pulling
down the Idolatrous Priests, whom the Kings of 2 King. 23. 4, -- 21.
Judah had set up, and his burning the Grove at the brook Kidron, and his
stamping it to powder, and his breaking down the houses of the Sodomites, and
his defiling of the high places where the Priests had burnt incense, and his
breaking in pieces the Images, and cutting down the Groves, and filling their
places with the bones of men, etc. So Joshua signifies a Savior, and his
practice was answerable to his name. Though he could not save his people from
their sins, yet he often saved them from their sufferings. Great and many were
the deliverances, the salvations, that were instrumentally brought about by
Joshua, as all know that have read the book of Joshua. So John signifies
gracious, and his practice was answerable to his name; he was so gracious in
his teachings, and in his walkings, that he gained favor in the very eyes of
his enemies. By all these Instances (and by many more that might be given) you
see that other Saints practices have answered to their names And therefore let
every one of us look that our practices do also answer to our names, that as we
are called the Lords secret ones, so we may be much with God in secret, that so
there may be a blessed harmony between our names and our practices, and we may
never repent another day, that we have been called Gods secret ones, his hidden
ones, but yet never made conscience of maintaining secret communion with God in
our closets. And thus you see that there are no less than Twenty arguments to
persuade you to closet prayer, and to maintain private communion with God in a
Corner.

The use and Application of all follows.

Is it so that Closet Prayer, or Private Prayer, is such an indispensible duty,
that Christ himself has laid upon all that are not willing to lie under the
the woeful brand of being hypocrites; then this truth looks very sourely and
sadly upon these five sorts of persons. First, It looks sourly and sadly upon
all those that put off secret prayer, private prayer, till they are moved to it
by the Spirit; for by this sad delusion, many have been kept from secret
prayer, many weeks, many months, O that I might not say, many years! Though it
be a very fit season to Isa. 62. 1. Psalm. 123. 1, 2 Gal. 4. 6.
pray when the Spirit moves us to pray, yet, it is not the only season to pray.
He that makes Religion his business, will pray as daily for daily grace, as he
does pray daily for daily bread. Luke 18. 1. And he spoke a parable unto them
to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. 1 These. 5. 17.
Pray without ceasing. Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and
supplication for all Saints. Romans 12. 12. Continuing instant in prayer. The
Greek is (...) In every season, as occasion and opportunity offers it self, we
must pray.
a Metaphor taken from hunting Dogs, that never give over the game till they
have got their prey. A Christian must not only pray, but hold on in prayer,
till he has got the heavenly prize. We are wanting always, and therefore we
had need be praying always. The world is always alluring, and therefore we
had need be always a praying; Satan is always a tempting, and therefore we
had need be always a praying; and we are always a sinning, and therefore we
had need be always a praying; and we are in dangers always, and therefore we
had need be praying always; and we are dying always, and therefore 1 Cor. 15.
31
we had need be praying always. Man's whole life is but a lingering death; man
no sooner begins to live, but he begins to die. When one was ask't, why he
prayed six times a day, he only gave this answer, I must die, I must die, I
must die. Dying Christians had need be praying Christians, and they that are
always a dying had need be always a praying. Certainly, prayerless families
are graceless families, and prayerless persons are graceless persons. It were
better Jer. 10. 25.
ten thousand times, that we had never been born into the world, than that we
should go still-born out of the world. But,

Secondly, This truth looks sourly and sadly upon those that pray not at all,
neither in their Families nor in their closets. Among all Gods Children, there
is not one possessed with a dumb devil. Prayerlesse persons are forsaken of God,
blinded by Satan, hardened in sin, and every breath they draw, liable to all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal Judgments. Prayer is that part of natural
worship due to God, which none will deny but stark Atheists, Psalm. 14. 1.

It is observable that amongst the That wicked men ought to pray, and the grand
objection against their prayers answered at large in my Treatise called The
Crown and glory of Christianity, from Page 326. to page 337.
worst of men, Turks; and the worst of Turks, the Moors, it is a just exception
against any witness by their Law, that he has not prayed six times in every
natural day, it being usual with them to pray six times a day.

1. Before the daybreak they pray for day. 2. When it is day, they give thanks
for day. 3. At noon they thank God for half the day past. 4. After that they
pray for a good Sunset. 5. And after that they thank God for the day past.
And then, sixthly and lastly, they pray for a good night after their day.

Certainly, these very Moors will one day rise in judgment against them, who
cast off prayer, who live in a total neglect of prayer, who suffer so many Suns
and Moons to rise and set upon their heads, without any solemn calling upon
God. I have read of a man, who being sick and afraid of death, fell to his
prayers; and to move God to hear him, told him, That he was no common beggar,
and that he had never troubled him with his prayers before, Heil. Mic. p. 376.
and if he would but hear him at that time, he would never trouble him again.
This world is full of such profane blasphemous, atheistical wretches. But,

Thirdly, This truth looks very sourly and sadly upon such, who are all for
public prayer, but never regard private prayer; who are ^ll for going up to
the Temple, but never care for going into their Closets. This is most palpable
hypocrisy, for a man to be very zealous for public prayer, but very cold and
careless as to private prayer. He that pretends conscience in the one, and
makes no conscience of the other, is an hypocrite in grain, Matthew. 23. 5.
Matthew. 6. 1, 2, 5. And the Devil knows well enough, how to make his markets of
all such hypocrites, that are all for the prayers of the Church, but perfect
Gallio's as to private prayer, Acts 18. 17. Such as perform all their private
devotion in the Church, but not in the Chamber, do put too great a slight upon
the authority of Christ, who says, When thou prayest, enter into thy Chamber;
he does not say, when thou prayest, Go to the Church; but, when thou prayest,
go into thy Chamber. But,

Fourthly, This truth looks sadly and sourly upon such, who in their Closets
pray with a loud clamorous voice. A Christian should shut both the door of his
Closet, and the door of his Lips so close, that none should hear without, what
he says within. Enter into thy Closet, (says Christ) and when thou have shut
thy door, pray. But what need a man shut his Closet door, if he may pray with a
clamorous voice, if he make such a noise as all in the street, or all in the
house may hear him. The Hen when she lays her Eggs, gets into a hole, a corner;
but then she makes such a noise with her cackling, that she tells all in the
house where she is, and about what she is. Such Christians that in their
Closets do imitate the Hen, do rather pray to be seen, heard, and observed by
men, than out of any noble design to glorify God, or to pour out their souls
before him that sees in secret. Sometimes children when they are vexed, or
afraid of the rod, will run behind the door, or get into a dark hole, and there
they will lie crying, and sighing, and sobbing, that all the house may know
where they are. O it is a childish thing so to cry and sigh, and sob, in our
Closets, as to tell all in the house, where we are, and about what work we are:
Well Christians for an effectual redress of this evil, frequently and seriously
consider of these five things.

First, That God sees in secret.

Secondly, That God has a quick ear, and is taken more with the voice of the
heart, than he is with the clamor of the mouth. God can easily hear the most
secret breathings of thy soul. God is more curious in observing the messages
delivered by the heart, than he is those that are only delivered by the mouth.
He that prays aloud in private, seems to tell others, that God does not
understand the secret desires, and thoughts, and workings of his peoples hearts.

Thirdly, It Is not meet, it is not convenient, nor expedient, that any should be
acquainted with our secret prayers, but God and our own souls. Now it is as much
our duty to look to what is expedient, as it is 2 Cor. 8. 10, Chap. 12. 1.
to look to what is lawful, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful unto me, but
all things are not expedient. So Chap. 10. 23. All things are lawful for me,
but all things are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but all things
edify not. Now it is so far from being expedient, that it is very high folly for
men to lay open their secret infirmities unto others, that will rather deride
them, than lift up a prayer for them.

Fourthly, Loud prayers may be a hinderance and disturbance to others, that may
be busied near us, in some Religious, or Civil exercises.

Fifthly and lastly, Hannah prayed and yet spoke never a word; her heart was
full, but her voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1. 11. Moses prays and cries, and
yet lets fall never a word, Exodus 14. 15. And the Lord said unto Moses,
wherefore cryest thou unto me? Moses did not cry with any audible voice, but
with inward sighs, and secret breathings and wrestlings of soul; and these
inward and secret cries, which made no noise, carried the day with God; for
Moses is heard, and answered, and his people are delivered. O the prevalency of
those prayers that make no noise in the ears of others.

Fifthly, and lastly, This truth looks sourly and sadly upon those that do all
they can to hinder and discourage others from this duty of duties, Private
prayer; and that either by deriding or vilifying of the duty; or else, by
denying of it to be a duty; or else, by their daily neglect of this duty; or
else, by denying them that are under them time and opportunity for the
discharge of this duty. In Matthew. 23. 13. You have a woe pronounced against
those that will neither go to Heaven themselves, nor suffer others to go that
are willing to enter into an everlasting rest. And so I say, woe to those
Parents, and woe to those Husbands, and woe to these Masters and Mistrises,
that will neither pray in their closets themselves, nor suffer their children,
nor their wives nor their servants, to pour out their souls before the Lord in
a corner. O Sirs, how will you answer this to your consciences, when you shall
lie upon a dying bed and how will you answer it to the Judge of all the world,
when you shall stand before a Judgment seat! Certainly, all their sins, and all
their neglects, and all their spiritual losses, that might have been prevented
by their secret prayers, by their closet communion with God, will one day be
charged upon your accounts. And, O that you were all so wise as to lay these
things so to heart, that you may never hinder any that are under your care or
charge, from private prayer any more. But,

Secondly, This may serve to exhort us, to keep close to our Closets, to be
frequent and constant in Private prayer, to be often with God in a corner. The
20 Considerations already laid down may serve as so many motives to provoke
your hearts, to this noble and necessary duty.

Objection.

But many will be ready to object and say, We have much business upon our
hands, and we cannot spare time for private prayer; we have so much to do in
our shops, and in our warehouses, and abroad with others, that we cannot spare
time to wait upon the Lord in our Closets.

Now to this Objection I shall give these Eight Answers, that this Objection
may never have a resurrection more in any of your hearts.

First, What are all those businesses that are upon your hands, to those great
businesses and weighty affairs that did lie upon the hands of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, Elias, Nehemiah, See the first Consideration.
Peter, Cornelius! and yet you find all these worthies exercising themselves in
Private prayers. And the King is commanded every day to read some part of Gods
word, notwithstanding all his great and weighty employments, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19,
20. Now certainly, Sirs, your great businesses are little more than ciphers,
compared with theirs: And if there were any on earth that might have pleaded an
exemption from private prayer, upon the account of business, of much business,
of great business, these might have done it; but they were more honest, and
more noble than to neglect so choice a duty, upon the account of much business;
these brave hearts made all their public employments stoop to private prayer;
they would never suffer their public employments to tread private prayer under
foot. But,

Secondly, I answer, no men's outward affairs did ever more prosper, than
theirs did, who devoted themselves to private prayer, notwithstanding their
many and great worldly employments. Witness the prosperity and outward
flourishing estates of Moses, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Nehemiah, David, Daniel,
and Cornelius; these were much with God in their Closets, and God blessed their
blessings to them: how Genesis 22. 17
did their cups over flow! what signal favors did God heap upon them, and
theirs! No families have been so prospered, protected, and graced, as theirs
who have maintained secret communion with God in a Corner. Private prayer 1 Chronicles. 11. 9.
does best expedite our temporal affairs; he that prays well in his Closet,
shall be sure to speed well in his Shop, or at his Plough, or 1 Timothy 4. 8.
whatever else he turns his hand unto. It Is true, Abimelech was rich as well
as Abraham and so was Laban rich as well as Jacob, and Saul was a King as well
as David, and Julian was an Emperor as well as Constantine: But 'twas only
Abraham, Jacob, David, and Constantine, who had their blessings blessed unto them
all the rest had their blessings cursed unto them; they had many Prove. 3. 33.
Mal. 2. 2.
good things, but they had not the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush with
what they had: and therefore all their mercies were but bitter-sweets unto
them. Though all the sons of Jacob returned laden from Genesis 43.
Egypt with corn and money in their sacks, yet Benjamin only had the silver
cup in the mouth of his sack. So, though the men of the world have their Corn,
and their Money, etc. yet it is only God's Benjamin's that have the silver Cup,
the Grace-Cup, the Cup of blessing, as the Apostle calls 1 Cor. 10. 16
it, for their portion. O sirs, as ever you would prosper, and flourish in the
world; as ever you would have your water turned into wine, your temporal
mercies into spiritual benefits, be much with God in your closets But,

Thirdly, I answer, It Is ten to one but that the objecter, every day fools
away, or trifles away, or idles away, or sins away, one hour in a day; and why
then should he object the want of time? There are none that toil, and moyle,
and busy themselves most in their worldly employments, but do Myrmecides, a
famous Artist, spent more time in making a Be, than an unskilful workman would
do to build a house. Plutarch.
spend an hour or more in a day to little or no purpose; either in gazing
about, or in dallying, or toying, or dourting, or in telling of stories or in
busying themselves in other men's matters, or in idle visits, or in smoking the
Pipe, etc. And why then should not these men redeem an hours time in a day for
private prayer, out of that time which they usually spend so vainly and idly?
can you notwithstanding all your great worldly employments find an hour in the
day to catch flies in, as Domitian the Emperor did, and to play the fool in?
and cannot you find an hour in the day to wait on God in your closets?

There were three special faults whereof Cato professed himself to have
seriously repented; one was passing by water when he might have gone by land,
another was trusting a secret in a woman's bosom, but the main was spending an
hour unprofirably. This heathen will one day rise up in Judgment against them,
who notwithstanding their great employments, spend many hours in a week
unprofitably, and yet cry out with the Duke of Alva, that they have so much to
do on earth, that they have no time to look up to heaven. 'Twas a base and
sordid spirit in that King (Sardanapalus) who spent much of his time amongst
women in spinning and carding, which should have been spent in Ruling and
governing his Kingdom. So it is a base sordid spirit in any, to spend any of
their time in toying and trifling, and then to cry out, that they have so much
business to do in the World, that they have no time for closet-prayer, they
have no time to serve God, nor to save their own precious and immortal souls.
But,

Fourthly, I answer, No man dares plead this objection before the Lord Jesus in
the great day of account: And why then should any man be so childish and
foolish, so ^ccl. 11. 9. Rom 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
ignorant and impudent to plead that before men, which is not pleadable before
the Judgment seat of Christ. O sirs, as you love your souls, and as you would
be happy for ever, never put off your own consciences nor others, with any
plea's, arguments, or objections, now, that you dare not own and stand by, when
you shall lie upon a dying bed, and when you shall appear before the whole
court of heaven, etc. In the great day of account, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be made manifest, and God shall call men to a reckoning, before
Angels, Men and Devils, for the neglect of private prayer; all giulty persons
will be found speechless, there will not be a man, or woman found, that shall
dare to stand up and say, Lord, I would have waited upon thee in my closet, but
that I had so much business to do in the world, that I had no time to enjoy
secret communion with thee in a Corner. It Is the greatest wisdom in the world,
to plead nothing by way of excusein this our day, that we dare not plead in the
great day. But.

Fifthly, I answer, That it is our It Is said of blessed Pooper, that he was
spare of diet, spare of words, and sparest of Time.
duty to redeem time, from all our secular businesses, for private prayer. All
sorts of Christians whether bond or free, rich or poor, high (...) low,
superiors or inferiors, are expressly charged by God to redeem time for
prayer, for private prayer, as well as for other holy exercises, Col. 4. 2, 3.
Continue inprayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; withal praying also
for us, that God would open unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery
of Christ, for which I am also in bonds.

But here some may Object and say, we have so much business to do in the world,
that we have no time for prayer. The Apostle answers this Objection in Verse. 5.
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. So Ephesians. 5.
16. Redeeming the time because the days are evil; (...), or, buying out, or
gaining the time. The words are a metaphor taken from Merchants, who prefer the
least profit that may be gained before their pleasures or delights, closely
following their business whilst the markets are at best. A Merchant when he
comes to a ^art or Fair, takes the first season and opportunity of buying his
commodities; he puts it not off to the hazard of an evening, or to the next
morning, in hopes to have a better bargain; but he improves the present season,
and buys before the Market is over.

Others carry the words thus, Purchase at any rate all occasions and
opportunities of doing good, that so ye may thereby in some sort, redeem that
precious Jewel of Time, which you have formerly lost. As Travelers that have
loytered by the way, or staid long at their Inn, when they find night coming
upon them, they mend their pace, and go as many miles in an hour, as they did
before in many. Though time let slip is physically irrecoverable, yet in a
moral consideration, it is accounted as regained, when men double their care,
diligence, and endeavors to redeem it. The best Christian is he that is the
greatest momopolizer of time for private prayer. No Christian to him that
redeems time from his worldly occasions, and his lawful comforts and
recreations, to be with God in his Closet. David having tasted of the
sweetness, goodness, and graciousness of God, cannot keep his bed, but will
borrow some time from his sleep, that he might take some turns in Paradise, and
pour out his soul in prayer and Psalm. 63. 6.
praises, when no eye was open to see him, nor no ear open to hear him, but all
were asleep round about him, Psalm. 119. 62. At midnight will I arise to give
thanks unto thee. Verse. 147. I have prevented the dawning of the morning, and
cried. David was up and at private prayer before daybreak. David was no
sluggish Christian, no sloathful Christian, no lazy Christian; he used to be in
his closet, when others were sleeping in their beds. So Verse. 148. Mine eyes
prevent the night-watches, that I might meditate in thy word. So Psalm. 130. 6.
My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I say,
more than they that watch for the morning. Look as the weary Sentinel in a
dark, cold, wet night, waits and peeps, and peeps and waits for the appearance
of the morning; so David did wait and peep, and peep and wait, for the first
and fittest season to pour out his soul before God in a corner. David would
never suffer his worldly business to justle out holy exercises; he would often
borrow time from the world for private prayer, but he would never borrow time
from private prayer to bestow it upon the world.

Mr. Bradford the Martyr, counted that hour lost, wherein he did not some good,
either with his pen, tongue, or purse.

Ignatius, when he heard a Clock strike, would use to say, Now I have one hour
more to answer for.

So the Primitive Christians would redeem some time from their sleep, that they
might be with God in their Closets, as Clemens observes. Clemens.


And I have read of Theodosius the Emperor, that after the variety Nicephorus
of worldly employments relating to his civil affairs in the day time were
over, how he was wont to consecratethe greatest part of the night to the
studying of the Scriptures and private prayer; to which purpose he had a Lamp,
so artificially made, that it supplied it self with oil, that so he might no
way be interrupted in his private retirements.

That Time ought to be redeemed, is a lesson that has been taught by the very
Heathens themselves. 'Twas the saying of Pittacus, one of the seven wise men,
Know time, lose not a minute. And so Theophrastus used to say, That Time is of
precious cost. And so Seneca, Time is the only thing (says he) that we can
innocently be covetous of; and yet there is nothing of which many are more
lavishly and profusely prodigal. And Chresius a Sophister or Byzantium in the
time of Hadrianus the Emperor, he was much given to Wine; yet he always
counted time so precious, that when he had misspent his time all the day, he
would redeem it at night.

When Titus Vespatian, who revenged Christ's blood on Jerusalem, returned Victor
to Rome, remembering Suetonius.
one night as he sat at supper with his friends, that he had done no good that
day, he uttered this memorable and praiseworthy Apothegme, Amici diem perdidi,
My friends, I have lost a day.

Chilo, one of the seven Sages, being asked what was the hardest thing in the
world to be done, answered, To use and employ a man's time well.

Cato held, That an account must be given not only of our labor, but also of
our leisure. And Aelian gives this testimony of the Lacedaemonians, That they
were hugely covetous of their time, spending it all about necessary things, and
suffering no Citizen either to be idle or play. And, says another, We trifle
with that which is most precious, and throw away that which is our greatest
interest to redeem.

Certainly, these Heathens will tise in Judgment, not only against Domitian the
Roman Emperor, who spent much of his time in killing of flies; nor only
against Archimedes, who spent his time in drawing lines on the ground when
Syracuse was taken; nor against Artaxerxes, who spent his time in in making
hafts for knives; nor only against Solomon the great Turk, who spent his time
in making notches of horn for bows; nor only against Ero^^s a Macedonian king,
who spent his time in making of Lanthorns; nor only against Harcatus the king
of Parthia who spent his time in catching of Moles. But also against many
Professors, who in stead of redeeming of precious time, do trifle and fool away
much of their precious time at the Glass, the Comb, the Lute* the Viol, the
Pipe, or at vain sports, and foolish pastimes, or by idle jestings, immoderate
sleeping, and superfluous feasting, etc. O Sirs, good hours, and blessed
opportunities for closet prayer, are merchandise of the highest rate and price;
and therefore, whosoever has a mind to be rich in grace, and to be high in
glory, should buy up that merchandise, they should be still a redeeming
precious time. O Sirs, we should redeem time for private prayer, out of our
eating time, our drinking time, our sleeping time, our buying time, our selling
time, our sinning time, our sporting time, rather than neglect our Closet
communion with God, etc. But,

Sixthly, I answer, Closet prayer is either a duty, or it is no duty. Now that
it is a duty, I have so strongly proved, I suppose, that no man nor devil, can
fairly or honestly deny it to be a duty. And therefore why do men cry out of
their great business? alas duty must be done, what ever business is left
undone; duty must must be done, or the man that neglects it, will be undone for
ever. It Is a vain thing to object business, when a required duty is to be
performed; and indeed, if the bare objecting of business, of much business,
were enough to excuse men from duty, I am afraid that there are but few duties
of the Gospel, but men would endeavor to evade, under a pretense of business,
of much business. He that pretends business to evade private prayer, will be as
ready to pretend business to evade family prayer; and he that pretends business
to evade family prayer, will be as ready to pretend business to evade public
prayer. Well sirs, remember what became of those that excused themselves out of
heaven, by their carnal Apologies, and secular businesses. I have bought a
piece of ground, and I Luke 14. 16, -- 15.
must needs go and see it; I pray thee, have me excused, says one. I have
bought (says another) five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee
have me excused. And, I have married a Wife, says another, and therefore I
cannot come. The true reason, why they would not come to the supper that the
King of Kings had invited them to, was not because they had bought Farms and
Oxen, but because their Farms and Oxen had bought them. The things of the world
and their carnal relatitions had taken up so much room in their hearts and
affections, that they had no stomach to heavens danties; and therefore it is
observable, what Christ adds at the end of the parable, He that hates not his
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, Verse. 26.
yea, and his own Life also, much more his Farm and his Oxen, he cannot be my
disciple. By these words it is evident, that 'twas not simply the Farm nor the
Oxen, nor the Wife; but a foolish, inordinate, carnal love, and esteem of
these things above better and greater blessings, that made them refuse the
gracious invitation of Christ. They refused the grace and mercy of God offered
in the Gospel, under a pretense of their worldly business; and God peremptorily
concludes, that not a man of them should taste of his supper. And indeed what
can be more just and righteous, than that they should never so much as taste of
spiritual and eternal blessings, who prefer their earthly business before
heavens dainties; who with the Reubenites prefer a country commodious Number. 23.
for the feeding of their Cattle, before an interest in the Land of Promise
Private prayer is a work of absolute necessity, both to the bringing of the
heart into a good frame, and to the keeping of the heart in a good frame. It Is
of absolute necessity both for the discovery of sin, and for the preventing of
sin, and for the imbittering of sin, and for the weakening of sin, and for the
purging away of sin: It Is of absolute necessity, both for the discovery of
grace, and for a full exercise of grace, and for an eminent increase of grace:
It Is of absolute necessity to arm us, both against inward and outward
temptations, afflictions, and sufferings: It Is of absolute necessity to fit us
for all other duties and services, etc. For a man to glorify God, to save his
own soul, and to further his own everlasting happiness, is a work of the
greatest necessity: Now private prayer is such a work; and therefore why should
any man plead business, great business, when a work of such absolute necessity
is before him. If a man's child, or wife, were dangerously sick, or wounded, or
near to death, he would never plead, I have business, I have a great deal of
business to do; and therefore I cannot stay with my child, my wife; and I have
no time to go or send to the Physician, etc. O! no, but he would rather argue
thus, It Is absolutely necessary that I should look after the preservation of
the life of my child, my wife, and this I will attend whatever becomes of my
business. O sirs, your souls are of greater concernment to you, than the lives
of all the wives and children in the world; and therefore these must be
attended, these must be saved, whatever business is neglected. But,

Seventhly, I answer, That God did never appoint or design any man's ordinary,
particular calling, to thrust private prayer out of door. That it is a great sin
for any professor to neglect his particular calling under any religious
pretense, is evident enough by Paradise was man's workhouse as well as his
storehouse, Genesis 2. 15. Man should not have lived idly though he had not*
fallen from his innocence.
these Scriptures. Exodus 20. 9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work. 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was
c^lled. 2 Thessalonians. 4. 10, 11. 12. For even when we were with you this we
commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear,
that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but
are busit-bodies: Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 11, 12. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to
work with your own hands (as we commanded you) That ye may walk honestly toward
them that are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. Ephesians. 4. 28. But
rather let him labor working with his hands the thing which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs. 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any provide not for
his own, and specially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith,
and is worse than an infidel. Yea, our Lord Jesus Christ was a plain downright
Carpenter, and was laborious in that particular calling, Mark 6. 3. Matthew. 13.
55, 56.
till he entered upon the public ministry; as all the Ancients do agree. And we
read also, that all the Patriarchs had their particular callings. Abei was a
keeper of sheep, Genesis 4. 2. Noah was a Husbandman, Genesis 10. 20. The sons of
Jacob were shepherds and keepers of Cattle, Genesis 46. 34, etc. And all the
Apostles, before they were called to the work of the Ministry, had their
particular callings.

By the law of Mahomet, the great Turk himself is bound to exercise some manual
Trade or occupation.

Solon made a Law, That the son Plutarch in the life of Solon.
should not be bound to relieve his father, when old, unless he had set himself
in his youth to some occupation. And at Athens every man gave a yearly account
to the Magistrate, by what trade or course of life he mantained himself, which
if he could not do he was banished. And it is by all Writers condemned as a very
great vanity in Dionysius, that would needs be the best Poet. And Caligula,
that would needs be the best Orator. And in Nero, that would needs be the best
Fiddler: and so became the three worst Princes, by minding more other men's
business than their own particular calling. But for a man to evade or neglect
private prayer under pretense of his particular calling, is a greeable to no
Scripture, yea, it is contrary to very many Scriptures, as is evident by the
many Arguments formerly cited. Certainly, no man's calling is a calling away
from God, or godliness. It never entered into the heart of God, that our
particular callings should ever drive out of doors our general calling of
Christianity. Look as our general calling must not eat up our particular
calling, so our particular calling must not eat up our general calling.
Certainly, our partilar calling must give place to our general calling. Did not
the woman of Samaria leave her waterpot, and run into the city, and John. 4.
28, 29.
say, come see a man that told me all things that ever I did: is not this the
Christ? Did not the shepherds leave their flocks in the field and go to
Bethlehem, and declare the good tidings of great joy, that they had Luke 2. 8,
-- 21.
heard of the Angel, viz. That there was born that day in the city of David a
Savior which was Christ the Lord? And did not Christ commend Mary Luke 10. 38,
-- ult.
for that holy neglect of her particular calling, when she sat at his seet, and
heard his word? And what do all these instances show, but that our particular
callings must give the right hand to the general calling of christianity.
Certainly the works of our general calling are far more great and glorious,
more eminent and excellent, more high and noble, than the works of our
particular callings are; and therefore it is much more to lerable for our
general calling to borrow time of our particular calling, than it is for our
particular calling to borrow time of our general calling. Certainly those men
are very ignorant or very profane, that either think themselves so closely
tied up to follow their particular callings six days in the week, as that they
must not intermeddle with any religious services, or that think their
particular callings to be a gulf or a grave designed by God to swallow up
private prayer in. God who is the Lord of time has reserved some part of our
time to himself every day. Though the Jews Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8.
were commanded to labor six days of the week, yet they were Exodus 29. 38,
39. Number. 28. 3.
commanded also to offer up morning and evening sacrifice daily.

The Jews divided the day into three parts;

The first, to Prayer.

The second, for the reading of the Law.

And the third for the works of their lawful callings.

As bad as the Jews were, yet they every day set a part of the day apart for
religious exercises. Certainly, they are worse than Jews that spend all their
time about their particular callings, and shut closet prayer quite out of
doors. Certainly, that man's soul is in a very ill case, who is so entangled
with the encumbrances of the world, that he can spare no time for private
prayer. If God be the Lord of thy mercies, the Lord of thy time, and the Lord
of thy soul, how can thou with any equity or honor, put off his service
under a pretense of much business? that man is lost, that man is cursed, who can
find time for any thing, but none to meet with God in his Closet. That man is
doubtless upon the brink of ruin, whose worldly business eats up all thoughts
of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of Eternity, of his Soul, and of his soul
concernments. But,

Eighthly and lastly, I answer, The more worldly business lies upon thy hand,
the more need have thou to keep close to thy closet. Much business lays a man
open to many sins, and to many snares, and to many temptations. Now the more
sins, snares and temptations a man's business lays him open to, the more need
that man has to be much in private prayer, that his soul may be kept pure from
sin, and that his foot may not be taken in the Devils trap, and that he may
stand fast in the hour of temptation. Private prayer is so far from Psalm. 1. 2,
3. Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Psalm. 128. 1. 2.
being a hinderance to a man's business, that it is the way of ways to bring
down a blessing from heaven upon a man's business; as the first fruits that Gods
people gave to him brought down a blessing from heaven upon all the rest, Deuteronomy.
26. 10, 11. Whet is no let; Prayer and Provender never hinders a Journey.
Private prayer is like to Jacob Genesis 30. 27, 30.
that brought down a blessing from heaven upon all that Laban had. Private
prayer gives a man a sanctified use, both of all his earthly comforts, and of
all his earthly business; and this David and Daniel found by experience, and
therefore 'twas not their great public employments that could take them off
from their private duties. Time spent in heavenly employments, is Deuteronomy. 28. 1,
to 8.
no time lost from worldly business. Private prayer makes all we take in hand
successful. Closet prayer has made many rich, but it never made any man poor
or beggarly in this world. No man on earth knows what may be the emergencies,
or the occurrences of a day, Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for
thou know not what a day may bring forth. Every day is as it it were a
great-belly'd day. Every day is as it were with child of something, but what it
will bring forth, whether a cross or a comfort, no man can tell; as whilst a
woman is with child, no man can tell what kind of birth it will be. No man
knows what mercies a day may bring forth, no man knows what miseries a day may
bring forth; no man knows what good a day may bring forth, no man knows what
evil a day may bring forth; no man knows what afflictions a day may bring
forth, no man knows what temptations a day may bring forth; no man knows what
liberty a day may bring forth, no man knows what bonds a day may bring forth;
no man knows what good success a day may bring forth, no man knows what bad
success a day may bring forth; and therefore a man had need be every day in his
closet with God, that he may be prepared and fitted to entertain and improve
all the occurrences, successes, and emergencies, that may attend him in the
course of his life. And let thus much suffice for answer to this first
Objection. But,

Object. 2.

Secondly, others may Object and say, Sir, we grant that Private Prayer is an
indispensible duty that lies upon the people of God; but we are servants, and
we have no time that we can call our own, and our masters business is such as
will not allow us any time for private prayer, and therefore we hope we may be
excused.

Sol. 1.

First, the Text is indefinite, and not limited to any sort or rank of Private
prayer is a duty that lies upon Saints as Saints.
persons, whether high or low, rich or poor, bond or free, servant or master.
But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet; and when thou have shut the
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret. Here are three thou's, thou, thou,
thou, which are to be understood indefinitely; thou servant as well as thou
master, thou bondman as well as thou freeman, thou poor man as well as thou
rich man, thou maid as well as thou mistress, thou child as well as thou
father, thou wife as well as thou husband. Private prayer is an indispensible
duty that lies upon all sorts and ranks of persons. A man may as well say that
that Pronoun (Tu) thou that runs through the ten Commandments (Thou shall have
no other Exodus 20. 3, -- 18.
gods before me. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image. Thou shall not
bow down thy self to them nor serve them. Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. Six days shall thou labor. Thou shall not kill. Thou
shall not commit Adultery. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid servant,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors, etc.) relates
to the rich, and not to the poor, to masters and not to servants, to the free,
and not to them that are in bonds, etc. as he may say, that the three thou's in
the Text relates to the rich and not to the poor, to masters and not to
servants, to those that are free, but not to those that are bound; but
certainly there is no man in his wits that will say so, that will affirm such a
thing. Doubtless this Pronoune Thou, reaches every man, of what rank or
quality soever he be in this world. But,

Secondly, I answer, That the first the third, the fourth, the fifth, the
sixth, the seventh, and the eighth Answers that are given to the first
Objection, are here very applicable; and O that all masters and servants were
so wise, so serious, and so ingenious, as to lay all those answers warm on
their own hearts: It might be a means to prevent much sin. and to bespeak
masters and mistresses to give their pious servants a little more time to lift
up their hearts to Christ in a corner. But,

Thirdly, I answer, If thou art a servant that have liberty to choose a new
Master, thou were better remove Psalm. 84. 10 Psalm. 120. 5.
thy station than live under such a masters roof, who is such an enemy to God,
to Christ, to Religion, to himself, and to the eternal welfare of thy poor
soul, as that he will not give thee half an hours time in a day to spend in thy
chamber, thy closet, though the glory of God, the good of his own family, and
the everlasting happiness of thine own soul, is concerned in it. It Is better
for thee to shift thy master, than to neglect thy duty. 1 Cor. 7. 21. Art thou
called being a servant? care not for it; but if thou may be made free, use
it rather. Justinus the second Fmperours Motto was Libertas res inestimabilis.
Liberty is unvaluable.
We lost our liberty by sin, and we affect nothing more than liberty by nature.

The Rabins say of Liberty, That if the Heavens were Parchment, the Sea Ink,
and every pile of Grass a Pen, the praises of it could not be comprised nor
expressed. Labans house was full of Idols; great houses are often so. Jacobs
tent was little, but the true worship of God was in it. It Is infinitely better
to live in Jacobs tent, than in Labans house. It Is best being with such Masters
where we may have least of sin, and most of God; where we may have the most
helps, the best examples, and the choicest encouragements to be holy and happy.

The religious servant should be as careful in the choice of his master, as the
religious master is careful in the choice of his servant. Gracious servants are
great blessings to the families where they live; and that master may well be
called the unhappy master, who will rather part with a gracious servant, than
spare him a little time in a day, to pour out his soul before the Lord in a
corner. But,

Fourthly, I answer, If thou art a gracious servant, then thou art spirited and
principled by God, to that very purpose, that thou may cry Abba Father, when
thou art Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 2 Timothy 1. 14.
alone, when thou art in a corner, and no eye sees thee, but his who sees in
secret. If thou are a gracious servant, then thou have received not the spirit
of the world, but the spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now he that has
this tree of life, he has also the fruit that grows upon this tree, Gal. 5.
22, 23. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. Now grace is called,
not the works of the Spirit, but the fruits of the Spirit.

1. Because all grace is derived from the Spirit, as the fruit is derived from
the root. And,

2. To note the pleasantness and delightfulness of grace: for what is more
pleasant and delightful, than Cant. 4. 16. Chap. 6. 2.
sweet and wholesome fruits?

3. To note the profit and advantage that does redown to them that have the
Spirit: for as many grow rich by the fruits of their gardens and orchards; so
many grow rich in grace, in holiness, in comfort, in spiritual experiences, by
the fruits of the Spirit. Now why has God given thee his Spirit, and why has
he laid into thy soul a stock of supernatural graces, but that thou may be
every way qualified, disposed, and fitted for private prayer, and to maintain
secret communion with God in a corner.

Certainly, God never gave any poor servant, a talent of gifts, or a talent of
grace, but in order to his driving of a secret trade heavenward.

Fifthly, I answer, Though King Darius had made a degree, that none should ask
any Petition of any, God or man, for thirty days upon the Penalty of being
cast into the Den of Lions, yet Daniel, who was both a subject and a servant to
King Darius, and one upon whose Dan. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10.
hands the chiefest and greatest affairs of the Kingdom did lie, did keep up
his private Devotions. In the first and second verses of that 6th of Daniel,
you will find that Daniel had abundance of great and weighty employments upon
his hands; he was set over the whole affairs of the whole Empire of Persia; and
he with two other Presidents (of whom himself was chief) were to receive the
accounts of the whole Kingdom, from all those hundred and twenty Princes,
which in the Persian Monarchy were employed in all public businesses. And yet,
notwithstanding such a multiplicity of business as lay upon his hands, and
notwithstanding his servile condition, yet he was very careful to redeem time
for private prayer; yea, it is very observable, that the heart of Daniel in the
midst of all his mighty businesses, was so much set upon private prayer, upon
his secret retirements for Religious exercises, that he runs the hazard of
losing all his honors, profits, pleasures, yea, and life it self, rather than
he would be deprived of convenient time and opportunities to wait upon God in
his chamber. Certainly, Daniel will one day rise in Judgment against all those
subjects and servants who think to evade private prayer, by their plea's of
much business, and of their being servants, etc. But,

Sixthly, I answer, If you who are gracious servants, notwithstanding your
Masters businesses, cannot redeem a little time to wrestle with God in a
corner, what singular thing do you? what do you more than others? Do you
hear? So do others. Do you read? so do others. Do you follow your Masters to
public prayers? So do others. Do you join with your Masters in family
prayers? so do others. O but now gracious servants should go beyond all other
servants in the world, they should do singular things for God, Math. 5. 47.
What do you more then others? (...)? What extraordinary thing do you? what
more ordinary than to find servan^s follow their Masters to Public Prayers,
and to Family Prayers? O but now to find poor servants to redeem a little time
from their Masters business, to pour out their souls before the Lord in a
corner, this is not ordinary; yea, this is extraordinary, and this does
wonderfully well become gracious servants. O that all men's servants, who are
servants to the most high God, would seriously consider;

First, How singularly they are privileged by God above all other servants in
the world. They are 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
called, adopted, reconciled, pardoned, justified before the throne of God,
which other servants are not, etc. And why then should not such servants be
singular in their services, who are so singular in their privileges?

Secondly, Gracious servants are made partakers of a more excellent nature than
other servants are. 2 Peter. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious promises; that by these you might be made partakers of the divine
nature. The Apostle None but Familists will say, that we are made partakers of
the substance of the Godhead, for that is incommunicable to any creature. The
Essence of God cannot be imparted to any created beings.
in this expression does not aim at any essential change and conversion of our
substance into the nature of God, and Christ; but only at the elevation, and
dignifying of our nature by Christ. Though that real, that near, that dear,
that choice, that mysterious, that peculiar, that singular union that
Christians have with Christ, does raise them up to a higher similitude and
likeness of God and Christ, than ever they had attained to in their primitive
perfection; yet it does not introduce any real transmutation, either of our
bodies or souls, into the divine nature. It Is certain, that our union and
conjunction with Christ, does neither mingle persons, nor unite substances, but
it does conjoyne our affections, and brings our wills into a League of Amity
with Christ. To be made partaker of of the divine nature, notes two things, say
some,

First, A fellowship with God in his holiness;

Secondly, A fellowship with God in his blessedness, viz. In the beatifical
vision, and brightness of glory. To be made partakers of the divine nature, say
others, is to be made partakers of those holy graces, those divine qualities,
which sometimes are called, The Image of God, the likeness of God, the life of
God, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
etc. whereby we resemble God not only as a picture does a man in outward
lineaments, but as a child does his father in countenance and conditions. Now
take the words which way you will; how highly does it concern those servants,
that are made partakers of the divine nature, to do singular things for God,
to do such things for God, that other servants that are not partakers of the
divine nature, have no mind, no heart, no spirit to do; yea, that they refuse
and scorn to do?

Thirdly, Gracious servants are worthily descended, they have the most
illustrious extraction, and honorable original, 1 John 5. 19. John 3. 8.
James. 2. 5.

Fourthly, Gracious servants are worthily attended, they are nobly guarded,
Psalm. 34. 14. Heb. 1. ult. Deu. 33. 26, 27. Zach. 2. 5.

Fifthly, Gracious servants are worthily dignified; they are dignified with the
highest and most honorable Titles, Peter 1. 2, 9. Rev. 1. 5, 6. Rev. 5, 10.

Sixthly, Take many things in one. Gracious servants have more excellent
graces, experiences, comforts, communions, promises, assurances, discoveries,
hopes, helps, principles, diet, raiment, portion, than all other servants in
the world have; and therefore God may well expect better and greater things
from them, than from all other servants in the world. God may very well expect
that they should do singular things for his Glory, who has done such singular
things for their good. Certainly God expects that gracious servants should be a
blessing of him, when other servants are a blaspheming of him; that they should
be a magnifying of him, when other servants are a debasing of him; that they
should be a redeeming of precious time, when other servants are a trifling,
fooling, playing or sinning away of procious time; that they should be a
weeping in a corner, when other servants are a sporting and making themselves
merry among their jovall companions; that they should be a mourning in secret,
when other servants are a sinning in secret; and that they should be at their
private devotion, when other servants are sleeping and snorting, etc.

S^l^mon, That was the wisest Prince that ever sat upon a Throne and who was
guided by an infallible spirit, has delivered it for a standing maxim above
2000 years ago, That the Righteous is more excellent Prove. 12. 26
than his neighbor. When Solomon dropped this Aphorism from his royal pen, there
was not a man in the world, that was legally righteous; Adam and all his
posterity being fallen Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. Lam. 5. 16.
from all their honor, glory, dignity, and excellency, into a most woeful Gulf
of sin and misery: and therefore Solomon must be understood of him that is
evangelically righteous. He that is evangelically righteous, be he Master, or
servant, rich or poor, bond or free, high or low, is more excellent then his
neighbor. And O that all masters would seriously consider of this, that they
may carry it no more so proudly* so loftily, so scornfully, so frowardly, so
strangly, so sowrly, so bitterly, so rigorously, toward their pious servants,
as not to afford them a little time to pour out their souls before the Lord in
a corner.

I have read of Ingo, an ancient King of the Draves and Veneds, who making a
stately feast, appointed all his Pagan Nobles to sit in the Hall below; and at
the same time commanded certain poor Christians to be brought up into his
presence Chamber to fit with him at Aenaeus Sylvius cap. 20. Europ. Aven. lib.
3. Annalium
his Table, that they might eat of his kingly cheer; at which many wondering,
he told them, That he accounted Christians, though never so poor, a greater
ornament at his Table, and more worthy of his company, than the greatest Nobles
that were not converted to the Christian faith; for says he, when these Pagan
Nobles shall be thrust down to Hell, these poor Christians shall be my consorts
and fellow Princes in Heaven. Certainly, this noble Prince will one day rise in
Judgment against all sour, churlish Labans, who carry it so harshly, and so
severely toward their gracious servants, as Ephesians. 69.
that they will not allow them a little time, to wait upon God in a hole. Why
should not gracious masters give their gracious servants a little time for
closet prayer now, considering that they are sharers with them in all the
fundamental good that comes by Christ in this world; and considering, that they
shall be partakers with them in all the glory of another world. The Every man
has two things to look unto more than all the world be side; a body, and a
soul: for the one ery one is either a Fool or a Physician; for the other,
either a Devil or a Divine, says one.
poorest servant in a family has a soul more precious than heaven and earth;
and the greatest work that lies upon his hand in this world is to look to the
eternal safety and security of that, for if that be safe all is safe, if that
be well all is well, but if that be lost all is lost. Every gracious servant,
though he be never so poor and mean, yet has he the image of God, the image of
the King of Kings stamped upon him; and woe to him that shall wrong, or despise,
or trample upon that image. Certainly, God himself is wronged by the injury
that is done to his image. The contempt and despite that is done to the image
or coin of a King, is done to the King himself, and accordingly he will revenge
it.

If it was a capital crime in Tiber^us his days, to carry the image of
Augustus upon a Ring or Coin into any sordid place, as Suetonius says it was;
what crime must it be in those masters, who despise, revile, reproach, scorn,
abuse and tread under foot, such servants as have the image of the great God
stamped upon their souls, and all because they look Godward, Christ-ward,
Heavenward, Holiness-ward, Duty-ward! Masters should never twit their servants
in the Prove. 22. 2. Chap. 17. 5.
teeth with their inferiority, penury, poverty, misery, mean parentage, or
servile condition; but remember that these things are more the Creators
pleasure, than the servants fault, and that that God that has made the master
rich and the servant poor, can as quickly make the master poor and the servant
rich. God many times puts down Luke. 1. 52.
the mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degree. Certainly, no
master nor mistress should dare to insult or triumph over such servants as have
souls as noble as their own; but they should seriously and frequently consider
of Solomon's Aphorism, The righteous (though a servant, though the meanest
amongst all the servants) is more excellent than his neighbor, and accordingly
give them a little time and liberty to converse with God in secret. And O that
all gracious servants would discover themselves to be more excellent than their
neighbors, by making more conscience of private prayer than their neighbors
do, and by being more in their closets than their neighbors are, and by
delighting themselves in their secret retirements more than their neighbors
will, and by redeeming some time for God, for their souls, and for eternity
more than their neighbors do. But,

Seventhly, I answer, That God is only the Lord of time. Time is Hab. 2. 3.
Dan. 11. 27. 29. 35. Job 7. 1. Psalm. 102. 13 Eccl. 3. 1. Dan. 2. 21 Isa. 60.
22. Job 14. 14.
more the Lords, than it is thy masters; and therefore it is no neglecting of thy
masters business, to take a little time daily for private prayer. Times do
belong to providence as well as issues; and as God is the God of our mercies,
so he is the Lord of our times; My times are in thy hands, says David, Psalm.
31. 15. Not only the times of his sorrows, but also the times of his comforts;
not only the times of his miseries, but also the times of his mercies; not only
the times of his dangers, but also the times of his duties, were in the hands
of God.

It Is observable, the Psalmist does not say time, but times, in the plural, to
show that every point and period of time, depends upon the hand of God.

One complaining of those who say, Come, let us talk together to pass away the
time; with grief of spirit Bernard, Sermon. de tripl. custod.
cries out (O donec praetereat hora, etc.) O until the hour be gone, O until
time be past, which the mercy of thy maker has bestowed upon thee to perform
repentance, to procure pardon, to gain grace, and to obtain glory. That servant
that borrows a little time every day to seek the face of God in a corner,
borrows it rather of God than of his master; and therefore why should his
master swell, or rage, or complain, considering that God never made him Lord of
time. But,

Eighthly, I answer, That servants should rather redeem time from their sleep,
their recreations, their daily meals, than neglect closet duty a day. And
certainly those servants that (out of conscience toward God, and out of a due
regard to the internal and eternal welfare of their own souls) shall every day
redeem an hours time from their sleep, or sports, or feedings, to spend with
God in secret, they shall find by experience, that the Lord will make a few
hours sleep, sweeter and better than many hours sleep to them, and their
outward sports shall be made up with inward delights, and for their common
bread, God will feed them with that bread that came down from heaven. Sirs, was
not Christ The Evangelist applies these words to Christ, Mat. 12. 15, 16, 17,
18.
his Fathers servant? Isa. 4^. 1. (Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect
(or choice one) in whom my soul delights! (or is well pleased) I have put my
spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles) Christ is
called Gods servant in regard of his humane nature, and in regard of his office
of Mediatorship.
and did not he redeem time from his natural rest, rather than he would omit
private prayer? Mark 1. 35. And in the morning, rising up a great while before
day, he went out and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. Christ
spent the day in preaching, in healing the sick, in working of miracles; and
rather than these noble works should shut out private prayer, he rises a great
while before day, that he might have some time to wrestle with his Father in
secret. So Luke 6. 12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went out
into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. O sirs, did
Christ spend whole nights in private prayer, for the salvation of your souls;
and will you think it much to redeem an hours time from your natural rest to
seek and to serve him in a corner, and to make sure the things of your
everlasting peace? The redeeming of time for private prayer, is the redeeming
of a precious treasure, which if once lost can never fully be recovered again.
If riches should make themselves wings and fly away, they may return again, as
they did to Job; or, if credit, and honor, and worldly greatness and renown
should fly away, they may return again, as they did to Nebuchadnezzar; If
success, and famous victories and conquests should make themselves wings and
fly away, they may return again, as they did to many of the Roman Conquerors
and others: But, if Sophocles. Phocilides. etc.
time (whom the Poets paint with wings, to show the volubility and swiftness of
it) fly from us, it will never more return unto us.

A great Lady of this Land, on Queen Elizabeth.
her dying bed cried out, Call time again, call time again; a world of wealth
for an inch of time; but time past was never, nor could never be recalled.

The Egyptians drew the picture of Time with three heads;

The First was, of a greedy Wolf gaping for time past, because it has
ravenously devoured even the memory of so many things past recalling.

The Second, Of a crowned Lion roaring for time present, because it has the
principality of all action, for which it calls aloud.

And the Third was, of a deceitful Dog, fawning for time to come; because it
feeds fond men with many flattering hopes to their eternal undoing. O that all
this might prevail with servants to redeem time for private prayer! And if my
counsel might take place, I should rather advise servants to redeem some time
for private prayer, from their sleep, or lawful recreations, or set meals,
etc. than to spend, in private prayer, that time which their masters call their
time; especially if their Masters be unconverted and in the gall of bitterness
and bond of iniquity; and that for these five Reasons.

First, Because this may be a means to prevent much Sin on the Masters side.
Masters that are in their unregenerate estate, are very apt to storm, and take
on, and let fly against God, and Christ, and Religion, and profession, etc.
When they see their servants spend that time in private prayer, or in any
oother religious exercise, which according to their understanding, is their
time, and ought to be wholly spent in following their businesses. Now gracious
servants should have that honorable respect, and that tender affection, and
that Christian compassion, to their Masters souls, as to do to the utmost all
that lies in them, to prevent their Masters from contracting guilt upon their
souls, or from Jude. 22, 23.
making work for repentance, for hell, or for the Physician of souls.

The Persians, the Turks, and many Indians are so compassionate that they erect
Hospitals, not only for lame and diseased Men, but also for Birds Beasts, and
Dogs, that are either, aged, starved, or hurt. O then, what tender compassions
should gracious servants exercise toward their Masters souls, which are Jewels
more worth then heaven and earth! But,

Secondly, Because this may be a means to convince the Judgments and
Consciences of their Masters, that there is some worth, some excellency, some
sweetness, etc. to be found in private prayer, and in other closet duties; for
when Masters shall observe their servants to redeem time for closet duties,
from their very sleep, recreations, dinner, suppers, they will be ready to
conclude, that certainly there is more worth, more goodness, more sweetness,
more excellency, more glory, more gain, in closet duties, than ever they have
understood, felt, or experienced, etc. and that there very poor servants are
better and more righteous than themselves. Sotomen reports, that the devout
life of a poor Captive Christian woman, made a King and all his Family embrace
the Faith of Jesus Christ. Good works convince more than Miracles themselves.

I have read of one Pachomius, a soldier under Constantine the Emperor, how
that his Army being almost starved for want of necessary provision, he came to
a city of Christians, and they of their own charity relieved them speedily and
freely; he wondering at their free and noble charity, enquired what kind of
people they were, whom he saw so bountiful? it was answered, that they were
Christians, whose profession it is to hurt no man, and do good to every man:
hereupon Pachomius, convinced of the excellency of this Religion, threw away
his Arms, and became a Christian, a Saint. Look as Husbands sometimes 1 Pet. 3.
1, 2.
are won by the conversation of their wives without the word so Masters may
sometimes be won by the gracious carriage and conversation of their servants,
without the word. The servants redeeming of time for private duties upon the
hardest and severest terms, may be so blessed to the Master, that it may issue
in his conviction, conversion, and salvation. There is a may-be for it; and a
very may-be should be a sufficient encouragement for every gracious servant, to
do all he can to save the soul of his Master, from going down into the infernal
Pit. But,

Thirdly, Because the servants redeeming of time from his sleep, recreations,
meals, for private prayer, will most clearly and abundantly evidence the
singular love, the great delight, and the high esteem that he has of private
prayer. We say those children love their books well, and delight much in
learning, who will be at their books when others are gone to their beds, and
who will be at their books before others can get out of their beds. Certainly,
they love private prayer well, and they delight much in closet communion with
God, who will be a praying when others are a sleeping, and who will be
addressing their souls before God in a corner, before their mistress is a
dressing of her self at the Glass, or their fellow servants a dressing
themselves in the shop. But,

Fourthly, Because the servants redeeming of time for private prayer, from his
sleep, set meals, recreations, etc. may be of most use to other fellow
servants, both to awaken them, and to convince them that the things of Religion
are of the greatest and highest importance, and that there is no trade for
pleasure, or profit, to that private Trade that is driven between God and a
man's own soul; and also, to keep them from trifling, or fooling away of that
time, which is truly and properly their Masters time, and by the Royal law of
heaven ought to be spent solely and wholly in their service and business. For
what ingenious servant is there in the world, but will argue thus? I see that
such and such of my fellow servants will redeem time for private prayer, and
for other closet services, from their very sleep, meals recreations, etc.
rather than they will borrow, or make bold with that time which my Master says
is his, etc. and why then should I be so foolish, so brutish, so mad, to
trifle, or idle, or play, or toy away that time, wnich should be spent in my
masters service, and for my masters advantage? But,

Fifthly, and lastly, Because the servants redeeming of time for private prayer
from his Sleep, his Meals, his Recreations, etc. cannot but be infinitely
pleasing to God, and that which will afford him most comfort when he comes to
die. The more any poor heart acts contrary to flesh and blood, the more he
pleases God; the more any poor heart denies himself, the more he pleases God;
the more any poor heart acts against the stream of sinful examples, the more
he pleases God; the more difficulties and discouragements a poor heart meets
with in the discharg of his duty, the more love he shows to God; and the more
love a poor heart shows to God, the more he pleases God, Jer. 2. 2, 3. Go, and
cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals; when thou wentest after me
in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown. Israel was holiness unto the
Lord, and the first fruits of his increase: all that devour him, shall offend;
evil shall come upon them, says the Lord. God was very highly pleased, and
greatly delighted with the singular love and choice affections of his people
toward him, when they followed after him and kept close to him, in that
tedious and uncouth passage through the waste, howling wilderness. How all
these things do comport with that poor pious servant that redeemes time for
private prayer upon the hardest terms imaginable, I shall leave the ingenious
Reader to judge. And certainly, upon a dying bed, no tongue can express, nor
heart conceive (but he that feels it) the unspeakable comfort that closet
duties will afford to him that has been exercised in them, upon those hard
terms that are under present consideration. But,

Ninthly, I answer, If thou art a gracious servant, then the near and dear
relations that is between God and thee, and the choice privileges John 8. 32,
33, 36.
that thou art interested in, calls aloud for private prayer. As thou art thy
Masters servant, so thou art the Lords freeman, 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23. For he that
is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman: Likewise also,
he that is called being free, is Christ's servant. Ye are bought with a price:
be not ye the servants of men, Either when they command you things forbidden by
Christ, or forbid you things commanded by Christ; or when they would exercise a
dominion over your faith, or a lord-ship over your consciences. Suffer not your
selves in spiritual things to be brought into such bondage by any men or
Masters in the world, as not to use that freedom Gal. 5. 1. Col. 2. 20. Gal. 2.
4.
and liberty that Christ has purchased for you with his dearest blood. No
servants are to serve their masters in opposition to Christ; nor no servants
are to serve their masters as spiritual masters; Nor no servants are to serve
their masters as supreme masters, but as subordinate masters, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6,
7. And as every gracious servant is the Lords freeman, so every gracious
servant is the Lords friend, Isa. 41. 8. James* 2. 23. John 15. 13, 14, 15. And
as every gracious servant is the Lords friend, so every gracious servant is the
Lords son, Gal. 4. 5, 6. Romans 8. 16. And as every gracious servant is the Lords
son, so every gracious servant is the Lords spouse, Hos. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11.
2.

And now I appeal to the consciences of all that have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, whether the near and dear relations that is between the Lord and
pious servants, does not call aloud upon them to take all opportunities and
advantages that possibly they can to pour out their souls before the Lord in
secret, and to acquaint him in a corner with all their secret wants, and
weaknesses, and wishes, etc. And as gracious servants are thus nearly and
dearly related to God, so gracious servants are very highly privileged by God.
Gracious servants are as much freed from the reign of sin, the dominion of sin,
and the damnatory Romans 6. 14.
power of sin, as gracious masters are. Gracious servants are as Romans 8. 1.
much freed from hell, from the curse of the Law, and from the wrath of God, as
their gracious masters are. Gracious servants are Gal. 3. 13.
as much adopted, as much reconciled, as much pardoned, as much justified, and
as much redeemed, as their gracious masters are. Gracious servants are as much
heirs, 1 These. 1. 10. Col. 3. 11. Gal. 5. 6. Romans 8. 17. Gal. 6. 14. 1 Pet. 2.
9.
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, as their gracious masters are.
Gracious servants are as much a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, called out of darkness into his marvelous light, as
their gracicious masters are. And therefore they being all alike interested in
all these great and glorious privileges, which belong to Saints as Saints,
they are without all peradventure alike obliged and engaged to all those duties
which lies upon Saints as Saints, among which private prayer is one; and
therefore they are to buckle to this duty, against all carnal reasons and
objections whatsoever. But,

Tenthly and lastly, I answer, That the promised reward in the Text, lies as
fair and as open to the Servant as to the Master, to the Bond as to the Free,
to the Peasant as to the Prince. Whosoever prays to his heavenly father in
secret, be he high or low, rich or poor, honorable or base, servant or master,
he shall receive an open reward. The reward in the text is not to be confined
or limited to this or that sort or rank of men, but it is to be extended to all
ranks and sorts of men, that make conscience of private prayer, of closet
duties. So Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Servants be obedient to them that are your
masters, according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your
heart, as unto Christ. Not with eye-service, as men pleasers, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart: The Persian Kings did
usually reward the faithful services of their servants. Surely the King of
Kings will not fall short of the Kings of Persia.
with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men: Knowing that
whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free. Col. 3. 22, 23, 24. Servants obey, in all things,
your masters according to the flesh, not with eye service, as men-pleaesers,
but in singleness of heart, fearing God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily,
as to the Lord, and not unto men: Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. Such servants as serve
their masters faithfully, cordially, and in singleness of spirit, shall receive
the reward of Grace, and the reward of the Inheritance. The meanest servant
that is faithful in the service of his master, shall Romans 8. 15. 16, 17.
for a recompense recieve the eternal inheritance. The recompense of reward in
the Scripture last cited is not of merit but of mere grace, because the
inheritance belongs only to children upon the account of their birth or
adoption. Faithful servants, shall of servants be made sons, and so enjoy the
heavenly inheritance. Christ is so noble a Master, that he will not suffer any
service that has been performed to men out of Conscience to his command to
pass unrewarded. O how much more will he recompense pious servants for those
spiritual services that they perform for his sake, for his glory! God is so
liberal a pay master, that no Mal. 1. 10.
man shall so much as shut the door, or kindle a fire upon his altar, or give a
cup of cold water, Mat. 10. 42.
one of the least, readiest, and meanest refreshments that be, but he shall be
rewarded.

It is an excellent observation of Calvin, upon Gods rewarding of the
Rechabites obedience, Jer. 35. 19. God (says he) often recompenceth the
shadows and seeming appearances of virtue, to show that complacency he takes in
the ample rewards that he has reserved for true and sincere piety.
Nebuchadnezzar though a Tyrant, yet being engaged in Gods service against Ezekiel.
29. 18, 19, 20.
Tire, he shall have Egypt as his pay, for his pains at Tire. It is an ancient
slur and slander that has been cast upon God, as if he were an austere Master,
an illiberal Lord, and as if there were nothing to be got in his service, but
knocks, blows, wounds, crosses, losses, etc. whereas he is a rewarder, not only
of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.
but even of the very worst of men that do any service for him. I have read of
Herod Agrippa (the same that was smitten by the Angel and eaten up of worms,
because he gave not glory to God, Acts 12. 23.) that being bound in chains, and
sent to Prison by Tiberius for wishing Caius in the Empire, one Thaumastus a
servant Joseph. Antiq, lib. 18. cap. 8.
of Caius, carrying a Pitcher of water, met him, and Agrippa being very
thirsty, desired him to give him some of his water to drink, which he willingly
did: whereupon Agrippa said, This service thou have done in giving me drink,
shall do thee good another day: And he was as big and as good as his word; for
afterward, when Caius was Emperor, and Agrippa made King of Judea, he first
got his Liberty, then made him chief Officer of his Household, and after his
decease took order that he should continue in the same Office with his Son. Now
how much more then will the King of Kings reward all those poor pious servants
of his, that do not only give to him in his Members cups of cold water, but do
also redeem time from their very rest, meals, and recreations, that they may
have some time to seek the face of God in a corner. Certainly, There shall not
be a sigh, a groan, a prayer, a tear let fall by a poor servant in a corner,
that shall not be at last regarded and rewarded by the great God. Lyra says,
that Mordecai waited six years, before his good service was rewarded by King
Ahasuerus. It may be God may reward thee sooner for all thy closet services;
but if he do not reward thee sooner, he will certainly reward thee better, he
will reward thee with higher Honors, with greater Dignities, 1 Cor. 9. 29 2 Timothy 4. 8. Rev. 2. 10. Jam. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
with more glorious Robes, and with a more royal Crown, even an incorruptible
Crown, a Crown of righteousness, a Crown of life, a Crown of glory. And
therefore hold on and hold out in your secret retirements. Though some may
deride you, and others revile you, and your carnal Masters discourage you, yet
God is faithful and will certainly reward you; yea, he will openly reward you
for all the secret pourings out of your souls in his bosom. But,

Object. 3.

Some may further Object and say, O but we cannot pray alone; we want those
gifts and endowments which others have; we are shut up and know not how to pour
out our souls before God in a corner; we would willingly pray, but we want
ability to pour out our souls before the Lord in secret, etc.

Sol. 1.

Gods dearest children may sometimes be shut up, they may with Zacharias, for a
time, be struck Luke 1. 20.
dumb and not able to speak, Psalm. 77. 4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
Psalm. 38. 9. Lord; all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid
from thee. Gods dearest children have sometimes been so shut up, that they have
been able to say nothing, nor to do nothing but groan. A child of God may
sometimes meet with such a blow from God, from Conscience, from Scripture, from
Satan, from the World, that may for a time so astonish him, that he may not be
able to speak to God, nor speak to others, nor speak to his own heart. Look as
the holy Spirit is not always a teaching Spirit, nor always a leading Spirit,
nor always a comforting Spirit, nor always a sealing Spirit, nor always a
witnessing Spirit, nor always an assuring Spirit to any of the Saints; so he
is not always a supplicating Spirit in any of the Saints. When he is grieved,
vexed, quenched, provoked, he may suspend his gracious influences, and deny the
soul his assistance; and what can a Christian then say or do? But,

Secondly, I answer, Thou can not pray; but can thou not sigh, nor groan
neither? there may be the spirit of Adoption in sighs and groans, as well as in
vocal prayer, Romans 8. 26. The force, the virtue, the efficacy, the excellency
of prayer does not consist in the number and flourish of words, but in the
supernatural motions of the spirit, in sighs, and groans, and pangs, and strong
affections of heart, that are unspeakable and unutterable. Certainly, the very
soul of prayer, lies in the pouring out of a man's soul before the Lord, though
it be but in sighs, groans, and tears, 1 Samuel 1. 13, -- 19. One sigh and groan
from a broken heart, is better pleasing to God, than all humane eloquence. But,

Thirdly, I answer, Beg of God to teach thee to pray. O beg the holy spirit
that is a spirit of prayer. God has promised his holy spirit to them that ask
it, Luke 11. 13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children: how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to them
that ask him? Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you: and I will takeaway the stony heart out of your
flesh and I will give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and
do them. Ezekiel. 11. 19. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new
Spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will
give them an heart of flesh. Zech. 12. 10. I will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplication.
Now Gracious promises are Gods bonds, and he loves to see his people put them
in suit. God expects Isa. 62. 6, 7. Isa. 42. 25, 26.
that we should be his Remembrancers, and that we should pray over his
promises. When he had promised great things to his people concerning
Justification, Sanctification and Preservation, he subjoynes, Yet, I will for
this be enquired of by Ezekiel. 36. 37.
the house of Israel to do it. God looks that we should spread his gracious
promises before him, as Hezekiah Isa. 37. 14.
did Seanacheribs letter. God is never better pleased than when his people
importune him in his own words and urge him with arguments taken from his own
promises. Though God be a very affectionate father, and a very liberal father,
yet he is not a prodigal father, for he will never throw away his mercies on
such as will not stoutly and humbly plead out his promises with him. God loves
to take state upon him, and will be sought unto, both for his giving in of
mercies, and for his making good of precious promises. Thou say thou can
not pray; why can thou not go into a corner, and spread the Promises last
cited before the Lord, and tell him how much it concerns his honor and glory
as well as thy own internal and eternal good, to make good those gracious
promises that he has made concerning his giving of his Spirit to them that ask
him, and his putting his Spirit within them, and his pouring out a Spirit of
grace and supplication upon them.

We read of Tamar, that when Genesis 38. 18, -- 25.
Judah her father-in-law lay with her, she took as a pledge his signet,
bracelets, and staff; and afterward when she was in great distress and ready
to be burnt as an Harlot, she then brought out her staff, and signet, and
Bracelets, and said, by the man whose these are, am I with child, and thereby
she saved her life. The promises are as so many rich Mines, they are as so many
choice flowers of paradise, they are the food, life, and strength of the soul,
They are as a staff to support the soul, and they are as a signet and
Bracelets to adorn the soul, and to enrich the soul; and therefore poor
sinners should bring them forth, and lay them before the Lord, and urge God
with them, there being no way on earth to save a man's soul, and to prevent a
burning in Hell like this. Concerning precious promises let me give you these
eight hints.

First, that they are truly propounded and stated by God, Mark. 10. 30.

Secondly, That they shall certainly be performed, 2 Cor. 1. 20. they being all
made in and through Christ; they are made first to Christ, and then to all that
have union and communion with him.

Sirtorius, says Plutarch, paid what he promised with fair words: but so does
not God. Men many times, say and unsay; they often eat their words as soon as
they have spoken them; but God will never eat the words that are gone out of
his mouth, Isa. 46. 10, 11. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass, I have purposed
it, I will also do it.

Thirdly, That they all issue from free grace, from special love, Hos. 14. 4.
from divine goodness,

Fourthly, That they are all as Jer. 31. 3.
unchangable as he is that made them.

Fifthly, That they are all bottomed and Mal. 3. 6.
founded upon the truth, faithfulness, and all sufficiency of God.

Sixthly, That they are pledges and pawnes of great things that Heb. 13. 5.
God will do for his people in time.

Seventhly, That they are most Heb. 6. 12.
sure and certain evidences of divine favor, and a declaration of the Number. 23.
19.
heart and good will of God to his poor people.

Eighthly, That they are the price of Christ's blood.

Now how should all these things encourage poor souls to be still a pressing of
God with his promises! But,

Fourthly, You say you cannot pray, etc. O that you would leave off objecting,
and fall upon praying. If you cannot pray as you would, nor as you should, pray
as well as you can. Joseph's brethren stood so long dallying and delaying and
trifling out the time, that having a Journey to go to buy corn, they might
have bought and returned twice, before they went and bought once. When Eliah
called Elizeus he goes about the bush, 1 Kings 19. 20.
and he must needs go bid his father and mother farewell, before he could
follow the Prophet. O friends, take heed of dallying, delaying, trifling, going
about the bush, when you should be a faling upon the work of prayer. What
though with Hannah thou can but weep out a prayer, or with Moses stammer out
a prayer, or with Hezekiah chatter out a prayer, yet do as well as thou can,
and thou shall find acceptance with God, 2 Cor. 8. 12. For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not. The Publicans prayer had not much Rhetoric or eloquence in
it, God be merciful to me a sinner, and yet God accepted it: He Luke 18. 13.
prayed much, though he spoke little, and God did not turn a deaf ear upon
him. That God that once accepted a handful of meal Lev. 2. 1, 2. Chap. 6. 15.
Luke 21, 3.
for a sacrifice, and a gripe of Goats hair for an oblation, and the poor
widows two mites, as if they had been two millions, will certainly accept of
what thou art able to do, though thou do fall short, yea much short of what
thou ought to do. Lord, says Luther, thou command me to pray: I cannot
pray as I would, yet I will obey: for though my prayer be not acceptable, yet
thine own commandment is acceptable to thee. If weak Christians would but put
forth in prayer that little strength they have, God would quickly renew their
spiritual strength, he would certainly carry them on from strength to strength,
he would Isa. 49. 29, 30, 31. Psalm. 84. 7.
still by secret assistances, and secret influences, help them on in their
heavenly trade. As a loving indulgent Father will take his little Child in his
arms, and carry him on in his way home ward, when his strength begins to fail
him, and he can walk no further, and the way proves dirty, slippery, or uneven.
So does God by his, Hos. 11. 3. I taught Ephram also to go (as a nurse does the
infant) taking them by their arm. When Gods poor Children come to a fowl way,
or a rough place, he takes them up in his own arms, and helps them over the
quagmire of Crosses, and the difficulties of duties, and over all that
straitness, and narrowness, and weakness o^ spirit that does attend them in
their closet performances.

It Is observable, that when the King of Israel was to shoot the Arrow, 2 Kings
13. 16.
he did put his hand upon the Bow, and Elisha did put his hand upon the Kings
hand. So when we go into our Closets, we are to put up our hand, and then the
Spirit of God likewise will put his hand upon our hand, he will put his
strength to our streng^h, or rather to our weakness, Romans 8. 26. Likewise the
Spirit also helps our infirmities, lifts with us, or helps together. The
Greek word (...) does properly signify such a help, as when another man of
strength and ability steppeth in to sustain the burden that lies upon our
shoulders, be it a logg, or a piece of timber, setting his shoulders under it,
to lift up, and bear part of it with us, or to help us as the nurse helps her
little child, upholding it by the sleeve. When a poor Christian sets himself to
closet prayer, or to mourn, or to believe, or to obey, etc. then the Spirit
comes in with new help, and new influences, and new assistances, and so carries
him on in all these noble services. That child that does but stammer at first,
in time will speak plainly and fluently. O how many Christians are there, that
now can pray with much freedom, liberty and fluency, who at first could only
sigh out a prayer, or stammer out a prayer, or weep out a prayer? Thou say
thou can not pray, but did thou but stir up thy self to obey that command,
Matthew. 6. 6. as well as thou can thou do not know but that a power may go
forth with the command, that may enable thee to act suitable to the command? In
Matthew 9. 1, -- 9. Christ bid the Palsy man rise and walk, Take up thy bed and
go unto thine house. The Palsy man might have objected, Alas, I am carried by
four, I am not able to stir a limb, much less to rise, but least of all to take
up my bed and walk, etc. Oh but he rouseth up himself as well as he could, and
a power went forth with the command, that enabled him to do what was commanded.
So Matthew. 12. 10, -- 14* There was a poor man that had a withered hand, and
Christ commands him to stretch forth his hand: he might have replied, My hand
is withered, and if I might have as many worlds as there be men in the world to
stretch it forth, I could not stretch it forth; yea, if my very life, if my
very salvation did lie upon stretching forth my withered arm, I could not
stretch it forth: Oh, but he throws by all such plea's, and complies with
Christ's command as well as he could, and a power went forth and healed his
hand. O sirs, if you would but pray in your closets as well as you can, you do
not know but that such power and virtue might flow from Christ into your
hearts, as might carry you on in your closet duties, beyond expectation, even
to admiration; others have found it so, and why not you, why not you? Well
remember, that God is no curious nor critical observer of the incongruous
expressions that falls from his poor children when they are in their closet
duties; he is such a father as is very well pleased with the broken expressions
and divine stammerings of his people when they are in a corner. It Is not a
flood of words, nor studied notions, nor seraphical expressions, nor elegant
phrases in prayer, that takes the ear, or that delights the heart of God, or
that opens the gates of glory, or that brings down the best of blessings upon
the soul; but uprightness, holiness, heavenlyness, spiritualness, and
brokenness of heart, these are the things that make a conquest upon God, and
that turns most to the souls account. But,

Fifthly, Thou say thou can not pray: but if thou art a child of God, thou
have the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of God is a Spirit of prayer and
supplication. That all the Children of God have the Spirit of God is most
evident in the blessed Scriptures. Take these for a taste, Zach. 12. 10. I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit
of grace and supplication. Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me. Romans
8. 15. Ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. 1
Cor. 2. 12. We have received, not the Spirit of the world, but the spirit which
is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. 1
These. 4. 8. Who has given unto us his holy spirit. 1 John 3. 2^. Hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. Chap. 4. 13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit.

That all the Children of God have the Spirit of God, may be further made
evident by an induction of these seven particulars.

First, They are all sanctified by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ye are sanctified
by the Spirit of our God. I do not say, that they are all equally sanctified by
the Spirit, but I say, they are all really sanctified by the Spirit. Though all
the servants of Christ have their Talents, yet all have not Mat. 25. 15.
their ten Talents, nor all have not their five Talents, nor all have not their
two Talents, some have only their one Talent. Though Benjamins Mess was five
times as much Genesis 43. 32 33, 34.
as his brethrens Mess, yet every one of his brethren had their M^ss; so though
some Christians have five times more measures of the Spirit, and more measures
of light, of love, of holiness, of heavenly mindedness, etc. than others have;
yet, every Christian has some measures of the Spirit, and some measures of
grace and holiness, etc. Though some are Babes in Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 1 John
2. 12, 13, 14.
and others are Children in Christ; though some are young Men in Christ, and
others are old Men in Christ, yet every one of them is John 3. 8.
born of the Spirit of Christ. Though none of the people of God in this life
have the Spirit in perfection, yet every one of them have so much of the Spirit
as will bring him to salvation; every Christian has so much of the Spirit as
will bring Christ and his Soul together: and therefore without all
peradventure, every Christian has so much of the Spirit, as will at last bring
Heaven and his Soul together.

Secondly, They are all led by the Spirit, Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Every Child of God has a twofold
Guide; the Word without, and the Spirit within, Isa. 30. 20, 21. How the Spirit
leads by the rule of the Word, and how he leads Prove. 6. 22. Ephesians. 5. 9.
to God, and leads to Christ, and leads to Truth, and leads to Righteousness,
and leads to Holiness, and leads to Happiness, I shall not now undertake to
show.

Thirdly, They are all upheld and strengthened by the Spirit, Ps. 51. 12. Uphold
me with thy free Spirit; or underprop me, or sustain me, as the Hebrew has it,
with thy free voluntary Spirit; or as the Greek turns it, with thy noble
princely Spirit. So Ephesians. 3. 16. To be strengthened with might by his Spirit in
the inner man. By the inner man, some understand the regenerate part of man;
others by the inner man, do understand the soul with all its noble faculties
and motions. Take the words which way you will, it is certain that all the
spiritual might and strength that a Christian has, he has it from the holy
Spirit. Though the Spirit strengthens every Christian in the inner man, yet I
do not say that the Spirit strengthens every Christian alike in the inward man.
Some have stronger corruptions to subdue than others, and more violent
temptations to with-stand than others, and greater difficulties to wrestle with
than others, and choicer mercies to improve than others, and higher and harder
duties of Religion to manage than others, and accordingly they are more
strengthened in the inner man than others.

Fourthly, They are all partakers of the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.
23. Our selves have the firstfruits of the Spirit; which are but as a handful
of corn in respect of the whole crop. All the grace, 2 Cor. 1. 22.
and all the holiness which we have from the regenerating Spirit at first
conversion, is but a drop to that S^a a mite to those Talents which we shall
receive in the life to come.

Fifthly, They are all taught by Isa. 59. 21.
the Spirit. John 14. 26. The Holy Ghost whom the father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things.

This promise primarily belongs to the Apostles;

Secondarily to all believers.

Though these words were spoken at first to the Apostles only, yet they were
not spoken of the Apostles only, Isa. 54. 13. In the words there are three
things promised to the Apostles.

First, Immediate illumination by the Spirit of God.

Secondly, A full knowledge of all those truths belonging to their Apostolical
office, and that were necessary for them at that juncture of time.

Thirdly, Absolute infallibility as to matter o^ Doctrine.

There are also three things promised to all believers.

First, Mediate illumination, teaching truths by the Spirit of truth, in the
use of the means of grace.

Secondly, Knowledge of all truth necessary to salvation.

Thirdly, infallibility too, so far forth as they adhere and keep close to the
spirits teaching in the word.

Philo says, That the primitive Christians were called Tillers, because as
husbandmen till their fields and manure their grounds, so did they teach their
Families, and nurture their Children and servants with good instructions O what
choice teachings of the spirit were these primitive Christians under, who made
it so much their business, their work, to teach those that were under their
charge. So John. 1. 2, 27. But the 1 These. 4. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 8.
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth. Not that we know all things simply, or that we need not a Ministry to
teach and instruct us; but he speaks comparatively; you shall not be so helped
by any instructions without the Spirit, as with the Spirit. The Spirit shall
declare the truth as it is in Jesus, more clearly, more freely, more
particularly, more certainly, more universally, more 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 4. 1. John 16. 25 Isa. 48 17. Eccl. 11. 5.
effectually, than any other is able to do. The Spirit, this holy unction,
shall teach the Saints all things; not all things knowable, for that is
impossible for finite creatures to attain unto. Who knows the motions of the
heavens, the influences of the stars, the nature of the creatures, or how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child? who knows the reason why
the River Nilus should overflow in the summer, when waters are at the lowest;
or why the lodestone should draw Iron to it, or incline to the Pole Star?

Pliny tells us of one that spent Lib. 11. c. 9.
eight and fifty years in learning out the nature of the Be, and yet had not
fully attained to it. How is it possible then for the wisest naturalist to
enter into the deep things of God!

Paul that learned his divinity among 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11.
the Angels, and that had the Holy Ghost for his immediate teacher, tells us
plainly That he knew but in part; and O then, how little a part of that part do
we know! But the Spirit teaches the Saints all things: that is,

First, He teaches them all things needful for the salvation of their souls,
all things necessary to bring John 17. 3.
them to heaven.

Secondly, All things needful to life and godlyness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

Thirdly, all things needful to their places, callings, sexes, ages, and
conditions.

Fourthly, All things needful for you to know, to preserve you in the truth,
and to preserve you from being deluded and seduced by those false teachers of
whom he speaks, verse. 18, 19, 22, 23, 26. And certainly this is the main thing
that John hints at in that expression. The all things spoken of in Verse. 27.
according to the ordinary Scripture style, must necessarily be interpreted only
of all those things which are there spoken of. But,

Sixthly, They are all comforted by the Spirit, Acts. 9. 31. They John 14. 16,
26. and Chap. 15. 26. and Chap. 16. 7.
walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost* Romans 14.
17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and dri^k, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. 1 These. 1. 6. And ye became followers of us, and of
the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the
Holy Ghost. Not that all Christians have always actual comfort or actual joy;
O no: For as the Air is sometimes clear, and sometimes cloudy; and as the Sea
is sometimes ebbing, and sometimes flowing: so the comforts and joys of the
people of God are sometimes ebbing, and sometimes flowing, sometimes clear and
sometimes cloudy.

Hudson the Martyr being deserted at the stake, went from under his chain; and
having prayed earnestly, was comforted immediately, and suffered valiantly.

So Mr. Glover the Martyr was deserted in Prison, but as he was going to the
stake he looked back, and cried out to his friend, He is come, he is come,
meaning the Comforter, and so he laid down his life with joy.

Rachel wept, and would not be comforted; she gave so much way to weeping, that
she would not give the least way to comfort: and so it is many times with the
choicest Saints. My soul refused to be comforted. Psalm. 77. 2.
It Is not my purpose at present to insist on the several ways, whereby the
people of God refuse comfort, and fall short of those strong consolations*
which God is willing that they should receive. The Sun may operate where it
does not shine, and a man may be in a state of salvation, and yet want
consolation, a man may fear the Isa. 50. 10. 2.
Lord, and obey the voice of his servant, and yet walk in darkness and see no
light. There is no Christian but may sometime have trouble in his conscience,
and grief in his heart, and tears in his eyes, and fears and questionings in
his soul, whether God be his Father, and whether Christ be his Redeemer, and
whether Mercy belongs to him, yea, whether any Promise in the Book of God
belongs to him? etc. Joy and comfort are those dainties, Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
those sweet-meets of heaven, that God does not every day feast his people
with; every day is not a wedding day, nor every day is not a harvest day, nor
every day is not a summers day. The fatted Calf is Luke 15. 22, 23. Eccl. 3. 4.
Romans 12. 15.
not killed every day, nor the Robe and the Ring is not every day put on; every
day is not a festival day nor a dancing day. As there is a time to sing, so
there is a time to sigh; as there is a time to laugh, so there is a time to
weep; and as there is a time to dance, so thereis a time to mourn; All tears
will never be clear wiped from our eyes, till all sinbe quite taken out of our
hearts. But notwithstanding all this, yet gracious ^ouls have always sure and
choice grounds of consolation, they have the promises, they have the first
fruits of the Spirit, they have union with Christ, and they have right to
eternal life, though they have not always sensible comforts. The Job 13. 15.
Psalm. 42. 5.
children of God have always cause to exercise faith and hope on God in their
darkest condition, though they have not always actual joy and consolation; The
comforter always abides with the Saints, though he does not always actually
comfort the Saints. John. 14. 16. The Spirit many times carries on his
sanctifying work in the soul, when he does not carry on his comforting work in
the soul; the Spirit many times acts in a way of humiliation, when he does not
act in a way of consolation; the Spirit many times fills the soul with Godly
sorrow, when he does not fill the soul with holy joy. The actings of the
Spirit, as to his comforting work, are all of his own sovereign will and
pleasure; and therefore he may abide in the soul, when he does not actually
comfort the soul. But,

Seventhly, The people of God These words says Zanchy, are a inetaphor taken
from Merchants, who having b^ught goods, seal them as their own, and so
transport them to other places. Ephesians. 4. 24.
first or last, are sealed by the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye
believed ye were sealed by the holy Spirit of promise. The nature of sealing
consists in the imparting of the image or Character of the Seal to the thing
sealed. To seal a thing is to stamp the character of the Seal on it. Now the
Spirit of God does really and effectually communicate the image of God to us,
which image consists in righteousness and true holiness. Then are we truly
sealed by the Spirit of God, when the holy Ghost stamps the image of grace and
holiness so obviously, so evidently upon the soul, as that the soul sees it,
feels it, and can run and read it; then the soul is sealed by the holy Spirit.
So Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption. The Person of the Holy Ghost is here set forth in
the Greek with a very great energy, such as our Tongue is not able fully to
express.

Here are three words that have three Articles, every word his several Article
by it self, (...), The Spirit, not a Spirit; and not holy, but the holy; nor of
God, but of that God, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and given the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts. In these Scriptures you see that the
Spirit is a seal. Now a seal among men is,

First, For secrecy;

Secondly, For distinction;

Thirdly, For authority;

Fourthly, For certainty. A writing sealed is authentic, and for ensureing.

In the three Tex^s last cited, if you compare them together, you may observe
these Six things.

First, The Person sealing, and that is the Father.

Secondly, In whom, in Christ.

Thirdly, With what seal, the Spirit of Promise. Where are all the Persons in
the Trinity making us sure of our inheritance.

Fourthly, When, after ye believed.

Fifthly, The End, which is twofold;

1. Subordinate, and that is the certainty of our salvation; 2. Ultimate, and
that is the praise of his glory.
Sixthly, The Time how long this seal and earnest shall thus assure us, and
that is till we have the complete possession of what it is an earnest. To
prevent mistakes and disputes about the Sealings of the Spirit on the one hand;
and to support, comfort, and encourage the poor people of God on the other
hand, let me briefly hint. at the Spirits ^pecial sealing times. As First
Conversion times are often the Spirits sealing times. Luke 15. 22, 23. Upon the
Prodigals return the fatted Calf is killed, and the best Robe is put upon his
back, and the Ring is put upon his hand, and shoes on his feet. Some by the
Robe understand the Royalty of Adam, others, the Righteousness of Christ. And
by the Ring, some understand the pledges of Gods love, Rings being given as
pledges of love: and by the Ring others understand the seal of Gods holy
Spirit, men useing to seal with their Rings. Among the Romans the Ring was an
ensign of virtue, honor, and nobility, whereby they that wore them were
distinguished from the common people. I think the main thing intended by the
Robe and the Ring, is to show us, that God sometimes upon the sinners
conversion and returning to him, is graciously pleased to give him some choice
manifestations of his gracious pleasure and goodwill, and to seal up to him his
everlasting love and favor. And hence it comes to pass that some that are but
babes in Christ, are 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. 1. John 2. 12, 13, 14. Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6.
so diligent and active in religious duties, and so conscientious and dexterous
in the exercise of their Graces. At first conversion, God helps some of his
people to read their own names written in legible letters in the Book of Life:
No sooner are some converted, but the Spirit stamps his seal upon them.

Secondly, Believing times are sealing times, Ephesians. 1. 13. When they were in
the very exercise of their faith, when they were acting Romans 15. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
of their faith (for so much the Original imports) the Spirit came and sealed
them up to the day of redemption. He that honors Christ by frequent actings of
faith on him, him will Christ honor, by setting his seal and mark upon him.

Thirdly, Humbling times, mourning times, are sealing times. When a holy man
was asked, which were the joyfullest days, the comfortablest days, that ever
he enjoyed, he answered, his mourning days. His mourning days were his
joyfullest days; and therefore he cried out, O give me my mourning days, give
me my mourning days, for they were my joyfullest days. Those were days
wherein God sealed up his everlasting love to his soul, Job 22. 29. Isa. 29.
19. When the Prodigal had greatly humbled himself before his father, then the
best Robe and the Ring were put upon him, Luke 15. 17, -- 24. There are none
that long for the sealings of the Spirit, like humble souls; nor none set so
high a price upon the sealings of the Spirit, as humble souls; nor none make so
choice an improvement of the sealings of the Spirit, as humble souls. And
therefore when men's hearts are humble and low, the Spirit comes and sets the
privy seal of heaven upon them.

Fourthly, Sin-killing, sin-mortifying, sin-subduing times are the Spirits
sealing times, Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, that no man knows saving he that receives it.

God will give to the victorious Christian a secret love-token, whereby his
soul may rest assured of the unspeakable love of God, and of its freedom from
condemnation. White*stones were of very great use among the Romans, and among
the Athenians, and served to acquit the accused in Courts of Justice. When
Malefactors were accused, arraigned and condemned in their Courts, they gave
them a Black stone in token of condemnation; but when they were acquitted they
gave them White stones, in token of absolution: And to this practice the holy
Ghost seems to allude. He that is victorious over Isa. 56. 5.
his lusts shall have a new Name, that is better than the names of sons and
daughters; and he shall have the pardon of his sins writ in fair letters upon
the white stone, so that he may run and read his absolution. The victorious
Christian shall 1 John 1. 7.
have assurance of the full discharge of all his sins, he shall have a clear
evidence of his Justification, and a blessed assurance of his eternal Election;
all which are hidden and mysterious things to all but those that have
experienced and tasted what these sweet meats of Heaven mean.

Among the Romans there were solemn feasts held in honor of those that were
victorious in their sacred Games. Now those that were to be admitted to those
Feasts were wont to have their names written on white shells, and white stones,
and by these Tickets they were admitted. Now some think the holy Ghost alludes
to this practice, and so would hint to us a privy mark whereby victorious
Christians may be known, and admitted as bidden guests to the heavenly banquet
of the hidden Manna, according to Rev. 19. 9. O sirs, when predominate lusts
are brought under, when bosom sins lie slain in the soul, then the Spirit comes
and seals up love, and life, and glory, to the soul.

Fifthly, Suffering times are sealing times, Act. 7. 55, 56, 59, 60. Rev. 1. 9,
10. 2 Cor. 4. 15, 16, 17. The primitive Christians found Acts 5. 40, 41, 42.
Psalm. 71. 20, 21. and Psalm. 94. 19. Rev. 1. 9, 10.
them so, and the suffering Saints in the^ Marian days found them so. When the
Furnace is seven times hotter than ordinary, the Spirit of the Lord comes and
seals up a man's pardon in his bosom, and his peace with God, and his title to
heaven. When the world frowns most then God smiles most; when the world puts
their iron chains upon the Saints legs, then God puts his golden chains about
the Saints necks; when the world puts a bitter cup into one hand, then the Lord
puts a cup of consolation into the other hand; when the world cries out,
Crucify them, crucify them, then commonly they hear that sweet voice from
heaven, These are my beloved ones, in whom I am well pleased.

Blessed Bradford, looked upon his sufferings as an evidence to him that he was
in the right way to heaven. And, says Ignatius, It is better for me to be a
Martyr, than to be a Monarch.

Sixthly, Self-denying times are the Spirits sealing times, Matthew. 19. 27, 28,
29.

First, There is sinful self, which takes in a man's lusts.

Secondly, There is natural self which takes in a man's arts, parts, gifts, with
Reason.

Thirdly, There is religious self, which takes in all a man's religious duties
and services, whether ordinary or extraordinary.

Fourthly, There is moral self which includes a freedom from gross, heinous,
enormous wickednesses, and a fair, sweet, harmless behavior toward men.

Fifthly, There is relative self, which takes in our nearest and dearest
relations in the flesh; as Psalm. 45. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Wife, Children, Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, etc. Now when a man comes
thus universally to deny himself for Christ's sake, and the Gospels sake, and
Religion sake, then the Spirit of the Lord comes and seals him up unto the day
of redemption. This is a truth confirmed by the experiences of many Martyrs now
in Heaven, and by the testimony of many Christians still alive.

Seventhly, Sacrament times are sealing times. In that feast of fat things, God
by his Spirit seals up his love to his people, and his covenant to his people,
and pardon of sin to his people, and heaven and happiness to his people. There
are many precious souls that have found Christ in this Ordinance, when they
could not find him in other Ordinances, though they have sought him
sorrowingly. In this Ordinance many a distressed soul has been strengthened,
comforted and sealed.

I might give you many instances; take one for all. There was a gracious woman,
who, after God had filled her soul with comfort, and sealed up his everlasting
love to her, fell under former fears and trouble of Spirit; and being at the
Lords Supper, a little before the bread was administered to her, Satan seemed to
appear to her, and told her that she should not presume to eat; but at that
very nick of time, the Lord was pleased to bring into her mind that passage in
the Canticles, Eat, O my friends. Cant. 5. 1.
But notwithstanding this, Satan still continued terrifying of her; and when
she had eaten, he told her that she should not drink; but then the Lord brought
that second clause of the Verse to her remembrance, Drink, yea, drink
abundantly (or, be drunk, as the Hebrew has it) my beloved (or, my loves, as
the Hebrew has it. All faithful souls are Christ's Loves) and so she drank
also, and presently was filled with such unspeakable joys, that she hardly
knew how she got home: Which soul-ravishing joys continued for a fortnight
after, and filled her mouth with songs of praise, so that she could neither
sleep, nor eat, more than she forced her self to do out of conscience of duty.
At the fortnights end, when God was pleased to abate her measure of joy, she
came to a settled peace of conscience, and assurance of the love of God; so that
for twenty years after she had not so much as a cloud upon her spirit, or the
least questioning of her interest in Christ. But,

Eighthly, When God calls his people to some great and noble work, when he puts
them upon some high services, some difficult duties, some holy and eminent
employments, then his Spirit comes and sets his seal upon them, Jer. 1. 5.
Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou came forth
out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee to be a prophet unto
the Nations. The Lord sending the Prophet Jeremiah to denounce most dreadful
judgments against a rebellious people, an impudent brazen-faced Nation, he
assures him of his eternal election, and of his choice presence, and singular
assistance in that work that he set him about, verse. 8, 17, 18, 19. Thus the
Lord dealt with Peter, James and John, Matthew. 17. 1, to the 6th, and thus he
dealt with Paul, Acts 9, to 23.

Ninthly, When they are taken up into more than ordinary communion with God,
then is the Spirits sealing time. When was it that the Spouse cried out, My
beloved is mine, and I am his, but when Christ brought her to his banqueting
house, and his banner over her was love? Cant. 2. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6. compared, etc.

Tenthly, and lastly, When Christians give themselves up to private prayer,
when Christians are more than ordinarily exercised in secret prayer, in Closet
duties, then the Spirit comes and seals up the Covenant and the Love of the
Father to them. When Daniel Dan. 9. 20, 21, 22, 23.
had been wrestling and weeping, and weeping and wrestling all day long with
God in his Closet, then the Angel tells him, that he was a man greatly beloved
of God, or a man of great desires, as the Original has it. There was a
gracious Woman, who after much frequenting of Sermons, and walking in the ways
of the Lord, fell into great desertions, but being in secret prayer, God came
in with abundance of light and comfort, sealing up to her soul that part of his
Covenant, viz. I will take the stony heart out of Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20.
their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh; that they may walk in my
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people,
and I will be their God. And thus I have given you a brief account of the
Spirits special sealing times.

Now mark, This seal God sets upon all his wares, upon all his adopted
children; for sooner or later there are none of his but are sealed with this
seal. God sets his John 3. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Heb. 12. 14.
seal of Regeneration, he stamps his Image of Holiness upon all his people, to
difference and distinguish them from all profane, moral, and hypocritical
persons in the World. Doubtless the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost
imprinting the draughts and lineaments of Gods Image of Righteousness and
Holiness upon Man, as a seal or signet does leave an impression and stamp of
its likeness upon the thing sealed, is the seal of the Spirit spoken of in
Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal,
the Lord knows them that are his. And let every one that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. But to prevent mistakes, you must remember, that
though the Spirit of the Lord, first or last, will set his seal upon every real
Saint, yet the impression of that seal is not alike visible in all; for some
bear this impression as Babes, others as men grown up to some maturity. All
Gods adopted children bear this impression truly, but none of them bear it
perfectly in this life. Sometimes this seal of Regeneration, this seal of
Holiness is so plain and obvious that a man may run and read it in himself and
others; and at other times it is so obscure and dark, that he can hardly discern
it, either in himself or others. This seal is so lively stamped on some of Gods
people, that it discovers it self very visibly, eminently, gloriously; but on
others it is not alike visible. And thus I have made it evident by these seven
particulars, that all the children of God, have the Spirit of God.

Now mark, The Spirit of God that is in all the Saints is a Spirit of prayer
and supplication, Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
we cry, Abba, Father. While the child is in the womb it cannot cry, but as soon
as it is born it cries. Whilst Paul did lie in the womb of his natural estate,
he could not pray; but no sooner was he born of the spirit, but the next news
is, Behold he prays! Acts. 9. 11. Prayer is nothing but the turning of a man's
inside outward before the Lord. The very soul of prayer lies in the pouring out
of a man's soul into the bosom of God. Prayer is nothing but the breathing that
out before the Lord, that was first breathed into us by the spirit of the Lord
Prayer is nothing but a choice, a free, a sweet, and familiar intercourse of
the soul with God. Certainly, it is a great work of the Spirit to help the
Saints to pray, Gal. 4. 6. Because you are sons, God has sent forth the spirit
of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, father. God has no still-born
children. The Gemination Abba, Father, notes fiduciall, filial, and vehement
affection. The first is an Pareus.
Hebrew or Syriack word, the Second a Greek, whereby is signified the union of
the Hebrews and Grecians, or the Jews and Gentiles, in one Church, Abba Father.
What is Abba? say others, in Hebrew, Father, and it is added, because in Christ
the corner stone both peoples are joined, alike becoming sons, whence soever
they come; circumcision from one place, whereupon Abba, uncircumcision from
another, whereupon father is named: The concord of the walls being the glory of
the corner stone.

The word Abba say others, signifies, Father in the Syriack Tongue, which the
Apostle here retains, because it is a word full of affection, which young
children retain almost in all Languages, when they begin to speak. And he adds
the word Father, not only to expound the same, but also the better to express
the eager movings, and the earnest and vehement desires and singular affection
of believers, in their crying unto God; even as Christ himself redoubled the
Mark 14. 36.
word Father to the same purpose, when he was in his greatest distress. This
little word Father, (says Luther) lisped forth in prayer by a Child of God,
exceeds the eloquence of Demosthenes, Cicero, and all other so famed Orators in
the World. It Is certain that the Spirit of God helps the Saints in all their
communions with God, viz. in their meditations of God, in their reading and
hearing of the Word of God, in their communions one with another, and in all
their solemn addresses to God. And as to this the Apostle gives us a most
special instance in that Romans 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered. When we are to pray, there is in us sometimes an infirmity of
ignorance, so that we know not what to pray for, either in regard of the matter
or the manner. And there is in us at other times an infirmity of pride and
conceitedness, so that we cannot pray with that humility and lowliness of
spirit as we should, spiritual pride having fly-blown our prayers. Sometimes
there is in us an infirmity of deadness, dullness, drowsiness, etc. so that we
cannot pray with that warmth, heat, life, spirit, and fervency, as we should,
or as we would; and at other times there is in us an infirmity of unbelief and
slavish fears, so that we cannot pray with that faith and holy boldness, as
becomes Children that draw near to a Throne of Grace, to a Throne of Mercy,
etc. But now the Spirit helps these infirmities by way of instruction,
prompting, and teaching us what to pray for, and how we should spell our
lesson; and by telling us as it were within, what we should say, and how we
should sigh and groan; and by rousing and quickening, and stirring of us up to
prayer; and by his singular influence and choice assistance opening and
enlarging our hearts in prayer; and by his tuning the Strings of our
affections, he prepares us and fits us for the work of Supplication: And
therefore every one that derides the Spirit of prayer in the Saints (saying
these are the men and the women that pray by the Spirit) blaspheme against the
holy Spirit; it being a main work of the Spirit to teach the Saints to pray,
and to help them in prayer. Now all the Saints having the Spirit, and the
Spirit being a Spirit of prayer and supplication, there is no reason in the
world why a Saint should say, I would pray in secret, but I cannot pray, I cannot
pour out my soul, nor my complaint before the Lord in a corner.

Sixthly and lastly, Thou say thou can not pray, thou have not the gifts
and parts which others have: But thou can manage thy callings thy worldly
business as well as others; and why then can thou not pray as well as
others? Ah friends, did you but love private prayer as well as you love the
world, and delight in private prayer as much as you delight in the world, and
were your hearts as much set upon closet prayer as they are set upon the world,
you would never say you could not pray, yea, you would quickly pray as well as
others; it is not so much from want of ability to pray in secret, that you don't
pray in secret; as it is from want of a will, a heart to pray in secret, that
you don't pray in secret. Jacobs love to Rachel, and Sechems love to Dina,
carried Genesis 29. and ch 34.
them through the greatest difficulties. Were men's affections but strongly set
upon private prayer, they would quickly find abilities to pray. He that sets
his affections upon a Virgin (though he be not learned nor eloquent) will find
words enough to let her know how his heart is taken with her. The application
is easy. He in Seneca complained of a Thorn in his foot, when his Lungs was
rotten. So many complain of want of ability to pray in their closets, when
their hearts are rotten. Sirs, do but get better hearts, and then you will
never say you cannot pray. It Is one of the saddest sights in all the world, to
see men strongly parted and gifted for all worldly businesses, to cry out that
they cannot pray, that they have no ability to pour out their souls before the
Lord in secret. You have sufficient parts and gifts to tell men of your sins,
your wants, your dangers, your difficulties, your mercies, your deliverances,
your duties, your crosses, your losses, your enjoyments, your friends, your
foes; and why then are you not ashamed to complain of your want of parts and
gifts, to tell those very things to God in a corner, which you can tell to men
even upon the housetop, etc. But,

Fourthly, Some may further intend to bestow upon us, whether we pray in our
closets or no; and therefore to what purpose do you press secret prayer so
hard upon us? etc.

To this Objection I shall give these Answers.

First, That this Objection lies as strong against Family Prayer, and Public
Prayer, as it does against Private Prayer. God knows all thy wants and
necessities, all thy straits and trials, etc. and therefore what need thou
pray in thy Family, what need thou attend Public Prayers in the Communion
of Saints. There is no wringing of any mercy out of the hands of Heaven, which
God does not intend to bestow: This Objection faces all kind of Prayer, and
fights against all kinds of Prayer. But

Secondly, I answer, That Private Prayer is that piece of Divine Worship and
Adoration, it is a part of that homage, which we owe to God upon the account of
a Divine Command (as I have already proved.) Now all Objections must bow before
the face of Divine Commands; As Joseph's Brethren bowed before him: Or as King
Ahasuerus Genesis 42. 6. Esth. 3. 2.
his servants bowed before Haman. Indeed every Objection that is formed up
against a Divine Command, should fall before it, as Dagon fell before the Ark,
or as Goliath fell before David. He that casts off Private Prayer under any
pretense whatsoever, he casts off the Dominion of God, the Authority of God,
and this may be as much as a man's life and soul is worth. But,

Thirdly, I answer, Though Prayer be not the ground, the cause of obtaining
favors and mercies from God; yet it is the means, it is the Silver Channel, it is
the Golden Pipe, through which the Lord is Isa. 55. 6. Jam. 1. 5. Isa. 62. 7.
Psalm. 22. 24.
pleased to convey to his people all temporal, Spiritual, and eternal favors,
Ezekiel 36. from the 26. verse, to the 37. verse of that Chapter. God promises to
give them the cream, the choycest, the sweetest, of all spiritual, eternal, and
temporal blessings; but mark, verse 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them. Though God be very prompt and ready to
bestow upon his people the best and the greatest of blessings; yet the will by
prayer be sought unto for the actual enjoyment of them. He that has no heart
to pray for a mercy he needs, he has no ground to believe that ever God will
give him the mercy he needs. There is no receiving, without asking; no finding,
without seeking; no opening, without knocking. The threefold promise annexed to
the threefold precept, in Matthew. 7. 7. should encourage all Christians to be
instant, fervent, and constant in prayer. The proud beggar gets nothing of men;
and the dumb sinner gets nothing of God. As there is no mercy too great for God
to give; so there is no mercy too little for us to crave. Certainly that man
has little worth in him, that thinks any mercy not worth a seeking. But,

Fourthly and lastly, I answer, Every Christian should labor to enjoy his
mercies in mercy, he should labor to have his blessings blessed unto him, he
should labor Genesis 22. 17.
to have the good will of him that dwelt in the bush with all he has. Now this
is an everlasting truth, a maxim to live and die with; that whatsoever mercy
comes not in upon the wing of prayer, is not given in mercy. O how sweet is
that mercy that comes flying in upon the wing of prayer: How sweet was that
water to Sampson which streamed to him in the channel of private prayer, Judge.
15. 19. he called the name of it, En-hakkore, the Well of him that prayed.
Sampson prayed as for life, and that water that was handed to him was as sweet
as life. Every mercy that is gathered by the hand of prayer, is as sweet as the
Rose of Sharon: But Can. 2. 1.
that mercy that comes not in at the door of prayer, comes not in at the right
door; and that mercy that comes not in at the right door, will do a man no
good; such mercies will make themselves wings and fly from us. Every Christian
should Pro. 23. 5.
narrowly look that all his mercies 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
are sanctified mercies; now every mercy is sanctified by the word and prayer:
Prayer prepares and fits us for mercy, and mercy for us: It Is Prayer that gives
us a right and holy use of all our mercies: Such mercies are but great miseries
that come not in upon the wing of prayer: Prayerless men's mercies are all given
in wrath, Psalm. 76. 23, -- 32. Yea their blessings are cursed unto them, Prove.
3. 33. Mal. 2. 2. Look as every sacrifice was to be seasoned with salt; so
every mercy is to be sanctified by prayer. Look as Gold sometimes is laid, not
only upon cloth and silks, but also upon Silver it self: So Prayer is that
Golden duty, that must be laid, not only upon all our natural and civil
actions, as eating, drinking, buying, selling, etc. but also upon all our
Silver duties, upon all our most religious and spiritual performances, as
hearing, reading, meditating, conference, church fellowship, breaking of bread,
etc.

Certainly prayer is very necessary to make every providence, and every
ordinance, and every mercy to be a blessing to us. Every mercy that comes in
upon the wing of private prayer is a double mercy; it is a great-bellied mercy,
it is a mercy that has many mereies in the womb of it. Happy is that Christian
that can lay his hand upon every mercy that he enjoyes, and say of them all as
once Hannah said of her Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 27. For this child I prayed, and the
Lord has given me my petition which I asked of him. But,

Fifthly, Some may further object etc.

To this Objection I shall give these three short Answers.

First, I suppose this Objection concerns but a few Christians in our days.
That God that has given a Christ to Believers, does commonly give them a
convenient corner Romans 8. 32.
to enjoy private communion with himself in. Most Christians I am afraid do
rather want a heart for private prayer, than a convenient place for private
prayer. What men set their hearts upon they will find time and place to effect
it, whether it be good or whether it be evil, whether it concerns temporals or
spirituals, whether it concerns this world or another world, this life or a
better life. If most men would but get better hearts, they would quickly find
or make convenient places for private prayer. He who has an inflamed love to
God, will certainly find out a corner to enjoy secret communion with God. True
lovers will find out corners to enjoy one another in. How many men are there
that can easily find out private places for their dogs to lie in, and their
swine to sleep in, and their horses to stand in, and their oxen to feed in,
etc. who cannot find out a private place to seek the face of God in? But did
these men but love their God, or their souls, or private prayer, or eternity,
as well, or better than their beasts, they would not be such brui^es, but that
they would quickly find out a hole, a corner, to wait upon the Lord in. But,

Secondly, I Answer, If a Christian be on the top of the house with Peter, he
may pray there; or if he be walking in the field with Isaac, he may pray there;
or if he be on the mountain with Christ, he may pray there; or if he be behind
the door with Paul, he may pray there; or if he be waiting at table with
Nehemiah, he may secretly pray there; or if he be in a wood, he may pray there,
as the primitive Christians in times of persecution did; or if he be behind a
tree, he may pray there; or if he be by the Sea side, he may pray there, as the
Apostles did: 'Twas a choice saying of Austin, Every Saint is Gods Temple
(says he) and he that carries his temple about him, may go to prayer when he
pleases. Some Saints have never had so much of heaven brought down into their
hearts, as when they have been with God in a corner: O the secret
manifestations of divine love, the secret kisses, the secret embraces, the
secret influences, the secret communion with God, that many a precious
Christian has had in the most solitary places, it may be behind the door, or
behind the wall, or behind the hedge, or behind the arbor, or behind the tree,
or behind the rock, or behind the bush, etc. But,

Thirdly and lastly, did thou never in thy unregenerate estate make use of
all thy wits, and parts, and utmost endeavors, to find out convenient seasons,
and secret corners, and solitary places to sin in, and to dishonor thy God in,
and to undo thine own and others souls in? yes, I remember with shame and
blushing, that 'twas so with me when I was dead in Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
trespasses and sins, and walked according to the course of this world. O how
much then does it concern thee in thy renewed, sanctified, and raised estate,
to make use of all thy wits, and parts, and utmost endeavors, to find out the
fittest seasons, and the most secret corners, and solitary places thou can to
honor thy God in, and to seek the welfare of thine own and others souls in! O
that men were but as serious, studious and industrious, to find out convenient
seasons, secret places to please, and serve, and glorify the Lord in; as they
have been serious, studious, and industrious to find out convenient seasons,
and secret places to displease and grieve the Spirit of the Lord in. But,

Sixthly and lastly, others may prayer, but that we can no sooner shut our
closet doors, but a multitude of infirmities, weaknesses, and vanities do face
us, and rise up against us; our hearts being full of distempers and follies;
and our bodies, say some, are under great indispositions; and our souls, say
others, are under present indispositions; and how then can we seek the face of
God in a corner? how can we wrestle with God in our closets? etc.

Now to this Obj^ction I shall give these six Answers.

1. I^ these kinds of reasonings or arguings were sufficient to shut private
prayer out of doors, where lives that man or woman, that husband or wife, that
father or child that master or servant that Psa. 40. 12. Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 7.
15, 24. Psalm. 130. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Chr. 6. 36. Phil. 3. 12.
would ever be found in the practice of that duty? Where is there a person
under heaven whose heart is not full of infirmities, weaknesses, follies and
vanities; and whose body and soul is not too often indisposed to closet duties?
1 Kings 8. 46. If they sin against thee, for there is no man that sins not,
etc. Eccl. Grace in this life, is like Gold in the ore, full of mixture.
7. 20. For there is not a just man upon the earth that does good and sins
not. Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? Job. 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Job
9. 30, 31. If I wash my self with Snow-water, and make my hands never so clean;
Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
Job 9. 20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me; If I say I
am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. Psalm. 143. 2. And enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
James 3. 2. For in many things we offend all. 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Such that affirm that
men may be fully perfect in this life, or without sin in this life, they do
affirm that which is expressly contrary to the Scriptures last cited, and to
the universal experience of all Saints, who daily feel and lament over that
body of sin and death that they bare about with them; yea, they do affirm that
which is quite contrary to the very state or constitution of all the Saints in
this life. In every Saint the flesh; lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
lusts against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other; so that
they cannot do the things Gal. 5. 17.
that they would: In every good Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
man there are two men, the old man and the new; the one must be daily put on,
and the other daily put off: All Saints have a law in their members rebelling
against the law of their minds; so that the Romans 7. 23. 15. comp.
good that they would do, they do not; and the evil that they would not do,
that they do: They have two contrary principles in them, from whence proceeds
two manner of actions, motions, and inclinations, continually opposite one to
another; hence it is that there is a continual combat in them, like the
struggling of the Twins in Rebecah's womb. An absolute perfection is peculiar to
the triumphant state of Gods Elect in Heaven: Heaven is the only privileged
place, where no unclean thing can Rev. 23. 21
enter in; that is the only place where neither sin nor Satan shall ever get
footing. Such as dream of an absolute perfection in this life, do confound and
jumble heaven Heb. 12. 22, 23.
and earth together; the state of the Church militant, with the state of the
Church Triumphant, which are certainly distinct both in time and place, and in
order, measure, and concomitants. This dangerous opinion of absolute perfection
in this life, shakes the very foundation of Religion, and overthrows the Gospel
of grace; it renders the satisfaction of Christ, and all his great transactions
null and void; it tells the world that there is no need of faith, of
repentance, of ordinances, of watchfulness: They that say they have no sin,
say, they have no need of the blood of Christ to cleanse them 1 John 1. 7
from sin: Such as say they have no sin, say, they have no need of Faith to
rest upon Christ for imputed Righteousness to justify their persons: Such as
say they have no Mat. 1. 21. 1 These. 1. ult.
sin, say, they have no need of Christ as King to subdue their lusts; nor as
Priest, to expiate offenses; nor as Prophet to teach and instruct them; nor as
a Savior, to save them from their sins, or from wrath to come. They that have
a perfect righteousness of their own, need not be be holden to Christ for his
pure, perfect, spotless, matchless Righteousness: Such as are without sin
have no cause to repent of sin, nor yet to watch against sin: Such as are
perfect cannot say, we are unprofitable servants. But are they indeed just? then
they must live by faith, Heb. 2. 4. Are they men and not Angels? then they must
repent, Acts ^7. 30. For now he commands all men every where to repent. Surely
the best of men are but men at the best. O how bad must those men be, who make
God himself a liar? 1 John 1. 10 But if these men are absolutely perfect* how
comes it to pass, that they are afflicted and diseased as other men? how comes
it to pass that they eat, and drink, and sleep, and buy, and sell, and die as
other men? are these things consistent with an absolute perfection? surely no.
An absolute perfection is not a step short of heaven, it is heaven on this side
heaven; and they that would obtain it must step to heaven before they have it.
But,

Secondly, I answer. That this Objection lies as strong against Family prayer,
and against all other kind of prayer, as it does against closet prayer: He that
shall upon any grounds make this Objection a great bugbear to scare his soul
from Closet Prayer; he may upon the same ground make it a great bugbear to
scare his soul not only from all other kind of prayer, but from all other
duties of Religion also, whether private or public. The Spirit of this
Objection fights against all Religion at once; and therefore you should say to
it, as Christ said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. But,

Thirdly, I answer, It Is not the infirmities and weaknesses of a Christian
which are seen, lamented, bewailed and resisted, that can A Spiritual infirmity
is the sickness or indisposition of the Soul, that arises from weakness of
Grace.
obstruct or hinder the efficacy and success of his prayers: Let me clear up
this in a few instances. Jonah, you know was a man full of sinful passions, and
other weaknesses, etc. and yet his prayer was very prevalent with God, Jonah 2.
1, 2, 7, 10. compared. So Elias his prayers were exceeding prevalent with God,
he could open and shut heaven at his pleasure; and yet Jam. 3. 17.
subject to like passions as we are: Elias was a man of extraordinary sanctity
and holiness, a man that 1 King 19. 8. Romans 11 2, 3.
lived in heaven, whilst he dwelt on earth, Enech-like he walked with God, and
yet subject to like passions as we are: God did in an eminent way communicate
to him his counsel and secrets; he lay in the bosom of the father; and yet was
a man subject to like passions as we are: He was a very powerful, and prevalent
Prophet; his very name imports as much: Eli-jah signifies my strong God. In
that 1 Kings 17. 1. it is Eli-jahu, that is, the Lord he is my strong God; and
yet subject to like passions as we are: He was a man much in fasting and
prayer; he was an inferior mediator between God and his people, and yet
subject to like passions as we are. Now because some from hence might object
and say, no wonder if such a man as he was, could by his prayers open and shut
heaven at his pleasure; but I am a poor, weak, low, sinful and unworthy
creature; I am full of infirmities, weaknesses and passions; and shall my
prayers ever find access to God, and acceptance with God, or gracious answers
and returns from God? Now to obviate this objection, and to remove this
discouragement out of the thoughts and hearts of poor sinners, the Holy Ghost
adds this clause, that he was not a God, nor an Angel, but a man, and such a
man as was not exempted from common infirmities; for he had his passions,
frailties and weaknesses, as well as other Saints; intimating to us, that
infirmities in the meanest Saints should no more prejudice the acceptance and
success of their prayers with God, than they did in Elias himself. The word
Pession sometimes signifies, First, a motion of the sensual appetite, arising
from the imagination of good or ill, with some commotion of the body. Secondly,
Sometimes Passions signisie sinful infirmities, sinful perturbations of the
mind. And Thirdly, Sometimes Passion is taken more strictly for the special
affection of sinful anger and wrath, which Chrysostom calls Brevis Demon, a
short Devil. It makes a man speak he knows not what, as you may see in Jonah;
and to do he knows not what, as you may see in Saul. Now in these two last
senses, Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are; and yet a man so
potent with God, that by private prayer he could do even what he listed in the
Court of Heaven. In that 1 Samuel 21. chap. You may read of David's round lies,
and of his other failings, infirmities, and unseemly carriages before Achish
King of Gath, and for which he was turned out of the Kings presence under the
notion of a Madman; and yet at that very time he prays and prevails with God
for savor, mercy and deliverance, Psalm. 34. 4. I sought the Lord, and he heard
me, and delivered me out of all my fears. But when was this? read the Title of
the Psalm, and you shall find it; A Psalm of David, who changed his behavior
before Abimilech, who drove him away, and he departed. In that Numb. 20. 10,
11, 12. Moses his infirmities are pointed out: First, You have there his
immoderate anger. 2. His speaking to the people when he should have spoke to
the Rock, verse. 8. 3. His smiting of it, when he should only have spoken to it
with the Rod in his hand; and smiting it twice, as in a pang of passion and
impatiency. 4. his distrusting of the Lords word, verse. 12. 5. His reviling of
the people when he should have convinced them, hear ye Rebels. 6. He seems to
be so offended at his Commission, that he can hardly forbear murmuring, Must we
bring water out of the Rock? Mark Number. 12. 3.
that word, must we? O how is the meekest man in all the world transported into
passion, and anger, and unbelief, and hurried into sad indecencies; and yet
there was not a man on earth whose prayers were so powerful and prevalent with
God, as Moses his were. Psalm. 106. 23. Exodus- 32. 9,-15. Chap. 33. 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. Exodus 14. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. So King Asa was a man full of
infirmitities and weaknesses; he relyes on the King of Syria, and 2 Chronicles. 16.
7, -- 13.
on the Lord; he is very impatient, and under a great rage upon the Seers
reproof: He imprisons the Seer; he oppressed some of the people; or, as the
Hebrew has it, He crushed, or, he trampled upon some of the people at the same
time: And being greatly diseased in his feet, he sought to the Physicians, and
not to the Lord; and yet this man's prayer was wonderful prevalent with God. 2 Chronicles. 14. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. The Saints infirmities can never Psalm. 50. 15.
Isa. 30. 19. Chapter 65. 24.
make void those gracious promises, by which God stands engaged to hearken to
the prayers of his people. Gods hearing of our prayers does not depend upon
sanctification, but upon Christ's intercession; not upon what we are in our
selves, but upon what we are in the Lord Jesus; both our persons and our
prayers, are acceptable in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. When God
hears our prayers, it is neither for our own sakes, nor yet for our prayers
sake; but it is for his own sake, and his sons sake, and his glory sake, and his
promise sake, etc.

Certainly, God will never cast off his people for their infirmities.

First, It Is the glory of a man to Pro. 19. 11.
pass by infirmities: O how much more then must it be the glory of God to pass
by the infirmities of his people*

Secondly, Saints are children: and what father will cast off his children for
their infirmities, and Psalm. 103. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 12. 27.
weaknesses?

Thirdly, Saints are members of Christ's body: and what man will cut off a
member because of a scab or wart that is upon it? What man will cut off his
Nose, says Luther, because there is some filth in it?

Fourthly, Saints are Christ's purchase, they are his possession, Ephesians. 1. 22,
23. 1 Cor. 6. u't. Chapter 7. 23, 1 Pet. 13. 18, 19, 20.
his inheritance: Now what man is there that will cast away, or cast off his
purchase, his possession, his inheritance, because of thorns, bushes, or briars
that grow upon it?

Fifthly, Saints are in a marriage Hos. 2 19, 20.
covenant with God: Now what husband is there that will cast off his wife for
her failings and infirmities? So long as a man is in covenant with God, his
infirmities cannot cut him off from Gods mercy and grace. Now it is certain a man
may have very many infirmities upon him, and yet not break his covenant with
God; for no sin breaks a man's covenant with God, but such as unties the
marriage knot. As in other marriages every offense or infirmity does not
disanul the marriage union; it i^ only the breach of the marriage vow, viz.
adultery, that untyes the marriage knot: So here, it is only those sins which
breaks the covenant, which unties the marriage knot between God and the Soul:
1. When men freely subject to any lust as a new master. Or, 2. When men take
another husband; Isa. 28, 15. 18.
and this men do, when they enter into a league with sin or the world; eh^
they make a new covenant with hell and deach. Now from these mischiefs God
secures his chosen ones. In a word, If God should cast off his people for their
infirmities, then none of the sons or daughters of Adam could be saved: For
there is not a just man upon the earth, that does good and sins not, Eccl.
7. 20. Now if God will not cast off his people for their infirmities, then
certainly he will not cast off the prayers of his people, because of those
invincible infirmities that hang upon them; and therefore our infirmities
should not discourage us, or take us off from Closet-prayer, or from any other
Duties of Religion. But,

Fourthly, I answer, The more infirmities and weaknesses hang upon us, the more
cause have we to keep close and constant to our Closet duties. If grace be
weak, The omission of good diet breeds diieases.
the omission of private prayer will make it weaker. Look as he that will not
eat will certainly grow weaker and weaker: So he that will not pray in his c^et
will certainly grow weaker and weaker. If corruptions be strong, the neglect of
private prayer will make them stronger. The more the remedy is neglected, the
more the disease is strengthened. Whatsoever the distempers of a man's heart be,
they will never be abated, but augmented by the omission of private prayer. The
more bodily infirmities hang upon us the more need we have of the Physician:
and so the more sinful infirmities hang upon our souls, the more need we have
of private prayer. All sinful omissions will make work for repentance, for
hell, or for the Physician of souls. Sinful omissions lead to sinful
commissions; as you may see in the Angels that fell from heaven to hell, and in
Adams fall in Paradise.

Origin going to comfort and encourage a martyr that was to be tormented, was
himself apprehended by the Officers, and constrained either to offer to the
Idols, or to have his body abused by a Black amore that was ready for that
purpose: of which hard choice, to save his life, he bowed unto the Idol; but
afterward, making a sad confession of his foul fact, he said, That he went
forth that morning before he had been with God in his Closet; and so
peremptorily concludes, that his neglect of Prayer was the cause of his falling
into that great sin.

The neglect of one day, of one duty, of one hour, would undo us for ever, if
we had not an Advocate 1 John 2. 1, 2.
with the father. Those years, those months, those weeks, those days, those
hours that are not filled up with God, with Christ, with grace, with duty, will
certainly be filled up with vanity and folly. All omissions of duty. will more
and more unfit the soul for duty: A Key thrown by, gathers rust: A Pump not
used, will be hardly got to go: And Armor not used, will be hardly made
bright, etc. Look as sinful commissions will stab the Soul; so sinful omissions
will starve the Soul. Such as live Isa. 24. 16. Job. 16. 8.
in the neglect of private prayer may well cry out, Our leanness, our leanness.
And therefore away with all these plea's and reasonings about infirmities, and
weaknesses, and indispositions, and address your selves to Closet-prayer. But,

Fifthly, I answer, It may be thy distemper and indisposition of body is not so
great, but that thou can buy, and sell, and get gain: Notwithstanding thy
aching head, The body it self, if you set too high a price upon it, will make a
cheap Soul; and he is the most unhappy man whose outside is his best side.
and thy shooting back, and thy pained sides, and thy feeble knees, yet thou
can with Martha cumber thy self about thy worldly affairs. In that Cant. 5.
3. Christ calls upon his Spouse, to open the door, and let him in: But sin and
shifting coming into the world together, see how poorly and unworthily she
labors to shift Christ off, I have put off my Coat; how shall I put it on? I
have washed my feet; how shall I defile them? Rather than she will make no
excuse for her self, she will make a silly excuse, a worthless excuse: She was
past a child: and what a great business had it been for her to have risen to
have let in such a guest, that brings every thing with him, that heart Rev. 3.
17. 17.
can wish or need require: She was not grown so decrepid with old age, but that
she was able to make her self ready; at least, she might easily have slipped on
her morning Coat, and stepped to the door without any danger of taking cold, or
of being wet to the skin, and so Rev. 22. 12.
have let him in, who never comes empty handed; yea, who was now come full of
the dew of divine blessings to enrich her; for so some sense those words, Mine
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. O the
frivolous pretenses, and idle excuses that even gracious persons are apt
sometimes to take up to over color their neglect of duty!

But some may say, It may be the Spouse of Christ was aseep: O no; for she
says, verse. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh: She slept with open eyes, as the
Lion does; she slept but half sleep: though her outward man was drowsy, yet
her in ward man was wakeful; though the flesh took a nap, yet her spirit did
not nod.

O, but it may-be Christ made no noise, he gave no notice that he was at the
door: O yes, he knocked, he knocked and bounced by the hammer of his word, and
the hand of his Spirit; he knocked by outward corrections and inward
admonitions; he knocked by providence, and he knocked by mercies: His
importunity and vehemence for admission was very great.

O but it may-be he did but only knock, he should have called as well as
knocked; for none but madmen would open their doors in the night, except they
knew the voice of him that knocks: O yes, he did not only knock, but called
also.

O but it may-be she did not know his voice, and therefore she would not open.
No chaste wife will at unseasonable hours arise and open her doors unto a
stranger, especially in her husbands absence: O yes, she knew his voice, verse.
2. It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks: She was not so fast asleep, but
that she knew the voice of her Beloved from all other voices, and could tell
every tittle that he said: The calls of Christ were so strong, so loud, and his
pulsations so mighty, that she could not but know and confess, that it was the
voice of her Beloved, though she was not so respectful and dutiful as to obey
that voice.

O but it may-be Christ knocked and called, like a friend in his journey, only
to enquire how it was with her, or to speak to her at the Window: O no! he
speaks plainly, he speaks with authority, Open to me.

O but it may-be she had no power to open the door: O yes; for when he commands
his people to open, he Phil. 1. 6, 13. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
lends them a key to open the door, that he may enter in. Infused grace is a
living principle that will enable the Soul to open to Christ. If a man be not a
free agent to work and act by the helps of grace received, to what purpose are
counsels, commands, exhortations, and directions, given to perform this, and
that, and the other work. And certainly, it is our greatest honor and happiness
in this world to cooperate with God in those things which concern his own
glory, and our own internal, and eternal good.

O but it may-be Christ had given his Spouse some distaste, or it may-be he had
let fall some hard words, or some unkind speeches, which made her a little
froward and pettish: O no! for he owns her as his Beloved, and courts her
highly, with the most winning and amicable terms of love, My Sister, my Love,
my Dove, my Undefiled, or, my perfect one (he calls her so for her Dove like
simplicity, purity, and integrity.) All these endearing and honoring Titles,
are the Rhetoric of Divine love; and should have been as so many sacred
engagements upon her, to open to her Beloved.

O but it may-be Christ was too quick for her, it may-be he gave but a knock
and a call, and was gone before she could rise and open the door: O no! Christ
stayed till his head was filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the
night; which most passionate expression, notes the tender goodness, patience
and gentleness of our Lord Jesus, who endures far greater and harder things
for his Spouses sake, than ever Jacob did for his Rachels sake. After Christ
had suffered much for her sake, and waited her leisure a long while, she very
unkindly, and very unmannerly, and unworthily turns her back upon all his sweet
and comfortable compellations, and blessed and bleeding embracements, and turns
him off to look his lodging in some other place; so that he might well have
said, Is this thy kindness to thy Friend, thy Husband, thy Lord, to suffer him
to stand bareheaded, and that in foul weather, yea, in the night time, wooing,
entreating, and beseeching admittance; and yet to turn him off as one in whom
thy soul could take no pleasure.

Now if you will but seriously weigh all these circumstances in the Balance of
the Sanctuary, you may run and read, the fault, and folly, the weakness and
madness, the slightness and laziness of the Spouse; and by her you may make a
judgment of those sad and sinful distempers that may seize upon the best of
Saints, and see how ready the flesh is to frame excuses; and all to keep the
soul off from duty, and the doors fast bolted against the Lord Jesus.

It Is sad when men are well enough to sit and chat, and trade in their shops;
but are not well enough to pray in their closets. Certainly that man's heart is
not right with God (at least at this time), who under all his bodily distempers
can maintain and keep up his public trade with men, but is not well enough to
maintain his private trade with heaven. Our bodies are but dirt handsomely
tempered, and artificially formed; we derive our pedigree from the dirt, and
are akin to clay. One calls the body, the blot of nature; another calls it, the
Soul's beast, a sack of dung, worms-meat; another calls it, a prison, a
sepulcher; and Paul calls it, a body of vileness. Now for a man to make so much
ado about the distempers of his body, to excuse the neglects of his Soul, is
an evil made up of many evils. But really, Sir, I am so ill, and my body is so
distempered and indisposed, that I am not able to mind or meddle with the least
things of the world: Well, if this be so, then know that God has on purpose
knocked thee off from the things of this world, that thou may look the more
effectually after the things of another world. The design of God in all the
distempers that are upon thy body, is to wind thee more off from thy worldly
trade, and to work thee to follow thine heavenly trade more close. Many a man
had never found the way to his Closet, if God by bodily distempers had not
turned him out of his shop, his trade, his business, his all, etc.

Well Christians, remember this once for all; if your indisposition to
Closet-prayer does really arise from bodily distempers, then you may be
confident that the Lord will pity you much, and bear with you much, and kindly
accept of a little: You know how affectionately Parents, and ingenious Masters
do carry it toward their children and servants, when they are under bodyly
distempers and indisposition; and you may be confident that God will never
carry it worse toward you than they do toward them. Ponder often upon that,
Ezekiel. 34. 4, 16, 21, 22. verse. But,

Sixthly and lastly, I shall answer this Objection by way of distinction, thus,

First, There is a contracted indisposition to private prayer, and there is an
involuntary indisposition to private prayer: there is a contracted
indisposition, and that is when a man by his wilful sinning against light,
knowledge, conviction, etc. contracts that guilt that lies as a load upon his
Conscience: Now guilt makes the Soul shye of God; and the greater the guilt is,
the more shye the Soul is of drawing near to God in a corner. The Child that is
sensibly under guilt hides himself (as Adam did) in the day from his Fathers
Genesis 3. 7. 8.
eye, and at night he slips to bed, to avoid either a chiding, or a whipping
from his Father. Guilt makes a man fly from God, and fly from Prayer: It Is a
hard Job 11. 14, 15. Jer. 20. 3, 4.
thing to look God in the face, when guilt stares a man in the face. Guilt
makes a man a terror to himself: now when a man is a terror to himself, he is
neither fit to live, nor fit to die, nor fit to pray: When Poison gets into the
body, it works upon the spirits, and it weakens the spirits, and it endangers
life, and unfits and indisposes a man to all natural actions; it is so here,
when guilt lies heavy upon the conscience, it works upon the Soul, it weakens
the Soul, it endangers the Soul, and it does wonderfully unfit and indispose
the Soul to all holy actions. Guilt fights against our Souls, our Consciences,
1 Pet. 2. 11.
our Comforts, our Duties, yea, and our very graces also: There is nothing that
wounds and lames our graces like guilt; there is nothing that weakens and wastes
our graces like guilt; there is nothing that hinders the activity of our graces
like guilt; nor there is nothing that clouds our evidences of grace like guilt.
Look what water is to the fire, that our sinnings are to our graces, evidences,
and duties. Guilt is like Prometheus Vulture, that ever lies gnawing. It Is
better with Evagrius to lie on a Bed of straw with a good Conscience, than to
lie on a Bed of Down with a guilty Conscience. What the Probationer Disciple
said to our Savior, Matthew. 8. 19. Master, I will follow thee whithersoever
thou go; that a guilty Conscience says to the sinner, whithersoever thou
go, I will follow thee: If thou go to a fast I will follow thee, and fill
thy mind with black and dismal apprehensions of God* If thou go to a feast,
I will follow thee, and show thee the Handwriting on the Wall: If thou go
abroad, Dan. 5 5.
I will follow thee, and make thee afraid of every Leaf that wags; thou shall
look upon every Bush as an armed man, and upon every man as a Devil: If thou
stayest at home, I will follow thee from room to room, and fill thee with
horror and terror: If thou lie down to rest, I will follow thee with
fearful dreams and tormenting apparitions: If thou go into thy Closet* I
will follow thee, and make thy very Closet a Hell to hold thee.

It is storied of King Richard the third, that after he had murdered his two
Nephews in the Tower, guilt lay so hard upon his Conscience, that his sleeps
were very unquiet; for he would often leap out of his Bed in the dark, and
catching his sword in his hand (which hung by his bed side) he would go
distractedly about his Chamber seeking for the Traitor.

So Charles the ninth of France, after he had made the streets of Paris run down
with the blood of the Protestants, he could seldom take any sound sleep, nor
could he endure to be awakened out of his sleep without music.

Judge Morgan that passed the Sentence of Condemnation upon Jane Gray (a
virtuous Lady), shortly after fell mad, and in his raving cried out continualy,
Take away the Lady Jane from me, Take away the Lady Jane from me, and in that
horror ended his wretched life.

James Abyes going to execution for Christ's sake, as he went along he gave his
money and his clothes to one and another, till he had given all away to his
shirt; whereupon one of the Sheriffs men fell a-scoffing and deriding of him,
and told him, that he was a madman, and an heretic, and not to be believed;
but as soon as the good man was executed, this wretch was struck mad, and threw
away his clothes, and cried out, that James Abyes was a good man, and gone to
Heaven, but he was a wicked man and was damned, and thus he continued crying
out till his death: Certainly he that derides, or smites a man for walking
according to the word of the Lord, the Lord will first or last sosmite and
wound that man's Conscience, that all the Physicians in the world shall not heal
it.

Now if thy indisposition to private prayer springs from contracted guilt upon
thy Conscience, then thy best way is speedily to renew thy Repentance, and
greatly to judge and humble thine own soul, and so to act Faith afresh upon the
blood of Christ, both for pardoning mercy, and for purging grace. When a man is
stung with Guilt it is his highest wisdom in the world to look up to the Brazen
Serpent, and not to spend his time, or create torments to his own soul by
perpetual poring upon his guilt: When Guilt upon the Conscience works a man to
water the earth with tears, and to make Heaven ring with his groans, then it
works kindly: When the sense of Guilt drives a man to God, to Duty, to the
Throne of Grace, then it will not be long night with that man: He that thinks
to shift off Private Prayer under the pretense of Guilt, does but in that
increase his own Guilt: Neglect of Duty will never get Guilt off the Conscience.

But then there is an involuntary indisposition to private prayer; as in a sick
man, who would work and walk, but cannot, being hindered by his disease; or as
it is with a man that has a great chain on his leg, he would very fain walk or
get away, but his chain hinders him. Now if your indisposition to private
prayer be an involuntary indisposition, then God will in mercy, in course, both
pardon it and remove it.

Secondly, There is a total indisposition to private prayer, and there is a
partial indisposition to private prayer. A total indisposition to private
prayer is, when a man has no Jer. 4. 22. Chap. 44. 17, 18, 19.
mind at all to private prayer, nor no will at all to private prayer, nor no
love at all to private prayer, nor no delight, nor no heart at all to private
prayer; now where this frame of heart is, there all is naught, very naught,
stark naught. A partial indisposition to private prayer is, when a man has
some will to private prayer, though not such a will as once he had; and some
mind to private prayer, though not such a mind as once he had; and some
affections to private prayer, though not such warm and burning affections as
once he had. Now if your indisposition to private prayer be total, then you
must wait upon the Lord in all his appointments, for a changed nature, and for
union with Christ; but if your indisposition to private prayer be only partial,
then the Lord will certainly pardon it, and in the very use of holy means in
time remove it. But,

Thirdly and lastly, there is a transient, accidental, occasional, or fleeting
indisposition to private prayer; and there is a customary, a constant, or
permanent indisposition to private prayer. Now a transient, accidental,
occasional, or fleeting indisposition to that which is good, may be found upon
the best of Saints, as you may see in Moses, Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and
in Jeremiah, Jer. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18. 19. and Chap. 20. 9. and in Jonah,
chap. 1 and in David, Psalm. 39. 2, 3. Now if this be the indisposition that
thou art under, then thou may be confident, that it will certainly work off
by degrees, Isa. 65. 2. Jer. 9. 3.
as theirs did that I have last cited. But then there is a customary, a
constant or permanent indisposition to private prayer, and to all other holy
Duties of Religion: Now if this be the indisposition that thou art under, then
I may safely conclude, that thou art in the very gall of bitterness, and in
Acts 8. 21, 22, 23.
the bond of iniquity, and thy work lies not in complaining of thy
indisposition, but in repenting and believing, and in laboring for a change of
thy heart and state; for till thy heart, thy state, be changed, thou will
remain for ever indisposed, both to Closet-Prayer, and to all other Duties of
Religion and godliness. To see a sinner sailing Hell-ward with Wind and Tide
on his side to alter his course, and Tack about for Heaven, to see the earthly
man become heavenly, the carnal man become spiritual, the proud man become
humble, the vain man become serious; to see a sinner move contrary to himself
in the ways of Christ and holiness; is as strange, as to see the earth fly
upward, or the Bowl run contrary to its own Bias; and yet, a divine power of
God upon the Soul can effect it, and this must be effected before the sinner
will be graciously inclined, and sincerely disposed to Closet-prayer. And let
thus much suffice by way of Answer to this Objection also.

Now for the better management of this great Duty, viz. Closet-prayer, I
beseech you take my advice and counsel in these 11. following particulars.

First, Be frequent in Closet-prayer, and not now and then only. He will never
make any yearnings of Closet-prayer, that is not frequent in Closet-prayer: Now
that this Counsel may stick, Consider.

First, Other eminent Servants of the Lord have been frequent in this blessed
work. Nehem. 1. 6. Let thine earnow be attentive, and thine eyes open, that
thou may hear the Prayer of thy Servant, which I pray before thee day and
night. So Daniel, he kneeled Dan. 6. 10
upon his knees three times a day and prayed, and gave thanks before his God,
as he did before time. So David, My voice shall thou hear in the morning, and
in the evening will Psalm. 5. 3.
I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. So Psalm. 88. 13. But unto thee
have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. So Psalm.
119. 147. I prevented the Psalm. 119. 164.
dawning of the morning, and cried unto the Lord. So Psalm. 55. 17. Evening, and
morning, and at noon, will I pray and cry aloud. Yea, he Exodus 29 38, 39. Numb.
28. 3. Mat. 6. 11.
was Vir orationis for his frequency in it. Psalm. 109. 4. For my love they are
my adversaries: But I give my self unto prayer: Or, as the Hebrew may be read,
But I am a man of prayer.

Of Carolus Magnus it was said, (Carolus plus cum Deo quam hominibus loquitur)
that he spoke more with God than with men.

Secondly, Consider the blessed Scripture does not only enjoin this Duty, but
it requires frequency in it also. Luke. 18. 1. 1 These. 5. 17. Col. 4. 2. In the
former part of this discourse, I have given light into these Scriptures; and
therefore the bare citing of them must now suffice.

Thirdly, Christ was frequent in Private Prayer, as you may easily see by
comparing of these Scriptures together; Mark 1. 35. Mat. 14. 23. Luke. 22. 39.
John. 18. 2. In my second Argument for Private Prayer you may see these
Scriptures opened and amplified. But,

Fourthly, Consider that you have the examples of the very worst of men in this
case. Papists are frequent in their private Devotions. And the Mahometans, what
occasion soever they have, either by profit or pleasure to divert them, will
yet pray five times every day. Yea, the very Heathens sacrificed to Hercules
morning and evening upon the great Altar at Rome. Now shall blind nature do
more than grace? But,

Fifthly, Consider, you cannot have too frequent Communion with God, you cannot
have too frequent intercourse with Jesus, you cannot have your hearts too
frequently filled with joy unspeakable and full of glory, and with that peace
that passes understanding, you cannot have heaven too frequently brought down
into your hearts, nor you cannot have your hearts too frequently carried up to
heaven, and therefore you cannot be too frequent in Closet-prayer. But,

Sixthly, Consider, that you are under frequent wants, and frequent sins, and
frequent snares, and frequent 1 Pet. 5. 8. Job. 1. 7.
temptations, and frequent allurements, and frequent trials, and frequent
cares, and frequent fears, and frequent favors; and therefore you had need be
frequent with God in your Closets. But,

Seventhly, Consider, you are the favorites of heaven, you are greatly
beloved, you are highly honored, you are exceedingly esteemed and valued in
the Court of the Most High; and remember, that the Petitions of many weak
Christians, and of many benighted Christians, and of many tempted Christians,
and of many clouded Christians, and of many staggering Christians, and of many
doubting Christians, and of many bewildred Christians, and of many fainting
Christians, etc. are put into your hands, for a quick and speedy dispatch to
the Throne of Grace; so that you had need be frequent in your Closets, and
improve your interest in heaven, or else many of these poor hearts may be
wronged, betrayed, and prejudiced by your neglect. Such as are Favorites in
Princes Courts, if they are active, diligent, careful and watchful, they may
do much good for others, they may come as often as they please into their
Princes presence, and with Queen Esther, have Esth. 8.
for asking what they please, both for themselves, and others, Esth. 7. O what
a world of good may such do for others that are Gods Favorites, if they would
be but frequent with God in their Closets!

O Sirs, If you have not that love, that regard, that pity, that compassion to
your own souls, as you should have; yet, O let not others suffer by your
neglect of private prayer! O let not Zion suffer! O let not any particular
Saint suffer by your being found seldom in your Closets.

Certainly, It might have gone better with the Churches of Christ, and with the
concernments of Christ, and with many of the poor people of Christ, if most
Christians had been more frequent with God in their Closets. But,

Eighthly and lastly, Consider, that this liberty to approach nigh Sanguis
Christi clavis Coeli.
to God in your Closets, cost Christ his dearest blood, Ephesians. 2. 13. Heb. 10.
20. Now he that is not frequent with God in his Closet, tells all about him,
that he sets no great value upon that liberty, that Christ has purchased with
his blood. The incomparable, the unparalleled 1 Pet. 1. 19.
price which Christ has paid down upon the nail (above sixteen hundred years
ago) that we might have liberty and free access to his Father in your Closets,
argues very strongly, yea irrefragably, the superlative excellency of that
liberty! O therefore let us improve to purpose this blessed purchase of our
Lord Jesus by being frequent with God in our closets. It Is disputed by some
whether one drop of Christ's blood was sufficient for the pardon of our sins and
redemption of our souls. My intention is not to dispute, but to offer a few
things to your Consideration.

First, It must be granted, that One little drop of Christ's blood is more
worth than heaven and earth. Luther.
by reason of the hypostatical union, a drop of Christ's blood was of an
inestimable worth and excellency; and the value of his passion is to be
measured by the dignity of his person. But,

Secondly, a proportion was to be observed betwixt the punishment due to men,
and that which What is the blood of the Grape, or the blood of a son, an only
son, to the blood of a Savior.
was suffered for man; that his sufferings, might be satisfactory, two things
were necessary, Poenae gravitas, as well as personae dignitas. That the least
drop of Christ's blood was not sufficient for the redemption of our souls may
thus appear.

First, If it were, then the Circumcision of Christ was enough, for there was a
drop, if not many drops of blood shed.

Secondly, Then his being Crowned with a crown of Thorns, was sufficient; for
it is most probable, that they drew blood-from him

Thirdly, Then all Christ's sufferings besides were superfluous and vain.

Fourthly, Then God was unjust and unrighteous to take more than was due to his
justice. But for any man to affirm that God has taken beyond what was his just
due, is high blasphemy.

Fifthly, Then Christ was weak and imprudent to pay more than he needed; for
what need was there of his dearest heart blood, if a drop from his hand would
have saved our souls. Let Schoolmen fancy what they please, it is certain,
that not one dram of that bitter Cup that Christ drunk off could be abated, in
order to his Fathers full satisfaction, and man's eternal redemption. Christ
has given under his own hand that it was necessary that he should suffer many
things, Mark. 8. 3. Luke 24. 26. O Sirs, shall Christ shed not only a few drops
of blood, but his very heart blood, to purchase you a freedom and liberty to be
as often in your Closets with his Father as you please; and will you only now
and then give God a visit in private? the Lord forbid.

My Second Advise and counsel is this, Take the fittest seasons and
opportunities that possibly you can for Closet-prayer. Many take unfit seasons
for private prayer, which do more obstruct the importunity of the soul in
prayer, than all the suggestions and instigations of Satan. As,

First, When the body is drowsy Cant. 3. 1.
and sleepy, this is a very unfit season for closet-prayer. Take heed of laying
cushions of sloth under your knees, or pillows of idleness under your elbows,
or of mixing nods with your petitions, or of being drowsily devoted when you
draw near to God in your closets.

Secondly, When a man's head and heart is filled with worldly 1 Cor. 7. 35.
Ezekiel. 33. 31.
cares and distractions, this is a very unfit season for closet-prayer.

When Dinah must needs be gadding abroad to see fashions, Shechem, Prince of
that country, meets with her, and forces her virginity. So when our hearts
Dinah-like must needs be a roving and gadding abroad after the things of the
world, then Satan, the Prince of the air, usually seizes upon us, commits a
rape upon our souls, and either leads us off from prayer, or else he does so
distract us in prayer, that it were better not to have prayed at all, than to
have offered the sacrifice of foolish and distracted prayer.

I have read a story, how that one offered to give his horse to his fellow upon
condition he would but say the Lords Prayer, and think upon nothing but God;
the proffer was accepted, and he began, Our Father, which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. But I must have the bridle too (said he) no, nor the
Horse neither (said the other) for thou have lost both already. The application
is easy.

Certainly, the most free and lively seasons for Closet-prayer is the mornings,
before a man's spirit be blunted or cooled, deadned, damped, or flatted by
worldly businesses. A man should speak with God in his Closet, before he speaks
with his worldly affairs and occasions. A man should say to all his worldly
businesseg, as Abraham said unto his young men, when he went to offer up his
only Isaac, abide you here, and I will go yonder and worship, and then return
to you again. He that will attend Closet-prayer without distraction or
disturbance, must not, first, slip out of the world into his Closet, but he
must first slip into his Closet before he be compassed about with a crowd of
worldly employments.

It was a Precept of Pythagoras, that when we enter into the Temple to worship
God, we must not so much as speak or think of any worldly business, least we
make Gods service an idle, perfunctory and lazy recreation: The same I may say
of Closet-prayer.

Jerome complains very much of his distractions, dullness, and indisposedness to
prayer, and chides himself thus, What do thou think, that Jonah prayed thus
when he was in the Whales belly; or Daniel when he was among the Lions; or the
Thief when he was upon the Cross?

Thirdly, When men or women are under rash and passionate 1 Timothy 2. 8.
distempers; for when passions are up, holy affections are down; and this is a
very unfit season for Closet-prayer; for such prayers will never reach Gods
ear, which do not first warm our own hearts. In the Muscovy Churches, if the
Minister mistake in reading, or stammer in pronouncing his words, or speak any
word that is not well heard, the hearers do very much blame him, and are ready
to take the book from him, as unworthy to read therein: And certainly God is no
less offended with the giddy, rash, passionate, precipitate, and inconsiderate
prayers of those, who without a deliberate understanding do send their
petitions to heaven in post-hast. Solomon's advice is worthy of all commendation
and acceptance, Be not Eccl. 5 2.
rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty, to utter any thing before
God: Or as the Hebrew may be read, Let not thy heart through have be so
troubled or disturbed, as to tumble over, and throw out words without wisdom
or premeditation. Good men are apt many times to be too hasty, rash, and
unadvised in their prayers, complaints and deprecations; Psalm. 31. 2. 2 Psalm.
116. 11 Job. 10. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 18. 15. 18. Jon. 4. 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 20. 20, 21.
witness David, Job, Jeremiah, Jonah, and the Disciples. No Christian to him
that does wisely and seriously weigh over his prayers and praises before he
pours out his soul before the Lord. He never repents of his requests, who first
duly deliberates what to request; but he that blurts out whatsoever lies
uppermost, and that brings into the presence of God his rash, raw, tumultuary,
and indigested petitions, confessions, complaints, etc. he does but provoke
God, he does but brawl with God, instead of praying to him or wrestling with
him. Suitors at Court observe their fittest times and seasons of begging, they
commonly take that very nick of time, when they have the King in a good mood,
and so seldom or never come off but with good success.

Sometimes God strongly enclines the heart to Closet-prayer, sometimes he
brings the heart before hand into a praying frame, sometimes both body and soul
are more enlivened, quickened, raised, and divinely enflamed than at other
times; sometimes Conscience is more stirring, working, and tender, etc. O now
strike while the Iron is hot, O now lay hold on all such blessed opportunities,
by applying of thy self to private prayer. O Sirs, can you take your fittest
times, seasons and opportunities for plowing, and sowing, and reaping, and
buying, and selling, and eating, and drinking, and marrying, etc. And cannot you
as well take your fittest times and seasons to seek the Lord in your Closets?
Must the best God be put off with the least and worst of your time? the Lord
forbid. Neglect not the seasons of grace, slip not your opportunities for
Closet-prayer; thousands have lost their seasons and their souls together.

My Third Advice and counsel is this, Be marvelous careful that you do not
perform Closet Duties merely to still your Consciences: you must perform them
out of Conscience, but you must not perform them only to quiet Conscience. Some
have such a light set up in their understandings that they cannot omit An ill
Conscience (says Austin) is like a scolding wife; a man (says he) that has
an ill Conscience he cares not to be at at home, he cares not to look into his
own soul, but loves to be abroad.
Closet-prayer, but Conscience is upon their backs, Conscience is still
upbraiding and disquieting of them, and therefore they are afraid to neglect
Closet-prayer, least Conscience should question, arraign and condemn them for
their neglects. Sometimes when men have greatly sinned against the Lord,
Conscience becomes impatient, and is still accusing, condemning, and terrifying
of them; and now in these Agonies they will run to their Closets, and cry, and
pray, and mourn, and confess, and bitterly bewail their transgressions, but all
this is only to quiet their Consciences; and sometimes they find upon their
performances of Closet-duties, that their Consciences are a little allayed and
quieted; and for this very end and purpose do they take up Closet-prayer, as a
charm to allay their Consciences; and when the storm is over, and their
Consciences quieted, then they lay aside Closet-prayer, (as the Monk did the
net when the fish was caught) and are ready to transgress again. O Sirs, take
heed of this, for this is but plain hypocrisy, and will be bitterness in the
end. He that performs Closet-prayer only to bribe his Conscience that it may
not be clamorous, or to stop the mouth of Conscience that it may not accuse him
for sin, he will at length venture upon such a trade, such a course of sinning
against Conscience, as will certainly turn his troubled Conscience into a
seared Conscience: And a seared Conscience is like a sleepy Lion, when 2 Timothy
4. 2.
he awakes he roars and tears his prey in pieces: and so will a seared
Conscience, when it is awakened, roar and tear the secure sinner in pieces.

When Dionysius Conscience was awakened, he was so troubled with fear and
horror of Conscience, that not daring to trust his best friends with a razor,
he used to singe his beard with burning coals, as Cicero reports. All the mercy
that a seared, a benumbed Conscience, does afford the sinner, when it does most
befriend him, when it deals most seemingly kind with him, is this, that it will
not cut, that it may kill; it will not convince, that it may confound; it will
not accuse, that it may condemn; it will spare the sinner a while, that it may
torment him for ever; it will spare him here, that it may gnaw him hereafter;
it will not strike, till it be too late for the sinner to ward off the blow. O
cruel mercy to observe the sin, and let alone the sinner, till the gates of
mercy be shut upon him, and hell stands gaping to devour him. Genesis 4. 7. Sin
lies at the door. The Hebrew word Robets signifies to lie down, or couch, like
some wild beast at the mouth of his cave, as if he were asleep, but indeed
watches and waketh, and is ready Amama quotes Tarnovius, who mentions a sort
of men, that brought in an opinion, which he calls a new-Gospel, that if a man
perform the external duties of Religion, viz. if he go to the Church, hear the
word, pray, etc. it was sufficient to salvation.
to fly at all that come near it. O Sirs, sin is rather couchant than dormant,
it sleeps dogs sleep, that it may take the sinner at the greater advantage, and
fly the more furiously in his face. But,

My Fourth Advice and counsel is this, Take heed of resting upon Closet-duties;
take heed of trusting in Closet-duties. Noah's Dove made use of her wings, but
she did not trust in her wings, but in the Arc: So you must make use of
Closet-duties, but you must not trust in your Closet-duties, but in Jesus, of
whom the Ark was but a Type. There are many that go a round of duties, (as
mill-horses go their round in a mill) and rest upon them when they have done,
using the means as mediators, and so fall short of Christ and heaven at once.
Closet-duties rested in, will as eternally undo a man, as the greatest and
foulest enormities; open wickedness slayes her thousands, but a secret resting
upon duties slayes her ten thousands: Multitudes bleed inwardly of this
disease, and die for ever. Open profaneness is the broad dirty way that leads
to hell, but Closet-duties rested in is a sure way, though a cleaner way to
hell. Profane persons and formal professors shall meet at last in one hell. Ah
Christians, do not make Closet-duties your money, least you and your money
perish together.

The Phoenix gathers sweet odoriferous sticks in Arabia together, and then blows
them with her wings, and burns her self with them; so do many shining
professors burn themselves by resting in their duties and services. You know in
Noah's flood all that were not in the Ark, though they climbed up the tallest
Trees, and the highest mountains and hills, yet were really drowned; so let men
climb up to this duty and that, yet if they don't get into Christ, they will be
really damned. It Is not thy Closet, but thy Christ that must save thee. If a
man be not interested in Christ, he may perish with Our Father in his mouth.
It Is as natural to a man to rest in his duties, as it is for him to rest in his
bed.

This was Bernards temptation, who being a little assisted in duty, could
stroke his own head with been fecisti Bernarde, O Bernard this was gallantly
done, now cheer up thy self. Ah how apt is man, when he has been a little
assisted, heated, melted, enlarged, etc. in a way of duty, to go away and
stroke himself, Isa. 50, ult.
and bless himself, and hug himself, and warm himself with the sparks, with
the fire of his own kindling.

Adam was to win life and wear Genesis 2. 2.
it, he was to be saved by his doings, Do this and live: Hence it is that Acts
2. 37. Chap. 16. 30.
all his posterity are so prone to seek for salvation by doing; What shall we
do to be saved? and good Master, Mark 10. 17, 20.
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Like Father, like Son. But
if our own duties or doings were sufficient to save us, to what purpose did
Christ leave his Fathers bosom, and lay down his dearest life, etc.
Closet-duties rested in may pacify Conscience for a time; but this will not
always hold: When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Hos. 5. 13.
Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King
Jareb; yet could they not heal him, nor cure him of his wound. If we rest on
Closet-duties, or on any thing else on this side Christ, we shall find them as
weak as the Assyrian, or as Jareb; we shall find to our cost, that they cannot
help us nor heal us; they cannot comfort us, nor cure us of our wounds. As
creatures, so duties, were never true to any that have trusted in them. When
the Israelites were in great Judge. 10. 14.
distress, the Lord bids them go and cry unto the gods which they had chosen,
and let them deliver you (says God) in the time of your tribulation. O Sirs,
if when you are under distress of Conscience, or lying upon a dying Bed, God
should say to you, go to your Closet-prayers and performances, that you have
made and rested in; go to your Closet-tears that you have shed and rested in,
and let them save you and deliver you; Oh what miserable saviors and
comforters would they be unto you? Look what the Ark of God was to the
Phylistins, that Closet-duties 1 Samuel 5.
are to Satan; he trembles every time he sees a poor sinner go into his Closet,
and come out of his Closet resting and glorying in Jesus, and not in his
duties; but when he sees a poor creature confide in his Closet-duties, and rest
upon his Closet-duties, then he rejoices, then he claps his hands and sings
ahah so would I have it. Orest not on any thing on this side Jesus Christ; say
to your graces, say to your duties, say to your holiness, you are not my
Savior, you are not my Mediator; and therefore you are not to be trusted to,
you are not to be rested in. It Is my duty to perform Closet-duties, but it is my
sin to rely upon them, or to put confidence in them; do them I must, but glory
in them I must not. He that rests in his Closet-duties, he makes a savior of
his Closet-duties. Let all your Closet-duties lead you to Jesus, and leave you
more in communion Heb. 7. 25.
with him, and in dependence upon him; and then thrice happy will you be. Let
all thy Closet-prayers and tears, thy Closet-fastings and meltings, be a Star
to guide thee to Jesus, a Jacobs I adder by which thou may ascend into the
bosom of Eternal Loves, and then thou art safe for ever.

Ah it is sad to think, how most men have forgotten their resting place, as the
Lord complains, My Jer. 50. 6.
people have been like lost sheep, their Shepherds have caused them* to go
astray, and have turned them away to the Mountains; they have gone from
mountain to hill, and forgotten their resting place. Ah how many poor souls are
there, that wander from mountain to hill, from one duty to another, and here
they will rest, and there they will rest, and all on this side their resting
place! O Sirs, it is God himself that is your resting place, it is his free
grace, it is his singular mercy, it is his infinite love that is your resting
place; it is the bosom of Christ, the favor of Christ, the satisfaction of
Christ, and the pure, perfect, spotless, marchless, and glorious
righteousness of Christ, that is your resting place; and therefore say to all
your Closet-duties and performances, farewell; prayer farewell, reading
farewell, fasting farewell, tears farewell, sighs and groans farewell,
meltings and humblings I will never trust more to you, I will never rest more
on you; but I will now return to my resting place, I will now rest only in God
and Christ, I will now rest wholly in God and Christ, I will now rest for ever
in God and Christ.

It was the saying of a precious Saint, that he was more afraid of his duties
than of his sins; for the one made him often proud, the other made him always
humble. But,

My fifth advice and counsel is this, Labor to bring your hearts into all your
Closet-prayers and performances: Look that your tongues and your hearts keep
time and tune. Psalm. 17. 1. Give ear unto my prayer, that goes not out of
feigned lips; or, as it is in the Hebrew, without lips of deceit. Heart and
tongue must go together; word and work, lip and life, prayer and practice,
must echo one to another, or else thy prayers and thy soul will be lost
together; the labor of the lips, and the travail of the heart must go together.

The Egyptians of all fruits made choice of the Peach to consecrate Plutark.
to their Goddess, and for no other cause, but that the fruit thereof is like
to ones heart, and the leaf like to ones tongue. These very Heathens in the
worship of their gods thought it necessary that men's hearts and tongues should
go together. Ah Christians, when in your Closet-duties your hearts and your
tongues go together, then you make that sweet and delightful melody, that is
most taking and pleasing to the King of Kings. The very soul of prayer lies in
the 1 Samuel 1. 15.
pouring out of the Soul before God. Psalm. 42. 4. When I remember these things,
I pour out my soul in me. So the Israelites poured out their souls like water
before the Lord: So the Church, The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to
the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea,
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early, Isa. 26. 8, 9. So Lament. 3.
41. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens. So Heb.
10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, etc. So Romans 1. 9. For God is my
witness whom I serve in the Spirit. 1 Cor. 14 15. I will pray with the spirit,
and sing with the spirit. Phil. 3. 3. We are the Circumcision which worship
God in the spirit. Under the Law the inward parts were only to be offered to
God in sacrifice; the skin belonged to the Priests; whence we may easily
gather, that truth in the inward parts, is that which is most pleasing in a
sacrifice. When the Athenians would know of the Oracle the cause of their often
unprosperous successes in battle against the Lacedaemonians, seeing they offered
the choycest things they could get, in sacrifice to the gods, which their
enemies did not, the Oracle gave them this answer, that the gods were better
pleased with their inward supplication without ambition, than with all their
outward pomp in costly Sacrifices. Ah Sirs, the reason why so many are so
unsuccessful in their Closet-duties and services is, because there is no more
of their hearts in them. No man can make sure work, or happy work in prayer,
but he that makes heart work on it. When a man's heart is in his prayers, then
great and sweet will be his returns from heaven; that is no prayer in which the
heart of the person bears no part. When the Soul is separated from the body the
man is dead; and so when the heart is separated from the lip in prayer, the
prayer is dead.

The Jews at this day write upon the walls of their Synagogues these words,
Tephillah belo cavannah ceguph belo neshamah; that is, a prayer without the
heart (or, without the intention of the affection) is like a body without a
soul.

In the Law of Moses the Priest was commanded to wash the inwards and the feet
of the Sacrifices in water, and this was done, says Philo, not without a
mystery, to teach us to keep our hearts and affections clean when we draw nigh
to God. In all your Closet-duties God looks first and most to your hearts, My
Son Pro. 23. 26.
give me thy heart. It is not a piece, it is not a corner of the heart, that
will satisfy the maker of the heart; the heart is a treasure, a bed of spices,
a royal throne wherein he delights. God looks not at the clegancy of your
prayers, to see how neat they are; nor yet at the Geometry of your prayers, to
see how long they are; nor yet at the Arithmetic of your prayers, to see how
many they are; nor yet at the Music of your prayers, nor yet at the sweetness
of your voice, nor yet at the Logic of your prayers; but at the sincerity of
your prayers, how hearty they are. There is no prayer acknowledged, approved,
accepted, recorded, or rewarded by God, but that wherein the heart is sincerely
and wholly. The true mother would not have the Psalm. 51. 17. James 1. 8.
child divided. As God loves a broken and a contrite heart, so he loathes a
divided heart. God neither loves halting nor halving, he will be served truly
and totally. The Royal Law is, Thou shall love and serve the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Among the Heathens, when the beasts were
cut up for sacrifice, the first thing the Priest looked upon Pro. 21. 27. Isa.
1. 11, 12. Chap. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32. Zech. 7. 4, 5,
6. 2 Chronicles. 25 1, 2. Psalm. 78. 36, 37.
was the heart, and if the heart was naught, the sacrifice was rejected.
Verily, God rejects all those services and sacrifices, wherein the heart is
not, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together. Prayer
without the heart is but as sounding brass or a tinckling Cymbal. Prayer is
only lovely and weighty, as the heart is in it, and no otherwise. It is not the
lifting up of the voice, nor the wringing of the hands, nor the beating of the
breasts, nor an affected tone, nor studied notions, nor seraphical expressions,
but the stirrings of the heart, that God looks at in prayer. God hears no more
than the heart speaks: if the heart be dumb. God will certainly be deaf; no
prayer takes with God, but that which is the travel of the heart.

The same day Julius Caesar came to the imperial dignity, sitting in his Golden
Chair, he offered a beast in Sacrifice to the gods; but when the beast was
opened, it was without a heart, which the South-sayers looked upon as an ill
omen. It Is a sad omen, that thou will rather provoke the Lord than prevail with
him, who art habitually heartlesse in thy Closet-duties. Of the heart God
seems to say to us, as Joseph did to his Brethren, concerning Benjamin, Ye
shall not see my face without it.

It was the speech of blessed Bradford, that he would never leave a Duty, till
he had brought his heart into the frame of the duty; he would not leave
confession of sin, till his heart was broken for sin; he would not leave
petitioning for grace, till his heart was quickened and enlivened, in a hopeful
expectation of more grace; he would not leave gratulation, till his heart was
enlarged with the sense of the mercies he enjoyed, and quickened in the return
of praise.

My sixth advice and counsel is this, Be fervent, be warm, be importunate with
God in all your Closet-duties and performances. James 5. 17. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; or as the Greek has it, the
working prayer; that is, such working (...).
prayer as sets the wholeman on work, as sets all the faculties of the soul,
and all the graces in the Psalm. 55. 1. Psalm. 61. 1. Psalm. 64. 1. Psalm. 88. 1,
13. Psalm. 119. 164. Jon. 2. 1, 2. Joel. 2. 13. Psalm. 119. 145, 147. Psalm. 119.
20.
soul at work; the word signifies such a working as notes the liveliest
activity that can be. Certainly all those usual phrases, of crying, wrestling
and striving with God, which are scattered up and down in Scripture, do
strongly argue that holy importunity, and sacred violence that the Saints of
old have expressed in their addresses to God. Fervency feathers the wings of
prayer, and makes them fly the swifter to Heaven. An Arrow if it be drawn up
but a little way, flies not far; but if it be drawn up to the head, it will fly
far, and pierce deeply: So fervent Qui timide rogat, docet negare, says the
Philosopher.
prayer flies as high as Heaven, and will certainly bring down blessings from
thence. Cold prayers bespeak a denial, but fervent prayers offer a sacred
violence both to heaven and earth. Look as in a painted fire there is no heat;
so in a cold prayer there is no heat, no warmth, no omnipotency, no devotion,
no blessing. Cold prayers are like Arrows without heads, as swords without
edges, as Birds without wings, they pierce not, they cut not, they fly not up
to heaven. Such prayers as have no heavenly fire in them, do always freez
before they reach as high as heaven: But fervent prayer is very prevalent with
God, Acts 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made
without ceasing. The Greek word (...) signifies instant prayer, earnest prayer,
stretched-out prayer, prayer stretched-out upon the tenters, as it were. These
gracious souls did in prayer strain and stretch themselves, as men do that are
running in a race; they prayed with all the strength of their souls, and with
all the fervency of their spirits, and accordingly they carried the day with
God, as you may see in the following verses. So Acts 26. 7. Unto which promise
our Twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night, or rather as the Greek
has it, (...) in a stretched-out manner, serving God day and night. These
Twelve Tribes (or the godly Jews of the Twelve Tribes of Israel) stretched out
their hearts, their affections, their graces, to the utmost in prayer. In all
your private retirements, do as the Twelve Tribes did. Romans 12. 11. Fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord. The Greek word (...) signifies seething hot. God
loves to see his people zealous and warm in his service: Without fervency of
spirit no service finds acceptance in heaven. God is a pure act, and he loves
that his people should be lively and active in his service, verse. 12.
Continuing instant in prayer; (...) continuing with all your might in prayer.
It Is a Metaphor from hunting dogs, that will never give over the game till they
have got it. Romans 15. 30. That ye strive together with me, in your prayers to
God for me; (...) strive mightily, strive as Championsstrive, even to an Agony,
as the word imports: It Is a military word, and notes such fervent wrestling or
striving, as is for life and death. Col. 4. 12. Always laboring fervently for
you in prayer: The Greek word (...) that is here used, signifies to strive or
wrestle, as those do that strive for mastery; it notes the vehemence and
fervor of Epaphras his prayers for the Colossians. Look as the wrestlers do
bend, and writhe, and stretch, and strain, every joint of their bodies, that
they may be victorious; so Epaphras did bend, and writh, and stretch and strain
every joint of his soul (if I may so speak) that he might be victorious with
God upon the Colossians account. So when Jacob was with God alone, ah how
earnest Genesis 32. 24, -- 27. Hos. 12. 4, 5.
and fervent was he in his wrestlings with God! he wrestles and weeps, and
weeps and wrestles; he tugs hard with God, he holds his hold, and he will not
let God go, till as a Prince he had prevailed with him. Fervent prayer is the
Souls contention, the Souls struggling with God; it is a sweating work, it is
the sweat and blood of the soul, its a laying out to the uttermost all the
strength and powers of the Soul. He that would gain victory over God in private
prayer, must strain every string of his heart; he must in beseeching God,
besiedge him, and so get the better of him; he must be like importunate
beggars, that will not be put off with frowns, or silence, or sad answers.
Those that would be masters of their requests, must, like the importunate
Widow, press God so far, as to put him to an holy blush (as I may say with
reverence:) They must with an holy impudence (as Basil speaks) make God ashamed
to look them in the face, if he should deny the importunity of theirs souls.

Had Abraham had a little more Dor. Don. Fol. p. 522. Genesis 18. 22, 23.
of this impudence (says one) when he made suit for Sodom, it might have done
well: Abraham brought down the price to ten righteous, and there his modesty
staid him; had he gone lower, God only knows what might have been done, for God
went not away (says the Text) till he had left communing with Abraham, that
is, till Abraham had no more to say to God: Abraham left over asking, before
God left over granting; he left over praying, before God left over bating; and
so Sodom was lost.

O the heavenly fire, the holy fervency that was in Daniels Closet-prayer! O
Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer Dan. 9. 19.
not for thine own sake. Look as there be two kinds of Antidotes against
Poison, viz. hot, and cold; so there are two kinds of Antidotes against all the
troubles of this life, viz. fervent prayers, and holy patience; the one hot,
the other cold; the one quickening, and the other quenching, and holy Daniel
made use of them both. Fervency to prayer, is as the fire was to the spices in
the Censor, or as wings to the Bird, or as oil to the wheels; and this Daniel
found by experience. God looks not for any James with horny knees, through
assiduity of prayer; nor for any Bartholomew with a Century of prayers for the
morning, and as many for the evening; but for fervency of spirit in prayer,
which alone carries all with God. Feeble prayers, like weak pangs go over, and
never brings a mercy to the birth. Cold prayers are stillborn Children, in whom
the Father of spirits can take no pleasure. Look as a painted man is no man,
and as painted fire is no fire; so a cold prayer is no prayer. Such prayers
never win upon the heart of God, that do not first warm our own hearts: As a
body without a soul, much wood without fire, a Bullet in a Gun without powder;
so are all prayers without fervency of Spirit.

Luther terms Prayer Bombarda Christianorum, the Gun or Canon of Christians,
or the Christians Gunshot.

The hottest springs send forth their waters by ebullitions. Cold prayers make
a smoke, a smother Isa. 1. 15. Chapter 65 5.
in the eyes of God. Lazy prayers never procure noble answers. Lazy beggars may
starve for all their begging.

Such as have a male in their flock, and offer to the Lord a female: Such as
offer to the Lord the torn, and the lame, and the sick; such as turn off God
with their cold, lazy, sleepy and formal Mal. 1. 13, 14.
devotions, are condemned, cast and cursed by God. David compares his prayers
to incense, and no incense was offered without Psalm. 141. 2.
fire; it was that that made the smoke of it to ascend. It Is only fervent
prayer that hits the mark, and that pierces the walls of heaven, though, like
those of Gaza, Isa* 45. 2.
made of Brass and Iron. While the Child only whimpers and whines in the
Cradle, the Mother lets it alone; but when once it sets up its note, and cries
out right, then she runs and takes it up. So it is with a Christian, Psalm. 34.
6. This poor man cried, (there is his fervency, he cried, but it was silently
and secretly, in the presence of King Achish, as Moses did at the Red Sea; and
as Nehemiah did in the presence of the King of Persia,) and the Lord heard him,
and delivered him out of all his troubles; here is his prevalency. So Latimer
plied the Throne of grace with great fervency; crying out, Once again Lord,
once again restore the Gospel to England, and God heard him.

Hudson the Martyr deserted at the Stake, went from under his Chain, and having
prayed fervently he was comforted immediately, and suffered valiantly.

I have read of one Giles of Bruxels a Dutch Martyr, who was so fervent in his
prayer, kneeling by himself in some secret place of the Prison where he was,
that he seemed to forget himself; and being called to his meat, he neither
heard nor saw who stood by him, till he was lifted up by the arms, and then he
would speak gently to them, as one awaked out of a Trance.

So Gregory Nazianzen, speaking Paulin. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
of his sister Gorgonia, says, that in the vehemence of her prayer, she came
to a Religious impudency with God, so as to threaten heaven, and tell God, that
she would never depart from his Altar, till she had her petition granted.

Let us make it our business to follow these noble examples, as ever we would
so Prince it in prayer as to prevail with God. An importunate soul in prayer,
is like the poor beggar, that prays and knocks, that prays and waits, that
prays and works, that knocks and knits, that begs and patches, and will not
stir from the door till he has an alms. Well Friends, remember this, God
respects no more lukewarm prayers, than he does lukewarm persons; and they
are such that he has threatened to spue out of his mouth. Those prayers that
are but lip-labor, are lost-labour: And therefore in all your Closet-prayers,
look to the fervency of your spirits.

My Seventh Advice and counsel is this, Be constant, as well as servent in
Closet-prayer; look that you hold on, and hold out, and that you persevere to
the end in private prayer. 1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing. A man must
always pray habitually, though not actually; he must have his heart in a
praying disposition, in all estates and conditions: Though Closet-prayer may
have an intermission, yet it must never have a cessation. Luke 18. 1. And he
spoke a Parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not
to faint, or as the Greek has it, not (...)
to shrink back, as sluggards in work, or cowards in war. Closet-prayer is a
fire like that on the Altar, that was never to go out, day, nor Lev. 12. 6.
night. 1 These. 3. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly: Paul speaks like a
man made up all of prayer, like a man that minded nothing so much as prayer. So
Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit,
and watching. thereunto with all perseverance. Calvin makes this difference
between praying always in the beginning of this Verse, and praying with
perseverance, in the end of this Verse; By praying always (says he) he
exhorts us to pray in prosperity as well as in adversity, and not to quit the
duty of prayer in a prosperous estate, because we are not driven to it by
outward pressing necessities and miseries; and by praying with perseverance, he
admonishes us that we be not weary of the work, but continue instant and
constance in its performance, though we have not presently what we pray for. So
that praying always, is opposed to a neglect of the Duty, in its proper times
and seasons; and praying with perseverance, is opposed to a fainting in our
spirits, in respect of this or that particular suit or request, that we put up
to God. When God turns a deaf ear to our prayers, we must not fret nor faint,
we must not be dismayed nor discouraged; but we must hold up and hold on in the
Duty of prayer with invincible patience, courage, and constancy, as the Church
did, Lament. 3. 8, 44, 55, 56, 57. compared. Col. 4. 2. Continue in prayer, and
watch in the same with thanksgiving. We must be constant and instant in
Closet-prayer; we must wait upon it, and lay all aside for it. He that is only
in his Closet by fits and starts, will neither glorify God, nor advantage his
own soul. If we do not make a trade of Closet-prayer, we shall never make any
yearnings of Closet-prayer. Look as they that get money by their Iron Mills, do
keep a continual fire in their Iron Mills; so they that will get any soul-good
by Closet-duties, they must keep close and constant to Closet-duties. The
hypocrite is only constant in inconstancy, he is only in his Closet by fits and
starts; now and then, when he is in a good mood, you shall find him step into
his Closet, but he never holds it; Job 27. 10. Will he always call upon God?
or as the Hebrew has it, Will he in every time call upon God? When they are
under the smarting rod, or when they are upon the tormenting rack, or when they
are under Isa. 26. 16. Psalm. 78. 34. Zech. 7. 5.
grievous wants, or when they are struck with panick fears, etc. then you
shall have them run to their Closets, as Joab run to the horns of the Altar,
when he was in danger of death; but they never persevere, they never hold out
to the end; and therefore in the end they lose both their Closet-prayers, and
their Souls together.

It was a most profane and Heil. Mic. P. 376.
blasphemous speech of that atheistical wretch, that told God, that he was no
common beggar, and that he never troubled him before with prayer, and if he
would but hear him that time, he would never trouble him again.

Closet-prayer is a hard work, and a man must tug hard at it, and stick close
to it, as Jacob did, if ever Ge^ 32.
he intends to make any internal or eternal advantages by it. Daniel chose
rather to run the hazard Dan. 6.
of his life, than to give over praying in his Chamber. It Is not he that begins
in the spirit, and ends in the flesh; it is not he that Gal. 3. 3. Luke 9. 62.
Mat. 24. 13. Rev. 2. 17.
puts his hand to the plow, and looks back; but he that perseveres to the end
in prayer, that shall be saved and crowned: It Is he that perseveres in well
doing, that shall eat of the hidden Manna, and that shall have the White Stone,
and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows saving him that
receives it. Those precious praying mourning souls, in that Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6.
that were marked to be preserved in Jerusalem, were distinguished (say some of
the learned) by the Character (...) Tau, which is the J. Menoch. Com. in Ezekiel.
Cap. 9. 4.
last of all the Hebrew letters, to teach them, that they must hold out, and
hold on to the end in well doing. It Is constancy in Closet-duty, that crowns
the Christian, and commends the duty.

But would God have his people to cast off their callings, and to cast off all
care of their Relations, and shut themselves up in their Closets, and there
spend their whole time in secret prayer? O no, Every Duty must have its time
and place; Eccl. 3. 1.
and as one friend must not shut out another, so one Duty must not shut out
another: The Duties of my particular calling, as I am a man, must not shut out
the Duties of my general calling, as I am a Christian; nor the Duties of my
general calling as I am a Christian, must not shut out the Duties of my
particular calling, as I am a man. But that you may be fully satisfied in this
case, you must remember, that a man may be said to pray always.

First, When his heart is always in a praying frame. Look as a man may be
truly said to give always, whose heart is always in a giving frame; and to
suffer always, whose heart is always in a suffering frame. For thy sake are
Psalm. 44. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 14. Jer. 9. 3.
we killed all the day long. And to sin always, whose heart is always in a
sinning frame: So a man may be as truly said to pray always, whose heart is
always in a praying frame.

Secondly, A man prays always, when he takes hold on every fit season and
opportunity for the pouring out of his soul before the Lord in his Closet. To
pray always is (...) to pray in every opportunity; but of this before.

It is observed by some, of Proteus, that he was wont to give certain oracles,
but it was hard to make him speak and deliver them, but he would turn himself
into several shapes and forms; yet if they would hold out, and press him hard
without fear, into whatsoever form or shape he appeared, they were sure to have
satisfactory Oracles: So if we continue constant in our Closet-wrestlings with
God, if we hold on in private prayer, though God should appear to us in the
form or shape of a Judge, an enemy, a stranger, we shall certainly speed at
last. O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto Mat. 5. 28.
thee even as thou will; and her Daughter was made whole from that very hour.

The Philosopher being asked in his old age, why he did not give over Non
progredi est regredi.
his practice, and take his ease, answered, when a man is to run a race of
forty furlongs, would you have him sit down at the nine and thirtieth, and so
lose the prize, the Crown for which he ran? O Sirs, if you hold not out to the
end in Closet-prayer, you will certainly lose the heavenly prize, the Crown of
Life, the Crown of Righteousness, the Crown of Glory. To continue in giving
glory to God in this way of duty, is as necessary and requisite, as to begin to
give glory to God in this way of duty; for though the beginning be more than
half, yet the end is more than all. The God of all perfections looks that our
Vltimum vitae, should Finis coronot opus.
be his Optimum Gloriae; that our last works should be our best works, and that
we should persevere in Closet-prayer to the end, Rev. 2. 10.

My eighth Advice and Counsel is this, In all your Closet-prayers, thirst, and
long after communion Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 73. ult.
with God; in all your private retirements, take up in nothing below fellowship
with God, in nothing below a sweet and spiritual enjoyment of God. Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. The Temple of the Lord, without communion
with the Lord of the Temple, will not satisfy David's Soul. Psalm 42. 1, 2. As
the Heart pants after the Water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God.
My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God!

The Heart, as Aristotle and others observe, is of all creatures most hot and
dry of it self, but especially when it is chased and hunted, then it is extreme
thirsty: The female is here meant, as the Greek article (...) he Elaphos does
manifest; now in the females the passions of thirst are more strong, as the
naturalists observe. By this David discovers what a vehement and inflamed
thirst there was in his Soul after communion with God: And as nothing could
satisfy the hunted* Heart but the water brooks; so nothing could satisfy his
soul but the enjoyments of God. Psalm. 43. 4. Then will I go unto the Altar of
God, unto God my exceeding joy. The altar of God is here put for the worship of
God; now it was not barely the Worship of God, but communion with God in his
Worship, that was David'e exceeding joy. Psalm. 63. 1, 2, O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee; my Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is: To see thy power and thy
glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. David's soul did not thirst
after a Crown; a Kingdom, or any worldly greatness, or glory, but after a
choice and sweet enjoyment of God in his wilderness estate. Never did any
Woman with Child long more after this, or that, than David's Soul did long to
enjoy sensible communion with God, in the midst of all his sorrows and
sufferings. Psalm. 84. 2. My Soul longs; yea, even faints for the Courts of
the Lord: My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. By the Courts of
the Lord, we are to understand the ordinances; now these without communion with
God, would never satisfy David's Soul.

I commend that speech of Bernard, Nanquam abs te, absque te recedo: I never
come to thee, but by thee; Bern. epist. 116.
I never come from thee without thee.

When ever you go into your Closets, press hard after real and sensible
Communion with God, that so you may come out of your Closets with some shines
of God upon your spirits; as Moses came down from the Mount with his Exodus 34.
29, 35.
face shining. O do not take up in your Closet-prayers, or tears, or joys, or
enlargements; but labor and long to enjoy that inward and close Fellowship
with God in your Closets, as may leave such a choice, and sweet favor of God,
both upon your hearts and lives, as others may be forced to say, surely Acts 4.
13.
these have been with Jesus. It Is sad when Christians return from their Closets
to their shops, their trades, their families, their commerce, etc. without the
least visible rays of divine glory upon them.

O Sirs, Closet-prayer will be found to be but a dry, saplesse, live-lesse,
heartlesse, comfortless, thing, if you do not enjoy Communion with God in it.
Communion with God is the very Life, Soul, and Crown of all your Closet-duties;
and therefore press after it as for Life: When you go into your Closets let
every thing go, that may hinder your fruition of Christ, and let every thing be
embraced, that makes way for your enjoyment of Christ. O let Closet-prayer be a
golden bridge, a wherry, a Chariot to convey your Souls over to God, and to
bring you into a more intimate Communion with God. Let no Closet-duty satisfy
you or content you, wherein you have not conversed with God, as a Child
converseth with his Father, or as a wife converseth with her Husband, or as a
Friend converseth with his Friend, even face to face. Nothing speaks out more
unsoundness, falsness, and baseness of heart, than this, when men make Duty,
the end of Duty; Prayer, the end of Prayer; than when men can begin a Duty, and
go on in a Duty, and close up a Duty, and bless and stroke themselves after a
Duty, and yet never enjoy the least Communion with God in the Duty.

But how shall a man know when he has a real Communion with God in a Duty or
no?

This is a very noble and necessary Question, and accordingly it calls for a
clear and satisfactory Answer; and therefore thus,

First, A man may have Communion Psalm. 51. 17.
man may have Communion with God in a heart-humbling, a heart-melting, and a
heart-abasing way, when he has not Communion with God in a heart reviving, a
heart-cheering, and a heart-comforting way. It Is a very great mistake among
many tender spirited Christians, to think that they have no Communion with God
in their Closets, except they meet with God embracing and kissing, Cant. 2. 4,
5, 6.
cheering and comforting up of their souls; when they find God raising the
springs of joy and comfort in their souls, when they find God a speaking peace
unto them, when they find the singular sensible Psalm. 85. 8.
presence of God cheering, refreshing, and enlarging of them in their Closets,
O then they are willing to grant that they have had sweet Communion with God in
their Closets; But if God meets with them in their Closets, and only breaks
their hearts for sin, and from sin, if he meets with them and only makes his
power and his presence manifest, in debasing and casting down of their souls,
upon the sight and sense of their strong corruptions and many imperfections,
how unwilling are are they to believe that they have had any Communion with
God. Well Friends, remember this once for all, viz. That a Christian may have
as real Communion with God in a heart-humbling way, as he can have in a
heart-comforting way; a Christian may have as choice Communion with God John
20. 11, -- 19.
when his eyes are full of tears, as he can have when his heart is full of joy.
Sometimes God meets with a poor Christian in his Closet, and exceedingly breaks
him and humbles him, and at other times he meets with the same Christian in his
Closet, and mightily cheers him and comforts him; sometimes God meets with a
poor Soul in his Closet, and there he sweetly quiets him and stills him, and at
other times he meets with the same Soul in his Closet, and then he greatly
revives him and quickens him: God does not always come upon the Soul one way,
he does not always come in at one, and the same door. We John 3. 8.
sometimes look for a Friend to come in at the fore-door, and then he comes in
at the backdoor; and at other times, when we look for him at the back door,
then he comes in at the fore-door; and just so it is with Gods coming into his
peoples souls: Sometimes they go into their Closets, and look that God will
come in at the fore-door of joy and comfort, and then God comes in at the
backdoor of sorrow and grief; and at other times, when they look that God
should come in at the backdoor of humiliation, breaking, and melting their
hearts, then God comes in at the fore-door of joy and consolation, cheering and
rejoicing their souls. But.

Secondly, I answer, That all Christians do not enjoy a like Communion with God
in their Closets; some enjoy much Communion with God in their Closets, and
others enjoy but little Communion with God in their Closets. Moses had a more
clear, glorious, Exodus 33. 11. Deuteronomy. 5. 4. Number. 12. 7, 8.
and constant Communion with God in his days, than any others had in those
times wherein he lived: God spoke to none face to face, as he did to Moses. And
Abraham in his time had a more close, Genesis 18.
friendly, and intimate Communion with God, than holy Lot or any others had in
that day. And though all the Disciples (Judas excepted) had sweet Communion
with Christ in the days of his flesh, Mat. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4.
yet Peter, James and John had a more clear, choice, and full Communion with
him, than the rest had: Among all the Disciples John had John 13. 23 John 20.
2. and Chap. 21. 20.
most bosom Communion with Christ, he was the greatest favorite in Christ's
Court, he leaned on Christ's bosom, he could say any thing to Christ, and he
could know any thing of Christ, and he could have any thing of Christ; now that
all Christians do not enjoy Communion with God alike in their Closets may be
thus made evident.

First, All Christians do not prepare alike to enjoy Closet-Communion with God,
and therefore all Christians do not enjoy Communion with God alike in Eccl. 5.
1. Psalm. 10. 17.
their Closets: Commonly he that prepares and fits himself most for
Closet-Communion with God, he is the man that enjoyes most Closet-Communion 2 Chronicles. 30. 17, 18, 19, 20.
with God.

Secondly, All Christians do not alike prize Communion with God in their
Closets; some prize Communion with God in their closets, before all, and above
all other things: As that noble Man (...) said, Cursed Job 23. 12. Psalm. 119.
127. Mat. 13. 45, 46.
be he that prefers all the world to one hours Communion with God: They look
upon it as that pearl of price, for the enjoyment of which, they are ready to
sell all, and part with all; others prize it at a lower rate, and so enjoy less
of it, than those that set a higher price and value upon it.

Thirdly; All Christians do not a-like press after Communion with God in their
Closets; some press after Communion with God in their Closets, as a condemned
man presses after a pardon, or as a close prisoner presses after enlargment, or
as a poor beggar presses after an alms; now, you know Psalm. 73. 8. Isa. 26. 8,
9.
these press on with the greatest earnestness, the greatest fervency, and the
greatest importunity immaginable: But others press after Communion with God in
their Closets more coldly, more carelessly, more slightly, more lazily. I have
put off my Coat, how shall I put Cant. 5. 3.
it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them (...) ^ow they that
press hardest after Communion with God in their Closets, they are usually blessed
with the highest degrees of Closet-Communion with God.

Fourthly, All Christians don't a-like improve their Communion with God in
their Closets; and therefore all Christians don't enjoy Communion with God
a-like in their Closets. Some Christians do make a more wise, a more humble, a
more holy, a more faithful, a more fruitful, and a more constant improvement of
their Closet-Communion with God than others do, and therefore they are blessed
with higher degrees of Communion with God than others are: Some Christians do
more improve their Closet-Communion with God against the world, the flesh, and
the Devil, than others do; and therefore no wonder if they do enjoy more
Communion with God in their Closets than others do.

Fifthly, All Christians do not a-like need Communion with God in their
Closets; and therefore all Christians have not a-like Communion with God in
their Closets. All Christians have not alike place in the mystical body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 14, -- ult.
some rule, and others are ruled; now every man stands in more or less need of
Communion with God, according to the place that he bears in the body of Christ.
Again, all Christians have not a-like burdens to bear, nor a-like difficulties
to encounter with, nor a like dangers to escape, nor a-like temptations to
wrestle with, nor a-like passions and corruptions to mortify, nor a-like
mercies and experiences to improve, etc. and therefore all Christians don't
need alike Communion with God in their Closets: Now commonly God lets himself
out more or less in ways of Communion, according as the various necessities
and conditions of his people does require.

Sixthly and lastly, All Christians do not a-like meet with outward
interruptions, nor inward interruptions; and therefore all Christians have not
a-like Communion with God in their Closets. Some Christians meet with a world
of outward and inward interruptions more than others do; some Christians
outward Callings, Relations, Conditions, and Stations, etc. do afford more
plentiful matter and occasions, to interrupt them in their Closet-Communion
with God, than other Christians Callings, Relations, Conditions, and Stations
do, etc. Besides Satan is more busy with some Christians, than he is with
other Christians; and corruptions work more strongly and violently in some
Christians, than they do in other Christians, etc. and let me add this to all
the rest, that the very natural tempers of some Christians are more averse to
closet duties, than the natural tempers of other Christians are; and therefore
all Christians have not a-like Communion with God in their Closets, but some
have more and some have less, according as God in his infinite Wisdom sees
best.

Now let no Christian say, that he has no Communion with God in Closet-prayer,
because he has not such a full, such a choice, such a sweet, such a sensible,
and such a constant Communion with God in Closet-prayer, as such and such
Saints have had, or as such and such Saints now have; for all Saints do not
alike enjoy Communion with God in their Closets, some have more, some have
less; some have a higher degree, others a lower; some are wrapped up in the third
heaven, when others are but wrapped up in the clouds: What man is there so
childest and babish as to argue thus, That he has no wisdom, because he has
not the wisdom of Solomon; or, that he has no strength, because he has not
the strength of Sampson; or, that he has no life, because he has not the
swiftness of Ahimaaz; or, that he has no estate, because he has not the
riches of Dives: and yet so childish and babish many weak Christians are, as to
argue thus, viz. that they have no Communion with God in their Closets, because
they have not such high, such comfortable, and such constant Communion with God
in their Closets, as such and such Saints have had, or as such and such Saints
now have; whereas they should seriously consider, that though some Saints have
a great Communion with God, yet other Saints have but a small Communion with
God; and though some Christians have a strong Communion with God, yet other
Christians have but a weak Communion with God; and though some of the people of
God have a very close and near Communion with God, yet others of the people of
God have but a more remote Communion with God; and though some of Gods servants
have a daily, constant, and uninterrupted Communion with God, yet others of his
servants have but a more transient and inconstant Communion with God. But,

Thirdly, I answer, When a man acts grace in Closet-duties, then certainly he
has Communion with God in Closet-duties; 2 Timothy 1. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 8.
when a man in Closet-duties acts faith on God, or faith on the promises, or
faith on the blood of Christ, or when a man in private duties acts repentance
for sin, or love to Jesus Christ, or sets up God as the object of his fear, or
as the object of his joy, etc. then he has Communion with God, then he has
fellowship with the Father, 1 John 1. 3.
and with the Son. An unregenerate man may act gifts and parts in a duty, but
he cannot act grace in a duty; for no man can act grace in a duty, but he that
has grace in his soul: And hence it comes to pass that unsanctified Isa. 1.
11, 12, 13*
persons under the highest activity of their arts, parts, and gifts in
religious duties, enjoy no Communion with God at all, witness the Scribes and
Pharisees, Demas, Judas, Simon Magus, etc. As ever you would have an evidence of
your Communion with God in Closet-duties, carefully look to the activity of
your graces, carefully 2 Timothy 1. 6.
stir up the grace of God which is in you. But,

Fourthly, I answer, When a man has Communion with God in his Closet, then he
gives God the glory of all his actings and Psalm. 115. 1.
activities. Communion with God always helps a man to set the Crown of praise
and honor upon the head of God, witness that gracious and grateful Doxology
of David and his people in that 1 Chr. 29. 13. Now therefore our God, we thank
thee, and praise thy glorious name. Men that enjoy no Communion with God in
Religious Duties, are still a sacrificing unto their own Net, and a burning
incense unto Hab. 1. 16.
their own Drag; they are still a blessing themselves, and a stroaking of
themselves, and applauding Luke 17. 11. 12.
themselves, they think the Garland of praise, the Crown of honor becomes no
head but their own; but now, men that enjoy Communion with God in Religious
Duties, they will uncrown themselves to crown God, they will uncrown their
duties, to Crown the God of their duties, they will Acts 3 11, 12, 13, 16. Rev.
4. 10. 11. Chap. 5. 11, 12.
uncrown their arts, parts, gifts and inlargments, to set the Crown of praise
upon the head of God alone. Thou think that thou have Communion with God in
Closet-duties, yea, thou say that thou have Communion with God in
Closet-duties, but on whose head do thou put the garland of praise? if on
Psalm. 148. 13.
Gods head, thou have Communion with God; if on thine own head, thou have no
Communion with God. As all the Rivers run into the sea, and all the lines meet
in the Center; so when all our Closet-duties terminate and center in the
advance of Gods glory, then have we communion with God in them.

Constantine did use to write the Name of Christ over his door. When a man has
Communion with Christ in a duty, then he will write the Name of Christ, the
Honor of Christ upon his duty. Some say, that the Name of Jesus was engraven
upon the heart of Ignatius; sure I am, when a man has Communion with God in a
Duty, then you shall find the Honor and Glory of Jesus engraven upon that
Duty. But,

Fifthly, I answer, When the performance of Closet-duties leaves the soul in a
better frame, then a man has Communion with God in them: When a man comes off
from Closet-duties in a more holy frame, or in a more humble frame, or in a
more spiritual frame, or in a more watchful frame, or in a more heavenly frame,
or in a more broken frame, or in a more quickened and enlivened frame, etc.
then certainly he has had Communion with God in those Duties. When a man comes
out of his Closet, and finds the frame of his heart to be more strongly set
against sin than ever, and to be more highly resolved to walk with God than
ever, and to be more eminently crucified to the world than ever, and to be more
divinely fixed against temptations than ever, then without all peradventure he
has had communion with God in his closet.

Sixthly, I answer, when Closet-duties fit a man for those other duties that
lie next his hand, then doubtless he has had Communion with God in them: When
private duties fit a man for public duties, or when private duties fit a man
for the duties of his place, calling, and condition, wherein God has set him,
then certainly he has had fellowship with God in Eccl. 9. 10.
them: When a man in Closet-duties finds more spiritual strength and power to
perform the duties that are next incumbent upon him, then assuredly he has met
with God; when private prayer fits me more for family prayer, or public
prayer, then I may safely conclude that God has drawn near to my soul in
private prayer; or when one Closet-duty fits me for another Closet-duty, as
when praying fits me for reading, or reading for praying; or when the more
external duties in my Closet, viz. reading or praying, fits me for those more
spiritual and internal duties, viz. self-examination, holy meditation,
soul-humiliation, etc. then I may rest satisfied that there has been some
choice intercourse between God and my soul: When the more I pray in my Closet,
the more fit I am to pray in my Closet; and the more I read in my Closet, the
more fit I am to read in my Closet; and the more I meditate in my closet, the
more fit I am to meditate in my closet; and the more I search and examine my
heart in my Closet, the more fit I am to search and examine my heart in my
Closet; and the more I humble and abase my soul in my closet, the more fit I am
to humble and abase my soul in my closet; then I may be confident that I have
had communion with God in my Closet.

Seventhly, I answer, That all private communion with God is very soul-humbling
and soul-abasing. Abraham was a man that had much private communion with God,
and a man that was very vile and low in his own eyes, Gen 18. 27. And Abraham
answered and said, Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
which am but dust and ashes: In respect of my original (says Abraham) I am but
base dust and ashes; and in respect of my deserts* I deserve to be burnt to
ashes. There are none so humble, as they that have nearest communion with God.
Jacob was a man that Genesis 28. 10, -- 18.
had much private communion Genesis 32. 24, to 31.
with God, and a man that was very little in his own eyes, Genesis 32. 10. I am
not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant; or as the Hebrew has it, I am less than Genesis 31.
38, -- 41.
all thy mercies. When Jacob had to deal with Laban he pleads his merit, but
when he has to do with God he debaseth himself below the least of his mercies.
Moses was a man that had much private communion with God (as I have formerly
evidenced) and a man that was the meekest and humblest person in all the world,
Numb. 12. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men that were upon
the face of the earth.

Josephus writing of Moses says (if he may be believed) that he was so free
from passions, that he knew no such thing in his own soul; he only knew
passions by their names, and saw them in others, but felt them not in himself.
And so, when the glory of God appeared to him, he falls upon his face, Numb.
16. 22. in token of humility and self-abasing. David was a man that had much
private communion with God, as is granted on all hands, and how greatly does he
debase himself, and vilify himself! 1 Samuel 26. 20. The King of Israel is come
out to seek a flea; and what more weak and contemptible than a flea? So Chap.
As Nazianzen said of Athanasius, He was high in worth, and humble in heart.
24. 14. After whom is the King of Israel come out? after whom do thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea? As if David had said, It Is not worth
the while, the labor, it is below the Dignity and Honor of the King of Israel
to take such pains and to pursue so violently after such a poor nothing as I
am, who has no more strength nor power to bite or hurt, than a dead dog, or a
poor flea has. So Psalm. 226. But I am a worm and no man. Now what is more
weak? what less regarded? what more despicable? what more trampled under-foot,
than a poor worm? The Hebrew word Tolagnath that is here rendered worm,
signifies very little worm, such as breed in Scarlet, which are so little that
a man can scarcely see them, or perceive them. Thus you see that holy David
debaseth himself below a worm, yea, below the least of worms. No man sets so
low a value upon himself, as he does, who has most private communion with God.
The four and twenty Elders cast down their crowns at the feet of Jesus Christ,
Rev. 4. 10, 11. Their Crowns note all their inward and outward dignities,
excellencies and Anstin being once asked, what was the first grace, answered,
humility; what the second, humility; what the third, humility.
glories; and the casting down of their Crowns, notes their great humility and
self-debasement. When Christians in their Closets, and out of their Closets,
can cast down their crowns, their duties; their services, their graces, their
enlargments, their enjoyments, etc. at the feet of Jesus Christ, and sit down
debasing and lessening of themselves, then certainly they have had a very near
and sweet communion with God.

Chrysostom has a remarkable saying of Humility, Suppose (says he) that a
man were defiled with all manner of sin and enormity, yet humble, and another
man enriched with gifts, graces, and duties, yet proud, the humble sinner were
in a safer condition than this proud Saint.

When a man can come off from Closet-duties, and say as Ignatius once said of
himself, Non sum dignus dici minimus, I am not worthy to be called the least;
then certainly he has had fellowship with God in them. All the Communion that
the creature has with God in his Closet is very soul-humbling and
soul-abasing. In all a man's communion with God, some beams, some rays of the
glory and majesty of God will shine forth upon his soul. Now all divine
manifestations are very humbling and abasing, as you may clearly see in those
two great instances of Job and Isaiah, Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee: Wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes. Isa. 6. 1, 5. In the year that King Vzziah died,
I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and his train
filled the Temple: Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. What sweet communion had Elias with
God in the low cave!

There was a Gentlewoman (of no ordinary quality or breeding) who being much
troubled in mind, and sadly deserted by God, could not be drawn by her husband
or any other Christian friends, either to hear or read any thing, that might
work for her spiritual advantage; at last, her husband by much importunity
prevailed so far with her, that she was willing he should read one Chapter in
the Bible to her; so he read that Isa. 57. and when he came to the fifteenth
verse For thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name
is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones. O says she, is it so, that God dwells with a
contrite and humble spirit, then I am sure he dwells with me, for my heart is
broken into a thousand pieces: O happy text and happy time, that ever I should
hear such comfort! and she was thereupon recovered. The more communion any man
has with God, the more humble and broken his heart will be.

Holy Bradford was a man that Fox his Acts and Mon.
had much private communion with God, and he would many times subscribe himself
in his letters John the hypocrite, and a very painted sepulcher. Agur was one
of the wisest and holiest men on the earth in his days, and he condemned Pro.
30. 2.
himself for being more brutish than any man, and not having the understanding
of a man. How sweet is the smell of the lowly Violet (that hides his head) above
all the gaudy Tulips that be in your garden! The lowly Christian is the most
amiable and the most lovely Christian. When a man can come out of his Closet,
and cry out with Augustine, I hate that which I am, and love and desire that
which I am not: Oh wretched man that I am, in whom the Cross of Christ has not
yet eaten out the poisonous and bitter taste of the first tree. Or as another
says, Lord, I see, and yet am blind; I will, and yet rebel; I hate, and yet I
love; I follow, and yet I fall; I press forward, yet I faint; I wrestle, yet I
halt; then he may be confident that he has had communion with God in his
Closet. He that comes off from Closet-duties in a self-debasing way, and in
laying of himself low at the foot of God, he certainly has had communion with
God; but when men come out of their Closets with their Luke 18. 11, 12.
hearts swelled and lifted up, as the hearts of the Pharisees were, it is
evident that they have had no communion with God: God has not been near to
their souls, who say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
than thou, Isa. 65. 5. But,

Eighthly and lastly, When a man finds such a secret virtue and power running
through his Closet-duties, as wounds and weakens his beloved corruption, as
breaks the strength and the power of his special sin, as sets his heart more
fully, resolutely, and constantly against his darling lust, as stirs up a
greater rage, and a more bitter hatred, and a more fierce indignation against
the Toad in the bosom, then certainly he has had communion with God in his
Closet-duties. Consult these Scriptures, Isa. 2. 20. In that day, a man shall
cast his Idols of Silver, and his Idols of Gold, which they have made, each one
for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats. In the day wherein God
should take these poor hearts verse. 3.
into communion with himself, their hearts should be filled with such rage and
indignation against their most delectable and desirable Idols, that they
should take not only those made of trees and stones, but even their most
precious and costly Idols, those that were made of Silver and Gold, and cast
them to the moles and to the bats, to note their horrible hatred, and
indignation against them. Idolatry was the darling sin of the Jews; their
hearts were so exceedingly affected and delighted with their Idols, that they
did not care what they spent upon them, Isa. 46. 6. They lavish Gold out of the
bag, and weigh Silver in the balance, and hire a Goldsmith, and he makes it a
God; they fall down, yea, they worship. The word here used for lavish, in the
Hebrew signifies properly to wast, or spend riotously; they set so light by
their treasure, that they cared not what they spent upon their Idols: God gave
them Gold and Silver, as pledges of his favor and bounty, and they lavish it
out upon their Idols, as if God had hired them to be wicked: O but when God
should come and take these poor wretches into a close and near communion with
himself, then you shall find their wrath and rage to rise against their Idols,
as you may see in that Isa. 30. verse. 19, 20, 21. Their communion with God is
more than hinted; but mark, verse 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy
graven images of Silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of Gold; thou
shall cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get thee
hence. None defile, deface, detest, and disgrace their Idols, like those that
are taken into communion with God. Fellowship with God will make a man cast
away, as a menstrous cloth, those very Idols, in which he has most delighted,
and with which he has been most pleased and enamoured. Idols were Ephraims
bosom sin, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined (or glewed, as the Hebrew has it) to
Idols: let him alone. O but when you find Ephraim taken into a close communion
with God, as you do in that Hos. 14. 4, 5, 6, 7. then you shall find another
spirit upon him, v. 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with
Idols? I have had too much to do with them already, I will never have to do
with them any more: O how does my Soul detest and abhor them, and rise up
against them! O how do I now more loath and abominate them, than ever I have
formerly loved them, or delighted in them! After the return of the Jews out of
Babylon, they so hated and abhorred Idols, that in the time of the Romans they
chose rather to die, than suffer the Eagle, which was the imperial arms, to be
set up in their Temple.

Though Closet-duties are weak in themselves, yet when a man has Communion
with God in them, then they prove exceeding powerful to the casting down of
strong holds, and vain imaginations, ^ Cor. 10. 4, 5.
and every high thing and thought, that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God. When a man comes out of his Closet with a heart more fully and
steadfastly set against every known sin, but especially against his bosom sin,
his darling sin, his Dalilah that he played and sported himself most with, and
that he has hugged with pleasure and delight in his bosom, then certainly he
has had private Communion with God.

After Moses had enjoyed forty days private communion with God in the Mount,
how did his heart rise, and his anger wax hot against the Molten Calf that his
people had made! Exodus 32. 19, 20. And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh
unto the Camp, that he saw the Calf and the dancing, and Moses anger waxed hot,
and he cast the Tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount: and
he took the Calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it
to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink
of it. Moses had never more intimate fellowship with God than now, and he never
discovered so much holy zeal, anger and indignation against sin as now. When a
man comes off from the mount of Closet-duties with a greater hatred, anger,
wrath, and indignation against bosom sins, darling sins, complexion sins, that
were once as dear to him as right hands, or right eyes, or as Dalilah was to
Sampson, or Herodias to Herod, or Isaac to Abraham, or Joseph to Jacob, then
certainly he has had communion with God in those Duties. When a man finds his
beloved sins, his Dalilahs (which like the Prince of Devils command all other
sins) to fall before his closet-duties, as Dagon fell before the Ark, or as
Goliath fell before David, then assuredly he has had fellowship with God in
them. Pliny writes of some Families that had privy marks on their Bodies,
peculiar to those of that Line. Certainly, there are no Families, no persons,
but have some sin or sins, some privy marks on their souls, that may in a
peculiar way be called theirs. Now when in private duties they find the bent of
their hearts, and the purposes, resolutions, and inclinations of their souls
more raised, inflamed, and set against these, they may safely and comfortably
conclude, that they have had communion with God in them. O Sirs, there is no
bosom sin so sweet or profitable, that is worth burning in hell for, or worth
shutting out of Heaven for; and therefore in all your private duties and
services, labor after that communion with God in them, that may break the neck
and heart of your most bosom sins. When Darius fled before Alexander, that he
might run the faster out of danger, he threw away his Massy Crown from his
head. As ever you would be safe from eternal danger, throw away your golden and
your silver Idols, throw away your bosom sins, your darling lusts.

And thus I have done with the Answers to that noble and necessary Question,
that was last proposed.

My Ninth Advice and Counsel is this, In all your Closet-Duties look that your
ends be right, look Christus opera nostra, non tam actibus quam finibus pensat.
Zanch.
that the Glory of God be your ultimate end, the mark, the white, that you have
in your eye. There is a great truth in that old saying, (Quod non actibus, sed
finibus pensantur officia) That duties are esteemed not by their acts, but by
their ends. Look as the shining Sun puts out the light of the fire; so the
glory of God must consume all other ends. There may be malum opus in bona
materia, as in Johu's zeal. Two things make a good Christian, good actions, and
good aims. And though a good aim does not make a bad action good (as in Vzzah)
yet a bad aim makes a good action bad (as in Jehu) whose Justice was approved,
but his Policy punished. God writes a nothing upon all those services, wherein
men's ends are not right, Jer. 32. 23. They obeyed not thy voice, neither walked
in thy Law, they have done nothing of all that thou have commanded them to do.
So Dan. 9. 13. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer
before the Lord our God. The Jews were very much in religious Duties and
Services; witness Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3. Zech. 7. 5, 6.
I might produce a hundred more witnesses to confirm it, were it necessary; but
because they did not aim at the Glory of God in what they did, therefore the
Lord writes a nothing upon all their Duties and Services. It was Ephraims
folly, that he brought forth fruit unto himself. Hos. 10. 1.
And it was the Pharisees hypocrisy, that in all their duties and Mat. 6. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
services they looked at the praise of men: Verily, says Christ, you have your
reward; a poor, a pitiful reward indeed. Such men shall be sure to fall short
of divine acceptance, and of a glorious recompense, that are not able to look
above the praises of men. Woe to that man, that with Augustus is ambitious to
go off the Stage (of Duty) with a plaudite. Peter was See more of this in my
Treatise on Holiness, page 157, to p. 168.
not himself when he denied his Lord, and cursed himself to get credit amongst
a cursed crew. As ever you would ask and have, speak and speed, seek and find,
look that the glory of the Lord be engraven upon all your closet-duties. He
shall be sure to speed best, whose heart is set most upon glorifying of God in
all his secret retirements. When God Crowns us, he does but Crown his own gifts
in us; and when we give God the Glory of all we do, we do but give him the
glory that is due unto his Name, for it is he, and he alone, that works all our
works in us and for us. All Closet Duties are good or bad, as the mark is at
which the soul aims. He that makes God the object of Closet Prayer, but not the
end of Closet Prayer, does but lose his Prayer, and take pains to undo
himself. God will be Alexander or Nemo; he will be All in All, or he will be
nothing at all. Such prayers never reach the Ear of God, nor delight the heart
of God, nor shall ever be lodged in the bosom of God, that are not directed to
the glory of God. The end must be as noble as the means, or else a man may be
undone after all his doings. A man's most glorious actions will at last be found
to be but glorious sins, if he has made himself, and not the glory of God, the
end of those actions.

My Tenth Advice and Counsel is this, Be sure that you offer all your Closet
Prayers in Christ's Name, and in his alone, John 14. 13, 14. And whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the father may be glorified in the
son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. John 15. 16. That
whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name, he may give it you. John 16.
23, 24, 26. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father
in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name:
ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. At that day ye shall ask
in my name: and I say unto you, that I will pray the father for you. O Sirs,
this is your Privilege as well as your comfort, that you never deal with God
but by a Mediator. When you appear before God, Jesus Christ appears with you,
and he appears for you; when you do invocare, then he does advocare; when you
put up your petitions, then he does make intercession for you. Christ gives you
a commission to put his name upon all your requests; and whatsoever prayer
comes up with this name upon it, he will procure it an answer. In the state of
innocence man might worship God without a Mediator; but since sin has made so
wide a breach between God and Man, God will accept of no worship from man, but
what is offered up by the hand of a Mediator: Now this Mediator is Christ
alone, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus. One Mediator, not of Redemption only (as the Papists
grant) but of Intercession also, which they deny.

The Papists make Saints and Angels co*mediators with Christ; but in this, as
in other things, they fight against clear Scripture Light. The Apostle plainly
tells us, that the Office of Intercession pertains unto Christ, as part of
his Mediation: Heb. 7 25.
And it is certain, that we need no other Master of requests in Heaven, but the
man Christ Jesus; who being so near to the Father, and so dear to the Father,
and so much in with the Father, can doubtless carry any thing with the Father,
that makes for his glory, and our good. This was typified in the Law: The High
Priest alone did enter into Ex. 28. 29.
the Sanctuary, and carry the names of the Children of Israel before the Lord,
whilst the people stood all without; this pointed out Christ's Mediation. In
that Lev. 16. 13, 14. you read of two things. First, of the cloud of Incense,
that covered the Mercy-Seat. Secondly, Of the blood of the Bullock, that was
sprinkled before the Mercy-Seat: Now that blood typified Christ's satisfaction;
and the Cloud of Incense his Intercession.

Some of the learned think, that Christ intercedes only by virtue of his
merits; others, that it is done only with his mouth; I conjecture it may be done
both ways, the rather because Christ has a tongue (as also a whole body, but
glorified) in Heaven; and is it likely, that that mouth which pleaded so much
for us on earth, should be altogether silent for us in Heaven?

There is no coming to the Father, John 14. 6.
but by the Son. Christ is the true Jacobs Ladder, by which we must ascend to
Heaven. Joseph Genesis 43.
you know, commanded his Brethren, that as ever they looked for any good from
him, or to see his face with joy, that they should be sure to bring their
Brother Benjamin along with them. O Sirs, as ever you would be prevalent with
God, as ever you would have sweet, choice, and comfortable returns from Heaven
to all your Closet-prayers, be sure that you bring your Elder Brother, the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the arms of your faith, be sure that you treat and trade with
God only in the name of the Lord Jesus.

It Is a notable speech that Luther has upon the 130. Psalm. Often Dulce nomen
Christi.
and willingly (says he) do I inculcate this, that you should shut your eyes,
and your ears, and say, you know no God out of Christ, none but he that was in
the lap of Mary, and sucked her breasts: He means, none out of him. When you
go to Closet-prayer, look that you pray not in your own names, but in the name
of Christ; and that you plead not in your own names, but in the name of Christ;
and that you believe and hope not in your own names, but in the name of Christ;
and that you look not to speed in your own names, but in the name of Christ,
Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus. Whatsoever we do, we are to do it by the authority of Christ, and
through the assistance of Christ, and in the name of Christ, and for the sake
and glory of Christ. Christ's name is so precious and powerful with the Father,
that it will carry any suit, obtain any request at his hands. Jesus in the
China Tongue signifies the rising Sun. When a man writes the name of Jesus upon
his Closet-prayers, then he shall be sure to speed. though God will not give a
man a drop, a sip, a crum, a crust, for his own sake; yet for Jesus sake he
will give the best, the choycest, and the greatest blessings that heaven
affords; that name is still mighty and powerful, prevalent and precious before
the Lord. The prayers that were offered up with the incense upon the Altar were
pleasing, Rev. 8. 3. and came up with acceptance, verse. 4. Joseph's Brethren
were kindly used for Benjamins sake. O Sirs, all our duties and services are
accepted of the Father, not for their own sakes, nor for our sakes, but for
Christ's sake. There are no prayers that are either hard, owned, accepted,
regarded or rewarded, but such as Christ puts his hand to. If Christ does not
mingle his blood with our sacrifices,, our services, they will be lost, and
never ascend as incense before the Lord. No coin is current that has not
Caesar's stamp upon it; nor no prayers go current in heaven, that have not the
stamp of Christ upon them. There is nothing more, pleasing to our heavenly
Father than to use the mediation of his Son. Such shall be sure to find most
favor, and to speed best in the Court of Heaven, who still present themselves
before the Father with Christ in their arms. But,

My eleventh and last advice and counsel is this, When you come out of your
closets, narrowly watch what becomes of your private prayers; look at what
door, in what way, and by what hand the Lord shall please to give you an answer
to the secret desires of your souls in a corner. It has been the custom of
the people of God, to look after their prayers, to see what success they have
had, to observe what entertainment they have found in heaven, Psalm. 5. 3. My
voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my
prayer unto thee, and will look up. In the words you may observe two things.
First, David's posture in prayer. Secondly, His practice after prayer. First,
His posture in prayer, I will direct my prayer unto thee. Secondly, His
practice after prayer, And I will look up. The Prophet, in these words, makes
use of two military words: First, he would not only pray, but martial up his
prayers, he would put them it battel-aray, (so much the Hebrew word Gnarach
imports) Secondly, when he had done this, then he would be as a spy, upon his
VVatch-Tower, to see whether he prevailed, whether he got the day or no; and so
much the Hebrew word Tsaphah imports. When David had set his prayers, his
petitions, in rank and file, in good array, then he was resolved he would look
abroad, he would look about him, to see at what door God would send in an
answer of prayer. He is either a fool, or a madman, he is either very weak, or
very wicked, that prays, and prays, but never looks after his prayers; that
shootes many an Arrow toward Heaven, but never minds where his Arrows a light.
Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints. If David would have God to hearken to his
prayers, he must then hearken to what God will speak; and upon this point it
seems he was fully resolved. The Prophets prayer you have in the seven first
verses of this Psalm, and his gracious resolution you have in the 8th verse, I
will hear what the God Lord will speak. As if he had said, Certainly, it will
not be long before the Lord will give me a gracious answer, a seasonable, and a
suitable return to my present prayers. Psalm. 130. 1, 2, 5, 6. Out of the depths
have I cried unto thee, O Lord. Lord hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive
to the voice of my supplications. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and
in his word do I hope. My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch
for the morning, I say, more than they that watch for the morning. Those that
watch abroad in dangerous times and tedious weather, look frequently after peep
of day. How does the weary Sentinel, that is wet with the rain of heaven or
with the dew of the night, wait and watch, look and long; for the morning
light. Now this was the frame and temper of David's spirit, when he came off
from praying, he falls a waiting for a gracious answer. Shall the husbandman
wait for the precious fruits of the earth? and shall the Merchant-man James 5.
7, 8.
wait for the return of his ships? and shall the Wife wait for the return of
her Husband that is gone a long journey? and shall not a Christian wait for the
return of his prayers. Noah patiently waited for the return of the Dove to the
Ark, with an Olive branch in his mouth: So must you patiently wait for the
return of your prayers. When children shoot their Arrows, they never mind where
they fall; but when prudent Archers shoot their Arrows up into the air, they
stand and watch where they fall. You must deal by your prayers, as prudent
Archers do by their Arrows. Hab. 2. 1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me
upon the Tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me. The Prophet in
the former Chapter having been very earnest in his expostulations, and very
fervent in his supplications, he gets now upon his Watchtower, to see what
becomes of his prayers; he stands as a sentinel, and watches as vigilantly, and
as carefully, as a spy, a scout, earnestly longing to hear and see the event,
the issue, and success of his prayers. That Christian that in prayer has one
eye upon a divine precept, and another upon a gracious promise, that Christian
will be sure to look after his prayers. He that prays and waits, and waits and
prays, shall Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3, 4.
be sure to speed, he shall never fail of rich returns. He that can want as
well as wait, and he that can be contented that God is glorified, though he be
not gratified; he that dares not antedate Gods promises, but patiently wait for
the accomplishment of them, he may be confident that he shall have seasonable
and suitable answers to all those prayers that he has posted away to heaven.
Though God seldom comes at our time, yet he never fails to come at his own
time: He that shall come, will come, Heb. 10. 37.
and will not tarry. The mercies of God are not styled the swift, but the sure
mercies of David. He that makes as much Conscience to Isa. 55. 3.
look after his prayers, as to pray, he shall shortly clap his hands for joy,
and cry out with that blessed Mr. Glover Acts and mon.
Martyr, He is come, Austin, he is come, he is come. Certainly there is little
worth in that man's heart, or in that man's prayers, who keeps up a trade of
prayer, but never looks what becomes of his prayers. When you are in your
Closets marshal your prayers, see that every prayer keeps his place and ground;
and when you come out of your closets, then look up for an answer, only take
heed that you be not too hasty and hot with God. Though mercy in the promise be
yours, yet the time of giving it out is the Lords; and therefore you must wait,
as well as pray.

And thus much by way of counsel and advice, for the better carrying on of
Closet-prayer.

I have now but one thing more to do, before I shut up this discourse, and that
is to lay down some means, rules, or directions, that may be of use to help you
on in a faithful and conscientious discharge of this great duty, viz.
Closet-prayer. And therefore thus.

First, As ever you would give up your selves to private prayer, Take heed of
an idle and sloathful spirit. If Adam in the state of Innocence must work and
dress the Garden; and if after his fall, when he was Monarch of all the world,
he must yet labor, why should any be idle or sloathful? Idleness is a sin
against the law of Creation: God creating man to labor, the idle person
violates this Law of Creation, for by his idleness he casts off the authority
of his Creator, who made him for labor. Idleness is a contradiction to the
August. de Gen ad. lit. lib. 8. cap. 8.
principles of our Creation. Man in Innocence should have been freed from
weariness, but not from employment; he was to dress the Garden by divine
appointment; And the Lord God took the man, and put Genesis 2. 15.
him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it. All weariness in
labor, and all vexing, tyring and tormenting labor came in by the fall, In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat Genesis 3. 19.
bread The bread of idleness is neither sweet nor sure. An idle person shall
suffer Pro. 19. 15.
hunger, says Solomon. An idle life, and an holy heart are far enough asunder.
By doing nothing (says the Heathen man) men learn to do evil things: It is
easy slipping out of an idle life into an evil and wicked life; yea, an idle
life is of it self evil; for man was made to be active, not to be idle. The
Cyclopes thought man's happiness did consist in nihil agendo, in doing nothing:
But no excellent thing 1 Cor. 1. 17. Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 These. 3. 10, 12.
can be the child of idleness. Idleness is a mother sin, a breeding sin, it is
pulvinar diaboli, the devils cushion on which he sits; and the devils anvile,
on which he frames very great, and very many sins. Look as Toads and Serpents
breed most in standing waters, so sin thrives most in idle persons. Idleness is
that which provokes the Lord to forsake men's bodies, and the Devil to possess
their souls.

No man has less means to preserve his body, and more temptations to infect
his soul, than an idle person. O shake off sloth. The sluggish Christian will
be sleeping or idling, or trifling, when he should be in his closet a praying.
Sloth is the Green Sickness of the soul; get it cured, or 'twill be your
eternal bane. Of all Devils, it is the idle Devil that keeps men most out of
their Closets. There is nothing that gives the devil so much advantage against
us as idleness. 'Twas Hierom. ep. 4.
good counsel that Jerome gave to his friend, Facito aliquid operis, ut te
semper Diabolus inveniat occupatum, that when the Devil comes with a
temptation, you may answer him, you are not at leisure.

It was the speech of Mr. Greenham (sometimes a famous and painful preacher of
this nation) that when the Devil tempted a poor soul, she came to him for
advice, how she might resist the temptation, and he gave her this answer, Never
be idle, but be always well employed, for in my own experience I have found
it; when the Devil came to tempt me, I told him that I was not at leisure to
hearken to his temptations, and by this means I resisted all his assaults.
Idleness is the hour of temptation, and an idle person is the Devils
Tennis-Ball, tossed by him at his pleasure.

He that labors (said the old Hermit) is tempted but by one Devil, but he
that is idle is assaulted by all. Cupid complained, that he could never fasten
upon the Muses, because he could never find them idle. The Fowler bends his bow
and spreads his net for Birds when they are set, not when they are upon the
wing: So Satan shoots his most fiery darts at men, when they are most idle and
sloathful: And this the Sodomites found by woeful experience, when God rained
Ezekiel. 16. 49.
hell out of heaven upon them, both for their idleness, and for those other
sins of theirs, which their idleness did expose them to.

It was said of Rome, that during the time of their wars with Carthage and
other enemies in Africa, they knew not what vice meant; but no sooner had they
got the conquest, but through idleness they came to ruin. Idleness is a sin,
not only against the Law of Grace, but also against the light of nature. You
cannot look any way but every creature checks and upbraids your idleness and
sloth; if you look up to the heavens, there you shall find all their glorious
Lights constant in their motions: The Sun rejoices as a strong man to run a
race, the Winds Psalm. 19. 5. Psalm. 104. 23.
blow, the Waters run, the Earth brings forth her pleasant and delightful
fruits, all the Fish in the Sea, Fowls in the Air, and Beasts in the Fields,
and on the Mountains, have their motions and operations, all which call aloud
upon man not to be idle, but active. Solomon sends the sluggard to the Prove. 6.
6.
Ant to learn industry. The Ant is a very little creature, but exceeding
laborious; nature has put an instinct into her to be very busy and active all
the Summer; she is early and late at it, and will not lose an hour unless the
weather hinder. And the Prophet Jeremiah sends the Jews to school to learn to
wait, and observe of the Stork, Jer. 8. 7.
the Turtle, the Crane, and the swallow. And our Savior sends us to the
Sparrows and Lillies, to learn attendance Mat. 6. 26, 28.
upon providence. And let me send you to the busy Be, to learn activity and
industry; though the Be be little in bulk, yet it is great in service; she
flies far, examines the fields, hedges, trees, orchards, gardens, and loads her
self with honey and wax, and then returns to her Hive. Now how should the
activity of these creatures put the idle person to a blush. O Sirs, Man is that
most noble creature, into whom God has put principles of the greatest
activity, as capable of the greatest and highest enjoyments; and therefore
idleness is a forgetting man's dignity, and a forsaking of that rank that God
has set him in, and a debasing of himself below the least and meanest
creatures, who constantly in their order obedientially serve the Law of their
creation. Nay, if you look up to the blessed Angels above you, you shall still
find them active and serviceable; Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent
Heb. 1. 14.
forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation? And if you look
down to the Angels of darkness below you, O how laborious and industrious are
they, to destroy and 1 Pet. 5. 8.
damn your precious and immortal souls!

For a close remember, that idleness is so great an evil, that it has been
condemned and severely punished by the very worst of men. Among the Egyptians,
Idleness was a capital crime. Among the Lucans, he that lent money to an idle
person was to lose it. By Solons Law, idle persons were to suffer death. And
Seneca had rather be sick than idle. The Lacedaemonians called men to an account
for their idle hours. Among the Corinthians, idle persons were delivered to the
Carnifex. Antonius Pius being Emperor, caused the roofs and coverings of all
such houses to be taken away, as were known to receive an idle people,
affirming, that nothing was Capitolinus
more uncomely, or absurd to be suffered, than such idle Caterpillars and slow
worms to have their food and nourishment from that Commonwealth, in the
maintenance of which there was no supply from their industry and labor. All
which should steel us, and arm us against sloth and idleness. I have the longer
insisted on this, because there is not agreater hinderance to Closet-prayer
than sloth and idleness. Slothful and idle persons commonly lie so long a bed,
and spend so much precious time between the comb and the glass, and in eating,
drinking, sporting, and trifling etc. that they can find no time for private
prayer. Certainly such as had rather go sleeping to Hell, than sweating to
Heaven, will never care much for Clos(...)t prayer: And therefore shun
sl(...)th and idleness, as you would shun a Lion in the way, or poison in your
meat, or coals in your bosom, or else you will never find time to wait upon
God in your Closets.

Secondly, Take heed of spending too much of your precious time about
circumstantials, about the little things of Religion, as mint, anise, and
cummin, or in searching Mat. 23. 23.
into the circumstances of worship, or in standing stoutly for this or that
ceremony, and in the mean while neglect the studying of the covenant of grace,
or about enquiring what fruit that was that Adam eat in Paradise, or in
enquiring after the Authors of such and such books, whose names God in his
infinite wisdom has concealed, or in enquiring what God did before the world
was made; when one asked Austin that Question, he answered, that he was
preparing Hell for such busy Questionists as he was. It was a saying of
Luther, From a vainglorious Doctor, from a contentious Pastor, and from
unprofitable Questions, the good Lord deliver his Church. It Is one of Satan's
great designs, to hinder men in the great and weighty duties of Religion, by
busying them most about the lowest and least matters of Religion. Satan is
never better pleased, than when he sees Christians puzzled and perplexed about
Col. 2. 21.
those things in Religion that are of no great moment or importance. Such as
negotiate and trade in Religion more for a good name, than a good life, for a
good report than a good Conscience, for to humor others than to honor God,
etc. such will take no pleasure in loset-duties: Such as are more 2 Timothy 3. 5.
busied about ceremonies than substances, about the form of godliness than the
power, such will never make it their business to be Mat. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
much with God in their Closets, as is evident in the Scribes and Pharisees:
Such as are more taken up with the outward dress and garb Luke 11. 34. 40.
of Religion than they are with the spirit, power, and life of Religion, such
will never affect to drive a secret trade heaven-wards. There cannot be a surer
nor a greater character of an hypocrite, than to make a great deal of stir
about little things in Religion, and in the mean while neglect the great and
main things in Religion. Such as these have all along in the Scripture
discovered a strangness, and a perfect carelessness, as to Closet-duties. I
never knew any man hot and zealous about circumstantials, about the little
things of Religion, that was ever famous for Closet-prayer. But,

Thirdly, Take heed of curiosity, and of spending too much of your precious
time in searching into those dark, abstruce, misterious, and hidden truths and
things of God and Religion, that lie most remote from the understanding of the
best and wisest of men. Curiosity is the spiritual adultery of the Soul.
Curiosity is a spiritual drunkenness: for look as the drunkard is never
satisfied, unless he see the bottom of the cup, be it never so deep; so those
that are troubled with the itch of curiosity, will say they can never be
satisfied, till they come to the bottom of the most deep and profound things
of God; they love to pry into Gods secrets, and to scan the mysteries of
Religion by their weak, shallow reason, and to be wise above what is written.
Curious searchers into the deep mysterious things of God will make all Gods
depths to be shallows, rather than they will be thought not able to fathom them
by the short line of their own reason. O that men would once learn to be
contentedly ignorant, where God would not have them knowing. O that men were
once so humble, as to account it no disparagement to them, to acknowledge some
depths in God, and in the blessed Scripture, which their shallow reason cannot
fathom. They are only a company of fools in Folio, that affect to know more
than God would have them. Did not Adams Tree of knowledge make him and his
posterity mere fools? He that goes to school to his own reason, has a fool for
his schoolmaster. The ready way to grow stark blind, is to be still prying and
gazing upon the body of the Sun: So the ready way to spiritual Deuteronomy. 29. ult.
blindness, is to be still prying into the most secret and hidden things of
God. Are there not many, who by prying long into the secrets Romans 9. 20.
of nature, are become arch-enemies to the grace of God? O that we were wise to
admire those deep mysteries which we cannot understand, and to adore those
depths and counsels which we cannot reach. O let us check our curiosity in the
things of God, and sit Romans 11. 33
down satisfied and contented to resolve many of Gods actions into some hidden
causes which lie secret in the Abyss of his eternal knowledge and infallible
will. Christ, when he was on earth, very frequently, severely, and sharply
condemned John 21. 22 Acts 1. 6, 7. Luke 1^. 23, 24.
curious enquirers, as is evident by the Scriptures in the margent; and the
great reason why our Savior did so frequently check this humor of curiosity,
was because the great indulgers of it, were too frequent neglecters of the more
great, necessary, and important points of Religion. Curiosity is one of Satan's
most dangerous engines, by which he keeps many souls out of their Closets, yea,
out of Heaven: when many a poor soul begins in good earnest to look toward
heaven, and to apply himself to Closet-duties, then Satan begins to bestir
himself, and to labor with all his might, so to busy the poor soul with vain
enquiries, and curious speculations, and unprofitable curiosities, that the
soul has no time for Closet-prayer. Ah how well might it have been with many a
man, had he but spent one quarter of that time in closet-prayer, that he has
spent in curious enquiries after things, that have not been fundamental to his
happiness!

The Heathenish Priests affected curiosity, they had their Mythologies, and
strange canting expressions of their imaginary unaccessible Deities, to amaze
and amuse their blind superstitious followers, and thereby to hold up their
Popish and apish Idolatries in greater veneration. O that there were none of
this heathenish spirit among many in these days, who have their faces toward
heaven. Ah how many are there that busy themselves more in searching after the
reasons of the irrecoverableness of man's fall, than they do to recover
themselves out of their fallen estate. Ah how many are there that busy
themselves more about the apostasy of the Angels, than they do about securing
their interest in Christ! And what a deal of precious time have some spent in
discovering the natures, distinctions, properties, and orders of Angels!

That high-foaring (counterfeit) Peter Martyr says, that to enquire of the
Angels accurately and subtly, is Magis ad curiositatem nostram, quam ad
salutem. And he wishes, that the schoolmen in their knotty, thorny, and
unprofitable discourses had observed this.
Dyonisius describes the Hierarchy of Angels as exactly as if he had dwelt
amongst them; he says there are nine orders of them, which he grounds upon
nine words, which are found partly in the Old Testament, and partly in the New,
as Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones, Powers, Hoasts, Dominions, Principalities,
Archangels and Angels, and at large he describes their several natures,
distinctions, and properties, as, that the first three orders are for immediate
attendance on the Almighty; and the next three orders, for the general
government of the creatures; and the last three orders for the particular good
of Gods Elect: That the Archangels surpass the beauty of Angels ten times,
Principalities surpass the Archangels twenty times, and that Powers surpass
the Principalities forty times, etc. How he came by this learning is not
known; and yet this Hierarchy in these nine several orders has passed for
current through many Ages of the Church.

The Platonicks were the first that divided the Angels into three Orders; as,
some above Heaven, called Supercaelestes; others in Heaven, called Caelestes;
and others under Heaven, called Subcaelest^^, and accordingly they assign them
several Offices. As,

First, They above Heaven (I mean this visible heaven) continually stand before
God (as they say) praising, and lauding, and magnifying of his name.

Secondly, They in Heaven are there seated to move and rule, and govern the
Stars.

Thirdly, They under Heaven, are some to rule Kingdoms, others Provinces,
others Cities, others particular Men.

Several Christian writers that have written of the Hierarchy of Angels, follow
these opinions. Now if we should take these surmises for real truths, then it
will follow, that the highest Angels do not minister to the Saints, but only
and immediately to God himself, which is Jude 9. v. Luke 1. 19, 26. Zech. 4.
10. Rev. 5. 6. Heb. 1. 14.
expressly contrary to several Scriptures, as you may see by them in the Margent
among others. When I was upon the Ministration of the blessed Angels, I did
then prove in several exercises (as some of you may remember) That all the
Angels in Heaven, were commanded and commissionated by God, to be serviceable
and useful to the heirs of Salvation. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent
forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of Salvation? The Devil knows he
is no loser, and the curious soul but a very little gainer, if he can but
persuade him to spend most of his precious time in studying and poring upon the
most dark, mysterious and hidden things of God. He that affects to read the
Revelations of John, more than his plain Epistles; or Daniels prophesies, more
than David's Psalms, and is more busy about reconciling difficult Scriptures,
than he is about mortifying of unruly lusts, or that is set more upon vain
speculations, than upon things that make most for edification, he is not the
man that is cut out for Closet-prayer. Such as affect sublime notions, obscure
expressions, and are men of abstracted conceits, are but a company of wise
fools, that will never take any delight to be with God in a corner. Had many
men spent but half that time in secret prayer, that they have spent in seeking
after the Philosophers Stone, how happy might they have been! O how holy, how
happy, how heavenly, how humble, how wise, how knowing, might many men have
been, had they spent but half that time in Closet-prayer, that they have spent
in searching after those things that are hard to be understood! 2 Pet. 3. 16.
But,

Fourthly, Take heed of engageing your selves in a crowd of worldly businesses.
Many have so much to do on earth that they have no time to look up to Heaven.
As much earth puts out the fire, so much worldly business puts out the fire of
heavenly affections. Look as the earth swallowed up Korah, Dathan and Abiram,
so much Number. 22. 32*
worldly business swallows up so much precious time, that many men have no
leisure to be with God in their Closets; this business is to be done, and that
business cannot be omitted, and the other necessary occasion must be attended, so
that I have no leisure to step out of my shop into my Closet, says Phil. 3. 19.
the earthly minded man; thus a crowd of worldly businesses crowds
Closet-prayer quite out of doors. Many drive so great a trade in their shops,
that their private trade to Heaven is quite laid by. There is nothing that has
kept men more from Christ and Closet-prayer, than the shop, the Exchange, the
Farm, and the Oxen, Luke 14. 16. -- 22.
etc. The Stars which have least circuit are nearest the Pole; and men that are
least perplexed with worldly businesses are commonly nearest to God, to Christ,
to Heaven, and so the fitter for Closet-prayer. It Is sad when men grasp so much
business, that they can have no leisure for Communion with God in a corner. The
noise is such in a mill, as hinders all private intercourse between man and
man; and so a multitude of worldly businesses make such a noise, as that it
hinders all private intercourse between God and the soul. If a man of much
business should now and then slide into his Closet, yet his head and his heart
will be so filled and distracted with the thoughts of his employments, that God
shall have little of him but his bodily presence, or at most, but bodily
presence, or at most, but bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
which profits little. If Christ blamed Martha for the multitude of her
domestical employments, Luke 10. 40, 41, 42.
though they were undertaken for the immediate service and entertainment of
himself, because they hindered her in her soul-concernments; Oh how will he one
day blame all those, who by running themselves into a crowd of worldly
businesses, do cut themselves off from all opportunities of pouring out their
souls before him in secret. But,

Fifthly, Take heed of secret sins. There is no greater hinderance to secret
prayer in all the world than secret sins; and therefore stand upon your watch,
and arm your selves with all your might against them. There is an Antipathy
betwixt secret sinning, and secret praying, partly from guilt, which makes the
soul shy of coming under Gods secret eye; and partly from those fears, doubts,
disputes, and disorders, that secret si^^ raise in the heart. Light is not more
opposite to darkness, Christ to Belial, nor Heaven to Hell, than secret prayer
is to secret sins; and therefore what ever you do, look that you keep clear of
secret sins: To that purpose consider these four things.

First, That God is privy to our most secret sins; his eye is as much upon
secret sins, as it is upon open Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jer. 13. 27. Chap. 29.
23. Psalm. 39. 1. 1 Kings 20. 39. Jer. 20. 20 Job. 10. 12.
sins, Psalm. 90. 8. Thou host set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins
in the light of thy countenance. God has an eye upon our inmost evils, he
sees all that is done in the dark, Jer. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do not I fill Heaven and
Earth, says the Lord? Prove. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good. To say that God does not see the most secret
sins of the children of men, is not only derogatory to his omniscience, but
also to his mercy; for how can God pardon those sins, which he does not see to
be sins? There is no cloud, nor curtain, nor moment of darkness, that can stand
betwixt the eyes of God and the ways of men, Prove. 5. 21. The ways of men are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. In this Scripture
Solomon mainly speaks of the ways of the Adulterer, which usually are plotted
with the most cunning secrecy; yet God sees all those ways. Look as no
boldness can exempt the Adulterer from the justice of God; so no secrecy can
hide him from the eye of God. Though men labor to hide their ways from
others, and from themselves, yet it is but labor in vain to endeavor to hide
them from God. Men that labor to hide God from themselves, can never hide
themselves from God.

I have read that Paphnutius converted Thais and Ephron, two famous Strumpets,
from uncleanness, only with this Argument, That God sees all things in the
dark, when the doors are fast, the windows shut, and the curtains drawn. Heb.
4. 13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all
things are naked and opened (anotamized) even to the eyes of him, with whom we
have to do: It Is an allusion to the Priests under the Law, who when they killed
a beast, all things that were within the beast were laid open and naked before
the Priest, that he might see what was sound, and what was corrupted. Though
evil be done out of the eye of all the world, yet it is naked and manifest in
his sight with whom we have to do.

Those sins which lie closest, and are most secretly lurking in the heart, are
as obvious and odious to God as those that are most fairly written upon a man's
forehead. God is (...) all eye; so that he sees all, the most secret, turnings
and windings of our hearts. Our most secret sins are as plainly seen by him, as
any thing can be by us at noonday, Psalm. 139. 11, 12, If I say, surely the
darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the
darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day; the darkness
and the light are both alike to thee. It Is not the thickest Clouds that can bar
out his observance, whose eyes fill Heaven and earth. What is the Curtain, or
the darkest night, or the double lock, or the secret Chamber, to him who
clearly observes all things in a perfect nakedness. God has an eye upon the
most inward intentions of the heart, and the most subtle motions of the
spirit. Those Philosophers were out, that held the eye and care of God
descended no lower than the heavens. Certainly there is not a creature, not a
thought, not a thing, but lies open to the all-seeing eye of God. The Lord
knows our secret sinnings, as exactly as our visible sinnings. Psalm. 44. 21. He
knows the secrets of our hearts. Would not a malector speak truly at the Bar,
did he know, did he believe that the Judge had Windows that did look into his
breast.

Athenodorus a Heathen could say, that all men ought to be careful in the
actions of their life, because God was every where, and beheld all that was
done.

Zeno a wise Heathen affirmed, that God beheld even the thoughts.

'Twas an excellent saying of Ambrose, If thou can not hide thy self Ambros.
Offic. l. 1. c. 14.
from the Sun, which is Gods Minister of light, how impossible will it be to
hide thy self from him, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the
Sun! Though a sinner may baffle his Conscience, yet he cannot baffle the eye of
Gods omnisciency. Oh that poor souls would remember, that as they are never out
of the reach of Gods hand, so they are never from under the view of his eye.
God is totus oculus, all eye; Jer. 16. 17. For mine eyes are upon all their
ways; they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine
eyes. Job 34. 21, 22. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all
his goings. There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves. Jer. 32. 19. For thine eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and the
fruit of his doings. You know what Ahasuerus that great Monarch said concerning
Haman, when coming in he found him cast upon the Queens Bed, on which she sat,
What (says he) will he force Est. 7. 8.
the Queen before me in the House? There was the killing emphasis in the words
before me; will he force the Queen before me? what will he dare to commit such
villainy and I stand and look on? O Sirs, to sin in the sight of God, to do
wickedly under the eye of God, is a thing that he looks upon as the greatest
affront, and as the highest indignity that can possibly be done unto him: What
(says he) will thou be drunk before me? will thou swear and blaspheme before
me? will thou be wanton and unclean before me? will thou be unjust and
unrighteous under mine eye? will thou profane my Sabbaths, and polute my
Ordinances before my face? will thou despise and persecute my Servants in my
presence? etc. This then is the killing aggravation of all sin, that it is done
before the face of God, that it is committed in the Royal presence of the King
of Kings; whereas the very consideration of Gods Omnipresence should bravely
arm us against sin and Satan; the consideration of his all-seeing eye should
make us shun all occasions of sin, and make us shy of all appearances of sin.
Shall the eye of the Master keep the Scholar from blotting his Copy? shall the
eye of the Judge keep the Malefactor from picking and stealing? shall the eye
of the Master keep the Servant from idling and trifling? shall the eye of the
Father keep the Child from wandering and gadding? shall the eye of the Husband
keep the Wife from extravagancies and indecencies? shall the sharp eye of wise
Cato, o^ the quick eye of a near Neighbor, or the severe eye of a bosom
Friend, keep thee from many enormities and vanities? and shall not the strict,
the pure, the jealous eye of an All-seeing God, keep thee from sinning in the
secret Chamber, when all Curtains are drawn, doors bolted, and every one in the
house a bed or abroad, but thee and thy Dalilah? Oh what dreadful Atheism is
bound up in that man's heart, who is more afraid of the eye of his Father, his
Pastor, his Child, his Servant, than he is of the eye, the presence of the
eternal God? O that all whom this concerns, would take such serious notice of
it, as to judge themselves severely for it, as to mourn bitterly over it, as to
strive mightily in prayer with God, both for the pardon of it, and for power
against it.

The Apostle sadly complains of some in his time who wallowed in secret sins.
Ephesians. 5. 2. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret: He speaks of such as lived in secret fornications and
uncleanness, there were many that had put on a form of godliness, who yet did
allow themselves in the secret actings of abominable wickedness and filthiness,
as if there were no God to behold them, nor Conscience to accuse them, nor
Judgment day to arraign them, nor Justice to condemn them, nor Hell to torment
them. O how infiniitely odious must they be in the eyes of a holy God, who can
highly court and complement him in public, and yet are so bold as to provoke
him to his face in private; these are like those whores, who pretend a great
deal of affection and respect to their Husbands abroad, and yet at home will
play the Harlots before their Husbands eyes.

Such as perform Religious duties only to cloak and color over their secret
filthinesses, their secret wickednesses; such as pretend to Pro. 7. 13, 14, 15.
Job. 24. 15.
pay their vows, and yet wait for the twilight; such as commit wickedness in a
corner, and yet with the Harlot wipe their mouths, and say, What have we done?
such shall at last find the Chambers, the Stones, Hab. 2. 11.
out of the Wall, the Beam out of the Timber, the Seats they sit on, and the
Beds they lie on, to witness against all their want on daliances, and
lascivious carriages in secret. Heb. 13. 4. Who remongers and Adulterers God
will judge: He will sentence them himself; and why? but because such sinners
carry it so closely and craftily, that oftentimes none but God can find them
out. Magistrates often neglect the punishing of such sinners, when their secret
wickedness is made known; and therefore God himself will sit in judgment upon
them. Though they may escape the eyes of men, yet they shall never escape the
judgment of God. Heart-iniquities fall not under any humane sentence. Usually
Whoremongers and Adulterers are marvelous close, and secret and subtle to
conceal their abominable filthiness; therefore the Harlot is said to be Rab.
Sol. in hunc verse.
subtle of heart, Prove. 7. 10. The Hebrew by Rabbi Solomon is translated
munito cord, and having her heart fenced; for, says he, as a City is
environed with fortifications, so her heart is fertified round about with
subtilty: or else it may be rendered occlusa cord, fast shut up in the heart,
even as close as a besiedged City, that is, most secret in the subtilty of her
heart, how open soever she be in the boldness of her outward carriage. So the
Prophet Agur reckons the way of a Man with a Maid, and the way of an
adulterous Woman, among those things which neither himself nor any other man
was possibly able to discover and find out, and compares it to the way of three
things, which no wit nor industry of man is able to descry; but yet God sees
all, and will bring them Prove. 30. 19, 20.
to the Bar for all. But,

Secondly, Consider, That secret In my Treatise called Apples of Gold, etc. I
have proved by many arguments, that the sins of the Saints shall not be brought
into the judgment of Discussion and discovery in the great day, page 155, to
page 172. and therefore understand this second particular of such who live and
die in their secret sins without Repentance and faith in the blood of Christ.
sins shall be revealed. The most hidden works of darkness shall be openly
manifested; for though the actings of sin be in the dark, yet the judgings of
sin shall be in the light, Luke 8. 17. For nothing is secret that shall not be
made manifest; neither any thing hid, that shall not be known, and come abroad.
The slanders of the Jews concerning the magical arts of Christ and his
Apostles; the horrible lies of the Pagans concerning the incestuous copulations
of the Christians, and their drinking mans-blood, were in time discovered what
they were, Eccl. 12. 14. God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil: Mark, he does not say
some work, but every work; and not only works, but secrets; and not only
secrets, but every secret; and not only secret good things, but evil to;
whether good works or ill works, whether secret or open, all must be brought to
judgment. The Books of Gods Omniscience, and man's Conscience, shall then be
opened, and then secret sins shall be as legible in thy forehead, as if they
were written with the most glistering Sunbeams upon a wall of Crystal. All
men's secret sins are printed in Heaven, and God will at last read them aloud in
the ears of all the world, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time until the
Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the heart. Look as there are a world of flies and
motes in the Air, which we never see till the Sun shines; so there are many
thousand thousands of proud thoughts, and unclean thoughts, and worldly
thoughts, and malicious thoughts, and envious thoughts, and bloody thoughts,
etc. which the world sees not, knows not; but in the great day, when the
counsels of all hearts shall be manifest, then all shall out, then all shall
appear, both to the upper and the lower world. In the great day all Masks,
Vizards, and Hoods shall be pulled off, and then all shall out; all that ever
thou have done in the secret Chamber, in the dark corner, shall be made known
to men and Angels, yea, to the whole Court of Heaven, and to all the world
beside, Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ: In this great day God will judge not only our words but our works, not
only our open works, but also our secret works and ways. When Jehoiakim 2 Chronicles. 36 8.
was dead, there was found the characters, superstitious marks, and prints of
his sorcery upon his body; which shows how deeply Idolatry was rooted in his
heart, seeing he bare the marks in his flesh: during his life, he being a King
bore it out bravely, and kept all close, but when he was dead, then all came
out, then the marks of his abominable Idolatry appeared upon his body: Though
sinners, though the greatest of sinners may hide and keep close their horrid
abominations for a time, yet there will come a time when all shall out, when
all their secret marks and secret abominations shall be obvious to all the
world.

But sinners may be ready to Object and say, Let us but alone in our secret
sins till that day, and then we shall do well enough. And therefore in the

Third place, Consider, that God many times does, even in this life, Isa. 41.
21, 22, 23.
discover and make known to the world men's secret sins.

God loves to act suitable to his own names: Now to be a revealer of secrets is
one of his Names, Dan. 2. 47. and accordingly, even in this world, he often
brings to light the most hidden things of darkness. Of all the glorious
Attributes of God, there is none that suffers so deeply by secret sins, as the
Attribute of his Omniscience; and therefore in this world God often stands up
to vindicate the Honor of that Attribute, by unmasking of sinners, and by
bringing to the light all those secret paths and ways of wickedness, wherein
they have long walked undiscovered. 'Twas for the honor of this blessed
Attribute of God, that the secret plotted Acts 5. 1, -- 12.
sin of Ananias and Saphira was so openly discovered; And great fear came upon
all the Church, and upon as many as heard these things. Joseph's Brethren for a
long time hide their malice, their craft, their Genesis 42. 21, 22. Chap. 50. 15,
-- 22.
cruelty, their envy, their tretchery, in selling their Brother into Egypt; but
at last by amazing and amusing providence all was brought to light. Conscience
that for a time may seem to be asleep, yet will in time awake, and make the
sinner know, that he is as faithful in recording, as he is fearful in accusing,
and this Joseph's Brethren found by sad experience. So Gehazi, 2 Kings 5. 20.
*ult.
he sins secretly, he lies fearfully, and after all he defends it stoutly; but
at last all comes out, and instead of being clothed richly, he and his
posterity was clothed with a Leprosy for ever; and instead of two changes of
Garments, God hangs him up in Chains, as a Monument of his wrath to all
Generations. So Achan secretly and sacriledgiously steals a goodly Babylonish
Garment, and two hundred Shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold of Fifty
Shekels Weight, and hides them in the earth in the midst of his Tent, and by
reason of this Israel flies before their enemies; but at last Achan is taken,
and all comes out, and his Golden Wedge proved a Wedge to cleave him, and his
Babylonish Garment a Garment to shroud him: Joshua makes a bonfire of all that
he had secretly and sinfully stolen, and burns him, and his children, and all
that he had, in it. Oh how openly, how severely does God sometimes punish men
for their most secret iniquity! The same you may see in that great instance of
David, 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10, 11, 12. Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment
of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with
the sword (this was done in a secret Letter) and have taken his Wife to be thy
Wife. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou
have despised me, and have taken the Wife of Vriah the Hittite to be thy Wife.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own
house, and I will take thy Wives before thy eyes and give them to thy
Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun. For 2 Samuel
16. 22.
thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before
the Sun. David was very studious and very industrious to hide his sin, and to
save his credit; but the covering made of Vriah's blood was too short, and too
narrow to hide his folly with Bathsheba, and therefore when he had done all he
could, his sin was tossed like a ball, from man to man, through Court, City and
Country.

I have read of one Parthenius an homicide, treasurer to Theodobert King of
France, who having traitorously slain an especial friend of his, called
Ausanius, with his Wife Papianilla, when no man suspected or accused him
thereof, he detected and accused himself after this strange manner: As he slept
in his Bed, suddenly he roared out most pitifully, crying for help, or else he
perished; and being demanded what he ailed, he half asleep answered, That his
friend Ausanius and his wife, whom he had slain long ago, summoned him to
judgment before God: Upon which confession he was apprehended, and after due
examination stoned to death: Thus the terrors and horrors of his own
consciences discover that secret wickedness, which none could prove against him.

I have read how that Mahomet Turk Hist. Fol. 400.
the great Turk had with great rewards procured two Turks to undertake to kill
Scanderbeg: These Traitors came to Scanderbeg making such a show of the
detestation both of Mahomets Tyranical Government, and vain superstition, that
they were both by Scanderbeg and others reputed to be indeed the men they
desired to be accounted, and so after they had learned the Principles of the
Christian Religion, they were both by their own desire Baptized: Soon after by
a providence it so fell out, that these two Traitors fell at variance betwixt
themselves, by which means the plot came to be discovered, and after due
examination and confession of the fact, they were presently condemned and
executed.

Conscience is Gods spy in the Conscience, says Philo, is the little
consistory of the soul. Conscience is mill testes, a thousand witnesses, for
or against a man. Conscience is a Court of Record, and whatsoever it sees it
writes down; and Conscience is always as quick in writing as the sinner can be
in sinning. The very Heathen could say, that Conscience was a God to every man.
bosom. Conscience as a Scribe, a Register, sits in the Closet of your hearts
with Pen in hand, and makes a Diurnal of all your secret ways, and secret
crimes, which are above the cognizance of men. Conscience sets down the time
when, the place where, the manner how, and the persons with whom such and such
secret wickednesses have been committed, and that so clear and evident, that go
where you will, and do what you can, the characters of them shall never be
cancelled or rased out, till God appear in judgment. Let a man sin in the
closest retirement that humane policy can contrive; let him take all the ways
he can to hide his sins, to cloak and cover his sin as Adam did; yet Conscience
will so play the Judge, that it will bring in the evidence, produce the Law,
urge the penalty, and pass the sentence of Condemnation upon him. There is many
a man who makes a fair profession, and who has a great name in the world, who
yet is (...) self-condemned for those secret sins which are not obvious to the
eyes of man, nor punishable by the Laws or hands of men; yea, many times in
this life God raises such a hell of horror and terror in many men's
Consciences, by reason of their secret sins, that they can have no rest nor
quiet, neither at bed nor at board, neither lying down nor rising up; fain they
would conceal their sins, unwilling they are that the world should know how
vile they have been in secret; but Conscience being upon the rack, and still a
gnawing, accusing, and condemning of them, they can hold no longer; now all
must out; and now those sins that were most secret and concealed come to be
published upon the housetop.

Some that have been under anguish of Conscience, others that have been smitten
with a Frenzy, and many in their very sleep have been often the blazers and
proclaimers of their own secret filthiness and wickedness. In those cases God
has made many a secret sinner to cry out with the Leper, unclean, unclean; and
with Judas Lev. 13. 45. Mat. 27. 4.
(before all present) I have sinned, I have sinned. Many times in this life,
God does very strangely and wonderfully discover those secret works of
darkness, in which persons have lived long undiscovered.

A Pythagorean bought a pair of Shoes upon trust, the Shoemaker dies, he is
glad, thinks them gained; but a while after his Conscience flies upon him, and
becomes a continual chider and tormentor of him; he hereupon repairs to the
house of the dead, casts in his money with these words, There, take thy due;
thou live to me, though dead to all besides. But,

Fourthly, Consider, That secret sins are in some respects more dangerous than
open sins. Many a man bleeds to death inwardly, and no man perceives it. The
more inward and secret the disease is, the more the man is in danger to lose
his life. There are no Fevers so dangerous, as those that prey upon the spirits
and inward parts; so there are no sins so dangerous and pernicious to the souls
of men, as those that are most inward and secret. secret sins often reign in
the souls of men most powerfully when least apparently.

First, Consider, That he that sins secretly deprives himself of those helps
and remedies, which by a divine blessing might arm him against sin, yea, make
him victorious over sin, to wit, the Prayers, Counsels, Reproofs, Examples and
Encouragements of Friends, Relations, etc. A man's house may be on fire; but
whilst it is all inward help comes not in; but when the fire flames out, when
it catches the outside of the house, then help runs in, then help on all hands
is ready. He that sins in secret debars himself of all public Remedy, and
takes great pains to damn his soul in a corner, and to go to Hell in the dark.
But,

Secondly, Secret sins will make way for public sins. He that makes no
Conscience of sinning in the secret Chamber, will e're long with Absalom be
ready to spread a Tent upon the top of the 2 King. 16. 21, 22,
house, and to go in to his Concubines in the sight of all Israel. Such as have
made no Conscience of stealing a few pins or pence, or a few shillings in
private, have in time come to be so bold, as to take a purse on the road at
high-noon. The Cockatrice must be crushed in the Egg, else it will soon become
a Serpent. The very thought of sin, if not thought on, will break forth into
action, action into custom, custom into habit, and then both body and soul are
irrecoverably lost to all eternity.

If Satan can but wound our heel (as the Poets feign of Achilles) he will make
a hard shift but he will send death from the heel to the heart. If this subtle
Serpent can but wriggle in his tail by an ill thought, he will soon get in his
head by a worse action. Hence it is that Christ calls hatred murder, and a
wanton eye adultery. Secret hatred often issues in upon murder, and secret
wanton glances of the eye do often issue in visible adultery. If Ammon be sick
with the sinful conceptions of incestuous lust, how will his soul be in pain
and travail till he has brought forth! And how many are there that in secret
have taken now and then but one Cup more than enough, who now may be seen at
high-noon reeling against every Post. Look as secret diseases in the body (if
not cured) will in time openly break forth; so secret sins in the soul (if not
pardoned and purged) will in time be openly revealed. Covetousness was Judas
his secret sin; and no sooner does an occasion, or a temptation present it
self, but he is very ready and forward to betray and sell his Lord and Master,
for thirty pieces of Silver before all the world. Lust having conceived brings
forth sin; and James 1. 15.
that thus, First, Sin has its conception, and that is delight; and then its
formation, and that is design; and then its birth, and that is action; and then
its growth, and that is custom; and then its end, and that is damnation. But,

Thirdly, Secret sinning puts far more respect and fear upon men than upon God.
Thou will be unjust in secret, and wanton in secret, and unclean in secret, and
treacherous in secret, etc. and why? but because thou art afraid that such or
such men should know it, or that such and such Friends should know it, or that
such and such Relations should know it: Ah poor wretch, art thou afraid of the
eye of a man, of a man that shall Isa. 51. 12.
dye, and of the Son of man, which shall be made as Grass? and yet not tremble
under his eye, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, sharp and terrible, such as
pierce into the inward Rev. 1. 14. Heb. 4. 13.
parts? Ah how full of atheism is that man's heart, that tacitly says, If my
sins be but hid from the eyes of the world, I do not care though the Lord knows
them, though the Lord strictly observes them, though the Lord sets a mark, a
Memorandum upon them. What is this, O Man, but to brave it out with God, and to
tempt him, and provoke him to to his very face, who is Light, and in whom there
is no darkness at all? Ah sinner, sinner, can man 1 John 1. 5, 6.
damn thee? can man dis-inherit thee? can man fill thy Conscience with horrors
and terrors? can man make thy life a very Hell? can man bar the gates of Glory
against thee? can man speak thee into the Grave by a word of his mouth? and
after all, can man cast thee into endless, easeless, and remediless torments? O
no; can God do all this? O yes; why then does not thy heart stand more in awe
of the eye of the great God, than it does of the eye of a poor, weak, mortal
man.

I have insisted the longer on this particular, because there is not any one
thing in all the world, that does more hinder secret Communion with God, and
secret prayer, than secret sins. And Oh that you would all make it your great
business, to watch against secret sins, and to pray against secret sins, and to
mourn over secret sins, and deeply to judge and condemn your selves for secret
sins, and carefully and Conscientiously to shun and avoid all occasions and
provocations that may be as fuel to secret sins.

Certainly there are no men or women that are so sincere and serious in
Closet-prayer, or, that are so frequent, so fervent, so constant, in
Closet-prayer, or, that are so delightful, so resolulute, so undaunted, or so
unwearied in Closet-prayer, as those that keep themselves most clear and free
from secret sins.

For a Close remember this, That though secret sins are in some respects more
dangerous than other sins are, yet in three respects they are not so bad nor so
dangerous as other sins are.

First, In that they do not so scandalize Religion as open sins do.

Secondly, In that they do not shame, grieve, and wound, the hearts of the
Saints, as open sins do.

Thirdly, In that they are not so infectious to others, nor such provocations
to others, to sin against the Lord, as open sins are. And thus you may see,
what those things are that you must carefully take heeed of, as ever you would
adict your selves to Closet-prayer.

And as you must take heed of these five things: So there are several other
things that you must carefully and conscienciously apply your selves to, as
ever you would be found faithful and constant in this great duty, viz.
Closet-prayer.

Now they are these;

First, Lament greatly, and mourn bitterly over the neglect of this choice
Duty. He that does not make Conscience of mourning over the neglect of this
Duty, will never make Conscience of performing this Duty. O that Jer. 9. 1.
your heads were waters, and your eyes a Fountain of tears, that you might weep
day and night, for the great neglect of Closet-prayer, He that mourns most for
the neglect of this Duty, will be found most in the practice of this Duty. He
that makes most Conscience to accuse, arraign, and condemn himself for
neglecting Closet-prayer, he will make most Conscience of giving himself up to
Closet-prayer. It Is said of Adam, that he turned his face toward the Garden of
Eden, and from his heart bitterly lamented his great fall: O that you would
turn your faces toward your Closets, and bitterly lament your rare going into
them. But,

Secondly, Habituate your selves, accustom your selves, to Closet-prayer: Make
private prayer your constant trade. Frequency begets familiarity, and
familiarity confidence, we can go freely and boldly into that friends house
whom we often visit. What we are habituted to, we do with ease and delight. A
man that is habituted or accustomed to write, to read, to ride, to run, or to
play on this, or that musical Instrument, etc. he does it all with delight and
ease; and so a man that does habituate himself to Closet-prayer, he will manage
it with delight and ease. But,

Thirdly, Keep a Diary of all Deuteronomy. 7. 18, 19. Psalm. 66. 12.
your Closet-experiences; O carefully record and book down all your
Closet-mercies: O be often in reading over your Closet-experiences, and be
often in meditating and in pondering upon your Closet-experiences. There is no
way like this, to inflame your love to Closet-prayer, and to engage your hearts
in this secret trade of private prayer.

O remember that at such a time, you went into your Closets with hard hearts,
and dry eyes; but before you came out of your Closets, Psalm. 6. 6. Psalm. 39.
12. Psalm. 56. 8.
ah how sweetly, how evangelically, how powerfully were you melted, and humbled
before the Lord! O remember how that at another time you went into your Closets
clouded and benighted, but came out of your Closets with as glorious a shine of
God upon your souls, as Moses had upon his face, Exodus 34. 28, 29.
when he came down from the Mount from communing with God! O remember how often
you have gone into your Closets Luke 24. 31, 32. Isa. 4. 4.
with cold, frozen spirits, but before you come out of your Closets what a fire
has God kindled in your souls, what a spirit of burning have you found in your
hearts! O remember how often you have gone into your Closets straightened and
shut up, but before you have come out, how has your souls been like the
Charriots of Aminnadab! O remember what Can. 6. 12.
power God has given you against corruptions in your Closets, and what strenth
God has given you against temptations in your Closets. O remember the sweet
discoveries of divine love that you have had when in your Closets: O remember
the secret visits, the secret kisses, the secret embraces, the secret whispers,
the secret lovetokens that Christ has given you in your Closets. O seriously
ponder upon these things, and then Closet-duties will be sweet unto you.

'Twas a sweet saying of Bernard, O Saint, know thou not that thy Husband
Christ is bashful, and will Can. 7. 11, 12.
not be familiar in company; retire thy self by Meditation into thy Closet, or
into the fields, and there thou shall have Christ's embraces. Meditatio nutrix
orationis, Meditation is the Nurse of Prayer. O the more any man Gerson.
meditates upon his Closet-experiences, the more he shall find his heart
engaged to Closet-duties; the more you ponder upon Closet-experiences, the
sweeter will Closet-experiences be to your souls; and the sweeter
Closet-experiences are to your souls, the more your souls will delight to be
with God in your Closets.

Pliny tells us of one Messala Corvinus, lib. 7. c. 24.
whose memory was so bad, that he forgot his own name. And I am afraid that
many of your memories are so bad, that you forget your Closet-mercies, your
Closet-experiences.

I have read of such a Pestilential disease once at Athens, as took away the
memories of those that were infected with it, so that they forgot their own
names: O that I had not cause to fear that some Pestilential Disease or other,
has so taken away the memories of many that they have quite forgot their
Closet-experiences. Well Friends remember this, though stony hearts are bad,
yet Iron memories are good; and O that you would all labor after Iron
memories, that so you may remember and ponder upon your Closet-experiences. I
have read of the Heathens, how they made use of white and black stones, for
these two ends, First, They gave them to persons at their arraignment before
the Judges; if any were condemned to death, they gave him a black Stone, but if
absolved and set free, a white Stone! (To which custom the Holy Ghost seems
to allude, in that Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give a White
Stone.) A second use of those Stones was this, that by them they might keep an
account of all the good days, or evil days they had met withal in their
lives. Hence Giacopo Senzaro having been long in love, and much crossed about
his match, he filled a Pot full of black Stones, putting only one white Stone
among them, and being asked the reason, answered, There will come one White
Day (meaning his Marriage Day) which will make amends for all my Black Days.

Ah Friends, how often has God given you the White Stone in your Closets!
Certainly you have had more White Stones than Black Stones; your Closet-mercies
and experiences have been more than your public crosses and miseries. O Sirs,
did you but reckon your good days according to the White Stones you have had
in your Closets, it would make you more in love with Closet-prayer than ever.
But,

Fourthly, Be sure that you do not spend so much of your precious time in
public Duties and Ordinances, as that you can spare none for private Duties,
for secret services. Though Pharoah's Kine eat up one another, yet our Genesis 41.
4.
Duties must not eat up one another; public Duties must not eat up family
duties, nor familyduties must not eat up public duties, nor neither of them
must not eat up Closet-duties: The wisdom of a Christian does most eminently
sparkle and shine, in giving every duty its proper time and place, I was going
to say, that either he was Eccl. 8. 5.
no Christian, or at least no excellent Christian, that is all eye to read, or
all ear to hear, or all tongue to speak, or all knee to bow, to kneel, to pray.
Ah how many are there that spend so much time in hearing of this man and that,
and in running up and down from meeting to meeting, that they have no time to
meet with God in their Closets. O Sirs, your Duties are never so amiable and
lovely, they are never so orient and beautiful as when they are seasonably and
orderly performed.

Oh how wise are the men of this world, so to order all their civil affairs,
that no one business shall interferre with another; they set apart for each
business a convenient proportion of time; they allot an hour for one business,
two for another, three for another, etc. O that we were as wise for our souls,
as wise for eternity, as they are for this world. O that our hearts would so
consult with our heads, that we may never want a convenient time to seek God in
a corner. That Devil that loves to set one man against another, and one Nation
against another, and one Christian against another, that Devil loves to set one
Ordinance against another, and one Duty against another: Hence it is that on the
one hand he works some to cry up public Prayers, in opposition to secret
Prayer; and one the other hand he works others to cry up private Duties in
opposition to all public Duties; whereas all Christians stand obliged by God,
so to manage one sort of Duties, as not to shut out another sort of Duties.
Every Christian must find time and room for every Duty incumbent upon him. But,

Fifthly, Love Christ with a more enflamed love, O strengthen your love to
Christ, and your love to Closet-duties. Lovers love Can, 7. 10, 11, 12.
much to be alone, to be in a corner together. Certainly the more any man loves
the Lord Jesus, the more he will delight to be with Christ in a corner. There
was a great deal of love between Jonathan 1 Samuel 18. 19. and chap. 20. com.
and David, and according to their love, so was their private converse, their
secret communion one with another; they were always best, when in the Field
together, or when in a corner together or when behind the door together, or
when locked up together, and just so it would be with you, did you but love the
Lord Jesus Christ with a more raised, and a more enflamed love; you would be
always best when you were most with Christ in a corner.

Divine Love is like a rod of Myrtle, which as Pliny reports, makes the
traveller that carries it in his hand so lively and cheerful, that he never
faints or grows weary. Ah Friends did you but love the Lord Jesus with a more
strong, with a more raised love, you would never faint in Closet-duties, nor
you would never grow weary of Closet-duties. Look as the Israelites removed
their Tents from Mithcah to Hashmonah, from sweetness Number. 23. 39.
to swiftness (as the words import): So the sweetness of Divine Love will make
a man move swiftly on in a way of Closet-duties. Divine Love will make all
Closet-duties more easy to the Soul, and more pleasant and delightful to the
Soul; and therefore do all you can to strengthen your love to Christ, and your
love to Closet-work.

It was observed among the Primitive Christians, that they were so full of love
one to another, that they could be acquainted one with another as well in half
an hour, as in half a year. O Sirs, If your hearts were but more full of love
to Christ, and Closet-duties, you would quickly be better acquainted with them,
you would quickly know, what secret communion with Christ, behind the door
means. But,

Sixthly, Be highly, thoroughly, and fixedly resolved in the strength of Christ,
to keep close to closet-duties, in the face of all difficulties and
discouragements that you may Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19, 20
meet withal. A man of no resolution, or of weak resolution, will be won with a
Nut, and lost with an Apple. Satan, and the world, and carnal relations, and
your own hearts, will cast in many things to discourage you, and take you off
from Closet-prayer; but be ye nobly and firmly resolved, to keep close to your
Closet, let the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, do and say what they can.
Daniel was a man of an invincible resolution; rather than he would om it
praying in his Chamber he would be cast into the Den of Lions. Of all the
Duties of Religion, Satan is the most deadly enemy to this of secret Prayer;
partly because Secret prayer spoils him in his most secret designs, plots, and
contrivances against the Soul; and partly because secret prayer is so musical
and delightful to God; and partly because secret prayer is of such rare use and
advantage to the Soul; and partly because it lays not the soul of open to
pride, vain glory, and worldly applause, as prayer in the Synagogue does; and
therefore he had rather that a man should pray a thousand times in the
Synagogues, or in the corner of the streets, or behind a Pillar, than that he
should pray once in his Closet, and therefore you had need to steel your hearts
with holy courage and resolution, that what ever suggestions, temptations;
oppositions, or objections you may encounter with, that yet you will keep close
to Closet-prayer.

There is not any better Bulwark in the day or battle, than an heroic
resolution of heart before the day of battle. Sanctified resolutions do
exceedingly weaken and discourage Satan in his assaults, they do greatly daunt
and dishearten him in all his undertakings against the Soul. That man will
never long be quiet in his Closet, who is not steadfastly resolved to seek the
Lord in a corner, though all the powers of darkness, should make head against
him. O Sir, Divine fortitude, holy resolutions, will make you like a Wall of
Brass, that no Arrows can pierce; they will make you like Armor of proof, that
no shot can hurt; they will make you like that Angel Mat. 28. 2.
that rolled away the Stone from before the door of the Sepulcher; they will
either enable you to remove the greatest Mountains of opposition that lie
between you and Closet prayer, or else they will enable you to step over them.

Lather was a man of great resolution, and a man that spent much time in
Closet-prayer. And such another was Nehemiah, who met with so much opposition,
that had he not been steeled by a strong and obstinate resolution, he could
never have rebuilded the Temple, but would have sunk in the midst of his work:
Now he was a man for private prayer, as I have shown in the beginning of this
Treatise. Who more resolute than David? and who more for secret prayer than
David? the same I might say of Paul, Basil, and many others, who have been
famous in their Generations.

O Sirs, Sanctified Resolutions for Closet-prayer, will chain you faster to
Closet-prayer, than ever Ulysses his resolutions did chain him to the mast of
the ship. 'Twas a noble resolution that kept Ruth close to her mother, when her
sister Orpah only complements her, kisses her, and takes her leave of her. Be
but nobly resolved Ruth 1. 10, -- 20.
for Closet-prayer, and then you will keep close to it, when others only court
it, and take their leaves of it.

In the Salentine Country, there is mention made of a Lake, that is still brim
full, if you put in never so much it never runs over, if you draw out never so
much it is still full. The resolution of every Christian for Closet-prayer,
Plin. Hist. l. 2. c. 103.
should be like this Lake, still brim full: Tide life tide death, come honor
or reproach, come loss or gain, come liberty or bonds come what can come, the
true bred Christian must be fully and constantly resolved to keep close to his
Closet. But,

Seventhly, Labor for a greater effusion of the Holy Spirit, for the greater
measure any man has of the Spirit of God, the more that man will delight to be
with God in secret, Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the House of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplications.
verse. 12, 13, 14. And the Land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of
the House of David apart, and their Wives apart; the family of the House of
Nathan apart, and their Wives apart: The family of the House of Levi apart, and
their Wives apart; the family of the House of Shimei apart, and their Wives
apart: All the families that remain, every family apart, and their Wives
apart. Mark, in the Joel 2. 28, 29. Isa. 44 3.
last of the last days, when men shall be generally under a greater effusion
of the Holy Spirit than ever, then they shall be more given up to secret prayer
than ever. There will never be such praying apart, and such mourning apart, as
there will be when the Lord shall pour out most richly, gloriously, abundantly,
of his Spirit upon his poor people; now every one shall pour out his tears and
his soul before God in a corner, to show the soundness of their sorrow, and to
show their sincerity by their secrecy; for Ille dolet vere, qui sine test
dolet, He grieves with a witness, that grieves without a witness.

Certainly the more any man is now under the blessed pouring out of the Spirit
of Christ, the more that man gives himself up to secret Communion with Christ.
Every man is more or less with Christ in his Closet, as he is more or less
under the anointings of the Spirit of Christ. The more any man has of the
Spirit of Christ, the more he loves Christ, and the more any man loves Christ,
the more he delights to be with Christ alone: Lovers love to be alone. The more
any man has of the Spirit of Christ, the more his heart will be set to please
Christ: Now nothing pleases Christ more than the secret prayers of his people.
(Cant. 2. 14. O my D^ve that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy voice; for
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.) And therefore such a one
will be much in secret prayer. The more any man has of the Spirit of Christ,
the more his heart will be set upon glorifying and exalting Christ: Now nothing
glorifies Christ more, nor exalts him more, than secret prayer; and therefore
the more any man has of the Spirit of Christ, the more that man will be found
in secret prayer.

There are many persons who say, they would be more in their Closets than they
are, but that they meet with many hindrances, many occasions, many diversions*
many temptations, many oppositions, many difficulties, many discouragements,
which prevent them. Ah Friends, had you a greater measure of the Holy Spirit
upon you, none of these things should ever be able to hinder your secret trade
Heavenward: Had you a more rich anointing of the Spirit upon you, you would
never plead, there is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the Streets; but were there
a thousand Pro. 26. 13.
Lions between you and your Closets, you would either step over them, or make
your way through them, that so you might enjoy Communion with Christ in your
Closets. But,

Eighthly and Lastly, As ever you would keep close to private prayer, Be
frequent in the serious Consideration of Eternity. O see Eternity standing at
the end of every Closet-Prayer, and this will make you pray to purpose in your
Closets.

O Sirs, every work you do, is a step to a blessed, or to a cursed Eternity.
Every motion, every action in this life, is a step toward Eternity. As every
step that a Traveller takes brings him forward to his journeys end: So every
step that a man takes in the secret ways of Righteousness and Holiness, such
as Closet-Duties are, they bring him nearer to his journeys end, they bring him
nearer to a blessed Eternity. Look as every step the sinner takes in a way of
wickedness brings him nearer to Hell; so every step that a Saint takes in a way
of Holiness brings him nearer to Heaven. Look as every step that a wicked man
takes in the ways of unrighteousness brings him nearer to a cursed Eternity,
so every step that a godly man takes in a way of Righteousness brings him
nearer to a blessed Eternity.

Zeuxis the famous Painter was so exceeding careful and curious in drawing all
his Lines, that he would let no Piece of his go abroad into the World to be
seen of men, till he had turned it over and over, and viewed it on this side
and that side, again and again, to see if he could spy any fault in it; and
being asked the reason, why he was so curious, and so long in drawing his
Lines, answered, Aeternitati pingo, I paint for Eternity. O Sirs, we all pray
for Eternity, we fast for Eternity, we read for Eternity, we hear for Eternity,
we wait for Eternity, we weep for Eternity; and therefore O how curiously, how
exactly, how wisely, how faithfully, how carefully, how diligently, how
unweariedly, should we be in all our Closet-Duties and services; seeing that
all we do is in order to Eternity! Friends, you must all e're long be eternally
blessed, or eternally cursed; eternally happy, or eternally miserable; eternally
saved, or eternally damned; eternally accepted, or eternally rejected: And
therefore what infinite cause have you, frequently to shut to your Closet
Doors, and to plead mightily with God in in a corner, for the lives of your
poor, precious, and immortal souls, that they may be eternally saved in the
great day of our Lord Jesus. O Sirs, when any hindrances to Closet-prayer
present themselves to you, seriously remember Eternity, and that will remove
them.

It is related of one Pachomius, that whenever he felt any unlawful Drex. de
Eternit. consid. 8.
desires to arise in his mind. he was wont to drive them away with the
remembrance of Eternity.

The same Author relates a story out of Benedictus Rhrexanus, of an ungodly
fellow, who on a certain Ibid. con. 5.
night could not sleep, who up on the serious Consideration of Death and
Eternity, and the damned lying in Hell, could not be at rest, but Eternity did
still run in his mind; fa^n would he have shaken off the thoughts thereof, as
gnawing worms; therefore he followed sports, and pastimes, and merry meetings,
and sought out Companions like himself, and sat oftentimes so long at his Cups,
that he laid his Conscience asleep, and so seemed to take some rest, but when
he was awakened, his Conscience flew in his face, and would still be a
suggesting sad thoughts of Eternity to him; of all things in the world he could
not bear it, to be kept awake in the night; but so it happened, that being
sick, he was kept awake one night, and could not sleep at all, whereupon these
thoughts rise in him, What is it so tedious then to be kept from sleep one
night, and to lie a few hours in the dark? Oh what is it then to be kept in
torments and everlasting darkness! I am here in my own house upon a soft bed in
the dark, kept from sleep but one night, but to lie in flames and endless
misery, how dreadful must that needs be! These and such like meditations were
the happy means of this young man's conversion.

I have read a notable Story of one Theodorus, a Christian young man in Egypt,
who when there was a great deal of feasting, mirth, and music in his Fathers
house, withdrew himself from all the company, and being got alone, he thus
thought with with himself, Here is content and delight enough for the flesh, I
may have what I desire, but how long will this last? this will not hold out
long; then falling down upon his knees before the Lord in secret, he said, O
Lord my heart is open unto thee, I indeed know not what to ask, but only this
Lord, let me not dye eternally; O Lord, thou know I love thee, O let me live
eternally to praise thee.

If there be any way or means on earth to bring us upon our knees before God in
secret, it is the serious and solemn thoughts of Eternity. O that the fear of
Eternity might fall upon all your souls: O that you would all seriously
consider that after a short time is expired, you must all enter upon an eternal
estate. O consider that Eternity is an infinite, endless, bottomless gulf,
which no line can fathom, no time can reach, no age can extend to, no tongue
can express: it is a duration always present, a being always in being; its
Vnum perpetuum hodie, one perpetual day, which shall never see light. O Sirs,
this is, and must be for a lamentation, viz. that Eternity is a thing that most
men never think of, or else very slenderly; a snatch and away, as Dogs are said
to lap and away at the River N^lus. But as ever you would have your hearts
chained to your closets, and to closet-duties, as the men of Tyrus chained
their God Apollo to a post, that they might be sure of him, then seriously and
frequently ponder upon Eternity, and with those forty valiant Martyrs, be
still a crying out (...), O Basil 40. Martyr.
Eternity, Eternity*

Mr. VVood after some holy discourse fell a musing, and cried out before all
present, for near half a quarter of an hour together, for ever, for ever, for
ever. Austins Prayer was, Hack me, hew me, burn me here, but spare me
heareafter, spare me hereafter. Certainly if Christians would but spend one
quarter of an hour every day in the solemn thoughts of Eternity, it would make
them more in love with Closet-prayer than ever, yea, it would make them more
fearful of omitting Closet-prayer than ever, and more careful and Conscientious
in the discharg of all Closet-Duties than ever.

And thus according to my weak measure, I have given out all that at present
the Lord has graciously given in to my poor soul, concerning this most
necessary, most glorious, and most useful point of points viz. Closet-prayer, I
shall by assisting grace follow this poor piece with my prayers that it may be
so blessed from on high, as that it may work mightily to the internal and eternal
welfare, both of Reader, Hearer, and Writer.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle Dedicatory, near the middle, for, for are, r. are for
corrosives. for appropiating, r. appropriating. In the 3. Lesson for Mow, r.
Now. In the 7. Lesson, for hang up, r. hang upon. p. 21. l. 28. read thus p. ^0
l. 28. read Paul. p. 98. l. 26. dele as well. p. 99. r. in the marg. Deus. p.
149. l. 2. dele must. p. 126. l. 7. r. lies. p. 168. l. 16. r. decree, for
degree. p. 170 l. 4. r. evade. p. 175 l. 20. r. Solomon. p. 189. l. ult. r.
adressing. p. 190. l. 14. r. or, for for. p. 209. l. utl. r. and. p. 224 l. 18.
r. drink. l. 22. r. affliction p. 254. l 7. r. he, for the. p. 298. l. 22. r.
cum. p. 357. l. 8. r. Marquess, for Martyr. p. 371. l. 28. r. a very, for every.

A TABLE Containing The Chief Heads of this BOOK.
Of Afflictions. THat Afflictions refemble a Rod in Seven Particulars, you may
see in the Epistle Dedicatory. Of Allegories. Of Allegories, p. 1. to 19. Of
the Blood of Christ. That the least drop of Christ's Blood was not s^fficient
for the redemption of our Souls, is made good by five Arguments, p. 303, 304,
305. C Doct. That Closet-Prayer (or private prayer) is an indispensable duty,
that Christ himself has laid upon all, that are not willing to lie under the
woeful brand of being Hypocrites, p. 6. Five Arguments to prove Closet-Prayer to
be a Duty, p. 6. to p. 8. The most eminent Saint in all Ages have applied
themselves to Closet-Prayer, p. 8, to p. 19. We may more freely, fully, and
safely, unbosome our souls to God in our Closets, than we can in the presence
of many or a few, p. 30, to p. 34. Christians enjoy most of God in their
Closets, p. 36, to p. 46. The time of this life is our only time for
Closet-Prayer, p. 46, 47. The prevalency of Closet-Prayer, p. 47. to p. 67. See
Secret. Rules to be observed in Closet-Prayer. First, Be frequent in
Closet-Prayer, and that upon eight grounds, p. 297, to p. 30^. Secondly, Take
fit seasons and opp^rtu^ities for Closet Prayer. Three unfit seasons for Closet
Prayer are hinted at, p. 305. to 311. Thirdly, Look that you do not perform
Closet-Duties* merely to still your Consciences, p. 312, to p. 315. Fourthly,
Take heed of resting upon Closet-Duties, p. 315, to p. 322. Fifthly, Labor to
bring your hearts into all your Closet-Prayers, p. 322, to p. 328. Sixthly, Be
servent, be warm, be importunate with God in all your Closet-performances, p.
328. to p. 339. Seventhly, Be constant in Closet-Prayer, hold on, and hold out
in Closet-prayer, p. 339 to p. 347. Eighthly, In all your Closet Prayers,
thirst and long after Communion with God, p. 347, to p. 384. Ninthly, In all
your Closet-Duties, look that your ends be right, p. 384, to p. 387. Tenthly,
Be sure that you offer all your Closet-Prayers in Christ's name, and his alone,
p. 387, to p. 393. Eleventhly, When you come out of your Closets narrowly watch
what becomes of your Closet-Prayers. p. 393, to p. 399. Of Christ. Christ was
much in Secret Prayer, p. 19, to 24. Six Arguments why Christ was so much in
Secret Prayer, p. 24, to p. 27. Christ was very much affected, and delighted in
the Secret Prayers of his people, p. 73, to p. 75. What a friend Christ is,
showed in Ten particulars, p. 76, 77, 78. Of Combats. The Combat between the
Allmigh- and Jacob, opened in Six particulars, p. 49, to p. 58. Of Communion
with God. Quest. How shall a man know when he has real Communion with God in
his Closet, or no? Answered eight ways, p. 352, to p. 384. Six Arguments to
prove that all Christians do not enjoy a like Communion with God in their
Closets, p. 356, to p. 363. Of Curiosity. Curiosity is a very great hinderance
to Closet-prayer, p. 410, to p. 418. E Of Examples. We are bound to follow the
best Examples, p. 16, to p. 19. Christ's Example is for our imitation, p. 22,
23. Of Eternity. As ever you would keep close to Closet-Prayer, be frequent in
the consideration of Eternity, p. 470, to the end. Of Experiences. He that
would keep close to Closet-Duties, must keep a diary of his Closet-Experiences,
p. 453, to p. 457. F Of a Friend, or Friends. What a Friend Christ is, showed
in Ten particulars, p. 76, 77, 78. H Of Hypocrites. No Hypocrites make secret
Prayer their ordinary trade or work. p. 27. to p. 30. I Of Idleness. Idleness
is a very great hinderance to Closet-Prayer; and therefore take heed of it, p.
400, to p. 408. L Of Love. He that would be much with God in his Closet, must
labor to Love Christ with a more enflamed Love, p. 460, 461, 462. M Eight
special Means to help on that great Duty of Closet-Prayer, from p. 451, to the
end of the Book. N Of Neglecting Prayer. He that willingly Neglects private
Prayer, shall certainly be neglected in his Public prayer, p. 100, to p. 103.
O Objections. Object. 1. We have much business upon our hands, and we cannot
spare time for Closet-Prayer, etc. Eight Answers are given to this Objection,
that it might never more have a resurrection, p. 134, to p. 162. Object. 2.
Sir, We grant that Closet-Prayer is an indispensable Duty that lies upon the
People of God, but we are servants and have no time that we can call our own;
and our Masters business is such as will not allow us any time for private
Prayer; and therefore we hope we may be excused. Ten Answers are given to this
Objection, from p. 162. to p. 202. Object. 3. O but we cannot pray alone, we
want those gifts and endowments, which others have, we are shut up, and know
not how to pour out our souls before God in a corner. Six Answers are given to
this Objection, from p. 202, to p. 251. Object. 4. God is very well acquainted
with all our wants, necessities, straits, and trials, and there is no moving of
him to bestow any favors upon us, which he does not intend to bestow upon us,
whether we pray in our Closets, or no. Four Answers are given to this
Objection, p. 251, to p. 257. Object. 5. I would drive a private trade wtth
God,: I would exercise my self in secret Prayer; but I want a convenient place
to retire into; I want a private corner to unbosome my Soul to my Father in.
Three Answers are given to this Objection, p. 257, to p. 261. Object. 6. We
would be often in private with God; we would give our selves up to
Closet-Prayer; but that we can no sooner shut our Closet-doores, bu^ a
multitude of infirmities, weaknesses, and vanities, do face us, and rise up
against us; besi^es both our bodies and souls are under great indispositions;
and how then can we seek the face of God in a corner. Six Answers are given to
this Objection, from p. 261, to p. 297. Of Gods Omnipresence. God is
Omnipresent, p. 96, to p. 100. O^ Prayer. First Such are reproved, that put off
Private Prayer till they are moved to it by the Spirit, p. 123, 124, 125.
Secondly, Such that pray not at all, neither in their families, nor in their
Closets, p. 125, 126, 127 Thirdly, Such as are all for public Prayer, for
going up to the Temple, but never care to go into their Closets, p. 127, 128.
Fourthly, Such who in their Closets, pray with a loud and clamorous voice, p.
128, 129. (Five Arguments to redress this evil, p. 130, 131, 132) Fifthly,
Such are reproved, that do all they can to hinder and discourage others from
Private Prayer, p. 232, 133. Of the Promises. Eight considerable hints about
the Promises, p. 207, 208, 209. R Of the Rod. In seven particulars Afflictions
resemble a Rod, in the Epistle Dedicary. Twenty special Lessons we are to learn
by the Rod, in the Epistle Dedicatory. Of Rewards. Secret Duties shall have
open Rewards, p. 34, 35. Of Resolutions. He that would be much in his Closet,
he must be a man of high, through, and fitted Resolutions, p. 462, 463, 464,
465. S Of the Spirit. Seven Arguments to prove that all the Children of God
have the Spirit of God, p. 216, to p. 228. He that would keep close to
Closet-Duties, had need labor for a greater effusion of the Spirit, p. 466, to
p. 470. Of the Spirits Sealing. Ten special Sealing times of the Spirit, p.
228, to p. 249. Of Secret Prayer. Secret Prayer is most enriching, p. 67, to p.
70. Secret Prayer is a Christians meat and drink; it is his chief City of
refuge in times of Affliction and Persecution, p. 91, to p. 96. Our near and
dear relations to God calls aloud for Secret Prayer, p. 107, to p. 111. God
has set a special mark of favor and honor upon those that have Prayed in
Secret, p. 111, to p. 113. Satan is a great enemy to Secret Prayer, p. 113, to
p. 116. Five things we may infer from thence, p. 116, 117. See Closet-Prayer.
Of Secret Sins. All Christians have their Secret Sins, p. 70, to p. 73. Four
Arguments to take heed of Secret Sins, p. 421, to p. 451. Of Secrets. God
reveals his Secrets only to his People, p. 75, to p. 78. There are three sorts
of divine Secrets that God reveals to his People, p. 78, to p. 91. Of Gods
Secret ones. The Saints are only the Lords Secret ones, p. 117, to p. 123. T
The Text opened, p. 1, to p. 6. Of the Times, and of Time. The times wherein we
live, calls aloud for Secret Prayer, p. 103, to p. 107. We must take heed of
spending too much of our precious Time about the little things of Religion, p.
408, 409, 410. About Redeeming of Time. Five Reasons why Servants should Redeem
Time for Private Prayer, from their sleep, recreations or set meals, etc. p.
185, to p. 193. W Of the World. A man that would exercise himself in
Closet-Prayer, must take heed of engaging himself in a crowd of Worldly
businesses, p. 418, to p. 421.

FINIS.

