THE UNERRING AND VNERRABLE CHVRCH OR An answer to a Sermon preached by Mr
Andrew Sall, formerly a Jesuit, and now a Minister of the Protestant Church.

Written by I. S. and DEDICATED TO HIS EXCELLENCY The most honorable Arthur
Earl of Essex Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

Anno 1675.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, THE MOST HONORABLE ARTHVR EARL OF ESSEX, VISCOUNT MALDEN,
Baron Capel of Hadham, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of his
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hertford, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD;
I present unto your Exllency a vindication of both Churchs, which a viper has
endeavored to byte, that the Catholic has bred in her bosom; to follovv the
Truth (if we believe him) he forsook all that was Dear unto him, he might
have used that phrase of S. Peter since that what he had to forsake, was but
Netlyke; but justly may we think he expected from Your Excellency, as S.
Peter had from Christ, a return of a Seat; not such as Peter obtained, but as
the children of Zebedee did pretend. But your Excellency, whose Decrees are
living Ecchos of the Royal sentiments, will adiudge him rather a Chalice to
drink, than a Seat to exalt him; a Chalice, I say, such as the Royal Piety of
King James prescribed to those of his blasphemous opinion, in the meeting of
his Clergy at Southampton: We detest in this point the cruelty of the
Puritans, and judge them worthy of fire, who affirm, that in the Popish
Religion a man may not be saved.

My Lord, all sober men of both Religions desire the execution of this
sentence, against this impious assertion, pronounced in your Excellencies
hearing, and given unto you in print (to profane both your ears, and eyes
with a repeated blasphemy) by a late Revolted from our Church, and that, not
only for a revenge of the injury don to your Excellency in particular, in
adiudging your Noble Ancestors (who almost all dyed in that Profession) unto
Hell; nor for condemning his own to the like misery, (if, for being of the
simple sort, he will not plead for their salvation) but for the injury don to
Christian Piety, to which that Position is contrary in the judgment of all
learned Protestants.

But what makes this execrable Position unpardonable in our Adversary, is that
his own words accuse him to speak against his conscience: page 116. he
says, Their Tenets are inconsistent with salvation, though ignorance may
happily excuse many of the simple sort, but not such as know, or with due care
and enquiry, may know their error. By this he exclues all Wise men of our
Profession from salvation, and affords it only to the simple sort, or those
who have an invincible ignorance. That heerin he speaks against his
conscience, its most apparent; for in his discourse he often styles Thomas
Aquinas a Saint; the first Reformers, and Passionat Sectaries degraded the
Saints of their Canonization, but Mr Sall, as yet, retains the respect due to
their glorious memory. VVhateuer he might say of others, he knovvs well that
S. Thomas Aquinas was of the Roman Religion, a friar of S. Dominicks Orders;
None of the simple sort, or that could be inuincibly ignorant, being well
versed in Scripture and an Eminent Master in most sciences; He believed,
professed, and taught our Tenets of Real Presence, Purgatory, etc. He was then
in Mr Salls judgment a Saint reigning in Heaven, and at the same time is
condemned by him to hell, because he believed and professed Tenets
inconsistents with salvation: is not this to speak against his conscience?

He had wit, My Lord, to understand, he could not justify his separation from
our Church, if in our Church there was not somvvhat, inconsistent with
salvation: for to separat from the true Church, under pretense of her being
guilty of some errors, and of reforming her, by purging her from those errors,
if the errors be not quite damnable, and inconsistent with salvation, is so
far from being lavvfull, that such Reformers cannot be excused from Schism: All
things should be endured (says S. Denis of Alexan. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eecl. l.
6. c. 25.) rather, than to consent to the division of the Church of God; and
says Iren. l. 4. cont. Heret. c. 62. No so important Reformation can be made,
as the Evil of Schism is pernicious, for if those Errors be consistent with
salvation, then they are no necessary cause obliging to a separation; the
separation from the true Church is Schismatical and damnable, when there is no
need, or necessary cause for separating; consequently, to separat from the true
Church for Errors which are consistent with salvation is a most damnable
Schism. Mr Sall felt, perhaps, the force of this consideration, and to justify
his separation from the Church uttered that horrid blasphemy of errors in her
inconsistent with salvation.

May it please, Your Excellency to consider what an injury he does to your
cause in seeking to justify it by an assertion so contrary to your Church, and
so odious to your Excellencies Piety, That there is no salvation in the
Catholic Church, That her errors are inconsistent with salvation. It Is far
from your Excellencies Piety to believe that S. Thomas Aquinas, admired by the
Word for his learning and sanctity, was condemned to Hell, and yet he
believed and taught the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament: it is
therefore no error inconsistent with salvation. Your Excellency will not
believe that S. Augustine is in Hell, who professed and taught the Tenet of
Purgatory, as appears in his Ench. c. 119. lib. 9. Conf. c. 13. and lib. de
Haeres. c. 53. where he condemns Aetius as an Heretic, for denying sacrifice
should be offered for the dead. Purgatory therefore is no Error inconsistent
with salvation: Your Excellency will not patiently hear any man to say that
S. Hierom is eternally damned, and yet he thaught the veneration and use of the
sign of the Cross Epist. ad Them. and the veneration of Relics of Saints lib.
cont. Vigil. S. Chrysostom prayed and exhorted to pray to Saints Hom. 43. in
Genesis Hom. 5. and 8. in Mat. and must we say that Chrysostom is damned to
Hell? These are the Errors, which Mr Sall affirms to be inconsistent with
Salvation; These are the Tenets, in whose Profession he says, no Wise and
Learned Man can be saved, impiously condemning to Hell the forementioned,
Saints which the Christian World reueres for the Pillars of the Chnrch, and
not only them but all Wise men Seculars and Ecclesiastic of all precedent
ages to Luther, if invincible ignorance did not excuse them, which they could
not pretend, nor can we imagine they could have, being the most learned
Doctors of Gods Church.

If this Treatise did contain nothing else but a check of this rash and impious
assertion, it would not be ungrateful to your Excellency; but had I left any
thing unexamined of what he treats in his discourse, he would interpret my
silence his own Victory, and flattering himself with a fond persvvasion of
the evidence of his arguments, would think vnansvverable, vvhateuer were not
ansvvered. And though he touches but lightly the Controversy of the Necessity
of an infallible living judge of Controversies; yet for the respect I own to
Your Excellency I endeavor to fathom this question: I say for the respect I
ovv to your Excellency, for vvanting nothing to an accomplished happiness under
your Excy's Government, but Unity of subjects in Faith and Communion, the
greatest obligation I can cast on them, and testimony of my Duty I can exhibit
unto your Excellency, is to show, by what means we may attain to that
Unity; which is no other, than a living infailible Judge, from whom we are
to receive the true fence of Scripture. I vvish my endeavors may be as
successful, as my inclinations are real to show my self in all occasions,

MY LORD, Your Excellencies most Humble, and faithful servant, I. S.

THE PREFACE.
IF Men's wills were inclined to embrace the Truth, as their understandings are
instructed to perceive it, we might spare our labor in writing, and cut short
the number of Controversy Books that the world is glutted with. It Is
inclination is wanting to the will; not instruction to the understanding.
Nature provided, the understanding should direct the will: That This should
neither love nor hate; but as That, should represent the object worthy of
hatred or love: but the malice of Man has preposterously inuerted this order:
now its not the practice, that the will love, what the understanding knows to
be good, but the will, biased by Interest, or other wordly considerations,
does incline, and in a manner force the understanding by the violence of our
Passions, to adiudge for Good (let it be what it will) watheuer suits best with
her depraved inclinations. Hence there are as many Religions in the State, as
there are Interest's; that bias the Subjects; we should therefore lay our
pens aside; and by a constant address of our prayers to God, beg his Grace for
to reform the will, which with the cloud of her desordered Passions darkens
our Reason; and lessen our Transgressions, which stupify our minds: for
certainly, it is not light, that is wanting in so learned an age; but sinsabound
which indispose our eyes to see it.

But whylst our Adversaries decry our Religion, with such a stream of Pamphers,
as flows daily from the Press; shall we by our silence starve our Cause, and
make it suspected of weakness, in giving some ground by our muteness, to think
it cannot be defended? or shall we spare a little Ink to defend, what we are
obliged to assert with our blood? This has moved me to write this Treatise;
and that as some receive better nourishment from grosser meats, than from
delicat fare; it may happen, that some one may meet with these lines, and
receive more spiritual nourishment from them, though rudely worded, and in a
plain style, than from the learned Treatises eloquently penned by others. Being
a Debtor (with S. Paul) to the wise and unwise, I endeavor to satisfy, Them,
with the strength of my Reasons; and These by stooping to vulgar expressions,
and sometimes to Periods which might be well omitted, if only Men of quick
Apprehensions were to read what I write, to open my fence to those of common
understanding.

What chiefly has moved me to publish these lines, was the dismal fall, of Mr
Andrew Sall; a Jesuit, and a Professor of Divinity and Controversies, as he
tells us, all which qualifications, if true, makes his Revolt from the Church
more criminal. He desires he may be answered seriously and soberly setting a
side all bitterness, calumnies and railleries, all which he shall easily obtain
of me, far from insulting over any Christian for his weakness; but rather
drawing from it a caution for my own safety. I am not of the severe opinion of
those servants, who would pluck out presently the Tares, which budded in the
field of Corn Mat. 13. but advised by the Master of the field to forbear with
patience; zizania dimitti iussit, (says S. Chrysoft. hom 30. in 9 Mat. vt
poenitentiaelocus daretur. He commanded the Tares should not be touched, that
there might be time for repentance: Because, as. S. Augus. says sermon. 46.
etiam ipsa zizania saepe in triticum mutantur. Perhaps that which now is Tare,
may by the kindness of the soil, and celestial influence become wheat; which
Experience has often shown to be a holsom advice; whereas many that have
fallen, have by Gods Mercy recovered, and by repentance been raised to a higher
degree of Sanctity, than the Innocent attained unto, who never did fall. And if
it be true (what he says) that some have aspersed him with base calumnies, and
laid ambush for his life; I am so far from approving that practice that I think
it an effect of insolency and pride, which blinds them not to consider their
own fraylty, and what they may be: we ought rather to pity his misfortune,
and praise God, that has not suffered us to split on the same Rock: and since
we do not know, but that by Gods mercy, he may be reclaimed, why should we
vpbraid him Pharisee-lyke, whom, for ought we know, God has designed to make
by a generous conversion and acknowledgment of his error, superior to us in
his Glory?

This just moderation shall guide my pen; neither can Mr Sall justly complain
that I exceed it, in letting the world know that he spreads too much his
Talents and employments in empty Titles, nay and fictitious ones. Professor of
Moral Theology in the Royal College of Salamanca; no more than in with Hall
at London. Professor of Controversies in the Irish College of Salamanca, and
his Auditory composed of Spaniards french and Irish. No controuerfies taught in
that College, nor has not been these forty years: and how unlikely it is to be
true, what he says, may appear, in that he says his Auditory was composed of
Spaniards, a People that cannot endure any dispute of the Principles of
Religion, altogether strangers to matters of Controversy: and of frenchmen; and
it is as hard to find a french Studiant in the university of Salamanca, or any
other of Spain, as a Swallow in winter, especially that when Mr Sall was in
Salamanca, the war betwixt France and Spain was very hot, and lykly they must
have got a Safe Conduct to go to be Mr Salls Scholars. Professor of Divinity
in Pamplona Tudela and Palencia in Spain. In the Colleges of Tudela and
Palencia there is not nor was there at any time Divinity taught: in Pamplona,
indeed he was Professor of Divinity, for one or two years; and had they been as
content of him, as he was of himself, he would have continued many more. Rector
of the Irish College he was; an employment that requires no more than a
mediocrity of discretion to govern half a dozen Lads peaceably; and I know not
was it a greater credit for him to have been in that imployement, than to have
been cast out of it before the years end, when others continued it for three
years at least, and commonly for 6. or eight years. As for other things that
might be said, I will take no notice of them.

And even from this moderat reprehension of his vanity, I would have willingly
abstained, did he not oblige me to it. For I appeal to the Protestant Reader,
whether it be not fit, that when he pretends by fictitious Titles to gain
credit to his cause, and to his arguments with the vulgar People, I should open
their eyes, to see that he is not, what he says he is The Priests and Leuits,
sent by the Jews to the great Baptist, to know what he was 10.1. made him two
very different questions, What are you; What do yo say of yourself; Knowing
that often tyms, there is a vast difference betwixt what a man really is, and
what he says he is. And this never appeared more apparently, than in the
great difference that is, betwixt what Mr Sall is, and what he says he is. And
it is very important for the truth of the cause which I defend, that the Reader
take notice of this difference: for wise men, dot not so much consider the
quality of the person that speaks, as what he speaks; and value not an
argument, for his sake who proposes it, but for its own merit: But Men of
vulgar capacity, who do not understand the strength or weakness of an argument;
value it not for what it is in itself; but for the learning and credit of the
Person, that proposes it whence it is, that men of common understanding, who
know not the weakness of Mr Salls arguments, will, not withstanding, believe
them to be very pregnant, because they are of a man of that vogue and credit,
which he most unjustly usurps, of a great Divine, a Venerable Rector, and
Professor of Divinity: so that the most dangerous weapon wherewith he attacks
us, is his credit and Authority, which belongs not to him. If he were content
to fight us with his arguments; we would be content with a bare answer, for
upon the learned men they would never make any impression; nor upon the
unlearned, who to value an argument, only looks on the Proponent: but when he
comes to fight us, in the shape of a very learned Divine, and a great Master in
Sciences; we must unmask his ignorance and vanity, least his arguments, which
in themselves have no force, assisted with that usurped credit and authority,
may work on the Spirits of ignorant People.

Perhaps this Treatise may seem larger, than might be thought necessary for an
answer to Mr Salls discourse: I confess it is; and were I to consider only what
his discourse deserves, it required no answer; for it contains nothing but what
has been said twenty times and answered so many more: though, this being the
first Essay of this great Divine in favor of Protestancy, its strange if he were
so learned as he would have us believe him to be, but that it should be an
exquisit piece: yet I have thought fit to answer it, and do intend not only an
answer to him, which could have been don in fewer lines, but an exact
discussion of the Points he touches, and particularly of that prime and great
Controversy of which depends the resolution of all others, The infallibility of
a living Judge of Controversies, which is the Church. Therefore, for a full
satisfaction of those that desire to know and embrace truth I divide this
Treatise into two Parts; in the first I will prove the Necessity of a living
infallible Judge of Controversies, and prove it to be the Roman Catholic
Church. In the second I will examine those pretended Errors, which he fastens on
our Church; and will endeavor to leave nothing unanswered that he objects
against us, though I may prepone or postpone his arguments as the Method of my
discourse requires. If my labor Prove to your spiritual advantage, I am
sufficiently rewarded; if not, I shall not want a reward from him that erowns
good desires* fare well.

Your friend in Christ Jesus I. S.

THE FIRST PART PROVING the necessity of an infallible living Judge.
I. CHAPTER. BUT ONLY ONE TRVE RELIGION. The need full Means afforded by God to
come to the know legde of it.
THAT God is to be adored, it is the voice of Nature, pronounced by all Nations:
Reason proves it; for were you yourself the chiefest in Power, the highest in
Dignity, the Richest and most adorned in virtues, in the Common wealth; you
would expect an Homage, and it could not be denied unto you by your Inferiors.
Confess then, that a far greater is due from you to God; whose Power is
supereminent; his Wisdom transcendent; his Goodness unlimited, his Perfections
innumerable. But it is not arbitrary to Man, to adore God with what manner of
Worship his fancy suggests unto him; or his private spirit inclins him unto.
God, as he requires a Worship at our hands, so he has himself revealed, what
manner of Worship he requires. Perdiscamus (says S. Chrysostom. hom. 51. in
Mat.) Christum ex sua voluntate honorare; nam qui honoratur, eo maxim honor
laetatur, quem ipse vult, non quem nos optamus. What sacrifices, Rites, and
Ceremonies, God would be adored with in the old law, he declared it to his
People by Moses Leuit. from the first, to the 7. chap. and declared that he
would not be otherwise worshipped Leuit. 10. In the law of Grace, his son
Incarnated, abolished that Ceremonial law; and revealed to Mankind a new manner
of divine worship, a new Sacrifice, Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies; by which
he will be worshipped, and by no other: in so much that by S. Paul Gal. 1.9. he
commands, that if an Angel from heaven should recommend unto us an other manner
of divine worship, we should not heed him.

This worship of God, revealed by him to Man, is true Religion; worship him
ever so much, if you do not adore him, as he has revealed he would be
worshipped, you have not true Religion. That there is a true Religion extant,
it is doubtless, both for that we pretend each of us, his own Religion to be
the true one; and that God has laid a command upon us, and we are obliged to
worship him in spirit and Truth (this is Religion) which command and obligation
supposes the Existence of a Religion. That among all those Religions, wherewith
the world abounds, there is but one true Religion, (whateuer, and whereuer it
be) its also manifest; for true Religion is that manner of divine worship,
which God has revealed; but God has not revealed those several manners of
divine worship, which do oppose and contradict one another: if it be he that
revealed we should worship him by denying the Messiah, as the Iewdoes;
certainly it must not be he that revealed we must worship him by believing in
the Messiah as the Christians do: consequently both those Religions of Judaism
and Christianity must not be true Religions. If it be he that commanded, we
should worship him by believing the real Presence of Christ his Body in the
Eucharist; certainly its not he that commanded, we should worship him by
denying the real presence, for that would be to contradict himself: therefore
of all those Religions, which clash one with an other, only one must be the
true Religion.

This is further proved: No Religion, wherein God is duly worshipped, and a man
may be saved; can justly be called, an accursed, heretical, and damnable
Religion; this Position is evident: (consequently it appears how unjustly
Protestants call the Catholic Religion, Idolatrous and superistitious; it being
by their own acknowledgment as we will prove against Mr Sall, a religion
wherein we may be saved and consequently wherein God is duly worshipped) But S.
Paul in express terms, does anathematise, accurse and condemn all and each
Religion, (even those that are Christian Religions) besides that one which he
and his fellow Apostles did teach; if we (Gal. 1.9.) or an Angel from Heaven,
should Euangelize unto you, otherwise than as we have don, let him be
accursed: pursuant to which doctrine, Hymenaeus, Philetus and others, declining
some what the doctrine of the Apostles, in the Article of the Resurrection of the
Body, not absolutely denying it, but saying it was already past 1. Tim. 1.20.
and 2. Tim. 2.18. they still remained within the verge of Christianity, but
because by their error in that Article only, they were of a different Religion
from that of S. Paul, he delivers them to Satan, calls them creeping Cankers
and subuertors of the Faith; which would have been a manifest injustice in him,
if they stiil remained in a true Religion, where God was duly worshipped: it
follows therefore that no other, even Christian Religion, is a true Religion,
but that one which S. Paul professed and from which they departed.

And if any Christian Religion, with a good Moral life were sufficient for
salvation, the Prelates and Pastors of the Church in all ages are to be laughed
at, for their continual care of keeping their flock in unity of Faith and
doctrine, whereas any Religion was sufficient with a good Moral life, the General
Councils were most rash and impious in condemming Arrius Nestorius, and other
heretics, whereas they still remained Christians, and the lives of many of them
were most just and upright as S. Augustine testifies of the Pelagians. Let the
Libertins then, of our age be vndeceiued, who to secure their interest and
ambition are ready to embrace any Religion, that is the most preualent in the
state; for all (though Christians) Religions but that one which S. Paul
professed; all but that, whose unity the Prelates and Concils did endeavor to
preserve, are accursed, heretical and impious.

Now since of all Religions, that only is the true, which God has revealed unto
us; and that no other worship will please him; doubtless he has afforded us the
needful and sufficient means, to know what Religion it is, and to distinguish
it from other pretended Religions which he has not revealed. Without Faith and
Religion it is impossible to be saved; God therefore who desires our salvation,
and commands us under pain of damnation to have true Faith, must have provided
us of the means necessary to attain to true Faith. Let us examine what Faith is:
It Is an Assent given to an object, for the testimony of him that proposes it:
it is therefore grounded on the Authority of the Proponent; and can have no
more assurance of the Truth, than the testimony on which it is grounded as for
example Human Faith, wherewith I believe what a Man of credit and known honesty
tells me, can have no more certainty, than the credit and honesty of that Man
has: and whereas Men, let them be few or many in Number, using only natural
means, may deceive or be deceived; either in the testimony they give, or in the
grounds of their Assertion; be it the evidence of their senses, (which are
subject to fallacy) or the evidence of their Natural reason (for some times,
reasons that seem to us evident, are but sophistries) it is manifest that
human Faith, which relyes only, on the testimony of men, is fallible: for
though it may happen, that de facto it is true, and that there may be moral
certainty of its being true; yet absolutely it might be otherwise, and so the
Faith grounded upon it is still fallible.

But divine Faith; That Assent which Gods requires of us to revealed Truths,
must be an infallible Faith, which not only is true, but cannot be otherwise
than true; it must be a firm Assent in the highest degree of certainty,
excluding all doubts and fear of being mistaken: and whereas Faith has no other
assurance of the Truth, than the Authority of the Proponent, it follows that
divine Faith must rely upon a most infallible undoubted Authority, which can
not deceive or be deceived. Hence it follows that no evidence of senses, (for
our sensations are deceitful) can be a sufficient ground for divine Faith, nor
no natural reason; for if it be probable, or only morally evident; it may be
false, or falsified; if absolutely evident; it can be no ground of Faith,
because Faith being an argument of things not appearing, as S. Paul says, it
surpasses natural reason; and because that if it be evident, it forces the
understanding to an Assent, and so leaves no place for the merit of Faith which
consists in believing what the understanding may deny, because of the
difficulty it finds in assenting to an obscure object; which the will
assisted with the pious inclination ouercomes, and thereby merits. No Histories
nor doctrine of Fathers, no testimony or authority of any fallible Church or
congregation, is sufficient, because divine Faith being infallibly certain must
be grounded upon an infallible Authority. Lastly it follows, that only the
infallible written word of God, or the authority of an infallible Church, must
be it, which proposes unto us the revealed Truths, and on which we must bottom
our Faith.

Let us hear what Mr Sall says as to this particular: he was once of opinion
that Scripture alone was not the means appointed by God for proposing unto us
the revealed Truths, their sense not being obuious even to learned men, and
consequently not the means suitable to vulgar capacityes, who being, as well as
the learned, obliged to believe, the means for attaining to the knowledge of
Religion must be suitable to their capacity, as well as to that of the learned;
and Scripture through the difficulty of it surpasses both: therefore, it became
the Goodness and Wisdom of God, to appoint a visible Judge, assisted with his
infallible spirit, that in case of doubt should determine our controversies, and
declare unto us what we ought to believe. But, says he, page 27. the
Archbishop of Cashell obiecting, that we ought to be very wary in censuring
the Wisdom of God, if this or that was not don in the government of the
world, which seems to us good to be don; the Modesty of the Proponent added
such weight to this aduertisment that it touched me to the quick, and
reflecting on this point in my solitudes, I savv says he, we might as well
say that it belongs to the goodness of God, not to permit that his holy
laws should be transgressed by vile creatures; nor that the Pastors of souls,
especially the Pope, should scandalize their flock and as we do not judge it
a failure in his goodness to permit sins; so we ought not waver in our
opinion of his goodness and Wisdom, if he has not appointed a visible Judge
for our direction, having given us the holy Scriptures, which a bound with
all light and heavenly doctrine, to such as are not vvillfully obstinat.

Briefly, Sr, here are three different opinions of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, Catholic, Lutheran, and Protestant: of the three quite opposite one
to the other, God has revealed but one as I for merly discoursed; and obliges
me under pain of damnation to believe that sense and no other; I say under pain
of damnation, for said he, if you will not eat the flesh of the son of Man
and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. Io. 6. must I not expect
of Gods goodness that he will afford unto me what is absolutely need full to
acquit this obligation? he absolutely requires of me to believe that sense, and
no other of those three which he revealed: must I not then expect of his
goodness some means to ascertain me which of those three different opinion is
that which he revealed? would it be consistent with his goodness to oblige me
under pain of damnation to fly to the Moon, and afford me no wings (which we
suppose are indispensably need full) for to acquit that obligation? The Assent
which he requires at my hands, is not a probable and dubious one; but an Assent
which renders me assured, in the highest degree of certainty, of the Truth I
profess; such and no other is divine Faith: such an Assent is impossible if
there be not an infallible Authority on which it is grounded; which you
Protestants cannot deny, for its therefore you reject Tradition, and will admit
no other Test of Faith but the written word of God, because Faith must be
grounded upon an infallible Authority, you say, and Tradition is fallible and
nothing infallible but Gods written word. if Scripture were not written by the
Apostles, could not you say without any injury to God, that it became his
wisdom to afford you some other infallible Authority, whereas without such an
authority it is impossible to have the Assent of Faith which he requires? and
was it not therefore that he gave to his Apostles who preached to the primitive
Christians, the credit of infallible Oracles, because then there was no
Scripture written nor any other Authority whereupon to bottom their Faith, but
the testimony of the Apostles? Since therefore we do manifestly prove that
Scripture alone is not sufficient to determine Controversies, and instruct us
what we are bound to believe, let not your instructors Modesty take it ill
that we say it becomes the goodness of God to appoint a living infallible
Judge on whose testimony and authority we may rely and ground our Faith. We
say with St Augustine l. de vtil. cred. ad Honorat. Si Prouidentia Dei non
praesidet rebus humanis, nihil est de religione satagendum. Si autem praesidet
non est desperandum ab eodem ipso Deo, authoritatem aliquam constitutam esse
qua velut gradu certo attolamur ad Deum. If Gods Providence gouerns not the
world, we need not be sollicitous of Religion; but if Providence rules all,
it cannot be doubted but that God has appointed an authority, by which, as by
a certain assured way we may be lead to God. We must therefore grant such
an Authority (which is not Scripture as we will prove) or deny Providence.

Your instance is very weak, and un becoming so great a divine as you profess
to be; Gods goodness cannot be questioned for permitting sins and the scandals
of Popes; nay it is becoming his goodness to permit them; for having created Man
with perfect liberty for to work well or ill, it becomes his goodness to give
him all that is needful for the exercise of that liberty; and Man could not
exercise it (if we did not pretend to some extraordinary miraculous Providence
for which we have no ground in Scripture nor reason, and to which his goodness
cannot oblige him) if he did not permit him to sin: and to question God why his
goodness does permit sin, is to ask why he created Man with perfect liberty?
which if you do, I answer; because he gave him liberty that he might use it
well; and if he uses it ill; its his own fault.

We ought not, say you, to waver in our opinion of Gods goodness for not
appointing a Living infallible Judge, vvheras he has afforded us the Scriptures
which abound with all heavenly light to them, that are not vvillfully
obstinat: and this you prove 2. Tim. 3.16. Holy Scriptures are able to make us
wise unto salvation, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works. But I infer to the contrary: whereas the Scriptures,
though replenished they be with heavenly light, are not sufficient for to
declare unto us what we ought to believe; we might waver in our opinion of
Gods goodness, if he did not appoint an infallible living Judge for to instruct
us: and that the Scriptures are not sufficient for the instruction of them that
are not vvillfully blind. Mr Sall himself proves it; for page 17. he tells us
that doubting of the Tenets of our Religion, his wit not content with an ipse
dixit like Pythagoras his scholar, demanded Reason for what he believed: he
betook himself to the frequent reading of Scripture: but, Sr, if you be not
content with an ipse dixit, you are as unfit for Christ's school, as for that
of Pythagoras, and if your wit demands reason for what you believe, Scripture
is no place to seek for it, which affords nothing but a bare ipse dixit. After
reading the Scriptures, he was so far from being sufficiently instructed, that
he confesses they made him doubt: whence it appears, that Scripture alone is
not sufficient even to those that are not vvillfully blind, he was no such, for
he did read with a real desire of being instructed.

The text of S. Paul says that Scripture is able to make us wise to
salvation; but does noy say, that Scripture alone is able: if you will have
text to be for your purpose, you must follow the example of Luther, who to
prove his error of justification by Faith only, corrupted the text of S. Paul
Romans 2.8. we account a man to be justified by Faith, without the works of
the law: and foisted in the word Faith alone. 2. S. Paul in that text speaks
only of the Scripture wherein Timothy was versed, and which he had perused from
his Youth, which was only the Old Testament: so that if the text proves the
sufficiency of the Scripture for our instruction, it proves the sufficiency of
the Old Testament only. 3. S. Paul in that verse chapter v. 14. says to Timothy,
thou continue in those things thou have learned, and are committed to thee
knovving from whom thou have learned them. Whence its apparent that he
remitted Timothy for instruction, to the Scripture and also to the doctrine
delivered to him by a living Oracle, which was the Apostle himself. Lastly the
whole Canon of Scripture was not completed when S. Paul writ that text, nor in
many years after; and you can not pretend that ever we had the sufficient
means for our instruction in any part, but in the whole and entyre Canon;
therefore you cannot pretend that that text does prove the sufficiency of
Scripture.

II. CHAPT. SCRIPTVRE ALONE, NOT THE Means for to instruct us in Faith.
IF Scripture alone, were the means appointed by God for to declare unto us
what we ought to believe; is it not strange, that Christ should not himself
have left us a Written word to walk by, when he laid upon us the obligation of
embracing true Religion; or that he should not, at least, have laid a Command
upon his Apostles of delivering us a written word? read the whole Canon, and
you shall find no such command: but he left Apostles and Pastors, and a command
upon them, to teach and preach unto us; and upon us of believing and obeying
them; which argues that the means which he designed for our instruction in
Religion, was not a written word, but a living Church. Necessity is laid upon
me, yea vvo is unto me if I preach not the Ghospel. 1. Cor. 9.16. He feared no
vvo for not vvriting, but for not preaching the Ghospel; because he would
deprive the flock of the means which God appointed for their instruction. And
the Channel by which Faith is conveyed unto us being our Ears, fides ex
auditu, and not our Eyes, it seems apparent, that the means which he appointed
is a living Oracle who speaks, and not a volum which we read.

But let us suppose that the Apostles did by special command of Christ write
the Ghospel: this is manifest, that since the very beginning of the Church,
Christians did doubt, which was the true Scripture written by the Apostles and
which not: there is not one part of all Scripture but was questioned and denied
by some Christians to be Canonical: Cerdon the Valentinians, and Manichaeans
denied the Old Testament to be Scripture. Epiph. Haer. 41. The Ebionits
rejected the four great Prophets, the Books of Salamon and Psalms of David.
Epiph. Haer. 30. Marcionits rejected all the Ghospels except that of S. Luke.
idem Haer. 4.2. and Irer. l. 1. c. 6. the Ebionits did own only that of S.
Matthew. They also rejected the Epistles of S. Paul Epiph. Haer. 30. And the
Disciples of Cerdon would not believe the Acts of the Apostles Tert. de
Praescrip. c. 51. The Lutherans this day blot out of the Canon the Epistle of
S. Paul to the Hebrews, as also that of Jude, the second of S. Peter and second
and Third of S. John, all which the Caluinists believe. The Church of England
will not admit the Books of Machabees, Esther Judith and others, which the
Chatolik Church admits: nor did the Ancient Fathers of the Church prove against
the Marcionists and other Heretics those Books to be Scripture by the
Scripture itself, but by the Church as S. Augustine l. cont. Episc. Man. c. 5.
Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae commoueret Authoritas: I would not
believe the Ghospel to be the Ghospel, if the authoriiy of the Church did not
move me to it.

Now I argue thus: you say true Religion is known by Scripture alone; that is
to say, we have no assurance of a Truths being a revealed Truth but by
Scripture alone. Therefore we can have no more assurance of a Truths being a
revealed Truth, than we have of the Scriptur's (which contains that Truth)
being true Scripture: if therefore you be not innfallibly ascertained that this
is true Scripture, you cannot be infallibly ascertained that the Truths which
it contains are revealed Truths: But Scripture alone gives no assurance that it
is true Scripture; that it is not corrupted either by the malice or ignorance
of the translators, or inaduertency of the Printer; for there is not a text in
all Scripture that mentions it: therefore the Scripture alone cannot ascertain
us of the Truth of Religion. And it cannot be imagined but that, since the true
sense of Scripture is doubtful, God has provided us of some means to know
which is the true sense; so also since that we are obliged to believe with
divine Faith, that this Book is Scripture; it cannot be doubted I say, but
that God has afforded some means for to ascertain us which is true Scripture,
and to confound those that deny the Scripture to be Scripture. But Scripture
itself alone can never assure us of its being Scripture.

For to say that Scripture does manifest itself to be Gods word by certain
Criteria, or signs found in Scripture itself, as a divine beam of light, a
Majesty of style, an energy of words, whereby it does manifest it self to the
humble and well intentioned hearts to be Gods word; these are but fond
imaginations: for all the Ancient Fathers of the first 402. years of the
Church, doubtless were as humble, and as well intentioned as we, and all that
time the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, Jude and S. Peeters second Epistle,
and second and Third of S. John were not believed, as an article of Faith to be
Scripture; nay were absolutely denied to be such, by Tert. Cypr. Lactan. and
others; and yet they had the same Majesty of style, and energy of words, as now
they have: and whateuer you may judge of us Catholics, Luther, you will say,
was humble and well intentioned, and could see no such Criteria or signs in
those Epistles, which Calvin belieues to be Canonical, and it is but a fond
imagination to conceit any such luster or Majesty in those Books, which you
believe, more than in the Books of Tobias, Esther and others which you deny.
Consider, I pray, if a Pagan desirous of his salvation, were placed in a vast
Library, could he distinguish the Scripture from other Books, and know it to be
the word of God, only by reading it: and if you did ever read, of any Kingdom
couerted to Christianity by reading the Bible only, without Apostolical men to
expound the Christian Doctrine, and by that you may gness, which were the means
appointed by God for our instruction, if Scripture alone, or a living Church.

And allowed we be assured this Book and an other is the word of God: of the
Scripture we may say, what S. Paul said of the Lords supper: This if worthily
taken is life and salvation; if unworthily is damation: if Scripture be
understood in the true sense intended by the Holy Ghost, it leads to true
Religion, if understood in the wrong sense, it leads to perdition, as S. Peter
says, 2. cpist. 3.16. speaking of the Epistles of S. Paul, the unlearned and
unstable deprave them, as the rest of the Scripture, to their perdition; by
misunderstanding them. Grant this volum to be the word of God: the words of it
may be, and are interpreted in diverse and quite opposite senses; as that
command of Christ, he that will not eat the flesh of the son of Man, and drink
his blood, shall not have life in him; it is interpreted in three opposite
senses by Lutherans, Catholics, and Protestants; and it is evident that Christ
intended only one of the three senses: we are bound under pain of damnation to
eat his flesh, and drink his blood, in that sense, which he intended, and no
other will suffice: the Scripture alone does not assure us, which of those
three senses, is that which Christ intended: for we have all the Scripture,
we read it, we study, we pray, and we cannot agree in the sense of those
words* either therefore there must be somewhat else beseids Scripture, for to
assure us of the true sense of it; or God has left us with an obligation of
believing and not afforded us the sufficient means for to ascertain us, what he
will have us to believe.

To say that God gives an inward light, and testimony of the spirit to the
humble and well disposed hearts, which assures them the sense which they hold of
the Scripture is the true sense, is a groundless fancy, exploded even by the
modern Protestants; whereas those illuminated persons cannot be assured if that
inward light be an illumination from God, or an illusion of Satan often
transfigured into an Angel of light: our Controuersists have fully refuted this
foolish fancy; I only add that if the means appointed by God to assure us of
the true sense of Scripture, be that inward light and testimony of the private
spirit, God has afforded no means for to keep us in unity of Faith; for there
are as many different lights and testimonies of the spirit, as there be men
almost, and so his house will not be a house of peace, but of confusion: and if
that be the true sense of Scripture, which the inward light and testimony of
each man's spirit does suggest; those lights and inward testimonies of the
spirit being quite contradictorily opposite one to the other; it follows that
the H. G. intended quite opposite senses in each text of Scripture: Nor could
any man reasonably pretend to persuade an other to be of his religion; for
since he has no assurance of the truth of his Religion, but what he has by that
inward light and spirit, how can he in reason go about to persuade me, that his
light and spirit is true, rather than that which I have my self: so each man
must be content to have his Religion to himself, and seek no other to be of
it. S. John 1. Epist. 4.11. bids us not to believe every spirit; but to try it;
and in that very chapter directs us to a touch stone whereat to try our spirits, He
that knovveth God hears us; he that is not of God hears us not: in this
we know the spirit of Truth, and the spirit of Error. If your spirit, hears
and obeyes the Pastors and Prelates of the Church, your spirit is of Truth, in
this we know the spirit of Truth in hearing us, not in reading us. If your
spirit will not hear the Church, but prefer it self before the spirit of the
Pastors and Prelates of the Church; your spirit is of error. The means therefore
to distinguish spirits, to know the truth, and the true sense of Scripture, is
not Scripture it self, nor your inward light but the Church, which is the
approuer or reprouer of spirits.

The Modern Protestants have found out an other way for to defend the
sufficiency of Scripture, for to understand by it alone the true sense of it:
for, say they, though some text or texts of Scripture be obscure, yet comparing
them with other texts, they are expounded, and the true sense found by the
scripture alone comparing one text with an other; especially in what concerns
the fundamental points of Religion necessary for salvation, which are easily
found, and clearly set down in Scripture. Mr Sall page 105. of his discourse
seems to be of this opinion; saying, that all necessary knovvlegde for Faith in
God, to serve and praise him, is fully contained in what is clear of Scripture.

There is nothing more clear, than that the Holy Scriptures are most obscure,
even in points necessary for salvation; the obscurity consisting in the hight
of the Mysteries it contains, in the difficulty of its phrases, in the
seemingly contradictions it contains; that the most learned men that ever were
in the Church found it a task too great for their understandings to expound it:
learned Protestants themselves do confess it, and our Controuersists have so
euidenced it, that it were a superfluous labor to prove it: that only text of
saint Peter 2. epist. 3. chapter which I quoted but now, sufficiently proves it;
and that no text nor texts of scripture compared does declare sufficiently even
the fundamental points of our Religion, two instances do clearly evidence.

First Gods Unity in Nature, and Trinity in Persons in all Christians
acknowledgment is a fundamental article of Religion: we believe he is One not
in Person, but in Nature; we believe he is Three, not in Nature, but in
Persons. And what text or texts compared one with an other can you bring to
show this Mystery? Let the dispute be betwixt a Protestant, an Arrian, and a
Pagan: suppose the Pagan confesses and agrees with both, that the scripture is
the word of God; but will not admit that either the Protestant or Arrian is
infallible in the interpretation of it: how will the Protestant prove against
the Pagan, that God is One in Nature, and Three in Persons? He will allege
out of saint John 1. ep. 5. the Father the son, and the spirit, and these Three
are One* the word One signifies Unity in Nature, and the word Three Trinity in
Persons: But says the Pagan, that is against all reason, and the principles of
Philosophy, that Three distinct Persons should have but One Nature; and though
I do believe the word of God to be infallibly true even in what surpasses my
reason, yet I will not believe against my reason but what the word of God does
assuredly say; and that text which you allege does only say they are One, but
does not express, if that Unity be in Nature or in Person, nor does the text
express that the Trinity is in Persons and not in Nature: nay the Arrian, who
is a Christian as well as you, says, that text signifies no such Unity of
Nature, and Trinity of Persons: and in your own confession, Christ is One
suppositum or Hypostasis: his Unity is not in Nature, (for he has Two Natures,
one Human, and the other Divine) but in Person; why may not we also say, that
the father, son, and spirit, are One, and that their unity is not in Nature but
in Person? whither will the Protestant go now, to prove against the Pagan this
great, and fundamental article? He will quote out of saint John an other text
for to expound the former; My father, and I are one, Io.10.20. where it is
expressed that the Father and son who are two different Persons, are but One
in Nature: But, replieth the Pagan, neither does that text say more, but that
they are One, and does not express, either that they are two distinct Persons,
or one Nature.

And says the Pagan, bring you as many texts as you please, you will never
bring any, which expressly declares the Unity to be in Nature, and Trinity in
Persons; and I must not renounce reason so far, as to believe a Mystery, which
no human reason can vnsterstand; particularly, when you require of me, to
believe only what the word of God expressy declares; and the word of God, which
you allege does not expressly declare that Mystery, nor does the word of God
oblige me to believe your interpretation of those texts: I hear the Arrians
and Sabellians, who are Christians as well as you, and they, with their
Abettors, (who are not fewer in number nor inferior in learning to you) say,
those texts which you allege do not at all import any Unity in Nature, or
Trinity in Persons: for the Sabellians say, the word One in those texts
signifies Unity in Person as well as in Nature; and the word Three signifies,
not Three distinct Persons, but one and the same Person, called by three
different names, for three several Offices, which he does exercise: Father
because he is the Author of all things; Son because he was born to redeem us;
and Holy Ghost, because he sanctifies us: even as, say they, these three
several names, Immense, Omnipotent, and Eternal signify One and the same God,
who includes the perfections signified by those names.

Arrius and his partisans understand those texts in a far different sense from
you Protestant: the word Three says Arrius signifies three different Natures,
which Arrius proves with a text, far more pertinent in appearence, than that
which you Protestants allege to prove the Unity of Nature, S. Io. 14.28. My
father is greater than I; which text, delivered without any restriction, says
Arrius, proves the son to be of a different and inferior Nature to the Father.
The word One says he, does not signify the Unity of Three Persons in Nature;
but their Unity by perfect conformity of Will and Charity; which exposition he
proves by S. Io. 17.11. where Christ praying for his Elect, asks his Father,
they may be one, as we are One: but certainly the Elect cannot be One in
Nature, nor did he ask any such Unity for them; but that they should be One by
perfect Charity and conformity of will therefore the Father and the Son are
not otherwise One.

Thus the Pagan to the Protestants, and adds; I believe the Scripture to be the
word of God, because he has revealed it unto me; I am resolved to be a
Christian; but I know not which party to embrace, the Protestant; or the
Arrian; you will have me believe Gods Unity in Nature and Trinity in Persons;
and though that Mystery surpasses human reason, I am content to submit unto it,
if I did find it expressly in Scripture; but those texts either singlely or all
together do not expressly declare it; as I judge and as the Arrians and
Sabellians who are Christians, as well as you, judge; and on the other side you
do not require of me to believe, but what is expressly contained in Scripture*
what shall I do in this case? You say it is expressly contained in those texts;
but am I bound to believe it is contained in them, because you think it is? the
Scripture does not tell me that I am bound to believe what you think, rather
than what the Arrians think is contained in it: if I side with the Arrians, you
say I am damned: if I side with you the Arrians say I am damned; and why to
side with one, rather than the other, I know not; for you are of equal
authority, as to me; both learned, pious, wise people, and well versed in
Scripture. You tell me the Arrians are condemned by General Councils; Arrians
and Sabellians also, tell me you are condemned by several Councils, in the
points you hold in opposition to the Catholics; you say the Councils and
Ancient Fathers, who condemned you did err, and were mistaken in the sense of
Scripture: the Arrians and Sabellians also, say the Councils which condemned
them, did err: you say the Mystery of the Trinity is unanimously believed by
Protestants and Roman Catholics: but I ask, what credit has the Roman and
Protestant Church? have you the credit of infallible Oracles, by which God
speaks, or have you only the credit of wise, learned pious men? if the first;
that indeed is somewhat, and ends all Controversy: if only the second, the
Arrians, Sabellians, Heathen and Pagan Philosophers, are as numerous as you, as
learned, wise, and, as to moral honesty, as good as you, and they all deny that
Mystery.

Can any man of reason, say, this Pagan in this occasion, is obliged to side
with the Protestants, rather than with the Arrians? they both have Scripture,
they are all Christians, they read and study it, they are both fallible in the
interpretation of it; and that either of both is effectually mistaken in this
case, its manifest: and which of them it is, this Man has no imaginable means
to be assured of. Now if God has appointed a living infallible Judge, to
interpret, and deliver the true sense of Scripture; this Pagan could not but be
obliged to acquiesce to his interpretation; whence its is manifest that
Scripture alone is not sufficient for to ascertain us of the true sense of
Scripture, even in fundamental points.

An other instance to prove this truth: there is a point of Faith, which we are
obliged to believe under pain of damnation, which is not expressed in any text
or texts compared of Scripture alone, whitout an infallible interpreter. I do
not mean the Necessity of Infants Baptism, nor the Validity of Heretics
Baptism, believed by both Churches, and for which, says S. Augustine l. 1.
cont. cresc. c. 32. there can be no example brought out holy of Scripture. I
prove it thus: We Catholics and you Protestants dispute, if Purgatory be a
fundamental point of Religion or not? If it be; its a damnable error, to say it
is not; both for that errors against fundamental points are damnable, as you
confess, and for that to deny for fundamental, that which is a fundamental
Truth revealed by God, is to diminish of the word of God; by which you deserve
to be blotted out of the Book of life; Apoc. 22. If it be not a fundamental
point; it is a damnable error to say it is; for that would be to add to the
word of God; which also deserves to be blotted out of the Book of life:
consequently in this our contest, we are indispensably obliged to believe,
either that it is, or that it is not: nor can we suspend our Judgment, but
must resolve absolutely on either side* but no text or texts of Scripture do
declare, if it be, or be not a fundamental article of Faith, if not expounded
by some infallible interpreter: therefore Scripture alone is not sufficient,
for to assure us what we are obliged to believe.

III. CHAPT. THE SAME ASSERTION proved.
Look back to the Infancy of the Church, for the first eight or tenn years;
there was not a word of the New Testament written; and the last part, (whateuer
that part was, wherein the Doctors do not agree) was not written in 40. years
after Christ his Ascension: part of the Scripture, after it was written did
perish; for example an Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians mentioned 1. Cor.
5.9. by which we understand that he writ three epistles to them, whereof two
only are extant: also part of the old Testament was lost, as appears Chron.
9.12. and 29. Nay this very Scripture that now is extant, and owned by us all
to be Canonical, for the first 402. was not (a good part of it) owned to be
such; for the Fathers of the Church disputed, and many denied S. Paul's epistle
to the Hebr. Iudes epist. second of saint Peter, second and Third of saint John
to be Canonical; consequently they could not be the Test of Faith; because they
were not believed to be Scripture* all this time, as there was an obligation
upon Christians to believe, so they had the sufficient means, for to know what
they were obliged to believe; which was not Scripture, because either it was
not written, or if written, it was not all, (as now it is) believed to be
Scripture: therefore God must have appointed some other means besides Scripture,
for to instruct us in Religion.

And if you insist, that the Scripture, as now it is extant, is the needful
and sufficient means for our instruction, I infer; therefore we had not the
needful and sufficient means, until all this Scripture now extant was
written; consequently the Church, was for many years without the sufficient
means for instruction: I infer again; therefore until the last text of
Scripture was written, we had not the sufficient means; and whereas you are
bound to prove by a clear text, that Scripture alone is the sufficient means,
it must be with the last text of all scripture you must prove it; for then, and
no sooner, was the scripture the sufficient means, when the whole Canon was
completed, and the last text was written; and this is impossible to be proved*
also it follows, that you must not pretend to prove the sufficiency of
scripture by any text of the new or old Testament, written before the last
text; whereas the whole Canon was not completed, when those texts were written;
and consequently they could not prove the sufficiency of scripture which in
your acknowledgment did not begin to be the sufficient means, until the Canon
was finished. Moreover if the scripture, as now it is extant, be the needful
and sufficient means; then the Lutherans, whom you receive to your Communion,
and embrace as Brethren, have not the sufficient means for divine Faith, (and
consequently nor Faith itself) whereas they deny many parts of Scripture to be
Canonical, which you believe.

But what most clearly proves that Scripture, as now it is extant, is not the
sufficient and needful means, is this discourse; first its not the needful
means, for if a very considerable part of this Scripture did perish, we would
still have the sufficient means, in what would remain of Scripture, to instruct
us in what we are bound to believe; for what we are bound to believe under
pain of damnation, are only the essential and fundamental points of Religion;
whoeuer belieues them, though he denies other points not fundamental, and
inferior Truths, in the doctrine of Protestants, belieues what is sufficient for
his salvation; but there are many chapters, or at least half chapters, or at
least many verses of Scripture, which do not in the least mention any essential
and fundamental point of Religion; therefore all those chapters and verses are
not needful for to know what we are bound to believe; and if they did all
perish, we would in what remained, have the sufficient means. Now that
Scripture as now it is extant, is not the sufficient means, I prove it: for if
any part of Scripture be the sufficient means, it must be that part, which
contains the fundamental and essential articles of Religion; and whereas you do
not know, nor could any of your Doctors ever yet (though often desired by us)
give a Catalogue of those, which you call fundamental points, which they be,
and how are they distinguished from not fundamental points; its impossible that
you can tell which part of Scripture is that, which contains the the
fundamental points of Religion, and consequently you cannot tell which part of
scripture in the sufficient for our instruction.

That the Church was the means appointed by God for our instruction, before the
scripture was written, the Protestant do not, nor cannot deny: and if they will
not waver in their Principles, they must confess it continued so, until the
whole Canon was finished; (which was not until many years after Christ his
Ascension:) But, say they, scripture being written, which doubteless God gave
unto us, for no other end, than to be our guide and rule of Faith, the Church
surceased from that office, and is not to be regarded further, than as she
agrees with that written word: so that after scripture was received for Gods
written Oracle, the Church was casheered out of those glorious offices, which
formerly she enjoyed: because (as our Adversaries pretend) there was no need of
any other infallible Oracle, but the scripture, which in the judgment of all is
such. If this discourse be good; it proves also, that the Apostles ceased to be
our instructors, and infallible Oracles after the scripture was written; and
that the Church ceased to be infallible in fundamental points, because the
scripture is an infallible oracle, contains all points, and one infallible
Oracle is sufficient: yet our Adversaries confess that the Apostles remained
still infallible; and the Church in fundamental points.

And, whereas all scripture was not written at once, but successiuly by parts;
the Church was not deuested of teaching us, but by degrees, as the parts of
scripture were written; which paradox, though ridiculous, follows out of the
former discourse. But what if part, or all the scripture did perish; which is
not impossible, both because that some part of it has perished already, and that
there is nor in all scripture, any promiss of its perpetuity, as there is of
the perpetuity of the Church: then, I hope the scripture would return to her
ancient prerogative of being the needful means appointed for our instruction:
this extrauagant position you are bound to affirm, and you can show no
scripture for it, and yet you can believe nothing but what is in scripture.

I should think this a good discourse: the Church was once our guide, and means
appointed to ascertain us of the truths when the scripture that now is extant,
was not written: But the scripture now owned for such, does not say, the Church
was deuested of that Prerogative; therefore I am still obliged to believe she
enjoys it: for the obligation that once was, and it not proved to be
abolished remains still in force: there was an obligation of believing the
Church to be Gods infallible Oracle; nothing appears, that takes away that
obligation: therefore its still in force.

To conclude, the Necessity of an interpreter besides Scripture, for to
instruct us what we are to believe, is proved, not only, because Christ did
place Apostles, Evangelist, Doctors and Pastors in his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. for
this end, as the Apostle distinctly faies, for to keep us in Unity of Faith, to
instruct us, that we may be no more Children wavering to and fro and carried
away with every vvind of doctrine. but also by the practice of the Catholic
and Protestant Churchs, who give such vast reuenews to Ecclesiastical persons
for teaching the flock, and expounding the Mysteries of Faith; if scripture
were so clear in the necessary points, what needed any more, but to give each
one a Bible, and employ the Rents of the Clergy in some other use? what needed
so many authentic Christian doctrins published by both Churchs for to declare
the Mysteries of Religion? what needed so many Volums and Commentaries of the
Fathers upon the scripture, if it alone is clear, full, and plain in what we
are bound to believe?

IV. CHAPTER. A TRVE CHVRCH ESTABLISHED by Christ to decide Controversies, and
deliver the true Doctrine which we are bound to believe.
NO Protestant, at least of our times, will deny the existence of a true
Church, it being an article of the Apostles Creed, I believe the holy Catholic
Church. The true Notion of it, we have from S. Paul Romans 12.4. by a comparison
of it with a Natural Body: as this has several members, each one whereof has
its proper function; so we all, as so many different members, which exercise
diverse functions, concur to constitute one Body in Christ. In the natural
Body, there is a head, which is the seat of the Judgment which gouerns; there
are eyes to see, ears to hear, a mouth to speak: hands to work and feet to
walk: thus in the Church, Christ's mystical Body; there must be a head to
govern, which is the suprem Pastor; there must be eyes to pry, and examine the
truth; and these are the Doctors; there must be hands to deliver the word of
God, and a mouth to speak; and these are the Preachers, Pastors and Curats,
there must be ears to hear and feet to walk which are the flock. Hence we
gather the true Notion of the Church of God to be a visible society of true
belieuers, under one suprem Pastor, where the Faith of Christ is taught and
believed.

The Church therefore is constituted of two parts, the One whose obligation is
to teach and rule the flock: the other whose obligation is to obey and believe
what the Church by her Pastors and Doctors does teach and command; and whereas
the Church was still extant (or the article of our Creed was some time false)
it follows, there were still extant Pastors, and Doctors, who did teach the
true Faith of Christ, and a flock that believed it. As to the obligation of the
Church to instruct and govern us, these texts of scripture euince it: Necessity
is laid upon me for to preach, and vvo be to me if I preach not. 1. Cor. 9.16.
Attend to yourselues and to the whole flock, vvherin the H. G. has placed you
Bishops to rule the Church of God. Act. 20.23. Which obligation was laid an the
Apostles and their successors, when Christ commanded them to teach all Nations,
to preach the Ghospel unto all creatures: which obligation S. Paul does in
several places of his Epistles declare, but particularly Ephesians. 4.11. He placed
in his Church, some Apostles, and some Prophets, others some Evangelists, others
some Pastors, and Doctors, and declares to what end did Christ provide his
Church of them: for the consummation of Saints into the work of the Ministry;
that we may meet in the unity of Faith, that we be no more children
wavering to and fro, and carried away with every vvind of Doctrine. Whence
two consequences follow; the first that if you be tossed in your mind, and
doubtful what to believe; if two Sacraments or seven; if real Presence or
figurative; you are not to be carried away with every wind of Doctrine; but go
the Church, which God has furnished with Doctors Apstoles, and Pastors for to
instruct you: the second consequence; that Christ Faith being but One, and we
obliged to live in the Unity of that Faith, the Apostle tells us in this text,
that the means which he has appointed for to keep us in Unity of Faith, are
the Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors of the Church, that the Church
by them may lead us to the professiion of one Faith.

The other part which co^stitutes the Church, is the flock, whose obligation is
to obey and believe what she by her Doctors and Pastors does teach and command
us: this obligation is manifestly proved Mat. 23.2. all, that they, who sit on
the chayr of Moses, will say unto you, that observe and do. Lu. 10.16. Christ
commands, that he who will not hear the Church, is to be esteemed a Heathen
and a Publican, and adds that he who despeiseth her, despeiseth him; that is
to say he that despeiseth her Doctrine, which S. Paul expounds 1. These. 4.8.
when after giving them instructions, he says. He that despeiseth these things,
despeiseth not man, but God: and 2. These. 3.14. he that obeys not our word,
do not acompagny him, that he may be confounded. These clear and manifest texts
prove the obligation of the flock to believe, and obey the Doctrine, and
commands, which the Church by her Pastors and Doctors lays upon them. Whence
it appears that the Church is the Oracle, and Mistress, which Christ has
appointed on earth for to instruct and govern us.

This discourse that the Church is constituted of two parts, the one whose
obligation is to teach and govern, the otherwhose obligation is to learn,
believe and obey, is clearly shown in the 1. Cor. 3. where the Apostle
compares the Pastors and Prelates to Husband men, who sows the seed, and to
Masterbuilders that make a house; and compares the flock to a field that
receives the seed and improuments, and to an edifice. But, says he, He that
planteh, and he that vvatereth are one, and every man shall receive his own
revvard according his own works; we are laborers together with God, ye
are Gods Husbandry, ye are Gods building. All is but one body, one common
wealth but with this distinction, that some in this Body and commonweath, are
laborers, some whose charge it is to plant, and sovv the seed, which are the
Apostles, and their successors: others are the Husbandry, the field which is
watered, and receives the seed, whichs the flock.

Out of these Premises I discourse thus: as it is impossible that God, laying
an obligation upon us of believing revealed Truths, should not have afforded us
the necessary means to know what Truths he has revealed; so it is a madness in
me to expect to come to that knowledge by any other way or means, than by that
which God has appointed for our conduct* it is an unquestionable truth, that God
might have established an other manner of Providence for the salvation of man
whitout Scripture Sacraments or Church; but if God has decreed in this his
present government, not to save Man but upon certain conditions, will you be so
peremptory as to expect by special privilege, as a person particularly
favored, to walk a path by yourself, and be exempted from those conditions
which are generally required fromall? God might do so, there is no doubt of it;
but it is a madness in you to expect it.

You are to enquire what worship God requires from Man; what truths he has
revealed; which is the true sense of Scripture: I do not doubt, but God might,
if he were pleased, use other means for your instruction, without Church,
Scripture, Pastors or Doctors, snatching you to the Third Heaven as hedid S.
Paul 2. Cor. 11.4. or by sending an Angel to resolve your doubts; or by inward
illustrations and divine lights: but since that in this his present Providence
he has established a Church, furnished as we mentioned with Doctors, Pastors,
Apostles, and Evangelists; and laid an obligation upon her to teach you, and
upon you to believe and obey her; will you as a person particularly
priuiledg'd, expect to have the knowledge of what you ought to believe, and to
yet the true sense of Scripture by any other means; than by and from that
Oracle, which God has appointed for the instruction of all? I pity some
deluded souls who ery out, God knovvs if I did know the true Religion, and the
true sense of Scripture, I would embrace it. But, friend, do you expect a
revelation from Heaven, or an inward light for to ascertain you? God has
afforded means for to instruct us and commands us all (he excepts none) to
hear and oby her, which is the Church: make use of the means which he has
appointed, and you will be instructed: think not that your ignorance will
excuse your incredulity of what you ought to believe; when God has given you
means whereby to be instructed, and you will not make use of those means; and if
you say you do not know, which Church is that, which God has appointed for your
instruction; both by what I have already discoursed, and what shall be said in
the ensuing chapters, it will manifestly appear, that it is the Roman Catholic
Church.

But, say you, I search the Scripture, as Christ commanded, 10.5.39. and what I
meet not there, I do not believe; because I am persuaded it is it that God has
left unto us for to instruct us; and that it contains expressly and clearly,
what we are bound to believe. But we have proved in the two former chapters,
that Scripture does not contain all articles which we are bound to believe;
and that even the fundamental points of Religion, are not sufficiently proved
by Scripture alone without an infaillible interpreter: for there is not any
text hardly of Scripture but may be interpreted in different senses, and
Scripture alone does not ascertain us, which is the true sense: And if an
Heretic did arise, and say, that it is not lawful to keep sunday for a Holy
day, but saturday; because God commanded this should be kept, and the Apostles
could not alter it against the express command of God, Ex. 20. if he should
say, that it is lawful for us to keep but one Holy day and no more in the
week, and that we are obliged to work the other six days according that
text, six days thou shall work, but the seaueth is the Sabbath of they Lord,
Ex. 20. can his error be eleerly proved by Scripture alone? if he should say,
that it is not conformable to the instruction of Christ, to give the Communion
to Women, because we do not read that Christ should have given it to any; by
what Scripture will you convince him of an error? If he should say, that you
cannot in conscience defend your right against one who commences a suit in law
against you, or that is an unjust usurper of your goods; he will give you plain
Scripture for it: To him that will contest with you in Law, and take your
Coat from you, give him also your Cloak: Mat. 5.40. and by what text will you
convince him, that he misvnderstands that text? if he should say with the
Luciferians, that a Priest who would apostatise from his Religion, ought not to
be received again to the Communion of the Church, though he did repent,
grounded upon the words of Christ, Mat. 5. if the salt (that is to say the
Doctors and Pastors of the Church) has lost its Savor, vvher with shall it
be salted? it is therefore good for nothing but to be cast out, and trod under
foot of men. This is a damnable error, the door is still open Mr* Sall, if you
will but knock with repentance: yet no text of Scripture does clearly convince
that error; finally there was never yet any Heresy, no never will be, but will
hit upon some text of Scripture to prove its error: and if it be lawful for
every man to interpret he Scripture in the sense that seems best to him, they
will never be convinced by Scripture alone.

Hence it follows, that since the texts of Scripture admit different senses;
either of two things must happen; or that God has left it arbitrary to Mankind,
to believe that sense, which each one bonafide thinks in his own judgment to be
the best; and has not obliged him to submit his judgment to the sense given by
any other; and if so, Arriants, Protestants, Catholics and all are of a good
Religion; for each of us belieues that sense of Scripture which we think the
truest, which is all that God requires. Or if God has obliged us all, to
believe one sense of Scripture, though that sense may not seem the best to
this, or that particular man; and will have us submit our judgments and believe
that sense, which he obliges us all to believe; if so, then God must have
appointed some suprem Authority to declare unto us, what sense is that, which he
will have us all believe; to which all dissenting Parties must assent, and
submit their judgment: for it were vnbecoming the goodness of God to oblige man
under pain of damnation to believe one sense, and no other of all the different
senses the letter of Scripture admits; and not to afford some assured means and
public Authority (for no private authority will suffice) to propose unto us,
what sense it that. Nor will it be possible to keep us in Unity of Faith,
without this suprem Authority, for its not possible to have Unity of Faith, if
we do not all hold one and the same senee of Scripture: nor it is possible
that we all hold the same sense, if there be not a public Authority for to
propose unto us what sense is it, that we must hold, to whose judgment we
must be all bound to acquiesce; for if it be lawful for every man to reject
that Authority, and hold that sense of Scripture which he judges the best; it
will be lawful for every man to live in a different Religion from that of
others, and so there will never be any Unity of Faith and Religion.

Now that the suprem Authority appointed by Christ for to decide our
Controversies, and deliver unto us the true sense of Scripture, is the Church
established by Christ, its proved by the texts of Scripture alleged in the
beginning of this Chap. its proved also by the practice of all ages; for when
in the Apostles days there arose a controversy about the Circumcision of the
Gentiles some affirmed they ought, not only be baptized, but also circumcised;
others denied the Necessity, of Circumcision; both Parties alleged Scripture,
but neither was appayed: and how was the controversy decided and the true sense
of Scripture alleged by both, proposed; by the Church conuened in a Council
at Jerusalem. Act. 15. the one Party was condemned for Heretics if they did
not submit* and acquiesce to the Doctrine proposed by the Church. About the
year 324. arose a dispute betwit Arrius, (that was a member of the Catholic
Church, and others also Catholics, concerning the Divinity of Christ; each of
the disputants alleged several texts of Scripture, and pretended his own, to
be the true sense: who decided this Controversy? was it the Scripture alone
without a public authority to propose the sense of it? No, but the Church,
gathered in the Nicen Council, to whose decisions all Christians were bound to
acquiesce, and condemned as Heretics that would not. About the year 378.
arose a dispute between Macedonius and other Catholics concerning the Diuity
of the H. G. which he denied; both Parties cited many texts of Scripture, but
the dispute was not ended until the Church, gathered in a Council at
Constantinople, examined that question and texts produced by both Contestants,
and concluded against Macedonius: after which Decision it was not lawful to
doubt of the Divinity of the H. G. To be brief look into all ages that ever any
question arose concerning Religion, the final decision was alluayes deuolued to
the Church, who delivered the true sense of Scripture quoted by the Disputants,
and esteemed an Heretic that did not submit. This shows that the world did
ever yet believe, the suprem authority of deciding controversies, and
delivering the true sense of Scripture was still in the Church.

But the weary Protestants themiselues, who decry the Church, and will have no
other Iugde of Controversies but Scripture, do confess that betwixt two Parties
proving their differents Assertions of Religion out of Scripture, the Church
has the suprem authority of deciding, and delivering the true sense of
Scripture, to which both Parties are obliged in conscience to acquiesce: read
Doctor Porter in his Treatise of Char. Mist. page 195. and Chilling-worth in
his Book of the Protestant Religion a safe way of salvation, page 206. and B.
Lawd cited by Doctor Porter they teach, that the Decrees of General Council
bind all Persons, oblige in conscience, til euideuce of Scripture or a
demonstration maks their error appear, that they are not to be controlled by
private spirits, nor cannot de renuersed but by an equal authority of an other
General Council But because Protestants easily contradict one an other; and
others will say these are but opinions of private Doctors, and not the Doctrine
of the Protestant Church: I will prove that what ever their Doctrine be, their
practice proves that they believe the supreme authority of deciding
Controversies betwitxt two Parties disputing out of Scripture, to be only in
the Church: the proof.

Arminius a Minister of Amsterdam and Professor of Divinity at Leyden, broached
new Doctrine, touching points of Predestination, Grace and Liberty; quite
contrary to the Doctrine of Calvin, received in the Churchs of Holland. By his
wit and credit, he got many Proselyts, that in a short time, his Doctrine made
great progress throughout all the States. Gomarus, nothing inferior to him in
wit and reputation; an ancient Professor of Divinity at Groeningue opposed this
nouelty, and with all the ancient Ministers stood for the Doctrine of Calvin.
Printed Pamphlets were published; Texts of Scripture quoted, but neither did
yield to the other; each drew Abettors to their opinions, and the Provinces
were divided into two factions of Armenians, and Gomarists. The Churchs of
Hollands petitioned to the States General for a National Synod to determine the
Controversy, but Armenius strengthened with the protection of Barneuelt A duocat
General of the States, obtained that in lieu of a Synod, the matter should be
discussed in a conference of Diuins: the States deputed some persons of quality
for to hear the Disptutans; Arminius presented himself with four Divines, and
Gomarus with as many: Arminius his five articles were scanned; texts of
Scripture searched for, and carefully examined, reasons proposed by both
Parties with all ardor; nothing omitted that wit or industruy could give, and
after a tedious and eager dispute, the question remained undecided; the Parties
receded, each proclaming the victory.

Armenius dyed soon after, but his scholars took up the cudgle, and gained so
much ground upon the Gomarists, that all the three Provinces of Holland,
Vtrecht, and Ouerissel embraced their five Articles; and pretended a petition
to the States General for a toleration in the profession of that Doctrine, which
they offered to defend with the pure word of God: adding, it did not appertain
to a National Synod but to the Diuins of each particular Province to take
cognizance of the affairs of Religion in that Province, and therefore they
protested against any National Synod. The Gomarists on the other side cried out
for a Synod: the controversy did not only trouble the peace of the Provinces,
but made a great Ecco in the neigh bouring Reformed Churchs. The King of
England by his Ambassador, Sr Dudley Carleton, represented to the States that
the only means for to allay those disputes was a National Synod, to whom it
belonged to judge which of the Doctrins controuerted was the most conformable
to the word of God, and if both could be toletated in the Church; and therefore
demanded a Synod. Zeland and the other Provinces demanded the same; as also the
Protestant Princes of Germany; the Commonwealth of Geneua, and generally all
the Reformed Churchs. All this passage is faithfully extracted, ex Act. Synodi
Dordrectani, Typis Isaaci Ioannis Canicy printed at Dordtecht an* Dom. 1620.

Heervpon the States General issued their circular letters to all the Provinces
requiring, that each should send six of their best Divines to Dordrecht, were
the Synod was opened the 13. December an 1618. The King of England, the
Electors of Palatin, Branderbourg, and Lansgraue of Hesse, the Valons, the
Cantons of Surich, Berne, Basle, and Schaffouse, the Commonwealths of Geneua,
Breme, and Embidem sent their Diuins of most credit and learning to this Synod,
so that we may call it more than a National Synod, and a Representative of all
the Reformed Churchs. And though the Ministers of France were not permitted to
go thither, they sent their judgment of the question debated, in writing. The
Arminians protested against the Synod, as being a Party concerned; and
consequently not a competent Judge, being composed of Persons confessedly of
the doctrine of the Gomarists. (was it not thus that the Reformers protested
against the Council of Trent.) The deputies of te extern Churches delivered in
writing their opinions of this protestation: Those of England; that it was
against the practice of the primitive Church; of the Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, Chalcedo, and Ephese, whose members were confessedly of the
Catholic Church, opposed by Arius, Nestorius, Macedonius, and Eutyches; that
not withstanding they were competent judges, against whom no protestation was
admitted, but all Parties were obliged to submit. The Diuins of Palatin; that
to determine a controversy in Religion, the Parties must not go to the Turks or
Pagans, or to indifferent Persons, that profess no Religion; but must be said
by the Pastors and Prelates of that Church, whereof they are members, and wherein
the question is debated. The Diuins of Geneua, that both Parties were by the
sentence of Christ bound to submit to the Synod, or to be esteemed Heathens and
Publicans. All the rest of the Diuins concluded the same; whereupon the Synod
condemned that protestation, and declared, it self to be the lawful and
soueraign Judge in that cause; Vel abycere debent omnem protestationem aduersus
Synodum, and subjicere sua dogmata illius judicio, vel certe si manent in
protestatione immoti, eo ipso se declarant vnioni Ecclesiarum reformatarum
renunciare: Or they must set by all Protestations against the Synod, and submit
their doctrine to its judgment, or if they persist in their protestation, thereby
they declare themselves to renounce the communion of reformed Churches. Is not
this to declare them Schismatics that will not submit to the Church? The
Armeniens were then summoned to wave the Protestation and give in writing their
five articles, which they did; they were examined by the Synod, and condemned
as erroneous and contrary to the word of God; and all those that would sustain
them incapacitated for to bear any charge, or exercise any Ecclesiastical
function, Sess. 138.

The Armeniens did not submit to this judgment alleging the Synod (as all
others) was fallible, and did err in this point, and therefore could not be
obliged in conscience to submit; and perhaps some Protestants will side with
them, saying that a Council can not oblige men's consciences, and that their
Decrees can reach no further, than to what concerns the Politic government of
the flock: but this Synod, which indeed was more than a National one, of the
Reformed Churchs, and assisted by the deputyes of the Church of England,
declares an obligation in conscience of acquiescing to its decisions, not only
by the words now alleged, but by the Sess. 42. Si conscientiae suae (quam
debent) oationem habent, ad obtemperandum supremarum Potestatum mandatis,
hujusque Synodi ordini and iudicio acquiescendum tenentur. If they have any
regard for their Conscience, (behold their Decrees reach to the Consciences)
they are bound to obey the commands of the heigher Powers, and acquiesce to
the judgment of this Synod. And immediately after this Synod, when the Arminiens
insisted in their reason for not submitting, because the Synod was fallible,
the States consulted their National Synod then assembled at Delpht, what ought
to be don, This answered, that notwithstanding the Synod was fallible, they
were obliged in conscience to believe the sense of Scripture proposed by it:
and gives for reason; that whereas many pious and learned Doctors from all
Churchs did meet together in the fear of the Lord, to declare by the word of
God, what ought to be believed, omnino credendum est, it must be undoubtedly
believed, that Christ according his promiss, was present to that meeting, and
governed it, by the Holy Ghost Iudic. Syn. Desph. Sess. 26. Syn. Dord. And if
the Decrees of Councils reach not to oblige Consciences, then Arrius must not
be judged an Heretic though condemned by the Council of Nice, nor can Mr Sall
believe S. Athanasius his Creed with the heavenly gift of Faith wherwhith he
belieues the Scripture, as he acknowledges, page 18.

Now whateuer any particular Doctor or Doctors of the Church of England say;
what Pagan, would enquire into the Mysteries of Christian Religion with a
desire of being instructed, would read this Synod of Dordrecht, and Delpht,
and also the Councils of Nice and all other General Councils of the Catholic
Church, and would not understanding, that it is the Doctrine and practice of
both Church the Reformed and Catholic, that the Councils have the suprem
Authority of deciding Controversies, and delivering the true sense of
Scripture; that none can protest against the authority of Councils legally
assembled; and that both Parties contesting about any point of Religion, is to
be said by the Church, whereof they are Members, and whoeuer will not submit
renounces the union of the Church, and becoms schismatic.

Hence it follows Mr Sall, that whereas there was no Christian Church visible,
when your first Reformers opposed the Catholic Tenets, but the Roman Catholic
Church; They were obliged to be judged by her, andsubmit their doctrine to her
judgment, they being Members of that Church; that in declining her Authority in
the Council of Trent, and protesting against her, as being a Party, and
fallible; they became Schismatics. And if the Reformation in its of spring was
schismatical, doubtless in their continuation it must be so, for time gives no
prescription to an error, nor have you more right to continue in that
separation from us, than your first Reformers had to begin it. And as the
Arrians are still Heretics, though separated from us these 1300 years, and
still obliged to teturn, so are you.

Now let us hear Mr Sall what means did he use to understand the true sense of
Scripture; to satisfy his doubts in Religion, and to know what he ought to
believe; and we will find he did not use the means which Christ appointed for
our instruction, page 17. you tell us, Mr Sall, that you discovered the Roman
Church to be guilty of idolatry, couelty and impiety; your wit, say you,
demanded you a reason for what you believed; and if it demanded and evidently
co^^cluding reason, it ourlasht, whereas the Mysteries of Religion are of things
not appearing, as S. Paul says, surpassing reason: you frequently, perused the
Scripture the Councils Fathers, and Histories, and all made you doubt of the
Truth of our Tenets; the consequence therefore is undeniable that Scripture
alone, is so far from being clear, and easy in points of Religion, that it
alone nor with the assistance of Historyes, Councils and Fathers, is not
sufficient, even to so great a wit as you pretend to be, in no ways obstinat
vvillfully, but desirous to know and embrace the truth, is not I say sufficient
to assure you what is an error or not; consequently somewhat else is wanting to
know what we ought to believe.

Page 37. you tell us that you went to the Church of England, whose Eminent
Persons by word and vvritting did assert, (do not you see that besides the
Scripture, we want a living Church to inform is what we out to believe?) that
the fumme of our Faith, is the word of God contained in Canonical Scripture,
and the plain vndubitable consequences out of it. But Mr Sall, you might have
belyed them all by your own experience, who read Scriptuse, assisted with your
eminent with (forsooth) and knowleg in sciences, assisted by the Fathers
Historyes and Councils, and yet, as you tell us, all made you doubt (page 18.)
but could not assure you of the truth or untruth of our errors: consequently
something else is requisite for to know assuredly what is Truth, and what not:
But Mr Sall, before that the Cchurch of England, by her Eminent Persons, did
tell you the Scripture alone and its vndubitable consequences is the intyre
sum of Faith, did you know that to be be true? did you understand it to be
true by the Scripture when you frequently read it, and by Councils and Fathers?
if you did* to what purpose do you speak unto us of the Church of England?
what need had you to go to her? You ought to have sought and found the
resolution of your doubts in the Scripture alone and its vndubitable
consequences: if you did not, then you believe the Scripture and its
indubitable consequences to be the sum of our Faith upon the testimony of the
Church of England and her Eminent Persons, which being fallible as you and she
confess all your Faith is built on a fallible bottom.

Moreover Mr Sall, the Church of England informed, that the Scripture alone,
and its indubitable consequences are the whole sum of divine Faith: but did
the Church of England tell you, who is he, that must draw those indubitable
consequences? Must those consequences be drawn by a public Authority
established by Christ, or is it sufficient that the consequences seem
vndubitable to you or me, or any private person? If the second, then all
sectaries in the world have a true rule of Faith, which is their own reason
that dictats what they believe, to be an undeniable consequence of Scripture;
and none can blame them for they regulat their Faith by the rule that Christ
has appointed, if the first, then the Church of England, should have informed
you, what suprem Authority is that, which must draw those consequences, and
aproue or reprove those which to private persons seem to be undeniably deduced
out of Scripture: But this which your instructors omitted, has been shown unto
you in this Chapter, not only by Scripture and reason, but by the practice of
your Reformed Churchs represented in the Synod of Dordrecht; that when two
Contestants draw contradictory consequences out of Scripture, each one
pretending his own to be vndubitably deduced out of the Text, the Church whereof
the Parties are Members, has the suprem Authority to resolve which is the true
consequence; that the Parties are bound in conscience to submit to her
judgment; and to be held for Schismatiks if they do not: and whereas your first
Reformers drew consequences which seemed to them to follow vndubitably from
Scripture, and their Adversaries judged the contrary to be vndubitable true;
your Reformers were bound to submit to the Catholic Church whereof their were
Members, and learn of her which were the true consequences, and were
Schismatic for not doing so; and as their error descended to you and your
living Brethren; the obligation also of being instructed by the Catholic
Church, and acquiescing to her judgment descends unto you. And thus Mr Sall you
miserably mistook the means which Christ appointed for to instruct us in
Religion.

V. CHAPTER. THE CHVRCH ESTABLISHED FOR our instruction, is infallible.
THough I reserve a chapter a part for Mr Salls arguments against this Tenet,
yet I must here toucth two of them, which show that he is either ignorant, or
malicious in mistaking our doctrine, by the answer to which I will declare, what
we believe in this particular. He impugns our doctrine from the page 29. to 35.
and from the page 39. to 44. page 39. he argues that Infallibility is an
Attribut proper to Gods essence, which can no more be communicated to any
Creature, than the Deyty itself; its a Blasphemy, says he, to attribute to any
creature, that which is proper to God alone; consequenty the Church of Rome is
guilty of Blasphemy in teaching the Pope or Council is infallible. I cannot
believe but that you are sufficienty sensible of the weakness of this argument,
which from the very beginning of your pretended Reformation is so common, that
any Collier will answer it; especially that it, and all the arguments you bring
in your whole discourse are exactly set down in Bellarmin, (whence you have
borrowed them) and most evidently answered; and if you had any ingenuity you
ought not to trouble your Auditory with such third bare tryfles, but tell them
also, what we answer; and retort it if you could. Can you that pretends to the
credit of a Professor of Divinity, ignore, that a man, who is by his own Nature
Mortal, might by Gods Protection, (who promises him, he shall never dye) be
immortal? and why will you deny but that Man, who by Nature is subject to
error, may by Gods special protection, (promising him that he shall never err)
be kept from falling into any error or mistake? This is what we believe, that
the Church, which is by Nature (as being a congregation of Men) fallible, may
be mistaken, and though ignorance or malice teach an untruth, but that God has
promised to assist her continually with his spirit, for to lead her into all
Truth; and never to permit her to teach or believe any error: by virtue of
which promiss (judge you if such a promiss be impossible) we say the Church
cannot err in her doctrine, which is to be infallible.

Dare you deny, but that the Prophets, the Apostles, and Evangelists were
infallible, in what they taught and writ? dare you deny but that the Church of
God is infallible in fundamental points of Religion? and are you therefore
guilty of Blasphemy, or do you entrench on Gods prerogatives, or give his
Attributs to creatures? God is infallible by Nature; by his own proper
perfection, this is his Attribut; and this cannot be given to any creature: to
be infallible by the protection of an other, who defends him from falling into
any error, is not Attribut of God, it were a Blasphemy to say that he is
infallible in that manner; but the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and the
Church are thus infallible, by Gods special protection and the conduct of his
spirit.

An other argument against our Tenet. page 30. is the disagreement of our
Authors, in placing this infallibity: some will have it to be in the Pope
alone; others in him and a Council of Cardinals; others in the Pope and General
Council alone. This dissension is to Mr Sall a concluding argument that there
is no such thing as Church infallibity: and thus he furnishes the Deists with a
concluding argument, that there is no such thing as true Religion in the world;
for, will the Deists say with him; the Authors that pretend to true Religion,
do not agree where it is; some say its in the Jewish Church; others that it is
in the Protestants, others in the Catholic Church; others in other
Congregations; and will conclude in Mr Salls Dialect; that there is no such
thing as true Religion extant, because the Pretenders to it, do not agree where
to find it. But the poor Man, ignorantly or maliciously mistakes our doctrine:
all Catholics do agree in the infallibility of the Pope and General Council
jointly, this is the infallibility we believe as an article of Faith.

Its true, that the Catholic Authors do dispute if the Pope alone is
infallible; some say he is, and will have it to be an article of Faith that he
is; others say that he is not, but with a Council of Cardinals and Divines;
others say, that neither this is an article of Faith; some say that a General
Council legally assembled is infallible in their Decrees, though not confirmed
by the Pope; others say not, if they be not confirmed by him. But all these are
but school questions; the Church hears them, and permits them to dispute: and
whateuer Bellarmin or any other says, we are not obliged to believe it to be
an article of faith whylst it is opposed by other Catholic Doctors and the
Church does not determine the Controversy: but what you are to observe is; that
those Doctors who defend the infalliblity of the Pope alone; and those that
deny it; those that affirm the infallibility of the Council alone, and those
that contradict it, they agree unanimously in the infallibity of the Pope and
Council together; because that with out any controversy the Pope and Council
ioyintly, represents the universal Church; and the universal Church is
infallible: this is the article of Faith we believe. And if you tell us, a
Pope, or a General Council has erred; you will tell us nothing to the purpose,
if you do not show that a Pope and Council together has erred: for that is the
Church, having by the answer of these two arguments, declared what
infallibility the Church clayms, and where we believe this infallibility to
be, let us now prove our Tenet.

First, its a comfort to an unacquainted Traveler to be guided by one whom he
firmly belieues to be acquainted with the way: though really your guide were
not acquainted with the way, if you certainly believe he is, and that he cannot
stray; though you do not know the way yourself, you will follow him with
satisfaction, and without fear of being biased: but if you do not know the
way, and you believe your guide is not so well acquainted, but that he may
stray; you will still travel with fear of being biased. This is the
different condition of a Catholic and a Protestant: the Catholic traveling in
the way to salvation, (which is Religion) is guided by a Church, which he,
without the least doubt, belieues cannot be mistaken; whether she can or not,
since he is absolutely persuaded she cannot, he trauells with satisfaction and
without fear: the Protestant in this way, is guided by a Church, which he
belieues, is not so well assured of the way, but that she may err; ought he not
therefore to walk disatisfyed, and with continual fear of being mislead?

You answer that the Protestant is not lead by the Church, but by the
Scripture; which is an infallible guide. Its very sure, the Scripture is
infallible, understood in the true sense, but you can have no assurance that
you have the true sense of Scripture; consequently you can have no assurance,
that you have an infallible guide; this proposition is certain: The Scripture
ill interpreted, does mislead: this proposition is also certain, you, and your
Church may err, in the interpretation of Scripture comparing one text with an
other. Since therefore your guide in the road of Faith, is the Scripture
interpreted by you, and your Church, comparing on text with an other. You are
guided by a guide, that may err and mislead you; and as you have no well
grounded assurance, that you and your Church do not err in the interpretation
of Scripture, co^paring one text with an other; you can have no assurance but
that you are mislead. But the Catholic believing his Church to be infallible in
the interpretation of Scripture, does rest his mind in the full assurance of
the truth he professes.

And ought not you to embrace that doctrine, which gives you that satisfaction,
and rest of mind; rather than the Protestant doctrine of fallibility, which
leaves you doubtful, if what you believe be true or not? Particularly when in
believing it, you hazard nothing: not your salvation; for all learned
Protestants (which we will prove against Mr Sall) do grant salvation in the
express belief of articles of Popery; you reply, its no solid comfort, that
the Catholic amuses himself with, in believing his Church that guides him to be
infallible, if really she be not so: for if it proves in effect to be
otherwise, he will come short of his imaginary comfort, and will find that he
and his Church is mistaken. I answer, if we consider the testimonies of
Scripture, the strength of reason, the consent of ages, the multitude of
Universities Fathers and Doctors that defend this doctrine of infallibility; it
is as lykely to be true as your doctrine of fallibility; its as lykely that you
are mistaken in believing fallibility, as I am in believing infallibility: you
run therefore as great a hazard of being mistaken as I do: on the other side,
you cannot have that satisfaction without fear of being mislead; that rest of
mind, in the assurance of the truth (for you may err) by believing fallibility,
as I have by believing infallibility: my condition then is still better than
yours, and my doctrine to be prefered before yours.

Your Church, as you confess may err in points of Religion, whence it
manifestly follows that it is not the true sense of Scripture, that leads you
in the road to Religion; for the true sense of Scripture is absolutely
infallible: I ask you therefore, on what do you ground your Faith? You tell me,
that upon the Scripture as interpreted by your Church, and comparing one text
with an other; but it may happen that your Church may err in the
interpretation; that you confess, for you say the true Church may err, now I
argue thus: whoeuer may err, relying upon a Principle; can never be sure that
he does not err, whylst he relyes only on that Principle: this proposition is
undeniable; for if he can err relying on that Principle; its because the
Principle is fallible, and if the Principle be fallible, it alone without the
help of some other, can never give any assurance that you do not err: for
example you believe the King is in London because an honest Man tells you so;
that is a fallible ground, which you rely on, and you may err by relying on
that ground, and as long as you rely only on that man's testimony, and have no
other; you will never be assured of the Kings being at London. You believe the
Church fallibility: and on what ground do you rely? on Scripture as interpreted
by the Church: you may err relying on this Principle as you confess; therefore
as long as you rely on this Principle only, and have no other, you can never be
assured that you do not err: the Church of England has no other, nor will admit
no other Principle to ground their Faith upon, but the Scripture interpreted by
her, and comparing one text with an other therefore she can never be assured of
the doctrine she belieues; consequently cannot be assured of the fallibility of
the true Church.

What will you say in this case: there is a Man accused of Murder before your
tribunal, he does not only deny the fact, but many circumstances favors his
innocence, and the very Person that accuses him says, he is not sure, he is
the Murderer: surely you would not condemn this Man to death; it being against
all the maxims of justice to punish a man that is not convicted criminal. This
is the very matter in hand: the true Church is accused of fallibility and
falsehood in her doctrine; the circumstances of having flourished for so many
ages, in the credit of an infallible Oracle, favors her innocence, and her
Accuser, which is the Church of England, does confess that she may err in her
accusation, and consequently must confess, as we proved, that she cannot be
sure, she does not err; for she grounds her accusation on the Scripture
interpreted by her, in which she may err; and whylst she has no other Principle
but that, she can never be certain she does not err: will not you then acquit
the Church, of whose crime her accuser is not sure, as you would that Man
accused of Murder?

Add this discourse to the former: it is a Principle in all well governed
Commonwealhs, that a preacable Possessor is not to be disturbd from his
possession, until that by unquestionable proofs he be convicted an unjust
usurper or detainer; no conjectures, nor probable reasons will put him out of
possession: he will still with a safe conscience maintain it; and the law will
continue him in it, until that by evident proofs he be convicted. The true
Church was in all ages in peacable possession of this prerogative of
infallibility, never denied to her, but by some few condemned Heretics: what
evident unquestionable proofs can you bring to convince her an unjust usurper
or detainer of it? Reason affords you none, for to say that infallibility is an
Attribut proper to God, is impertinent; whereas she clayms no other
infallibility, but such as you grant to the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists:
but, say you, in a General Council, which is a multitude of Men, where a point
of Religion is to be resolved by the mayor part of Votes: and where passion,
and interest somtymes may sway, it may happen, that an error may have more
Abettors, and truth be out voted: This is to say that God has no Providence
over his Church: since he has promised the conduct of his infallible spirit to
her, for to lead her into all truth, and keep her unspotted from all errors;
let each particular of that multitude be ever so corrupt in himself: God, who
can as easily govern the hearts of many, as of one; will not permit them to
determine an error, nor truth to be out voted. Was not the Council of the
Apostles and Ancients at Jerusalem a multitude? Were not the first four General
Concils multitudes, which the Protestants confess to have been infallible, and
guided by Gods spirit, which was as necessary to the Councils of succeeding
ages, the emergent Controuersyes being no fewer in number, nor less in weight.

Neither does Scripture afford you any: match, if you can these texts: I am
with you all the days, until the consummation of the world Math. 28.20. and
if the Church did teach an untruth, would Christ be with her then? He will
give you an other Paraclet the Spirit of Truth, that will abide with you for
ever; who will lead you into all truth. Io. 14.16. when the Paraclet will
come, whom I will send from my Father, the Spirit of truth, he will give
testimony of me, and you will give testimony: Io. 15.26. the Paraclet and the
Chruch, are joint Witnesses of the truth.

Nor does experience favor you: all that you can show is that some Pope did
err, or that some Council did err; but that's not to the purpose, if you do not
show (which you will never do) thal a Pope and Council together has erred.
whereas therefore neither scripture, Reason, nor experience does afford you any
unquestionable evident proofs, that the Chruch is an vnuist usurper or detainer
of that prerogative of infaillibility, which she has en ioyed in all ages, why
will you pretend to disturb her peacable possession?

Let us hear what the scripture suyes: Lu. 10.16. He that hears you, hears
me: Christ spoke to his Apostles and Disciples on whom he laid the charge of
teaching and preaching, and who were the Church representative: whateuer
therefore we hear from the Chruch representative, we hear it from Christ;
whateuer the Church speaks, Christ speaks, otherwise we should not hear
Christ speak, when we hear the Church speak: the Church therefore, is the
Mouth by which Christ speaks: and as we cannot hear an untruth from him, as he
cannot speak any, so she cannot speak, nor be heard to speak an untruth: this
is de clared by S. Paul 1. These. 2.13. when you received from us the word of
the hearing of God, you received it, not as the word of Man, but as indeed it
is, the word of God. And therefore says he 1. These. 4. S. he that despeiseth
these things, despeiseth not man, but God. Could a man speak more pertinently
to signify that the doctrine of the Church is the doctrine of God; that when we
hear her, we hear him; and that her words are infaillible, whereas they are
the words of God?

Observe that the Council of Apostles and Ancients at Jerusalem. Act. 15.28.
deciding the Controversy concerning Circumcision, delivers their sentence thus;
It seems good to ihe Holy Ghost and to us. Signifying that the resolution
proceeded jointly from both; from the Holy Ghost; by his inward inspiration and
direction; from the Council, by its outward declaration: can we doubt
therefore, but that the resolution of Controuersyes by that Council was
infallibly true; and not only of that, but also of all succeeding Councils;
whereas the Apostles pronounced their sentence in those words, grounded on the
words of Christ, He that hears you hears me, grounded on the words of
Christ Io. 15.26. when the Paraclet vvi^l come, he shall give testimony of me
and you shall give testimony; in which words Christ did speak to his Church,
which was the witness, which jointly with the Holy Ghost, was to give testimony
of him; and grounded on the Promiss of his Paraclet, which was made by Christ,
not only to the Apostles, but to his Church for ever, until the consummation
of the world.

This is yet more clearly proved by the following discourse: Christ commands us
to hear the Church; that he that despeiseth her despeiseth him Lu. 10.16. to
observe and do what those that sit on Moses his chair, bids us do Mat. 23.2.
commands them to be esteemed as Heathens and Publicans, that will not obey her.
S. Paul commands us (Heb. 13.17.) not to be carried away with various and
strange Doctrins, but obey the Church, wherein says he, Ephesians. 4. God has placed
Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors to teach us: out of these and the
like texts, (which are frequent in scripture,) largue thus. He that does what
Christ bids him do, and belieues what he bids him believe; cannot do amiss, nor
believe an error: but Christ bids us believe and do, what the Church commands
us to believe and do, as appears by these texts; therefore he that does what
the Church commands him to do, and belieues what she commands us to believe;
cannot do amiss nor believe an error: consequently what teuer the Church
teachs is no error.

To conclude. S. Io. 1. epis. 4.6. having warned us to try our Spirits, if from
God or Satan; he gives us a rule whereby to try them; he that knovveth God
hears us, he that knovveth not God, hears us not. In this we know the
Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error. This is the way prescribed by S.
John to ascertain us of the nature of our Spirits: if our Spirit be conformable
to the Spirit of the Church, its a Spirit of Truth; if it does not conform
itself to the Spirit of the Church; its a Spirit of error: but if the Spirit
of the Church de fallible, it can give me no assurance of my Spirit, whether it
be of truth or of error: for what assurance can you have, that the Cloth
which you measure is of a yard in length; if you be not assured, that the yard
wherewith you measure, it is an exact yard? neither therefore can you be assured
that your Spirit is of truth by trying it with the Spirit of the Church; if you
be not assured that the Spirit of the Church is of Truth.

But because our Adversaries, will still reply that all this is to be
understood of the Apostles, who were infallible whylst they lived, and are now
infallible in their written word: I have already shown that the written word
is not sufficient to ascertain us of the truth or untruth of our Spirits, and
will now prove in this.

VI. CHAPT. THAT NOT ONLY THE APOSTLES and Church in their days, but that the
Church in all succeeding ages is infallible.
THe Church of England confesses that the Apostles and Church in their time,
nay and for some ages after (if you ask how many they do not agree) was
infaillible; this is not consequent to their Principles that say only God is
infallible; but howeuer, its their Doctrine, as appears in Mr Salls discourse
page 18 professing to believe, the Holy scripture the Apostles Creed, and S.
Athanasius his Creed (parallelling this with the other two) with the heavenly
gift of faith; and if the Council of Nice, which delivered unto us the doctrine
contained in Athanasius his Creed, had not been directed by the Holy Ghost, as
the Writers of the scripture were; it were a Blasphemy to believe that Creed,
and the doctrine of the Council with the same Faith, with which we believe the
scripture. Now the Protestants all agree in this; that now, nor in these many
ages, the Church is not infallible; for which assertion, you must expect no
scripture from them, nor no reason, but their bare word.

But let us see what reason they pretend: God, say they, having given us an
infallible written word, sufficient to instruct us, Church infallibility was
for the future needless; what school boy but sees the weakness of this reason?
first, after the scripture was written, the Church continued infallible for
some ages, Mr Sall must confess by what I have now said; as generally all
Protestants say; and as all, must say, otherwise Arrius, and other Heresiarks,
might have questioned the truth of their doctrine if they had been fallible; and
could not be obliged in conscience to acquiesce to their iugdment, nor ought
not tobe held for Heretics nor excommunicated for not submitting to them, if
they were fallible; as yon do not esteem yourself an Heretic for not
submitting to the Catolick Church on te same account. S. Gregory l. 1. c. 24.
says of the first four Councils I do embrace and reverence the four General
Councils, as the four Books of the Gospel; which had been rashly and
impiously said, if they had not been infallible. Secondly if Church
infallibility was needbess because the scripture, which is infallible, was
written; then it was also needless that the Church should be infallible in
fundamental points of Religion; and yet Protestants do constantly aver, that
the Church is still infallible in fundamental points, thought he scripture be
infallible also in them. Thirdly, the Apostles remained still infallible after
the Scripture was written; and why not the Church? fourthly, if infallibility
is needless, because the Scripture is infallible, we may say also that S John
is not infallible in is Ghos pell, at least, as to those points which were al
ready mentioned in Matthew, Mark, and Luke; or that these three, lost their
infallibility by the writing of S. John's Ghos pell; because one infallible Ghos
pell is sufficient, at least as to the points it contains.

These instances show that reason to be very frivolous: and if it proved any
thing, at most it can prove that the Church infallibility is not necessary for
our instruction; but it might be-necessary for other ends of Gods providence;
who might have left still that gift of infallibility to his Church, for a mark
of his love to her. we find he did promise the conduct of his infallible
Spirit to his Church; we de not find he should have limited this grace to any
time; nay to the contrary, we find that he said, it should be for ever, all
days, to the consummation of the world, why should we therefore limit that
favor unto a time; to conclude we have proved in the 2 and 3 chap. that
Scripture is not sufficient to instruct us, and consequently an infallible
Church is still necessary.

An other reason no less silly, to prove that the Church after few ages became
fallible: for the Popes. Prelates, and People became very vicious; and from the
debauchery of manners, they came, by Gods just iugdment, to fall into errors
in doctrine: which Mr Sall pretends to prove by Scripture page 32. the promise
made by Christ of the Paraclet, for to lead the Church into all truth, was a
conditional promise as appears by Christ his word Io. 14.16. if you love me,
keep my commandmens, and I will ask my father, and he will give you an other
Paraclet, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the world cannot receive. The Paraclet is promised on condition they Keep the
commandments; and by the later words, whom the world cannot receive; the
Paraclet is flatly denied to all those, the Scripture styles by the name of
world; that is to say, the, wicked and wordly men. Hence (says Mr Sall we
can be no more sure, that the Pope and his Council are infallible; than we are
that he lives in Gods love, and observance of his commandments: and whereas it
is manifest by our own Historyes, that the Pope, Pastors and flock have fallen
into many crimes, it follows they have forfeited the conduct of Gods
infaillible Spirit.

If from the lewdness of manners, we might conclude the Churches corruption in
doctrine, what Gospel could the world expect from Luther, and the other
pretended Reformers, for whose wickdness there are as good Records as for the
debauchery of Popes and Prelates: the sins of Prelates did deface the Gospel,
and did the Apostasy of Luther and the Sodomy of Calvin restore it to its
splendour? Christ did foresee that they, who should sit on the chair of Moses,
would be wicked in their lives; and yet commanded us, to obey, and believe
their doctrine. The conduct of Gods Spirit promised to them, for to lead them
into all Truth, was not a personal gift given to them for their own sakes, but
for the flock; for to keep them in unity of Faith: and therefore though God
does permit them to fall into wickedness of life, his Providence will not
permit them to fall into errors of doctrine; that the flock, which it obliged to
obey them, may not be mislead. To prove that the Promiss was only conditional,
you corrupt the text: for as well your Bible, as ours, says thus: if you love
me, keep my Commandments; and there puts a punctum. Then ads a distinct verse
or section; And I will ask my Father, and he will give you an other Paraclet
etc. which makes an absolut sense, independent of the former. That this is the
true interpretation of that text; it appears, for in several other texts, That
assistance of as Mat. 28 20* behold I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world. Mat. 16. the Gates of hell shall not prevail
agaiust her. Io. 16 13. when the Paraclet shall come the Spirit of Truth, he
shall teach you-all truth. And is it not strange Mr Sall should auerr, the
Paraclet was promised upon condition of Gods love, and observance of his
Commandments; whereas the Church remayns still infallible infundamental points;
notwithstanding that it has failed in that condition, as Mr Sall and all
Protestants do deknowledge. But what he will never answer is, that if that
Promiss was conditional, it folloues we cannot be sure the Gospel is
infallible, if we be not sure that the Evangelists, when they wrote it, have
been in the love of God, and observance of his Commandments; for if they were
not, they had not the Paraclet says Mr Sall; but no text of Scripture tells
us, that the Evangelists were in the state of Grace when they writ the
Gospel; nor nothing else gives us assurance of it. Therefore we are not
assured the Gospel written by the Evangelists is infallible: nay which is
worse, in the common doctrine of Protestants, we are assured it is not
infaillible; for the common doctrine in their Church is, that it is impossible
to keep Gods commandments; the Evangelists therefore, when they writ did not
keep Gods Commandments; consequenly they could not have the Paraclet to lead
them into truth; consequenly the Gospel is not infallible, and so Mr Sall
ouerthrows all-Christian Religion.

Let us consider what inducements had the primitive Christians to believe the
Apostles infallible: was it not the testimony of the Apostles, confirming their
doctrine with many Miracles? look into the Historyes of all succeding ages, and
you will find, that the Church, which affirmed herself to be infallible, did
confirm her doctrine with many and great Miracle, as we will evidence in the
ensuing Chap. And on what do you ground your belief, when you say the Apostles
were infallible? You say, that upon the Scripture: but I defy you to show any
text of Scripture which declares the infallibility of the Apostles, that
relates not to the Church in succeeding ages, as well as to them; either
therefore they prove the Church to be infallible in succeeding ages, or they do
not prove the Apostles to be infallible.

For example we prove the infallibility of the Apostles by the words of
Christ: he that hears you, hears me. Lu. 10. whence follows, that the
words of the Apostles were the words of Christ. But Christ himself, Mat. 18.
declares that text must be understood of his Church, whereuer it be: if he vvil
not hear the Church, let him be to you as a Heathen and Publican. We prove it
out of S. John 14.18. He will give you an other Paraclet, the spirit of truth,
that will a bide with you for ever; but this text plainly declares that the
Promiss was made also to the Church in succeeding ages, by the word for ever;
for the Apostles were not to be for ever in their own persons, but in their
successors; and to remove all occasion of cauilling upon the word for ever,
saying that it signifyes only the time of the Apostles lives, Christ declares
himself in a cleerer expression, Mat. 28. I am with you all days to the
consummation of the world giving us to vnd erstand, that the Paraclet was not
sent to his Apostles alone, but to their successors to the words end. We prove
it by the text of S. Io. 16.26. when the Paraclet will come, whom I will
send from my Father the spirit of Truth, who proceeds from the Father, he
will give testimony of me, and you will give testimony. But there is nothing
more clear, than that the whole Chapter speaks all a long of the Church;
(read, y pray, the text) consequently that text is to be understood of the
Church, as well as of the Apostles. We prove it, because the Apostles were the
fundation (S. Paul Ephesians. 2.20.) whereupon the Church was built: But S. Paul calls
the the Church also the Pillar and foundation of Truth 1. Tim. 3. We prove it
because S. Paul commands us in several places to believe his doctrine, for that
his word is not the word of Man, but indeed of God, and consequently
infallible. 1. These. 2. bu^ Christ also Mat. 23* commands us to obey and
believe the Church in succeeding ages: on the chayr of Moses have sat the
scribes and Pharisees, vvhateuer they bid you do, observe and do, obliging us
to obey and believe not only Moses, but those that succeed in his chayr. Thus
not a text shall you meet for the infallibility of the Apostles, but proves
lykwise that of the Church.

Doubtless you will not deny, but that Christ his Command of teaching all
Nations, preaching the Gospel, that the Bishops should rule the Church, was
laid not only on the Apostles, but on their successors for future ages; other
wise the Prelates and Pastors of future, and this our age would not be obliged
to teach preach, and rule us. You will not deny also, but that Christ his
command of hearing the Church under pain of being esteemed Heathens and
Publicans, of obeying them that sit on Moses his chayr, of being subject to
our Prelates, was laid on the flock of all succeeding ages, as well as on that
of the Apostles days: it follows therefore that the Pastors of our age are as
much obliged to teach us, as the Apostles were to preach to them of their age;
and that we are as much obliged to obey and believe the Church in our age, as
the flock was in the Apostles time to believe and obey them: who can doubt them
but that as the Authority, jurisdiction, and obligation of teaching descended
to succeeding ages, the infallibility also given to the Apostles for to acquit
that obligation, did descend; it being given by God, for the love and
government of the flock, that they should not be mis lead. And here enters the
argument that I proposed in the former Chapter. Whoeuer does as Christ bids him
do, and belieues as Christ bids him believe, cannot do amiss, nor believe an
error; but Christ bids us do and believe, as the Church in succeeding ages
bids us do and believe; therefore we cannot do amiss, nor believe an error,
consequently they cannot mislead us.

But says our Adversary, the Paraclet was to remayn with the Church until all
truth was taught necessary for salvation; but it cannot be doubted but that the
Paraclet taught the Apostles all truth, and they delivered those Truths in
their written word. Therefore after that word was delivered to us, the Paraclet
was to remain no longer. This objection well understood, will give light to
our doctrine, and manifestly confirm its truth.

Christ says Io. 15.15. that he taught his Apostles all whateuer he had heard
from his Father: it is manifest therefore he taught them all truths necessary
for salvation: this was before his Passion, and yet after his Resurrection, S.
Luke c. 24. tells us, that ie his iourny to Emaus with the two Disciples he
interpreted the passages of Scripture to them, which signifyes, that through
inaduertency or forgetfullness we may come to doubt, even of what truths were
already taught: nay he says Io. 16.12. that he had as yet, things to deeclare
to them; and that the Holy spirit, when he came, would teach them all truth.
Behold how Christ, having said he taught all things, yet he says, that he had
many things to open to them, which they could not then learn, until the
Paraclet came. This might seem a contradiction, but is none: for when he said
that he taught them all he had heard from his Father, that is to be understood,
that he taught and delivered to them the General Principles and Truths of
Faith, wherein all truths of Religion were contained; and what he had yet to say
to them, were the consequences, and particular Truths of Faith contained in
those general Principles, which the Paraclet would disclose to them, its
therefore that the Holy Ghost is called by the Fathers, Basil. 5. cont. Eunom:
and Mar. vict: 3. contra Arium, the Interpreter, and Voice of the Son because
the interpreter says nothing of his own, but delivers in expresser terms, what
the Author has already said: and the text clearly says, the Paraclet taught
nothing of the new, but what he had heard. Non enim loquetur a semetipso, sed
quaecunque audierit loquetur: because he did but expound in particular, what
Christ had taught in general Principles, and opened to the Apostles the
consequences that were contained in them.

Now its manifest out of the text, that the Paraclet when he descended did not
of a sudain open to the Apostles all the Truths and consequences included in
those General Principles delivered by Christ; or if he did, that he did not so
clearly, as that they should have understood all; for after that descent, we
read Act. ^0. that Peter doubted, if the Gospel ougth to be preached to the
Gentiles, and he was instructed by a heavenly vision, it ought: also Act. 15.
it was doubted if besides Baptism, the Faith full were to be circumcided. But
we do freely grant that the Apostles had at length a full and perfect
knowledge of all truths of our Faith, and all the consequences included in
those general Principles delivered to them by Christ: consequently there is no
Truth of Faith which now is believed by us, or shall be believed by future
Ages, but the Apostles did distinctly and particularly know; for as Tertul.
says, l. de praeser. c. 22. quis integrae mentis credcre potest, aliquid eos
ignorasse, quos Magistros Dominus dedit: what man of a sound wit, can
believe, that they were ignorant of any thing whom the Lord gave us for
Masters: we confess also, that the Apostles did teach and deliver all those
truths to their disciples either by their written word; or by word of Mouth to
be handed to Posterity by Tradition. whence S. Paul 2. These. 2. commands, hold
the Traditions which ye have learned, *vvheter by Epistles, or by word of
Mouth:* some of these truths, in succeding ages either through forgetfullness,
or through inaduertency of their Disciples, and their successors (who minded
chiefly those Articles that were opposed by Heretics and labored in declaring
them, and neglected the others,) came to be only confusedly known and not so
exactly, as they were delivered by the Apostles; and this occasions, and has in
all ages occasioned disputes in Religion.

When therefore the Church in Ceneral Councils declares an Article of Faith, it
does not, as our Adversaries calumny us, coin a new Article; it ads nothing to
what the Apostles delivered; but it declares to the Disputants in Religion,
what was anciently taught and believed by the Apostles, and was forgotten or
misunderstood by others. Doubts in Religion, are but Doubts of what the
Apostles did teach, some say onething, others an other: what we pretend is,
that whereas these doubts have been in all ages and ever will be; there has
been, and ever will be an infallible Church to ascertain us, which is the true
Doctrine; for though the Apostles knew all Truths, and taught them, either by
word of Mouth, or in vvriting; what Doctrine they delivered verbally, or by
word of Mouth, is doubted of by Posterity; if This, or That be of Apostolical
Tradition; also the written word is questioned, if This, or That Part of
Scripture be truly Canonical: what we pretend is, that as, though Christ
taught all Truths to his Apostles, yet he sent an infallible interpreter (the
Paraclet) after his Ascension, to assist and direct them in case of any Doubts
arising of those Truths, to declare unto them the true sense of the Truths
which he taught them: That as, though the Paraclet taught all Truths to the
Apostles, yet he still remained with them to direct them, if any doubts should
occurr against those Truths; and as, though the Apostles taught to their
Disciples all those Truths, yet the Protestants themselves confess it was
needful, they should have left an infallible written word, to inform and
ascertain us what Doctrine the Apostles did teach: so we pretend that, though
the Apostles have taught verbally and by their written word all Truths of
Religion, yet since that we see It Is douted what the Apostles did teach
verbally, and which is their written Doctrine, it was absolutely needful there
should be left to us after their departure an infallible Guide and Instructor
for to ascertain us, which is the Doctrine and written word of the Apostles,
and the true sense of that written word; which infallible Guide and
instructor we say, is the Church, constantly assisted by Gods infallible
Spirit. So long therefore shall the Church be assisted with that Spirit, to
direct us, as there shall be doubts against Religion, which will be, for ever.

VII. CHAPTER. THAT THE ROMAN CATHOLIC Church is the true Church appointed to
teach us: Infallible in all Points of Religion.
BY the Roman Catholic Church, we do not understand the Dioces of Rome, as Mr
Sall wilfully mistakes; but the whole Congregation of Faith full spread
troughhout the world, united in Faith and Communion with the Pope as their
Head; and because he resides in Rome, this Congregation takes the de nomination
of Roman: as, though an Army be quartered twenty miles round, the Camp takes
its denomination from the head-quarter, where the General lodges. This Church,
we say, is the Church which Christ established to teach us what Truths he
revealed: for that Church established by Christ, which flourished in the
Apostles time, is it now extant or not? if not we all labor in vayn in
proving each of us, that his won Church is the true and Primitive Church; if it
be, it must be infallible as that was: but no other Church but the Roman Church
pretends to be infallible; nay they lowdly disclaym infallibility; therefore no
other is the true Church but the Roman Catholic.

You say the True Church is infallible in Fundamental Points; that Your Church
is so far infallible, and no other Church can justly claym to any more;
consequently that yours is the true Church. But I reply; the Scripture says
the Church is infallible, and you now in some measure do consess it: the
Scripture does not limit that infallibility to points fundamental; nay says
the Paraclet shall lead her to all Truth. by what Authority do you make that
restriction? the Apostles and Church in their time was infallible in all Points
Fundamental and not Fundamental they taught as well the chief and prime
Articles of Faith as the inferior Truths; they writ the new Testament which
contains both kind of Articles Fundamental and not Fundamental; and which is
infallibly true in whateuer it contains; and they were no less infallible in
what they taught verbally, then in what they writ; whereas S. Paul commands us
to hold fast the Traditions received from them, whether by written Epistles,
or by speech. 2. These. 2. Now I ask were the Apostles infallible in the Points
not fundamental and inferior Truths that they taught, or not? if not,
Scripture is not infallible in those points, nor could S. Paul say when he
preached points not fundamental, that their word was indeed the word not of
men, but of God; for the word that is not infallibly true, is not Gods word. If
they were infallible, then the Church in the Apostles time was infallible in
all points fundamental and not: either that Church therefore is not now extant,
and so we labor in vayn in pretending it is, or there is a Church now extant
infallible in all doctrine of Religion fundamental and not; which can be ne
other but the Roman Church, whereas Protestants and all other sectaryes-owns
themselves to be fallible.

You answer again, its the same Church as to the substance and essence of a
Church, which requires only to be infallible in fundamental points, as yours
is; but I will prove that it is as repugnant to the essence of the true Church
to be fallible or falls in small articles of Faith as in great ones: I say in
small articles of Faith: for to teach a doctrine to be an article of Faith, is
to teach it is revealed by God: but it is impossible the true Church, should
teach any doctrine small or great to be a revealed Truth, which is an untruth,
and not really revealed by God because the Church is commissioned by God to
teach us his doctrine, what he has revealed; and for that purpose has given her
the Mark and Seal of his Commission, which are Miracles, whereby to confirm
their doctrine, by which God moves men to embrace and believe the Church which
teaches. No proof more certain and strong of the true Faith, Church, and
Religion, than Miracles wrought in confirmation of it: when Moses, Ex. 4.1.
said, They will not believe me, nor hear my voice: God gave him the gift of
Miracles as a mark and sign that he was sent by him. When Elias raised the dead
Child to life (3. Reg. 17.24.) the Mother cried out; now in this I have
known, thou art a man of God, and the word of our Lord in they mouth is
true. Christ being asked if he was the Messiah, proved himself to be such, by
the Miracles he wrought, Mat. 11.3. The blind see, the lame walk, the Leapers
are made clean, the deaf hear, and the dead rise again. S. Paul 2. Cor.
12.12. calls the Miracles which he wrought, the signs of his Apostle ship, and
S. Mar. last chapter says that the Apostles preaching every where wrought Miracles
in confirmation of their doctrine. Christ to prove against the Scribes and
Pharisees (Mat. 9.6.) that he had power of forgining sins, which they denied,
cured the sick Man of the Palsy, That you may know that the son of Man has
power of forgining sins, says he to the sick of the Palsy, Arise, take up
thy bed, and go to thy house. Therefore if the Catholic Church does work
Miracles in proof of the doctrine she teaches, it is an unquestionable truth, that
she is the true Church (as Nicodemus concluded, Io. 3.2. No man could do those
things if God were not with him.) and that no man can deny or doubt her
doctrine to be from God: wherefore Christ (Mat. 11.21. pronounced VVo against
Corozain and Betsaida, because they did not beliue his doctrine to be divine,
which they did see confirmed with so many Miracles you say they were no true
Miracles, but Sorceries and Enchantments, or that the Authors were mistaken in
judging them to be Miracles which were but Natural effects of natural causes.
But I answer that nothing can be said against those Miracles wrought by the
Professors of our Religion, and related by S. Augustine, S. Bernard and other
Saints of the Church, which may not be also objected against the Miracles of
our B. Savior and Apostles. Could not the inhabitants of Corozain and
Bethsaida say, that the Miracles which Christ alleged, were but Sorceries, or
effects of natural causes? did not the Scribs and Pharisees say it? to
conclude, if thy were true Miracles, It Is evident the doctrine in whose
confirmation they were wrought, is divine; and all things considered, you will
find, its rashness to deny that they were true Miracles, if you read carefully
this Chap.

Now it is impossible that God, who is infinitely True, and to whose infinite
Veracity it is as repugnant to speak a small untruth as a great one, should
confirm any untruth, euerso small, with a Miracle; consequently a Church that
would deliver a mixed doctrine, of some great Truths, and some small untruths, it
is impossible that God should work Miracles by that Church, in confirmation of
her doctrine; for that would be to own that doctrine for his own, and own small
untruths to be revealed by him, whereas he gives his commission, and his seal
and Marks of his authority for to teach them: And as it is not credible that
the King of England should give his commission under the broad seal of England
to any man to induce his subject into a Rebellion, so its less imaginable that
God should give his commission. with his broad seal, which are Miracles and
supernatural signs, to teach an untruth ever so small; his infinite veracity
being so auerse to all untruth. By no other means did he confirm the doctrine of
the Trinity to be his doctrine, by no other signs did he move men to believe,
than by working Miracles by the Church that taught it; if therefore he works
miracles by the Church that teachs Purgatory, real Presence, and others, which
you call inferior points and small errors, he confirms that doctrine to be
his, and so approues and ownes small untruths to be revealed by him. Therefore
S. Paul when he preached as well great, as inferior Truths or articles, could
co^fidently say, that his words were indeed the words of God, because God did
co^firm his doctrine by Miracles and supernatural signs: particularly Mr Sall
auerring that the doctrine of Purgatory and real Presence are damnable errors,
if ignorance does not excuse the Professors, certainly God would not give the
Marks of his Commission (which are Miracles) to teach them. It remayns that we
prove, God has wroutght Miracles by the Roman Catholic Church, even in those
ages, wherein the Protestants affirm that she was plunged in errors; and in
confirmation of those Tenets, which they say are errors. Secondly that we are
bound to believe them to have been true Miracles; thirdly that the doctrine in
whose confirmation they were wrought must be true revealed doctrine.

As to the first, we speak not of forged Miracles, which have been* and are
still condemned by the Church, and their Authors punished as impostors; we
speak of uncontrolled Miracles wrought in the presence of the very Authors
(and Authors of an unspotted credit, Holiness and learning, even in the opinion
of our Adversaries) who relate them in their works left to Posterity. S.
Augustine l. 22. de Ciuit. Dei c. 8. relates, that in his own time, many
miracles were wrought, and some in his own presence, by the Sacraments of the
Church, by the intercession of Saints, and their Relics, especially of saint
Stephen, of saint Geruase and Protase, when (he being then in the town) their
Bodies were by a heavenly revelation discovered to saint Ambroise at Milan: by
the sign of the Holy Cross, by the sacrifice of Mass, and Earth of Christ's
sepulcher; and mentions in particular (besides others) that a woman called
Palladia was sudainly cured by praying to S. Stephen, Ad sanctum Martyrem orare
perrexerat, quae mox vt cancellos attigit sana surrexit. S. Bernard in saint
Malachy's life relates many Miracles wrought by this Saint; and that he
himself, after the Saint expired, took his hand, and laid it upon the withered
and useless hand of a boy then present, who was presently restored to perfect
health. The Miracles wrought by S. Bernard himself in confirmation of the
Catholic doctrine of Transubstantion and Invocation of Saints, opposed in his
time by the Henricians, and Waldensis, are recorded by God fred in vita S.
Bern. l. 3. c. 5. and particularly, that stupendous Miracle of Sarlatum, a
village near Toulouse, when the Saint blessing some loaves of bread, he said to
the multitude that were present. In this you shall know that these things,
(meaning those Tenets opposed by the^ foresaid Heretics) are true, and those
false, which the Heretics endeavor, to persuade you that whosoever of your
diseased persons, shall taste of these loaves, they shall be healed: and the
Bishop of Chartres (his friend) then present, adding that the promise was
conditional, provided they did eat of that bread with Faith, the Saint replied;
that he did speak without any such restriction, that his meaning was, that
whosoever did taste of them loaves should bo cured of his sickness. And
effectualy, as many sick persons as did eat of the loaves, were cured; and this
Miracle being published, such a multitude flockt to meet the Saint from all
parts, that he was forct to decline the common road. No less authentic is that
passage of S. Damascen, related by John Hierosolymitanus in the life of
Damascenus, his own scholar and privy to all his life. Leo Isauraus thar great
persecutor of Images, understanding that Damascen was very active in defending
their worship, and that he had writ learnedly in the defense of that Tenet;
conterfeited a letter, as written by Damascen unto him, inuiting him to
surprise the City of Damasco, whereof he was Governor; this letter Leo Isaurus
sent unto Hisiam, Caliph, or King of the Saracens, whose subject Damscen was;
proving thence the Treachery of Damascen, and his own sincerity and honesty in
detesting so execrable an action of a subject against so deserving a Prince:
Hisiam astonis^ht that Damascen should be capable of so base an action,
consulted his Councellers, concluded him guilty, and condemned him to the
forfeiture of his Means and Employments, and that his right hand should be cut
of, and nayld to a gibet in the Market place; which being executed, the saint
retired to his house, humbly begged of* Hisiam that his hand might be restored
to him; this was granted; and the saint betaking himself to his Oratory,
prostrated before the Picture of our B. Lady, earnestly prayed het, that that
hand, which by the malice of Leo Isaurus he had lost for defending the honor of
her and the saints Images might be restored to him; which. He promised he would
continually employ in defending that Doctrine against the Heresy of the I
conoclasts: he fell asleep; and the Mother of God appearing to him, said;
Theypetition is granted, and they hand restored; but remember to employ it,
according to they promise, in vvriting against the impiety of those who iniure
us by their un worthy demeanor toward our Images: awaked out of his sleep he
found his hand as perfectly united to his arm, as ever it has been. This
Miracle was diuulged; Damascen called by Hisiam; and after so supernatural a
testimony of his Innocence, restored to his former dignities and Means; all
which he renounced; gave his Means to the Poor, and became a Priest, and a
great Opposer of the Iconoclasts. There is hardly any age of the Church but
affords us the like Miracles wrought by the Roman Catholics in confirmation of
our Doctrine: it were tedions to rehearse more, especially when these now
related are sufficient for the present subject.

That these things happened (whither they were true Miracles or no, we do not
dispute now) but that such things as we have related, did really happen, no
sober man can deny it; for certainly he would be held for an obstinat fool that
would say, there was no such man as Caesar or Cicero in the world; that he
never fought with Pompey; for which we have no other warrant, but the
testimony of Heathen Authors (for no Christian did ever see them) and none but
a mad man will deny but S. Agustin, S. Bernard, Iohn-Hierosolimitanus and other
saints and learned D. Doctors that writ the forementioned passages, and others
of the same kind in several other ages, are as much deserving of credit, as the
Heathens: and if you did meet in S. August. S. Bern. and other saints, that the
figurative presence was believed in their ages, and such as believed Purgatory,
were punished, doutless you would believe them, and cry victory against us; it
can not then be, but prejudice that will hinder you from believing those
passages did happen, whereas they do in their writtings testify they happened in
their own presence* what caracter would he deserve, who would say, there was no
such man as william the Conqueror in England; no such thing, as wars betwixt
france an England in Ancient tyms; no such things a spanish fleet defeated by
the English, in Queen Elizabeth's time and Philip the second of Spain. would not
you judge such a man to be mad: for all this we have no other warrant but
Histories; and the Authors were not, more honest, learned, wise and holy than
S. Augustine, Bern: and other saints who relate Miracles wrought in all-ages-can
he then deserve a better caracter, than of a mad man or fool that will deny
them? moreover either S. Augustine, S. Bern, and the other saints that relate
those Miracles, did believe the Tenets of Invocation of saints, adoration of
Images, and real Presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, or not? if they
did, then you confess that the saints now reigning in heaven, and confessed by
you to be saints, and none of the simple sort, but learned wise men, did
believe and were saved in the belief of our Tenets: if they did not believe
them; what end or advantage could they have in feigning those Miracles: we
must therefore confess, those things did happen, in their own presence as they
say. Lastly the Protestant Doctors do not deny but such things did happen; but
they say they were no true Miracles: the Centurists, and Osiander in Epit.
cent. 9.10.11. page 213. the Miracles which superstitious Monks relate, are
either feigned Miracles, or wrought by Satan's enchantments to establish
wicked worship of Images, Invocation of saints etc. not that I think S.
Bernard was a Magician ( says Osiander Cent. 12. page 310.) but that I think
it probable, Satan wrought the Miracles, vvherby the saint himself, and others
were deceived.

Supposed then, that such things did really happen, we will prove they were,
and we are bonnd to believe they were true Miracles: for this you cannot deny,
but that S. August. S. Bern: John Hierosol. and God fred. who were wise
learned, Holy D. Doctors did know what a Miracle was, as well as you: those
saints, and the saints of other ages were ey wittness of what passed* they
examined narrowly the passages, and their circumstances; thy judged them to be
true Miracles; must not we believe them to have been such, rather than your
iugdment, who did not see the passages, nor was not born many hundred years
after? and what is to be observed, that when Damascens hand was restored, and
S. Bernard cured the sick by the laoues he blessed; is it possible, if these
had not been notorious miracles, but enchantments, that some Iconoclast, and some
Henrician or waldensis, against whose Doctrine they were wrought, should not
have examined and discovered the cheat? S. Bernard had many Enemies infrance,
all the Henricians, and Apostolici, waldensis; Damascen had the Emperor Leo
for Enemy and all the Iconoclasts, and not only them but in the weary City of
Damasco, all the Ambitious Courtiers; who enuyed his greatness, and pressed
Hisiam to cut of his hand: and can it be imagined that none of all these should
have writ or published if that passage was a cheat and no known miracle? or by
what means did the Centurists, Osiander, and Protestants in our age, come to
discover they were all but enchantments, which the enemies of those Saints,
that then lived, could not discover? Once that Luther in Germany thought to
cheat the world, and make men believe he could cast out Devils, the cheat was
discovered and many writers of that time did relate it. Once that Calvin in
Geneua thought to delude the world, and show that he could raise the dead, he
bryb'd a man to feign himself dead, that he might be thought to raise him to
life; but the man was found dead in good earnest, and the fourberie published
by many writers. And those Miracles related by Saints and Ecclesiastical
Histories, had they been Sorceries and enchantments, is it possible that the
Heretics, against whose Doctrine they were wrought, or some one then living
should not have discovered it?

This you cannot deny, but that Herod, and many Jews, who never did see our
Savior work any Miracles, nor hear him preach, were bound to believe, and
obstinat for not believing our Sauiors Miracles and Doctrine; only upon this
account, that they were credibly informed by those who were ey witness of his
Miracles and doctrine; notwithstanding that the Scrib^ and Pharisees said, they
were wrought by the Devil: whereas therefore S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and the
Saints of other ages, are as credible Witnesses as those Jews were that related
the Miracles of Christ's, and could judge and know what a miracle was, as well
as those Jews, do inform you that those true miracles were wrought in those
ages in confirmation of our Catholic Tenets, and that, in their presence; you
are bound to believe they were true miracles, and obstinat in not believing
them. To say, as the Centurists and Osiander, that these miraculous works were
Sorceries and enchantments, is a most desperate assertion; first it is to make
the Saints and Fathers of antiquity (who relates them as wrought in their own
presence, examined by them, and judged to be true miracles) mere fools, that
were deceived, and knew not to distinguish betwixt a true miracle, and a
Sorcery: Secondly what rule or way has Osiander and the Centurists got, to
know those passages to be enchantments and not true miracles, which S.
Augustine, S. Bernard and other Saints had not? Thirdly, Christ appayed the
hungar of a multitude with few loaves which he blessed; S. Bernard cured the
diseases of a multitude by the loaves, which he blessed: let us abstract from the
Authors of these two actions; let the actions be considered by a learned Pagan
Philosopher, who belieues not in Christ; will not he judge them both to be
equally miraculous, or both to be but enchantments? I conclude what all wise
learned holy men, (and especially even the adversaries also of the Author) do
judge, after an exact examine of all circumstances, to be a true miracle; it is
wilful obstinacy to deny it be such: but the fore named Saints, and they of
all other ages (as will appear if you read the Ecclesiastical Histories) have
judged miracles to be truly wrought in each age, some have been eywitnesses of
miracles, other have examined and enquired what they were, and their
circumstances, and judged them to be such: S. John Damascen, and S. Bernards
enemies against whom they preached and writ, did not deny them to be such.
Therefore we cannot without obstinacy deny them.

Now, that we are obliged to believe the doctrine in whose confirmation they
we wrought, its proved by what is said; and that if we be not obliged to
believe Catholecisme, its most apparent, we are not obliged to believe
Christianity; for by the self same arguments by which you prove, against a
Pagan, the Christian Religion to be true, we also prove, the Catholic to be
true: consequently either the Catholic must be true or the Christian is not:
by what were the Jews and Gentiles persuaded, that Christianity was revealed by
God? because it was preached by Holy men, of great sanctity of life, of great
austerity, of no attache to the world or wordly things, of admirable virtue,
and who confirmed their doctrine with supernatural signs and Miracles: but S.
Bernard who preached the Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, and
veneration of Relics, against the Henricians, was a great Saint; witness
Whitaker de Eccl. page 369. I do realy believe S. Bernard was a true Saint.
Osiander, Cent. 12. Saint Bernard Abot of Clareual was a very pious man.
Gomarus in speculo Eccl. page 23. One pious man your Church had in many years
Bernard a Saint. Pasquils return into Engl. page 8. he was one of the lamps of
Gods Church. S. Augustine was confessedly a great saint, S. John Damascen that
writ several learned Treatises against the Iconoclasts for the worship of
Images, S. Malachias, S. Thomas Aquinas and S. Francis Xauerius, who converted
so many Kingdoms in the Indies to the Catholic Religion, at that very time,
that Luther revolted from the Church; all these, and many more great Saints
preached the Catholic Religion and confirmed it with many Miracles, as we
have related and the Histories do manifest: therefore we have as strong
motives to persuade the truth of Catholic Religion, as you have to prove the
truth of Christian Religion; both therefore must be believed, or neither.

Can any man judge it consistent with the goodness of God, to permit
Transubstantiation and the worship of Saints and Images, if they were false
doctrine, to be proposed to men, by great and Holy Saints, and confirmed by so
many miracles; when by the very self same means and motives of credibility, he
proposes to us Christianity; whereby men must find themselves equally obliged to
believe both or neither? nor will it be an evasion, to say that the Miracles
wrought in favor of Christianity were true miracles, and those which were
wrought for Popery, were but enchantments and sorceries; for abstracting from
Faith, which obliges us to believe that the miracles wrought by Christ and his
Apostles were true miracles, our senses and Natural reason cannot but judge the
restitution of Damascens hand, the healing of the sick by the loaves blessed by
S. Bernard to be as true miracles, as any that was wrought by the Apostles; and
therefore they were judged by all wise men of those ages to be such: and
abstracting from Faith as I said, what reason can be alleged for to say, the
one were true miracles, and the others not?

I conclude with this discourse: as Children are obliged in conscience to
honor, their Parents, (its Gods commandment) so you are obliged in conscience
to believe that Doctrine to be true, which is confirmed by true Miracles: for as
we formerly discoursed, its impossible that God should confirm false Doctrine
with true Miracles, that being repugnant to his infinite veracity, to confirm a
lie with the seal, and marks of his Commission to teach it: but for your
obligation of honoring this particular Man and woman, who are your Parents; its
not requisite you have evidence, and infallible assurance, that they are your
Parents; its sufficient for your obligation, that you are morally certain, they
are yours; and this moral assurance which you have, is grounded only upon the
testimony of honest people that informs you of it: the like you have, that true
Miracles have been wrought in many ages in confirmation of those Tenets of
ours, which you call erroneous; the testimony of great saints, as honest men as
those, who tell you that these are your Parents; therefore you are obliged to
believe that doctrine is true, in whose confirmation those Miracles were wrought.

You reply; this makes our Faith of that doctrine but fallible Faith; for if I
have no more assurance of the truth of those Tenets, than I have of the
Miracles that were wrought in confirmation of them; of the truth of those
Miracles, I only have a moral assurance grounded upon the testimony and
judgment of those saints which relate them; all which is but fallible; for it
might happen they were deceived; consequently all the certainty I have of the
truth of the Tenets, is but a moral and fallible certainty; and so our Faith is
not infallibly true. I answer, the motive of my Faith, and ground where upon it
is bottomed, is only the voice of God pronounced by the Church, which delivers
that doctrine of God; which Motive and ground is infallibily true. But because
this Motive is obscure, and does not appear evidently and certainly to the
understanding that it does exist, the understanding cannot assent unto it,
until it be made more known, and the way to make is more known, is not to
make it evident that it exists; for the Motive of Faith must be obscure, and it
is against the essence and nature of Faith, to be evident, or the Motive of it
to be evidently proposed to the understanding, as Mr Anderton does most solidly
and learnedly demonstrat in his Treatise of a soueraign remedy against Atheism
and Heresy: The way therefore of making it more known, is to make it evidently
credible, and lykely in the judgment of any rational man, that such a voice of
God speaking by the Church, is extant: and this is don by the Miracles and
supernatural signs, which the Church works in confirmation of her Doctrine;
which are undeniable inducements to any man of reason to judge it most credible
and lykely, that it is God who speaks by that Church: and our understanding
being thus confirmed by this judgment of credibility then follows our
obligation of believing the Doctrine; the credibility of the existence of Gods
voice by the Church, and our obligation of believing being thus proposed by our
understanding; The understanding is still able to deny an assent to Gods voice
speaking, because nothing can force the understanding to an essent, but the
evidence of the object; and its not evident to the understanding, that God
speaks, but evidently credible: therefore; the will must enter, which assisted
with the preuious judgment of the credibility of the doctrine, and a pious
inclination from God, for to resolve, commands the understanding to assent to
Gods voice speaking, in which command of the will determining the vndersting to
Assent, the Merit of Faith does consist. So that the whole and only Motive of
our assent of Faith, is Gods voice speaking by the Church: the Miracles and
other supernatural signs, are not the Motives of our Faith, but of our
Judgment of credibility, and of our obligation of believing a Doctrine so
credibly proposed: which Judgment of credibility and obligation of believing,
need not to be absolutely and Metaphisically evident, but morally evident in the
highest degree of Moral evidence, as it is in this case, that true Miracles
have been wrought in many, or most ages by the Catholic Church in confirmation
of her Tenets. Read the Resolution of Faith in the 2. part of thise Treatise.

Your obligation of believing the Miracles of the Church being thus proved,
your obligation of believing her infallible in all points of Doctrine, is most
apparent: for God, whose veracity is infinite, cannot speak the least untruth,
nor deliver it as his Doctrine, nor give his commission to teach it; nor confirm
it with the marks and scale of his Commission, for that would be to own it te
be his Doctrine revealed by him; whereas therefore he has confirmed the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church with so many Miracles, its impossible it should contain
the least untruth.

And when you would be so obstinat, as to doubt of all other Miracles, you
cannot be so blind, as to doubt of the conversion of all Nations that ever were
converted to Christianity, by the Catolick Church; what Nation was there ever
yet converted to Christianity by the Protestant Church? or in what History do
you read that ever you sent Preachers to convert Pagans? it was S. Austin, a
Massing Priest sent by Pope Gregory the Great, that converted England to
Christianity; if you believe the Chronicles of England: it was S. Xauerius a
Jesuit, (to whom Sectaries have no relation, if you will not make him Father of
the Quakers) that converted the Indies; it was S. Patrick sent by Pope
Celestin, that converted Ireland; they were Priest and friars and Monks that
propagated the Gospel, in whom Protestants have no Interest, but what their
revolt from the Church has given them in their Lands and estates* what
Miracles, what conversion of Nations to Christianity, what succession of
Pastors, since Christ his time, what General Councils that condemned Heresies,
can the Protestant Church show? And is it possible, that God should have given
those glorious Marks of a true Church, to the Catholic Church, if it were not
the true Church; and give no visible Mark at all of a true Church to the
Protestant, if it were the true one? both Churchs pretends to be the true, and
sereual other Congregations pretends to the same: has God given no visible
marks whereby to distinguish his true Church from falls ones? otherwise, why
should we be obliged to believe This, to be the true Church, rather than That
other? and can it be imagined, that he should have given Miracles and
supernatural signs to the Catholic Church, if it were the false one, and give
none to any other, if any other were the true Church.

Lastly I prove that the Roman Catolick Church, is infallibly true in her
Doctrine Purgatory, real Presence, and any Doctrine though small and inferior
you call it. The Catholic Church as you confess, is infallible in fundamental
points of Religion, you say, (if you be a Protestant) that the Roman Church is
still a true Church because it has not erred in the fundation or essential
points of Faith. But if it did in any point whateuer, though small you judge
it, it would etr in fundamental articles of Religion: therefore it has not, nor
cannot err in any whateuer: I prove the Minor. Its a fundamental article of
Faith, that God is infinitely true, that he cannot tell an untruth: but if the
Doctrine of Purgatory were untrue, the Catholic Church would teach that God
delivers an untruth; for the Church teaches, that Purgatory is a Doctrine
teuealed by God; if therefore Purgatory be an untruth, she teachs that God
delivered an untruth; and consequently she errs in a fundamental article of
Faith.

Now its time we examine that impious Position of our new Minister, Mr Sall he
follows much the tract of Luther his Grand Reformer, not in that he should have
disputed with the Devil as Luther did, in points of Religion, for the Devil is
not so kind but to the grand Heresiarcks: thus far he imitats Luther that, in
the beginning of his Apostasy, his chief drift was a separation from the
Catholic Church upon any account whateuer; I say vvhateuer, for it is evident
that the first Reformers had not fixed on any one settled Religion in oposition
to the Catholic, whereas they were struggling and disputing for many years in
several meetings, had to that purpose, to determine what ought to be believed by
all, and what articles of Popery ought to be denied, and which not: which does
evidence, that their first drift was to separat from the Catholic, and their
second endeavor was to find out some other Religion, we have the proof of
this in the Chronocles of England, for their separation from the Church of Rome
began by the Schism of Henry the Eight, which was quite different from the
Religion his successor and Son Edwrad the 6. endeavored to establish; and this
quite an other, from that which Queen Elizabeth introduced; for she would have
an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and other points denied by the former: that which
the Queen established, was fashioned to an other shape by King James and his
successors. Nay to this day the Sectaries, who style them selves Reformed
Religion, do not agree, what Tenets must be held in oposition to the
Catholics, but are sufficiently Reformed by denying what the Catholic
belieues. Thus does Mr Sall proceed, for what he has proposed to himself was a
separation, howeuer it should be, from the Church of Rome, but you will find in
his discourse that he is not yet thoroughly resolved, what Religion to choose and
what to believe; not only because that he has resolved to be of the Church of
England which is an indiuiduum vagum ready to change with all governments, but
that in his Declaration he professes to believe the 39. Articles of the Church
of England, and page 39. he says, that the sum of his Faith is the written
word of God and the plain vndubitable consequences out of it and it is manifest
that the 39. Articles are not plain vndubitable consequences out of Gods
written word: for, a plain vndubitable consequence, is that, which, the
Premises being granted, is judged by all wise, learned, understanding men, to
follow out of the Premises, and cannot be denied be any wise understanding
man; That in the Roman Catholic Church there are wise, learned men, it were a
madness to deny it; but a far greater madness to say that the Fathers and
Doctors of all ages before those 39. Articles were coined, were not wise and
learned men, that studied and understood the Bible; and to all these the 39.
Articles seems contrary to the word of God, so far they were, from judging them
plain, and undeniable consequences out of it: And the Lutherans, Presbyterians,
Anabaptists and Huguenots of France, do not allow the 39. Articles of the
Church of England, and consequently do not judge them to be plain undeniable
consequences out of Scripture. So that you must say, that either all are a
company of knaves that speak against their consciences, or that those 39.
Articles are not plain and undeniable consequences out of Scripture;
consequently Mr Salls some times belieues only Scripture, and its plain
consequences; sometyms more.

But what proves that he is not yet thoroughly a Protestant (and so we know not
what he is, but a Not Catholic) is, his blasphemous Position, that there is
not salvation in the Roman Catholic Religion; for it is the constant doctrine
of the Church of England that the Catholic Religion is a saving Religion:
first, because this has been ever yet their complaint against us, that we are
uncharitable in denying salvation in their Church, and they extol their own
charity for granting that in the profession of Popery (provided, he has no
other sin) a man may be saved. Secondly because they confess, there was a true
Church extant, the age that Luther began the Reformation, and all the precedent
ages, for its an Article of our Creed, the constant Existence of Gods Church, I
believe the Catholic Church; and that there was no other Church then extant,
but the Roman Catholic Church, they also confess it, and must grant it; for
the essence of the true Church consisting as they say, in the due
administration of the Sacraments, and preaching of the word of God; and no
other Church being extant in Luthers age, and the precedent, that administered
Sacraments or preached the Gospel but the Roman Church; doubtless it must
have been the true Church; for in what Kingdom, Province, City, Village,
Church or Chapel in the world was these things, or any of them, don by
Protestants? its therefore the constant doctrine of Protestants, that Roman
Catholic Church was then the true Church, and is now a true Church, for its
the same now that then it was. Now, that a man may be saved in the true Church
of God, provided his life be good, it were a blasphemy to deny it; consequently
its a blasphemy to say, that in the Roman Church a man may not be saved; and it
were to say that all our Ancestors, for so many ages, all the Fathers Doctors
and saints confessed by the Protestants shem selves to be saints, were all
damned.

Neither can Mr Sall excuse his Blasphemy, and cure the wound with that
plaster of Ignorance which he applies, saying that Papists (page 116.) may be
excused by ignorance; and this small comfort, he will not grant but to the
simple sort, and not at all to the learned men. So that none of our Ancestors
were saved for the space of so many hundred years, no saints that are confessed
by both Parties to be such, if they were not fools and ignorant people of the
simple sort; whereby all the wise and learned Fathers and Doctors of the
precedent ages, and of this age are absolutely damned. Nay and Thomas Aquinas,
which he him self styles a saint, and none of the simple sort* but a learned
Doctor, who confessedly was a Papist is also damned. Its impossible that his
Auditors, if they were of the Church of England, could hear him with patience,
to cast all their Ancestors to hell; a Blasphemy so opposite to the Doctrine of
their Church; wherein does the Charity of the Protestant Church consist, and
they do vaunt that they exceed the Catholics? is it in saying that by
ignorance a Papist maybe saved in his Religion, provided his life be good? this
is no excess of Charity, for we grant also (as we will declare in the
ensueing Chap.) that Protestants, and not only they, but Heathens and Jews may
be saved in their Religion, if they be ignorant, and live well. we are but
little beholding to the Protestant charity, if they grant no greater capacity
of salvation in the Roman Catholic Religion, then in Paganism and Judaism. No
Sr since you are resolved to be a Protestant let me teach you their Doctrine;
its thus: they say we are guilty of errors, that their Tenets of figurative
Presence, No Purgatory etc. are undeniable plain consequences out of Scripture,
and therefore we err in denying them: and that we do err blamably and
wilfully, because they are plain vndubitable consequences out of Scripture;
(as you say also Mr Sall (and whereas we have the scripture, and believe it to
be the word of God, and have wits to understand, and sufficient instruction,
we cannot but be wilfully ignorant, which ignorance is not sufficient to
excuse us from blame for not believing: but they say, that our denying of them
articles, though we be obstinat in our denial, will not damn us, (if we have
no other sin) because they are not fundamental Articles of Faith; our errors
do not shock the essential parts of religion, though it were better and more
safe to believe them, yet their belief is not absolutely requisite for salvation.
This is the Doctrine of the Church of England; they grant us salvation, not for
any ignorance, but because we hold the substance and all essential points of
Faith.

Its therefore that Bramhal, Bishop of Armagh, called the Articles wherein the
Protestant dissent from the Catholic Church, Pious opinions, and concluded
that both Churchs had true Faith, its therefore that Doctor Stillingfleet
compares both Churchs, the Catholic to a Leaky ship, wherein a man may be
saved, but with great danger and difficulty; and the Protestant to a sound
ship, wherein one may be saved without hazard. Its therefore that King I ames in
the meeting of the Protestant Clergy at Southampton pronounced this sentence;
we detest in this point the cruelty of the Puritans, and judge them deserving
of fire, who affirm that in the Popish religion a man may not be saved: read
the Doctors of your Church; Luther c. 6. and c. 4. in Genesis Osiander in epitom:
p. 2. page 1073. Melancthon in Conf. Aug. art. 21. printed at Geneua, an: 1554.
zuinglius in epis. dedicat: of his Confession of Faith to francis the first,
king of france. Doctor field l. 3. de Eccl. c. 9. Bunnie in tract. de pacif:
sect. 18. whitaker q. 5. c. 3. Hooker l. de Pol. Eccl. but it were tedious to
name all; not any of the Church of England, nor of the Lutherans but confess
that the Catholic Church, is a saving Church because it has not erred in any
fundamental points; that we are of one and the same Faith, as to the substance.

Its true the Rigid Puritans, and the Hugonots of france do say, that the
Catholic Church did err in fundamental points of Faith necessary for
salvation; and that therefore there is no salvation in her Comnunion: and the
Hugonots are of this sentiment, but since about the year 1634. for before,
they constantly believed with the Church of England, that the Catholic Faith
was a saving Faith; witness the answer of the Hugonot Diuins to Henry the
fourth of france, who asking if a man could be saved in the Roman Religion,
they answered yea; where upon he prudently choosed that Religion, which in the
judgment of all Parties was a saving Religion Spondanus ad an 1593. But Mr Sall
does not Profess to be a Puritan, nor Hugonot; and how come he to utter such an
impious expression?

But I will prove against him and his Associats Puritans, and Hugonots, that
there is salvation in our Religion, even in their own Principles: for either
the true Church can err in fundamental points, destructive of salvation, or
not; if not, then the Roman Church, which in the confession of you all, was the
true Church, before, and in Luthers age, did not err in any point of doctrine
repugnant to salvation; if it can, then your Church, though it should be, as
you pretend, the true Church can err also in fundamental points: and you
consequently, cannot know if you be in the way of salvation. Secondly you
confess that the Lutherans and Protestants are in a true way of salvation; but
if the errors of the Catholic Church were fundamental and damnable; They could
not be in a sure way of salvation; for it is as damnable an error, to say that
a man may be saved in the profession of damnable errors; as to profess them:
for example its as damnable an error to say, that a man may be saved denying
Jesus Christ, as it is to deny him; vae qui dicitis bonum malum; if the
Catholics therefore be in a damnable state for professing those, which you
call errors; the Protestants and Lutherans; who unanimously say, they can be
saved in the actual profession of those errors, must be in a damnable state.
You must then either absolve both, or condemn both: besides, the Lutherans hold
some Points with the Catholics, which you condemn as damnable errors in our
Religion, for example, the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist; yet
you believe the Lutherans may be saved in their Religion; therefore you must
grant salvation to the Catholics.

And now let us draw Mr Sall by the skirt, and mind him of what he says page
24. The Arch. B. of Cashel his instructor, discoursed with him, and his modesty
(page 28*) added great weight to his reasons; Poor soul; how simply you were
fooled out of your Religion, as appears by this passage: His Lordship
acknow-ledged the Catholic Church was a part of the true Church: (but not the
whole) and Mr Sall fancyed to perceive such an admirable charity and real
desire of union among Christians, in this noble acknovv-ledgment of his Grace,
in granting us that Honorable Title, that he presently yielded all respect and
submission to his reasons. Open your eyes, Poor Man, you are charmed by your
instructors modesty, and cheated of your Religion by fair words. Honorable
title? wherein does the Honor of that Title of Catholic consist, if it does not
signify a Profession leading to salvation? is it because that we believe many
articles of Christianity, though we deny some? then the Title of Arrian and
Pelagians is Honorable; which Professions believed diverse Tenets of
Christianity. Is it because that by ignorance we may be excused and be saved?
but you say, that only the simple sort can have that ignorance; and besides,
Jews and Pagans may be saved in their respective Professions, if they can claym
ignorance. Thus that Honorable title, which sounded so plea sant to your ears
is but an empty voice.

His Instructor granted the Church of Rome to be a part of the Catholic
Church, but not the whole; and Mr Sall did see such a vein of Charity and zeal
to run through these words that he was ravished: was ever, Poor soul so
deluded. why did not you ask, what his Lordp meant by Roman Church, if he meant
the Dioces of Rome; that indeed is a part of the Catholic Church, but that is
not the Church we speak of; that we say, is infallible; and whereof we are
Members, (for we are no Members of that Church) wherein we say, man must be
saved if in any: but if his Lordp did speak to the purpose, and to what we
believe; by the Roman Catholic Church, as I declared 5. chapter and in the
entrance to this chap. we understand all Christians throughout the world
united in Faith and Communion with the Church of Rome; which is the chief and
Mother Church: if he says, This is but a part of the Church of God; where is
the other part? I say where was it when Luther began his pretended Reformation?
for then there was no visible Congregation of Christians (at least No
Protestants nor any thing like them) that did administer Sacraments and preach
the word of God, but was united in Faith and Communion with the Roman Church;
only such as were then held by Luther, and now by us schismatic as you are:
which then, was the other part of Christ's true Church? but this is not all;
how could he say, and you believe, that the Roman Church, (take it either for
the Dioces of Rome, or as we understand it,) is a part of the Catholic
Church, if it be guilty of damnable errors? can that be the true Church, or any
part of it, that professes damnable errors against Faith? S. Athanasius his
Creed says, no: for it: requires to have an entyre and inviolable Faith: and
you that is a Professor of Divinity, will say, that a particular Person who
holds damnable errors against the doctrine of the Church and obstinatly adheres
to them, is an heretic, and no member of hers: consequently you must say, (and
your Instructor deluded you in saying the contrary) that the Roman Church can
be not part of the true Church, if in her there was no saluationthrough
damnable errors in doctrine.

You see Mr Sall that against the doctrine of the Church of England, against
your own and your Instructors concessions, you have engaged in that blasphemous
assertion of not salvation in the Catholic Church, to use your own expression,
page 75. to spite the Catholic you ran beyond all measure, even of your own
principles; as to spite the Jew, and seem a good Christian, one would eat
more Pork, than his stomak can bear. And to get the credit of a sound and
zealous Protestant among your new Brethren, you have exceeded them in decrying
the Church.

But the Reader will understand by what I have discoursed in this Chapter, that
the Catholic Church is the true Church; that she cannot err in any point
whateuer of Religion, and consequently, that salvation is to be sought in her.

VIII. CHAPT. THAT THE PROTESTANT CHVRCH is not the Church of Christ, nor any
part of it: That they cannot without blasphemy allege Scripture for their
Tenets: That they have not one, and the same Faith with Catholics: that out
of the Catholic Church there is no salvation. How far can ignorance excuse
Protestants.
IT is the constant doctrine of the Protestant Church (for I call not the
Puritans and Hugonots of France, Protestants, whose error in this point I have
she wen in the former chap.) that the Catholic Church has not erred in
fundamental points of Religion; because the true Church, (such as the Catholic
was before Luther confessedly, and now is, in their acknowledgment) cannot err
in essential and fundamental articles, consequently they discourse, that the
Protestant and Catholic Church, differ only in points not fundamental, and
inferior truths, which, say they, are pernicious errors, but break not Unity of
Faith, nor destroys not salvation. That the true Church can err, and is
fallible in points not fundamental and inferior truths. This is faithfully the
doctrine of the Protestant Church, as you will find in the Authors I quoted in
the former Chapt. in Stilling fleet in his book miscalled a Rational Account
and in several others cited in the Protestant Apology, tr. 1. c. 6. and tract.
2. c. 2.

Now we must consider, what is the Protestant Church properly; it belieues
many Articles (and as they say all fundamental Articles) that the Catholic
belieues: so far they are not Properly Protestants, but their proper Notion is
to be taken from those Tenets, wherein they differ: so that Protestancy
properly, and as it is condistinct from Catholecism, or Popery, as you say; is
the doctrine wherein the Protestant Church differs from the Catholic. Now I
prove that the Protestant Church, as it is properly the Protestant Church,
condistinct from the Catholic, is not the Church of Christ; because it does
not teach the doctrine of Christ; and no Church can be called of Christ further
that it teaches his doctrine; and doubteless if we did ask the Protestants and
first Reformers, why they did separate from the Catholic Church, they would
say. To believe and practice the Doctrine of Christ, which the Catholic
denied. But I will prove that their doctrine, for which they separated from us,
and wherein they differ from us, is not the Doctrine of Christ.

The argument is in Ferio, thus: No fallible doctrine is the doctrine of Christ.
For who would be so blasphemous, as to say, that what Christ has taught is
fallible Doctrine: But Protestancy (that's to say all the Doctrine wherein
Protestants differr from Catholics and for which they separated from us) is
altogether fallible Doctrine; therefore Protestancy, as it is properly the
Doctrine of the Protestant Church, is not the Doctrine of Christ: That
Protestancy, or the Doctrine wherein we differ, is all fallible Doctrine, its
manifest; for Protestancy, or Doctrine wherein we differ, is altogether of
points not fundamental; we all agree in the fundamental Articles, as they
unanimously confess; we only differ in inferior Truths, wherein the Catholic
Church has erred. But the doctrine of points not fundamental and inferior truths
is fallible Doctrine; for its their constant Doctrine also, that the true Church,
be it the Catholic or Protestant, can err and is fallible in articles not
fundamental, and inferior truths: therefore all your Protestancy is but
fallible doctrine; therefore its not the doctrine of Christ. I confess
ingenuously, I think this argument cannot be solidly answered.

For is it not certain, that you differ from us, as you say, only in not
fundamental articles? is it not also your doctrine, that the true Church is
fallible in articles not fundamental; how can it then be denied, but; that you
differ from us only in fallible doctrine; the doctrine wherein you differ from us
is Protestancy, and nothing else is properly Protesta^cy, but that for which you
departed from us: therefore your Protestancy is but fallible doctrine, and
consequently not the doctrine of Christ.

Hence I infer that you cannot without Blasphemy look for your doctrine in
Scripture; no text or word of God can be alleged for Protestancy; nor any
other warrant but your mere fancy: for your protestancy is but a parcel of
fallible doctrine, and no fallible doctrine can without Blasphemy be sought for
in Scripture, which contains nothing but Gods infallible word. Observe how
vainly the Protestants do boast their Religion, and difference from us to be
bottomed on the word of God; that their figurative Presence, is clear in the
Scripture that they will prove the pretended errors for which they forsook us,
by Scripture: they amuse the poor People with the specious pretext of
Scripture; no Rule of Faith but Scripture; no Judge of Controversy, but
Scripture; no warrant for Divine worship, but Scripture, and after all, its
manifest by my former discourse, that no Article of Protestancy, as it is a
particular Doctrine distinct from Catholecism* can without sacrilege be sought
for in Scripture.

If the Protestant Church be not The Church of Christ, it can be no part of it,
for the same reason which, but now, I proposed, for that no Article of
Protestancy is the Doctrine of Christ, being all but fallible Doctrine; if they
will not pretend to be a part of the Church because they believe the chief and
fundamental Articles, wherein they agree with us; and that's ridiculous, because,
in so much they are not Protestants; its not for them Articles that they
departed from us, and set up a distinct Church, this is to be a part of the
Church in as much as they can pretend to be of the Roman Catholic Church: and
if they might be called a part of the Church for that reason; Pelagians,
Eutychians, and other Heretic Congregations may be called so also, and thus
the Church of Christ instead of being the House of Peace and union, be a house
of confusion.

Out of this discourse also we may understand, how vain is the pretense of
Protestants and several other sects, to unity of Faith with the Roman
Catholics; for when we urge them with this argument; There is but One Faith,
as there is but one God S. Paul Ephesians. 4. without that one Faith, its impossible
to please God; the Catholic Church has that Faith, for you ackowledg its a
true and a saving Faith, that holds all Articles necessary for salvation; if
therefore there be but one saving Faith no other will save but the Roman
Catholic Faith: they are so grauel'd with this discourse that they are glad to
claim kindred with us, and say that we all, Catholics, Lutherans Presbiterians
and Protestants, have but one and the same Faith, as to the substance and
Essentials of Faith; because we all believe the Prime and chief Articles of
Chlistianity, Christ's Incarnation, Passion, etc. which with a good moral life
is sufficient for salvation; nor is it possible that God will condemn a man
that belieues those Articles, and lives a good life, for denying Purgatory, a
tryfle nothing material if there be any or not. This Omnifidian Doctrine of the
Latitudinarians is now in great vogue, and cried up for a charitable Doctrine
that excludes none from salvation, but lycenceth you to change Religions as
your Interest or conuemency requires.

Out of this Principle follows, that if they have not the same Faith with the
Roman Catholics, they have not a saving Faith; otherwise there would be two
saving Faiths: But they are not of the same Faith, nay they are of a far
different; for its not enough for unity of Faith with the Catholics, to
believe the Prime fundamental Articles; but all and every particular Article,
though inconsiderable it may seem to you, which the Catholic Church proposes
to be a revealed truth: any one Article that you deny, though small it be, for
example Purgatory, breaks unity of Faith with the Roman Catholic Church.

The Church belieues the Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and belieues
the Lawfullness of Marriage; and the lawfullness of eating any victuals. You
cannot justly say, that one of these Articles is more. Fundamental than the
other: why should the Lawfullness of Marriage be a Fundamental point of
Religion, more than the real Presence? by your sense of Fundamental and not
fundamental Articles, they are of a seyse. And what think you? would he that
agrees in all other Articles and deny only the Lawfullness of Marriage, would
he, I say, have unity of Faith with the Catholic Church? by your rule he
would, because he agrees in all fundamental, and Prime points; he only differs
in an inferior truth, a small matter. Yet S. Paul expressly says that he would
not: 1. Tim. 4.3. in the lather days certain will depart from the Faith
(observe the word depart) attending to the Spirit of errors and Doctrine of
Devils, for bidding to Marry and abstain from meats. Does not this prove that
the denial of small Articles breaks unity of Faith? you cannot therefore
pretend to have the same Faith with the Roman Catholics, that deny many
Articles of their Faith.

Secondly the resurrection of the flesh is indeed a fundamental Article,
contained in the Apostles Creed; but if it be to come at the end of the world,
or already past, to such as are dead; each soul after man's death reassuming
again his body in a short time, as Hymenaeus and Philetus said, its no
fundamental Article, as you Protestants understand fundamentals, for the chief
and prime Articles: yet S. Paul says of these two 2. Tim. 2.18. their speech
spreads like Canker, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus who have erred from
the truth, saying that the Resurrection is past, and have subverted the Faith
of some. Behold the denial of small and inferior truths, is called by S. Paul,
a spreading canker, an erring from the truth, a subversion of the Faith; it
breaks therefore unity of Faith; and hence conclude, that you have not unity of
Faith with the Roman Church, though you believe with her the Trinity,
Incarnation and other chief Articles, because you deny many others, under the
pretense of being small and inferour Truths* and deceive not your self with
that distinction of fundamental and not fundamental Articles, where with your
Leaders do amuse you. No article whateuer is man obliged to believe, if it be
not sufficiently proposed to him that God has revealed it: and any article
whateuer, which is sufficiently proposed unto us, to have been revealed by God;
we are obliged under pain of damnation to believe: it so that as to our
obligation of believing, all Articles are equally fundamental, if they be
sufficiently proposed. Its true some Mysteries of Faith are of their own Nature
more requisite, and needful, and on that account may be called fundamental, as
the Mystery of the Trinity, and Christ his Incarnation; but that is nothing to
our purpose, what obliges me to believe them, is not that they are so absolutely
or greatly needful, for no such absolut nor great necessity of Christ his
death can be proved, he could have redeemed us with one tear he shed; yet it is
a fundamental Article, because it is sufficiently proposed to me, to be a truth
revealed: so that in order to my obligation of believing, all Articles
sufficiently proposed, as revealed truths, are equally fundamental: And since
that we own our obligation of believing the Scripture to be Scripture, Trinity
and Incarnation, upon the testimony of the Church which says they are revealed
Truths, since the same Church declares that Purgatory also is a revealed Truth,
I am as much obliged to believe it, as the Trinity and Incarnation, though the
Mysteries in them selves, be of an infinite inequality.

By this its proved that without the entyre belief of all and every Article
believed by the Church of Rome, you have not one and the same Faith with her;
if you have not her Faith, you have not the true saving Faith; for hers is
such, and there is, but One: if you have not a true saving Faith, you cannot be
saved: therefore out of the Church of Rome there is no salvation. Blame me not
for this Assertion; blame S. Paul who says there is no salvation without
Faith, and says there is but one Faith, which we have proved, and you confess
to be our Faith: blame S. Augustine epist. 152. VVhoeuer is, or shall be
separated from the Catholic Church, although he thinks himself to live most
laudibly, for this one wickedness, that he is disioyned from the unity of
Christ, shall have no life, but the wrath of God remayns on him; blame the
Fathers of all ages, who unanimously agree in this; that out of the true Church
there is no salvation. By what I have discoursed in the first chap. it is
evident there is but one Church: by what I have discoursed in the progress of
this Treatise and especially in these two last chap. I proved that this one
true Church is the Roman Catholic Church. Its consequent therefore that out of
her Faith and communion is no salvation.

Neither can we be justly accused of want of charity for holding this Tenet:
by your acknowledgment (I mean the Protestants and Lutherans) the Catholic
Religion is a saving Religion: but no Religion is a saving Religion, that is
not charitable, witness S. Paul 1. Cor. 13.2. If I should have Faith, so as to
move mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. Therefore you cannot say,
but our Faith is a charitable Faith.

Answer me to this argument; God has commanded under the dreadful punishment
of being blotted out of the book of life, to add nothing to, or diminish any
thing from his word: Revel 22.19. and Deuteronomy. 4.2. Either we Catholics do add
to the substance and essentials of the Faith of Christ, by believing real
Presence, and Purgatory to be fundamental points of Religion revealed by God,
or you Protestants do diminish from the substance and essence of his Faith by
denying those points, and saying they are not substantial and essential points
of Religion: either then, we Catholics must be blotted out of the Book of
life, because we believe too much, and impose upon the flock a larger belief
than Christ has; or you Protestants must be blotted out of that book, because
you take away some fundamental points which Christ has revealed: it is
therefore impossible that in both Religions a man be saved. Either we are not
a saving Religion, because we add fundamental points; or you are not, because
you take them away, But by your acknowledgment, and by what we have proved we
are in a saving Religion; therefore you must confess that you are not.

Now we must examine if ignorance can excuse the Protestants, they pretend that
they do not know they are in an error; ad here we will answer to what Mr Sall
auers, that all Catholic Doctors confess, that a Protestant baptized,
believing the Common Principles of Christianity, not convinced of error against
Faith, but conceiving he follows the truth; is not an Heretic, but a member,
of the Catholic Church; and so living a good life may be saved; for which he
cites our Catholic Diuins.

It is the constant Doctrine of our schools, that an invincible ignorance of the
Truth excuses from the profession of it: and saying that it is the constant
Doctrine, I need not cite Authors for it. An invincible ignorance, is when you
have no means, nor cannot get, after a diligent enquiry, any means, for to
overcome it, and be informed of the Truth. The second position assented also
unto by our schools, that a vincible, supin, or gross ignorance does not excuse
you, from professing the Truth: and this kind of ignorance you are in, when you
have means afforded to you, for to instruct you, and through carelessness or
some other motive, you do not make use of those means: or if you have not those
means at hand; you may, if you enquire for them get them and be instructed; and
in so weighty a matter as Christian Faith whereof depends your salvation; did
you know that in Constantinople you could find them, you ought, setting all
other considerations aside, to go thither to seek them. Now we all grant, that
a Protestant who is inuincibly ignorant, that has no way, nor after due
enquiry, can get no means to ouercom his ignorance, and be sufficiently
informed of the truth of the Catholic Tenet; such a man Baptized, believing
the common Principles of Christianity; and living a good life will be saved:
but this is small comfort, for of the Jews and Pagans we must say the like.
Secondly a Protestant (and there are I fear, many of this sort) that would
amuse himself with the persuasion of being in an invincible ignorance, and that
his Tenets will not condemn him, because, if in effect they should be false he
is ignorant of that, and his ignorance, which he perswads himself to be
invincible, will excuse him, and will not be curious to enquire any more; this
man, I auerr is in state of damnation; for its a damnable sin to expose himself
to a manifest danger of professing a damnable error, but this man who persuades
himself that he is inuincibly ignorant, and sooths himself with that
persuasion, and so rests content, exposes himself manifestly to the danger
of holding a damnable error: for what he has to secure him, is only an
invincible ignorance, and what if that ignorance be not truly invincible? what
if he be not certain, that his ignorance is invincible? then it cannot excuse
him: therefore whereas he does not certainly know that his ignorance is
invincible, he exposes himself to manifest danger of professing a damnable
error.

But howeuer the Principle taken in itself is true; that if a Protestant be
inuincibly ignorant, it excuses him. And whereas no man can certainly know that
the ignorance of a Protestant it not invincible;, (only God can know that)
certainly it is rashness in any man to say; this man that dyed in the
Protestant Religion is damned. For invincible ignorance is a matter of fact; it
depends, of, that the truth was not sufficiently proposed; that the means
appointed by God for our instruction were not had, or could not be had; and how
can you know certainly, that all Protestants have the truth sufficiently
proposed to them or that they have, or can have the sufficient means to be
instructed in the truth; nay or to doubt in the least of their own Profession:
for example a young Lad that never left his Fathers house; never heard of
Catholic Religion but all to desaduantage; has no Catholic to confer, with,
or if any, not such as can give him satisfaction; he is through sickness or
other impediments unable to go in search of Priests, or learned men; he lives
in his own Profession well: can you be sure that this Lads ignorance was not
invincible? for my part, I judge there are some though but few I fear, that
have an invincible ignorance. I say but few, for the reason I will produce
soon. But of learned men and men versed in the transactions of ages, we may
have moral assurance, that their ignorance cannot be invincible; and of them we
may say, that if God has not given them some inward light in the last gasp, and
an act of contrition, (which yet to us is un known) but that they dyed in the
belief of their Tenets they are damned.

The reason why I say, that but few Protestants can have an invincible
ignorance of our Catholic Doctrine, is; All men are persuaded that there is a
true Church, and there is nothing more evident to any man of common sense, than
that all those Congregations, and each of them which we see among us of
Quakers, Presbyterians Anabaptists, Protestants, Catholics, are not the true
Church, this I say is apparent to any man of common sense; because each of us
condemns not only the external government, but the Tenets of the other; and
though all the rest ioyns to oppose the Catholic, yet take them seperatly,
they are as apposit against one an other, as they are against us. In this
confusion there is a very easy way to find out which of all is the true Church;
for what is more easy for a man that reflects seriously upon the concerns of
Religion, (which every man is obliged in conscience to do) than to learn by the
Chronicles of England, and by the several Historyes that are written, when did
these that we call Reformations begin; on what occasion, and where in the
world was there any such thing as Protestant Church, Presbyterian Church etc.
two hundred and four years agon. There is not a child in the Parish hardly, but
knows that Luther and Calvin began the Reformation which now is called
Protestant, Presbyterian etc. in opposition to Popery, which was, as they
pretended full of errors; then Mass was banished, Bishops, Monks and Priests
were exiled, and their Lands forfeited, the Churches were taken from us; and
the Reformation introduced. I know the Protestant will reply thath his Religion
is Apostolical, that it was the very Religion which Christ established and the
Apostles preached, but this consideration is too heigh for men of common
understanding, this point cannot be soon cleared; therefore I will not now
engage in it, because I pretend to show to men of common understanding an easy
way to find out, if this or that be a true Church* whether your Religion was in
the Apostles time or no; you cannot deny, but that which you call the
Reformation, is but of less than two hundred years date. The ruins of the
Churchs and Abbyes, the Church Lands, the Crosses placed in the heigh way, and
several other marks yet extant of Popery do testify it was the Catholic
Religion, that was the Religion of the Land, your Chronicles bear witness, it
was it that flourished for so many ages before, in it your Ancestors did live
and dye. This no man but knows.

This supposed; there is no man of common sense (if he reflects on the affairs
of his salvation, which reflection we are all obliged to make) but is obliged
to doubt of this Reformation, or any branch of it be the true Religion; you say
men of common sense, and of good understanding do not doubt of it,
notwithstanding all what we have premissed; but I say that they are obliged in
conscience to doubt of it, if they do not its through a supin and gross
negligence of their salvation, which is culpable and damnable. I say they are
bound in conscience to doubt of it: first because common sense, if not biased
by some prejudice, does dictat to any man, that novelties and innouations in
matters of Religion are to be suspected, and this pretended Reformation is
such, that was un known to the world the day that Luther began it, and to all
the precedent ages; for never was there any such thing as Protestancy spoken
of. Secondly because common sense dictats to a man that an ancient Religion,
which flourished, and which, and noe other was established in all Christiandom
ought not to be reuersed by a private Man as Luther was, without sheuving by
Miracles and supernatural signs, that he was commissioned by God for so great a
work; and whereas Luther did show no such (no Protestant dare say that ever he
did) the truth of his Reformation ought to be doubted of. Thirdly that very
Catholic Church which he opposed, was in former ages often opposed by others,
and she still remained victorious, and her opposers condemned for Heretics,
which to any rational man is a sufficient ground for to doubt, that Luther also
might be such as the other opposers were.

And if you say that you ought not to doubt because your Ancestors have
sufficiently examined the causes of that Reformation, and found them to be
just; and that you receive the Faith you profess from them; and that you rely
on their word: I answer, for one Ancestor of yours who approved the
Reformation; a hundred of your Ancestors approved the old Catholic Religion,
without any such Reformation. And were there no other cause for any man of
common sense for to doubt of the truth of the Reformation, than that the very
Reformers and their respective successors are divided among themselves, some of
them approving in the Catholic Church for good Doctrine, what others condemn
for an error; this very dissension ought to make the Reformation suspected. For
Calvin and his Disciple, which are the Church of England (in so much) condemns
the Real Presence of Christ his Body in the Euchartst; Luther and his Disciples
do firmly believe the Real Presence; Luther condemns the Catholic Church for
believing S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrevvs, and some other parts of Scripture,
to be Canonical: Calvin, with the Church of England says the Catholics do
well, and they also believe them to be Canonical. Several other examples we
could bring of Doctrins that some of the Reformers condemn for errors in the
Catholic Church, and other Reformers say they are no such: ought not this to
make us doubt of the truth of this Reformation.

Now that it is apparent, that any man man of common sense who reflects on
Religion ought to doubt of this Reformation; the way to satisfy his doubt is
very easy. For if he finds that the Catholic Church does in this age, and in
Luthers, and each of the precedent ages work Miracles in confirmation of her
Doctrine; and that the Reformation, nor any branch of it, has none; can any
reasonable man desire a more pregnant proof of the truth of the Catholic
Church, and falsehood of the Reformation? read the Historyes, and Fathers of
all ages, you shall find the Miracles wrought by her, as I related in the
former Chapter; you say you find them related, but you do not believe them:
this I call, and cannot be called otherwise than obstinacy; to deny what the
whole Torrent of Antiquity affirms, as it would be obstinacy to deny there was
a Julius Caesar in the world, for which we have but the testimony of Historyes
written by Pagans, for no Christian did see him. You say the Authors that
relate those Miracles were Papists and therefore their testimony to be
suspected. I answer the Authors who write those Miracles had no pike against
Protestants, nor did not write out of any design against you, for you were not
in the world, and therefore, you ought not to pretend any exception against
them: and if but one or two did relate them, your reflection could be
pardonable; but to say that all the Fathers and Historians of Antiquity, were
knaves that spoke against their consciences (many relating them to have been
wrought in their own presence) or fools that did not understand what miracles
were, is an intolerable impudence.

Add to the Miracles wrought by this Church in all ages, the conversion of
Nations to Christianity, (and none by the Reformation) the succession of her
Bishops without interruption for so many ages; (no such in the Reformation) Her
Eminent Saints, (none in the Reformation) her union in Doctrine of Faith; (none
in the Reformation) the voluntary poverty of her Professors, exchanging
plentiful estates for the powerty of a religious life (a practice recommended
by Christ, and thought madness by the Reformation) the multitude of Churchs
built by her, and demolished by the Reformation. Does not all this prove our
Church to be the true Church of Christ, that he has qualified with such
glorious Marks. These makes our Church so glorious, and shine like the City on
the Mountain, like the candle in the candlestick, that it is hardly possible
that any man can have on invincible ignorance of her being the true Church; and
VVo be to the man, that relying on the persuasion of the inuincibility of his
ignorance (which in effect is but obstinacy) will live out of her.

I conclude with that Paper, that Mr Sall speaks of, wherein he delivered that
a Protestant, believing the common Principles of Christianity, and lieuing
acording the rules of his profession, being inuincibly ignorant might be saved;
for which doctrine he complains to have been censured; and cries Victory,
because that none of our Clergy did answer, though they did censure him. He
misinforms his Readers; it was not that doctrine which was censured, and if his
Paper did contain no more than it; it required no answer; it was his
indiscretion was censured: and I will be judged by you, Reader, if he was not
indiscreet in this point: for if a Preacher were sent to convert Pagans to
Christianity, would it be discretion in him to teach them, Srs the Christian
Religion is the best, but you may be very well saved in that which you hold,
if you be inuincibly ignorant. The doctrine is very true, but a man that goes to
convert them, to Christianity from a Religion that he knows is in itself false,
ought not to encourage them to remayn in that Religion, with the hopes of being
sauedin it: his obligation is to beat them out of their ignorance, and not to
propose it unto them, as a Medium of salvation: would not they answer him well;
if we can be saved through our ignorance in the Religion we have; why do you
disturb us with any other, and creat scruples in our minds? This is Mr Salls
case that was sent to Ireland to convert Protestants who thought themselves
perhaps to be inuincibly ignorant: judge you was it discretion to propose unto
them their invincible ignorance as an encouragement to remayn in their errors.
Its not always discretion to declare the truth itself (when there is no
obligation of declaring it, as in this there could be none: for the Nobility,
which, he says, proposed him that question, were they Catholics or
Protestants? if Catholics its manifest, they needed not to be instructed in
that truth; its no fundamental point of Religion. If Protestants, they were not
obliged to know it, for the same reason* and, that the answer was an
encouragment to them to remayn as they were, and seek no instruction; and
whereas they made that question it seems they doubted if invincible ignorance
was sufficient; and if that answer had not been given; lykely the would secure
their salvation by seeking instruction. This is the indiscretion, for which he
was censured. Now we will descend to the errors which he fixs on the Church of
Rome.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE PRETENDED ERRORS of the Roman Church, alleged by Mr
Sall.
Having in the former part shown the Necessity of an Infallible living Judge;
and that to be the Roman Catholic Church; there needed no other answer to any
doubt in Religion, though intricat and unanswerable it might seem to us, but to
say, the Church which is infallible and Gods Oracle teaches it: therefore it
must be true, though I do not understand how. But because our Adversary
confides much in the strength of his arguments, we will descend to examine each
point in particular, which he impugns; and it will appear, that though we had
not the testimony of an infallible Church, to rely upon; but only Reason, and
Scripture as interpreted by Ancient Fathers; our cause is better grounded, than
theirs, and if not better, at least as well: which if it appears; then none,
but will condemn them for forsaking an old Religion, and seeking to reuers it
by a pretended Reformation, when they can show no better grounds for their
Novelties, than we have for our Ancient doctrine.

POP'S INFALLIBILITY, AND THE Resolution of Faith expounded.
HE forsakes the Catholic Church for her errors, and which be they? the first,
is the Popes infallibility: if this be an error, its not of the Church, for as
I have shown chapter 5. its no Arcicle of Faith that the Pope is infallible; if he
mislyked that doctrine, he might have denied it, and remain a Catholic. I can
not well perceive what he thinks of the Church universal; whether he belieues
her infallible or no? for, page 34. he grants, that the text of S. Paul Tim.
3.15. The Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth. Must be understood of the
universal Church; but whether he grants, that thence she is proved infallible
or no; I cannot understand: thence he inferrs; that the Roman Church, that is
to say the Dioces of Rome, is not infallible, nor the Pillar and ground of
Truth: but alas he might have spared himself that labor; for we do not
believe, that the Dioces of Rome is an infallible Church; nor that the Pope is
infallible: when we say, the Roman Catholic Church is infallible, we mean,
(and all our Adversaries know that) the Church of Rome, and all Churchs
universally spread throughout the world, which are united with her in Faith and
Communion; either as she is diffused, or representative in a General Council:
wherein Protestants are not included, though a Christian Congregation, because
they are divided from her. This Church is the true universal Church; called
Roman, because the chief Pastor is in Rome; called Vaiuersal, because her
Members are spread throughout the world: of the infallibility of this Church,
Mr Sall speaks nothing, but of the Pop's infallibity, which is no Article of
Faith; which, if an error, is not of the Church, and therefore ought not to
leave the Church for this reason.

When our Adversaries are obliged, and do promise to prove our errors by plain
and undeniable Scripture, from the page 29. to 35. and from page 39. to 44.
where Mr Sall under takes to prove this error, not one text of Scripture does
he allege, but three, so far from being plain and undeniable, that any man of
common sense will find them impertinent: the first ps. 11.1. verities are
m^imed among the children of Men. And how can this prove the Church to be
fallible, if it does not prove, that the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets
are also fallible, who were Children of Men? and if it does not prove the
Church to be fallible also in fundamental points, which Mr Sall and all
Protestants deny? The second, all Men are Liars, Fallibility, signifies only a
possibility of delivering an untruth: a Liar is he that actually delivers an
untruth, and that against his own knowledge: so that the text, if it proves any
thing to Mr Salls purpose; it proves that the Apostles, Evangelists, and the
Church of England, are a company of fourbs, that against their mind and
knowledge delivered untruths; for they are all men; and all men are lyards* The
third text, is out of S. Io. 16. proving that the Paraclet was promised to the
Church only upon condition of loving God, and keeping his Commandments; to
which I have given a full answer chapter 6^ read there to save me and yourself the
trouble of a Tatalogy.

Thus Mr Sall has forsaken our Church, and cannot prove by plain Scripture (as
he is obliged) her errors. Two reasons he alleadgs, that infallibility is an
Attribut proper to God; and that there must be no such thing as infallibility
of the Church, whereas our Authors do not agree, where to place it; if in the
Pope alone, or in the Council: to which reasons I have sufficiently answered in
the beginning of the 5. chapter He says, that the text of S. Paul Tim. 3. the
Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth, must not be understood of the Dioces
of Rome: and he knows well, that we do not pretend it should; we plead for
the infallibility of the universal Church, as we said, but now: He admires
that Bellar: should prove the Popes infallibility be the two Hebrew words,
signifying Doctrine and Truth, placed by Gods command, in the breast plate of
the High Priest; and thence draws a consequence very absurd to him; that the
High Priest also must have been infallible in the old Law. I will not enlarge
in this point because, it concerns the Popes infallibility; which is no
Articles of Faith (and only such I intend to vindicat:) but I must advertise
him of his ignorance, in admiring it should be pretended, that the High Priests
of the Ancient Law were infallible; whereas (though monstrous it seems to him)
not only Catholic but Protestant Authors do teach it: one I produce, Doctor
Porter a great Clerk in the Protestant Church, in his book called Char. Mist.
page 35. The High Friests in cases of moment had a certain Privilege from
error, if he consulted the Divine Oracle, by the judgment of vrim, or by the
breast plate of judgment vvherin were vrim and Thummim; vvherby he had an
absolut infallible direction. And immediately following: if any such promiss
made by God to assist the Pope, could be produced, his Decison might pass
justly for Oracles without examination.

This blasphemy says he, of parallelling the Pope with God in the Attribut of
infallibility, is raised to a higher degree by their practice, of making the
Pope the suprem Judge and Arbiter of Gods Laws. And how does he prove this
calumny? Bellarmin l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 5. sticks not to say, that if the
Pope did command vices, and prohibit virtues, the Church would be obliged to
believe vice to be good, and virtue bad. And the Council of Constance commanded
the Decrees of Popes to be preferred before the institution of Christ; vvheras
having confessed, that our savior did ordain the Communion under both kinds to
the Layty, and that the Apostles did practice it; they commanded it should be
given for the future but in one kind, alleading for reason that the precedent
Popes and Church did practice it so: which is to extol the Decrees of Popes
above them of Christ: as if the Laws of England, were not to be understood,
or practifed in Ireland, but accordging to the will and declaration of the
King of France, certainly the King of France would be deemed of more Power in
Ireland, than the King of England, and the People more his subjects.

Answer: Bellarmin in that place speaks expressly of vices and virtues, when
there is a doubt of their being such: as for example, usury is a vice of its
nature bad: (per se malum) now we all know it to be such; and restitution to
be a virtue: if there should arryse a doubt of vsury's being a vice; and in
that case the Pope should command usury to be practiced: then we should be
obliged to practice usury: and Bellar. gives the reason; quia tenetur Ecclesia
in rebus dubys acquiescere iudicio summi Pontificis. Because in dubious cases
the Church is obliged to obey the Pope. Behold how Bellar: speaks in case of
doubt that vice is vice, and virtue is virtue: for in that case the Pope, as
being the chief Pastor, is in possession of the obligation of being obeyed by
Gods command, and a doubtful excuse cannot exempt the subjects from their
apparent duty. Melior est conditio possidentis.

The Council of Constance knew, that though the Communion was instituted, and
practiced by the Apostles in both kinds; yet Christ left it arbitrary to his
Church to give it either in one or both, which I will prove in the discourse of
Half Communion; and therefore finding that Christ himself and his Apostles
somtymes gave it in one; and that the precedent Popes for just reasons had
commanded it should be received so; issued that Decree of receuing it in one
kind. And it is false what you say that they alleged no other reason for so
doing but the Decrees of precedent Popes; they alleged also for reason the
example of Christ and his Apostles who gave it in one kind. Though Christ
washed his Disciples feet before he gave the Communion. Might not the Council
say, Notvvithstanding that Christ did vvash the Receivers feet, yet we do not
require that ceremony? because that though he did so, he did no oblige us to
it: its so in this case; though in the institution he gave both kinds; he did
not oblige to give both; and therefore the Council might have commanded to give
but one: which was not to prefer their Decrees to his institution; but to make
use of the Power he gave them. Your example of the King of France proves
against you: for if the King of France had the Power and command from him of
England, to interpret the Laws; and the Irish were commanded by him to
understand and practice them, as the King of France should interpret them, and
not otherwse; certainly you would not say in that case, that the King of France
woul have more command and Prower in Ireland, than the King of England; if to
flatter his Excellency, you have not a mind tn say, that the Lord Lieutenant
has more Prower in Ireland, than the King and so bid fair for a haulter.

Another example to prove we extol the Papal Laws above the Divine: Costerus,
says he, c. 15. (17. he sold have said) prop. 9. doubts not to auerr, that it
is a greater sin in a Priest to Marry, which he confesses is but a
transgression of a Papal Law; than to keep a Concubin, which is against the Law
of God. You belie Costerus in saying that the Marriage of a Priest is but a
transgression of a Papal Law; Though it be but a Papal Law, that any who
receives Priesthood, shall make a vow of Chastity; yet the vow being once
made, its a transgression against the Divine Law to violat it: a breach of vow
a sacriledg, says Costerus. And this being evident; its no less that it is
agreater sin for him to marry; first because he shows by marrying that he is an
Heretic, believing that to be a marriage, which really is none. Secondly, by
marrying he testifies a steady resolution of perseuearing in the sin.

Canus, says he, and others cited by him, do aver that the Church can err
materially, and consequently allows no more infallibility to the Church, than
to a private Doctor: Answer. Canus and other Diuins say that the Church an err
materially in matters of fact; as I will declare in the next ensuing Point; but
in Points of Doctrine, no Catholic says that the Church can err, nor
materially; and Private Doctors can err not only materially but formally. Lastly
he impugns our Doctrine of infallibility with an argument as old as the
Reformation: because we cannot prove it but by Scripture, and we prove
Scripture again by the infaillibility of the Church; and this again by
Scripture; and so go still round in circle, which is ridiculous in the schools:
and hence he takes occasion to pick aquarrel with Becanus; to no other effect,
but that his Auditory should understand that he was acquainted with the works
of great Diuins. But I will declare how we can easily expound the Resolution
of our Faith without any Circle; which I am sure the Protestants will never do.

An act of Faith, is an Assent to a truth which is obscure and reason cannot
comprehend ( an argument of things not appearing says S. Paul) only because it
is sufficiently proposed to us, that God revealed it: and therefore S. Paul
calls it a captiuating of our understanding, which is to say sumission of our
Reason. By Resolution of Faith the Diuins understand, To declare the Motive,
why I believe, or the ground whereupon our Faith does rest.

God does not require of us to believe suddenly that a doctrine is revealed by
him, because the Proponent tells us so. S. Peter calls Faith, a Reasonable
Obsequy: we must have strong reasons to move us for to believe a Truth to be
revealed before we give our Assent: therefore, before the Act of Faith (and in
human Faith also its so) we have some inward dispositions preuious to the
Assent, a good opinion of the Proponent for his life, for his actions and
conversation, which prepare our understanding, representing it reasonable to
believe what is proposed. Christ himself, when he came to preach, did not
oblige the Jews to believe abruptly, that he was the son of God, but began with
a Holy life, admirable doctrine, miracles and supernatural signs, and these were
preuious dispotions to prepare them, that having such strong and credible
Motives, for to judge him a Person above the rank of Ordinary men, they should
believe him, when he should teach them, that he was the son of God; whereas it
was incredible that God should credit him with such supernatural works, and
continual marks of his benevolence, if he were an impostor.

This appears in the passage of the Blind man cured by Christ's Io. c. 9. the
Scribs and Pharisees said Christ was a sinner; the Blind Man argued, No; in as
much as he worked so great a miracle in him: Nisi hic homo esset a Deo, non
poterat facere quid quam: if this man were not from God he could do nothing:
all this while, he did not believe that Christ was God; but a man from God,
extraordinarily favored by him. He being thus prepared with these external
Motives, and judgment of credibility, whereby he judged Christ to be somewhat
more than ordinary; Christ meets him again, and bids him believe in the son of
God, yea, said he, who is he: (behold how he was ready, and prepared by that
precedent judgment, for to believe) He that speaks to you, is he, said Christ:
and presently he believed: Credo Domine. You see the Motive of his Assent, was
the testimony of Christ; which he thought, he was bound to believe, having
formerly seen his works; which made it evidently credible to him that he must
speak but truth; whereas they proved him to be a man from God. Thus the People
of Samaria, believed him to be the son of God, when they did hear him; because
they were preuiously disposed by the words of the Samaritan, and the miracle,
she related of him. Thus the Prophets and Apostles proceeded, preparing their
Auditory, with the Holiness of their lives, secret energy of their doctrine,
miracles and supernatural signs, which moved men to judge that they were sent
by God; and that they could not be Cheats, and the People, (which is to be
observed) would be judged obstinat, and were judged obstinat, such as did not
believe their doctrine, when they did see them; or, though they did not see
them, but were credibly informed by those that did see them.

We have in the former part of this Treatise shown the great inducements and
Motives we have to judge that the Roman Catholic Church, beyond all
Congregations in the word, is particularly favored by God; the sanctity of her
doctrine, the conversion of Nations by her, unto a doctrine so seemingly contrary
to reason, and irksom to our natural inclinations; miracles wrought by her in
all ages, the constancy of her Martyrs, even in the youngest age and weaker
sex. Her unity in doctrine, against the persecutions of so many Tyrants and
Heresiarks that almost all ages opposed it; these marks which are proper only
to her; and that no other congregation can claim, makes it evidently credible,
that if God speaks to us by the mouth of any, it must be by hers. The like, and
no other, had the Primitive Church, to judge of the Apostles that God spoke by
them: and such as in the Apostles times did not believe them, having so great
inducements to judge them men of God, were condemned for obstinat people: and
consequently who will not judge the same of this Church, ought also to be held
for obstinat, notwithstanding any pretense of ignorance they may allege.

Having these inducements to prepare our understandings for Faith, it follows,
that what ever this Church proposes unto us, to be a Truth revealed by God; we
are obliged to believe her, and embrace her doctrine upon her testimony; whereas
it appears by those inducements so credible, that God speaks by her as he did
by the Apostles.

Now I resolve my Faith thus: you ask why I believe the Trinity? I answer,
because God has revealed it. You ask why I believe, that God revealed it? I
answer, because the Church, by which God speaks tell us so. You ask, why I
believe, that God speaks by the Church? (here is the difficulty:) I must not
answer, because the Scripture says it, for I believe Scripture only upon the
testimony of the infallible Church, and to prove again the infallibility of
this, by the Scripture, would be a circle: neither must I answer, that I
believe God to speak by the Church, because she works miracles, for if the
miracles be absolutely evident, they can be no Motive of Faith, which is of its
own nature obscure: and if they be but morally evident miracles, they cannot be
the Motive, because the motive of Faith must be infallible; and because the
Motive of an Act of Faith must be Gods word, and miracles are not Gods word,
but signs and Marks of his word. We must therefore answer to that question
again, because the Church by which God speaks, says, that God speaks by
her, and I am obliged to believe he speaks by her because he does credit her
with so many miracles and supernatural Marks, which makes it evidently
credible, that he does speak by her. Where you distinguish the Motive of your
Act of Faith, from the Motive of your obligation of believing, and your
judgment of credibility: the Motive, that you give for your Act of Faith, is
only the word or voice of God by the Church: (and nothing else but the word of
God can be the Motive of Faith.) the Motive you give for your obligation of
believing, and judgment of credibility; are the external inducements of
miracles and supernatural signs. You reply: To believe that God speaks by the
Church, because the Church by which God speaks says so; is to believe that God
speaks, because Gods speaks by the Church; which is idem per idem: to believe a
thing for itself; and an obscure thing, for a thing equally obscure; which is
unreasonable; whereas an obscure unknown thing cannot be believed but for
something that is more clear and known. I answer, what is believed, is that God
speaks by the Church, which is obscure and unknown to our reason: The Motive,
why we believe it, is the voice of God by the Church, evidently proposed to
our understanding by the external Motives of credibility to be credibly his
voice; so that the same thing which of itself, and considered without the
external Motives of credibility, is obscure and unknown; acompanied with the
motives of credibility is more clear and known and moves me to believe: but
so, that the Motives of credibility are not the Motive, nor any part of the
Motive why I believe the testimony of the Church to be the voice of God; but
are the Motives why our understanding evidently knows it to be very credible,
and judges it very just and reasonable that we should believe it to be the
voice of God.

And that this is the way of Resolving Divine Faith, its proved; for we have
the same Faith, that the Primitive Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, and Damasco
had: and consequently we must have the same Motive of Faith. When the Apostles
preached to them, they believed the Trinity, not for Scripture; for but little
or nothing was then written of the new Testament; but because God told them by
the Apostles that it was a revealed Truth. And if you did ask them, whey they
believed that God did speak by the Apostles? they would answer, because the
Apostles who were Gods Messengers told them so, and they could not but be
obliged to believe it because of their miracles and supernatural signs. Thus
we say of the Church.

Now the Church being believed infallibly true; we believe the Scripture to be
the word of God upon her testimony; and the Scripture being believed Gods word;
then we draw out of the Scripture, new proofs and Motives of believing the
Church to be infallible; because the Scripture, which is the word of God says
it. But the chief and last Motive whereupon our Faith must rest, is the word of
God speaking to us by the Church: the Church, I say by which God actually, in
this present age speaks unto us: for we do not believe because God did speak
in the 1.2. and third age by the Church; for that is Tradition, and Tradition
(nor Scripture) is not the Motive, but the Rule of our Faith; the Rule by which
the Church is guided to know which and what is the word of God: the Motive of
our Faith, is because God speaks now, by his Church, as he did in those first
ages; for which we have evident arguments of credibility as the first ages had.

Pop's supremacy.
What is believed, as an Article of Faith by the Church, is the spiritual
supremacy of the Pope: his supreme Power either Direct or indirect in temporal
affairs over Princes, is no Articles of Faith; but a question disputed in the
schools, and neither Party, that denies or affirms is condemned of Heresy by
the Church; if Mr Sall mislyked the Doctrine he might have disclaimed it, and
remain a Catholic, as many other Catholics do. He speaks of the sufferances
of the Irish upon the account of this Doctrine, a mere fiction, as wittily, as
maliciously invented to make the Pope odious to the People: That the Irish
should have suffered for that cause, is false, but its very true that they
suffered for not swearing the contrary Doctrine, That the Pope has no such
Power; which no man can swear whereas he is not certain of it; and whereas it
is a question disputed in the schools if he has or not, that Power; how can any
man in conscience swear either part to be true? but what Mr Sall might well
condole is the sufferances of the Irish for not taking the oath of supremacy,
that the King of England is head of the Church, and let him consider if it be
not cruelty against souls, to oblige them to swear a thing that, not only
Catholics, but all sectaries out of England denies, nay Calvin in cap. 6. Amos
Prophetae says. Qui tantopere extulerunt Henricum Regem Angliae, fuerunt
homines inconsiderati, erant enim Blasphemi, cum eum vocarent summum Caput
Ecclesiae. And the very Protestant Doctors themselves not agreeing, in what
sense, and how far is it true that the King is supreme Head of the Church, the
poor People must be forced to swear it.

Then, say you, the Council of Lateran erred in assuming that Power, when it
decreed Princes, who did not purge their Territories from Heresies, should be
deprived of their Lands. You abuse the Council; neither it, nor any other
Council did no assume that Power, as you say, but finding that is was that the
probable, and perhaps, as they supposed the most probable opinion of Diuins,
that the Church had that power, grounded their fact upon that opinion; and
issued their Decree of that punishment against such Princes: And the
Catholics, who deny any such Power in the Church do not, nor any man cannot
say, the Council erred formally (that is to say blameably) in that Decree;
because it was grounded upon a probable opinion; and it is not requisite in any
Tribunal for the justice of a Decree or sentence, that it be grounded upon
infallible grounds. And the Catholics who deny that power do say, that Decree
was Materially erroneous, because the opinion upon which the Council was
grounded, was false. whence you can only gather that the Council may err
Materially only, in matters of fact, (such as that was) but in Doctrina fidei
and morum, in Doctrine of Faith and Manners, it cannot err, neither formally nor
Materially, because it is assisted in that Doctrine constantly by Gods
infallible Spirit.

Transubstantiation.
How strangly Mr Sall is blinded in calling us Idolaters, for believing Christ's
real personal Presence in the Sacrament; and page 116. says we will be damned
for this, and orher Tenets, if ignorance does not excuse us; and yet the
Lutherans who are the Elder Brethren of the pretended Reformation; whom
Protestants do embrace, and receive to their Communion; believe that real
personal Presence of Christ as well as we: are they Idolaters also; and will
they be damned, if ignorance does not excuse them? or will it be pardonable in
them, and damnable in us?

He says we have no pertinent text of scripture for it, page 21. and 28. but
I defy him with all his Divinity, to answer me to these two following
syllogism, grounded upon most clear texts: first Luke 22.19. eat, this is my
Body which is given for you. The text declares he gave them somewhat what to
eat: we say it was his Real Body, and prove it: He gave to them, that which he
gave for them: the text says it, eat, this is my Body which is given for you.
But what he gave for them, was not a figure, but his real and true Body;
therefore what he gave to them was not a figure, but his true and Real Body. it
will be no answer, to say that he gave to them figuratively, what he gave for
them really; for the text makes no distinction, betwixt what he gave to them,
and what he gave for them; and if you presume to say, that what he gave to
them, was but a figurative; why may not we as well say, that what he gave for
them, was but a figure, and so fetch from Hell again the Heresy of Marcion,
that what suffered for us, was but a Fantastical Body?

For to lead you the second syllogism, observe that when the Multitude Io. 6.
said, This saying is hard, how can this man give us his flesh to eat; Christ
called them Unbelievers: There be some of you, who do not believe; nay says,
they are damnable unbelievers, v. 54, He that will not eat of the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, shall not have life in him. Observe secondly,
that what the Jews though hard, and impossible, was that Christ should give
them to eat his true and real flesh, for no man could apprehend any difficulty
in that Christ should give the figure of his Body, whereas they did eat yearly
the Paschal Lamb, which they believed to be the figure, of the Messiah; Christ
promised what they judged hard and impossible; what they judged hard and
impossible, was not that he should give a figure of his flesh, but his true and
real flesh; therefore what Christ promised was not a figure but his real and
true flesh: and Mr Sall himself, page 63. does acknowledge, that the Jews did
understand Christ to have spoken of his true and real flesh: The Jews
understood him to have spoken of a corporal and fleshy eating, as the Papists
do. Now answer me, I pray, to this syllogism: A damnable vnbelieuer is he who
denies a Truth sufficiently proposed to him to be revealed by God; The Jews in
this occasion were damnable unbelievers, and what they denied was a fleshy
eating of his real Body, as the Papists believe it: therefore Christ in this
occasion did sufficiently propose unto them a fleashy eating of his real Body
as the Papists believe it.

Page 63. he rayses an argument upon this text for the figurative presence: for
says he the Jews understood him to speak of a corporal and fleshy eating of
his Body, as Papists do, and so represented difficulties that reason dictated
against the like expressions, as we did in the beginning of this discourse;
but he did correct their understanding, by his subsequent words, v. 63. it is
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak
are spirit and life by which he draws them from the apprehension of a
corporal eating, to that of a spiritual feeding: consequently Christ did mean
a figurative spiritual eating of his flesh: thus Mr Sall.

By this, you acknowledge, that the Jews did not apprehend or think of any
figurative eating, consequently they could not either believe it, or deny it;
for how can a man deny, that which never fell into his apprehensions: tell us
therefore what is that which they denied, and denied damnably? they could not
deny, but that which they apprehended was spoken; and what they apprehended, as
you confess, was a corporal fleshy eating. That therefore they must have
denied; therefore they were called unbelievers: but how were they damnably
unbelievers, if Christ did not sufficiently and credibly propose unto them a
corporal and fleshly eating? For none is bound to believe, if the revealed
Truth be not sufficiently and credibly proposed to him? either therefore Christ
his words, My flesh is truly meat, my Blood is truly drink, did sufficiently
and credibly propose a corporal eating of his real flesh, or they ought not to
be called damnably unbelievers. They would not believe that corporal eating of
his real flesh, as you do not, for the difficulties which reason dictated
against the like expressions; such as you, and your fraternity, proposes
against them; and therefore we say, that you are damnably unbelievers, as they
were, and you, and they are checked by those words of Christ, the flesh
profits nothing, its the spirit that quickneth, etc, which were not to check
their understanding for apprehending a corporal eating; but to check their
obstinacy, that for the difficulties, which natural reason did suggest against
his expressions, they would not believe, what he spoke, and they understood him
to have spoken: the flesh profits nothing, that was to say to them and to
you, that they must not judge of this Mystery by the senses of the flesh, nor
by natural reason which is adquired by the help of the fleshy senses, They
cannot understand how that can be: Its the spirit that quickneth, that's to say,
its the Divine grace, that must enlighten your understandings to know and
believe how this can be. Even as when S. Peter confessed Chist to be the son of
the living God, Christ added, its not flesh and blood that revealed that unto
thee, but my Father that is in heaven, Mat. 16 17. which was to say; that it
was not natural reason, nor any knowledge of the senses of flesh, or gotten by
them; but the grace of the heavenly Father that discovered that Mystery to him.

If you read that passage in S. Io. 6. you will find, that Christ as we have
evidently proved, proposed a corporal eating of his real flesh, but did not at
all then (which is to be observed) propose the manner, how he would give his
flesh to be eaten. The obligation of the Jews was to believe that he would give
it; and not to dispute, how that could be, or in what manner: but they began
to think how it could be, quomodo potest, etc. and their natural reason, (which
only they consulted) not understanding that it could be otherwise, than by
cutting his flesh in morsels to be given to them, this appearing so absurd to
human reason, they absolutely denied, the possibility of the Mystery. If Christ
when he proposed to them his flesh for food, had also proposed the manner that
he intended of giving it, perhaps they would have believed, but then he did
not, but only the eating of his flesh. Their error was two fold; the one, that
they denied the possibility of giving his flesh to be eaten; for which they
were called unbelievers: the other was the cause, why they denied it; because
the manner of eating it which their natural reason proposed unto them, appeared
absurd, and therefore not conceiving how it could be they denied it; therefore
Christ checked this their understanding, that the manner of giving his flesh
really to be eaten was in a spiritual way, above what their natural reason
could apprehend, and said its the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing; as we have expounded: but they, either because they did not
understand this expression, or that they obstinatly adheared to their first
denial, flincht from him.

I conclude with this reason: you will not deny but that God might, if he were
pleased, have converted the substance of that bread, which he took in his
hands, into his real flesh and Body; as by his omnipotent word he created all
things of nothing; as he converted the water into wine; and as the bread, which
we eat, is by the heat of our stomachs converted into our flesh and blood:
suppose, I pray, that he intended at the last supper to make such a change; or
that now he descended from heaven to make it: what words could he use, more
significant, to let us understand that he gave us his real and true Body under
the Accidents of bread, than those, take, eat, this is my Body which is given
for you, this is truly my flesh: if in a serious discourse I promised you a
horse; would not you understand that I intended to give you a true horse? would
I perform my promomiss by giving the figure of one? since then that he might
have given us, if he had been pleased, his true and real Body, and that he
spoke, as if really he did intend it, (for he could not speak otherwise if he
did) we must understand that he did intend it, and gave it. If he did intend
it, when he spoke those words; what could hinder him? if he did not intend it;
was it sincerity and honesty to speak otherwise, than as he intended? no more
than if you, having promised a horse, would give only the picture of one.

Let us hear Mr Salls arguments; he begins, as the Jews, with difficulties
that reason proposes against so great a Mystery; that the Accidents of bread
should be without any substance to rest on, that a Body would be at one time in
many places; that a well proportioned body should be confined to the small
compass of a wafer; that the Accidents converted into vermin should produce a
substance. I would tire my Readers patience, if I did scan each triuial
objection of these that has been a hundred times answered, and our answers
never replied unto. You would have shown more wit, Mr Sall, and got more
credit by replying to the answers, that our writers give to these objections
and especially Bellarmin from whom you borrow them, than by repeating again a
parcel of third bare tryfles, against so great a Mystery, in homage of which,
we must captiuat our sense and reason, as we do to the Mystery of the
Trinity, which surpasses all created intellects, far more than this Mystery
and yet not so clearly expressed in Scripture, as this is. And if you must have
natural reason, for to believe this Mystery, tell me, what reason have you for
to believe that the Bread and wine gives life and grace to the worthy eater?
what proportion can reason find betwixt bread, and Divine grace? what proportion
betwixt the water of Baptism, and spiritual Regeneration? none, if you do not
appeal to the omnipotency of God: by he same we answer you also, (to shun
tedious Tatalogyes) that those difficulties you represent be impossible to
Nature but they are possible to the omnipotent word of God.

But for the satisfaction of the Reader I will deliver this argument in the
terms of an ingenious man which once I discoursed with. This Mystery, said he,
is repugnant to sense and reason; consequently it is not to be imposed on man,
if God will not have him to renounce both. Its repugnant to sense, for what we
see, taste, and feel, is but bread: repugnant to reason; for this ought
prudently to conclude, that the substance of bread is there, upon the testimony
of the senses, which perceive the Accidents that, by natural course, are
inseparable from the substance of bread. I answer, Reason prudently ought to
conclude the substance of bread is there, whereas the senses perceive the
Accidents, which are naturally inseparable from that substance, if there were
not a higher Authority that affirms the substance is not there; to whose
testimony, Reason is bound to yield, against the evidence of the senses: as
when the Angel appeared to Tobias to acompany him in his voyage; Tobias, at his
first appearance chapter 5. prudently judged him to be a Man, whereas the senses did
perceive all the Accidents proper to human Nature; and nothing affirmed him to
be an Angel: there Reason prudently concluded upon the testimony of the senses:
but when in the 12. chapter the Angel discovered him self to be an Angel; then
Tobias his reason was reclaymed, and against the evidence of his senses, which
did see nothing but Accidents of Human Nature; believed it a Spirit upon the
testimony of an Angel. The like passage we read to have happened to Abraham,
Genesis 18. whence we understand, that God may separat the Accidents from the
substance to which they are proper; and also that when the testimony of our
senses clashs with a higher Authority, Reason must yield to the higher
Authority, against the evidence of our senses.

This is the present case: our senses say its bread what we see after the
consecration: the word of God says its his Body; if the word of God did not
oueraw the senses, reason ought prudently to conclude its bread; but the word
of God being of a more infallible authority than the senses, Reason must yield
to the word of God, and say its Christ's Body; against the evidence of the
senses that say its bread.

But replied he, God will not have Reason go against the evidence of our
senses, but yield to them even in matters of Faith; for after his Resurrection
he proved it to his Apostles by the evidence of their senses, saying Lu. 24.36.
feel and see for a Spirit has no flesh nor boans as you see me to have. I
answer, they did not believe his Resurrection only upon the testimony of their
senses, but also of his word and asseueration, that said he was revived. God
will have us, as I said formerly, yield to the evidence of our senses, when
there is no higher authority that thwarts their evidence, as here there was
none, but the higher authority did rather assert, what the senses did testify,
but in the Mystery of the Eucharist it is not so; Gods word does contradict the
senses, and therefore Reason must, yield to it against our sensations.

Page 21. Mr Sall argues, that no necessity vrges us to believe Christ's real
presence in the Sacrament; neither for the effects that he promises by it: not
for the verifying of his words, seeing our savior said in the same tenor, I am
the true vine; without any alteration in the vine, or his person: not for the
effects of the Sacrament; Christ being able to conferr, what spiritual graces
he pleases, with the worthy receiving of bread and wine, without any
substantial alteration in the Elements; as in the water of Baptism he affords
the soueraign grace of spiritual regeneration in the substance of water.

I answer, its necessary for the verifying of Christ's words in the institution
of the Sacrament: for let the words Body and flesh, vine, Rock etc. be
equiuocal, as he will have them to be; indifferent to bear two senses
figurative and real. This is evident, that when a word bearing an equiuocal
signification, is put in a Proposition, it is determined to signify that, of
which only, and of no other, the Predicat can be verifyed: as this word Man,
may signify a true, or painted man: in this proposition Man is a rational
living creature, it is determined to signify a true Man; because the Predicat,
rational living creature, can be verifyed only of him, and not of a painted
man. So the word Body, that may signify a true, or figurative one; in the
institution of the Sacrament, This is my body which is given for you, its
determined to signify Christ his true body, because of it only, and not of a
figure, it can be verifyed which is given for you. If you observe this
Principle, you will clearly answer any text that may be alleged against this
Mystery. As to the instance of vine and such like mystical expressions spoken
of Christ, put them in a proposition with the word Christ, and they will be
determined to a figurative or mystical signification, because that Christ that
dyed for us cannot be said of a vine or Rock in their proper signification.

Now to the second part of his argument: that God might, had he been pleased,
have redeemed us, with out any real Incarnation of the second Person, or real
Passion of Christ upon the Cross, its out of controversy; for his infinite
wysdom and Power, wanted not other means for to redeem us: is it therefore we
must say, with the Heretic Marcion, that the text, And the word was made
flesh, must be understood figuratiuly, and deny any real Incarnation of Christ,
or Passion, on the Cross, but only a figurative one? by your argument we
might, because God might, had he been pleased, convey unto us by a figurative
body and Passion, all the effects and grace, that he conveyed unto us by a real
Incarnation and Passion: the spiritual regeneration, conferred on us in Baptism
by water, he might have conferred it on us by wine or Rose water: is it
therefore we must say that true natural water is not necessary for Baptism?
but say you, the text does distinctly express water; yea, and the text in the
institution of the Eucharist does distinctly express Body: and as the text does
not add, true, and real Body, so it does not add true and natural water; by
what rule, must water in the text sygnify natural water, and the word Body,
must not sygnify a real body?

Thus far we agree that Christ might, were he pleased, have given us the
effects of the Sacrament by a figurative Presence only; also that he might have
conferred them upon us by the real presence of his Body (for there is no
impossibility in that he should have giuenvs his real Body under the Accidents
of bread) the question is, what is it that he has effectually don, and which of
the two has he given, the figure of his Body, or his real Body? I say that his
real Body, for that is requisite for the verifying of his words in the
institution of the Sacrament.

But why does S. Paul call it Bread so often; even after the consecration? as
1. Cor. 11.13. as often as you eat this bread, vvhoeuer shall eat this bread,
he took bread in his hands he brake it and said this is my Body which is
broken for you. These expressions denote, that it remayns still bread. No Mr
Sall, it retains the name of bread, because it retains the appearance of bread,
and because that when a thing is changed into an other, it still retains the
name of what it was, as in the Scripture we read, the blind see, the lame
walk; though they see, they are called blind, because they were blind, and are
restored to their sight. And S. Io. 2.9. says; when the Ruler of the feast,
had tasted the water, that was made wine. The liquor that the Ruler of the
feast tasted was true wine; yet the text calls it water, because from water it
was converted into wine. So the bread, which by the words of the consecration,
is converted into Christ his Body, retains the name of bread, because it was
once bread; because it has still the appearance of bread, and because we
should understand, that true bread and wine, and nothing but bread and wine, is
requisite for the due administration of that Sacrament; as for the Baptism true
natural water is necessary.

And that you may not be startled at S. Paul's calling it so often bread,
observe you the rule I have given, and you will easily perceive that the word
bread so often used after the consecration, signifyes not true and real bread,
but bears only a mystical or figurative signification, for you will find that
the Predicats that are said of that bread after its consecration, cannot, in
any wise, be verified of true substantial bread; and consequently that the word
bread after the consecration cannot signify real, but figurative bread, for
example Christ says of that bread that S. Paul speaks of; the bread that I
shall give is flesh for the life of the world: what was given for the life of
the world, was not true bread, but true flesh, consequently when that flesh is
called bread, the word bread must not signify real bread. Christ says of that
bread, this is my Body, which is given for you: This Predicat, which is given
for you, cannot be verified of bread, in its true and proper signification;
consequently the word bread after the consecration, signifyes but figurative
bread, the appearance of bread.

But says Mr Sall, we all agree in calling the Eucharist a Sacrament, a
Sacrament is but a sign of a sacred thing; why should not we agree also, in
calling the Sacrament of Christ his body, the sign of Christ his Body: and
here he brings a rapsody of texts of S. Augustine, S. Denis, and others, to
prove that it is but a type, a Symbol, a figure, and remembrance of Christ his
Body, which labor he might have well spared; for we do freely grant that the
Eurachist is a sign, type, remembrance and Symbol of Christ his body offered
for us on the Cross; the Eucharist is a commemoration, and representation of
that bloody sacrifice; but it is also Christ his true Body: the unbloody
oblation of his Body in the Eucharist, is a figure and representation of the
bloody oblation of the same body on the Cross; as a King that would act a Part
in a tragedy of his own victoryes, he would be the thing represented and the
representation. He alleadges the words of some Fathers of the Church, that
expressly say the Symbols in the Sacrament are not changed in their Nature, but
do abide in their proper substance, figure and form: nay, more distinctly, they
say, that the Nature and substance of bread and wine remain after the
consecration: thus speaks Saint Chrysostom. if you believe Mr Sall, in an epistle
he writ ad Caesarium; but if you believe Bellarmin, S. Chrysostom. never writ any
such epistle: also Gelasius, a Pope says Mr Sall, though Bellarmin says he
was no Pope but some Monk) and Theodoret dial. 2. c. 24. And is it not a pretty
thing that the Protestants would persuade us, that these Fathers and others,
did believe only a figurative Presence, and yet from the very first beginning of
their pretended Reformation they constantly auerr, that all the Fathers fell
into the errors of Purgatory, real Presence, Adoration of Saints, etc. whoeuer
will read those Fathers will find the real Presence most clearly asserted in
several places of their works; especially in S. Chrysostom.; and for one or two
obscure passages, or expressions, that our Adversaries meet, with they must be
for a figurative Presence? Bellarmin and our Catholic Authors, give a
Catholic sense to those words; the Protestants give an other, the Fathers do
not live to speak for themselves and declare what sense they intended: is it
not necessary therefore, that we should have an infallible living judge, who
may deliver unto us, what we must believe in this Mystery?

This aduertisment I must give my Reader; that the Fathers in all ages of the
Church, some spoke nothing at all of the Mysteryes now controuerted, and
believed by us, others spoke of them but briefly and obscurely; others wrote in
some places of their works plainly, and distinctly; but in other places in
expressions, subject to misconstruction. The reason was, that the Fathers of
each age professedly writ, or altogether, or for the most part of their works,
of those points of doctrine which were opposed by the Heretics of those times,
and those they delivered in their proper Notions, expressly, and carefully,
shunning any dubious words; but of other Mysteryes and Articles of Faith, that
were unanimously believed, no contradiction of Heretics requiring an exact
discussion of them; either they omitted to speak of them, or writing of them,
they were not so careful in speaking with clear expressions, because they had
no occasion of fearing a misconstruction of their words; particularly when in
other places of their works, they had delivered themselves in plain terms.
Hence it is that we must not be startled if we do not find any mention of
Indulgences, Purgatory, or real Presence in some Fathers; or if we meet some
words in some Fathers, which may be wrested against our Tenets; as in this of
the real Presence, which until about the year 800. had not any opposition
among Christians, then it was apposed by John Scotus (not the Franciscan friar)
and by the Arch Bishop of Sens in France: but this storm was soon and easily
calmed: about the year 1100. Berengarius raised much dust against this
Mystery, and drew many Abettors to his faction; then the Catholic writters did
declare the Mystery and defend it, and Berengarius was condemned by five
Councils successiuly assembled against him and his Partisans: the Fathers who
writ since that time speak so manifestly in favor of the real Presence, that
you will hardly find any expression in their works whereat your understanding
may stumble.

Its most false what Mr Sall imputes to Scotus, Ocham and other more modern
Catholics, that the doctrine of Transubstantiation, it not contained in the
Canon, nor was an Article of Faith before the Lateran Council; they expressly
teach, especialy Scotus in 4. did. 11. q 3. that the doctrine was believed
before the Council, continually in the Church; but more explicitly declared by
the Council, who for that end introduced the word Transubstantiation, which
expresses better the doctrine believed, as the Council of Nice introduced the
word Consubstantial, to signify the equality of the son with the Father: nay
Scotus in that place brings for example the Creed of the Nicen Council which,
says he, was no new doctrine of the Council, but a more explicit declaration of
the sense formerly believed by the Church; so the Decree of the Lateran Council
was but an explicit declaration of the sense that was held by the Church in all
ages in this point of the real Presence. Suarez indeed tells us, that Caietan
(but speaks nothing of Bassoly, so much you add of your own) spoke rashly of
this Mystery, but tells us also that his expressions were censured by the
Church; and all that Mr Sall can prove by this, is that Caietan did err: and
what then?

But fayes he Bellarmin and the Roman writers do agree that in that text, this
Cup is the new Testament of my blood, the word Cup, is taken by a Trope, not
for the material Cup, but for the thing it contains; and why will we not also
admit a Trope, in the words relating to the bread consecrated. Mr Sall plays
the Catholic undoubtedly under the mask of Protestancy, for this argument
proves manifestly our Doctrine: we confess that in the text alleged, the word
Cup must be taken, by a Trope, for what it contains, not for the material Cup;
so we desire him that in this text the bread which I vvil give is flesh for
the life of the world; the word bread, may be taken by a Trope, not for the
material bread, but for what it contains which we prove to be in the Cup, the
true blood of Christ (because of it, and not of the material Cup, it can be
verifyed that it was shed for us) in the bread, the true flesh of Christ; for
of it, and not of the material bread, that Predicat can be verifyed, given for
the life of the world.

He concludes with a discourse which shocks the Hierarchy of the Church of
England. Mr Anderton has lately proved in his judicious Treatise styled a
Soueriagn Remedy against Atheism and Heresy, the Nullity of the Protestant
Clergy and Mr Sall not sufficiently as yet engaged in the defense of that cause
(as we may judge by his so weak opposition of our Tenets, and defense of
theirs, that he has not as yet got so great advantages by his Revolt, as he
expected, that should edge his wit to plead with more vigor) I know not with
what design strengthens this Assertion with his following argument against our
Adoring of Christ in the Sacrament. How can you (says he) give Divine
Adolration to the wafer! whereas in your own Principles you cannot be sure that
Christ is there present: for in your Principles, That depends of the intention
of the Priest who consecrats, and of his true ordination; this depends of the
intention, and due ordinatio^ of the Bishop that ordained him; and this Bishop
depends of the true ordination of others that consecrated him; and so upwards
of endless requisits, impossible to be known certainly: consequently you
cannot certainly know, that Christ is present in that wafer; how then are you
so desperate as to adore it?

Answer: its question less on both sides, yours and ours, that some things are
essentially requisite for the validity of a Sacrament; the defect of which, or
any one thing of them nullifyes the Sacrament: as, for the validity of Baptism,
water is essentially necessary; and the form of words, I baptize you in the
name of the Father son and Holy Ghost. This you believe as well as we, now who
doubts, but that it depends of the free will of the Minister to vitiat the
form; for since that the validity of the Baptismdoes not require, that he vters
the form in aloud voice; he may pretend to speak the form, and utter some what
else in lieu of it: or if he should pronounce some words of it with an audible
voice; he may, with an under voice omit some word, or add some word, that would
destroy the form; this may happen through malice or ignorance: and we cannot
possibly be certain, that it does not, or has not happened; and consequently
we can have no assurance (if Mr Salls discourse be good) of the truth of any
man's Baptism. The ordination of your Ministers depends essentially, in your
Principles also, as well as in ours, of the Jurisdiction of the Bishop (for if
he be no true Bishop he can give no orders) and of the exact form, or words
essentially requisite for a due ordination: the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
depends of the due ordination of the Consecrators (for he must be consecrated
by the imposition of hands of true Bishops) and the uttering of the form of
Consecration; the due ordination of the Consecrators depends of the like
requisits in those from whom they received their Caracter: now since that the
defect, either of the true form of the Consecration, or of the true Ordination
of the Consecrators, nullifies your Hierarchy; and that there is no possible
means for us to know certainly that neither of those two, was wanting, in any
one of the whole trayn of your Ordainers; for if it was wanting in any all the
Ordinations derived from him, are Null, what assurance have you, or can you
have of the truth of your Hierarchy, and but that you are all buth mere laymen
without any authority, or jurisdiction for preaching or administering
Sacraments? Thus Mr Sall obliges his Church in opening a way to question the
Jurisdiction of the Clergy: let him make his peace, as he can, with his Church
and Clergy, we will answer his objection thus.

We can without hazard of Idolatry, and ought in conscience to adore the wafer
consecrated, though we be not infallibly assured of the Priests intention: for
our obligation of adoring is grounded on, and guided by that General Principle
of Faith (which is infallibly true) that Christ is really present in the wafer
duly consecrated; this General Principle applied to this particular case of
this vvafer, consecrated by this Priest, obliges me to adore this wafer, though
that application of the said general Principle be not infallibily sure, or I am
not infallibly ascertained that it is applied in this particular case: it is
sufficient for my obligation of adoring, that I am morally assured that it is
applied. As in this case, this General Principle of Nature, Parents are to be
honored by their children, is infallibly true and just; and grounds an
obligation in all children to honor their Parents: in virtue of this general
Principle applied this particular Man and woman that are your Parents, you are
obliged to honor them; but are you infallibly assured that these are your
Parents? not at all: are not you not withstanding obliged to honor them? is it
rashness or folly in you to honor them? for though the general Principle that
Parents must be honored be infallibly true and just, yet you are not infallibly
assured, that this general Principle is duly applied to these in particular;
but for your obligation that is not requisite; its sufficient that you are
morally assured: this is our case in the adoration of the Host. And hence we
cannot: but condemn your intolerable rashness in saying that, its an
intolerable boldness to aver, that there is the same reason for the adoration
of the Host as there is for the adoration of Christ's Divinity; for if you
understand our Doctrine, which is that there is as much reason for adoring an
Host truly consecrated as there is for adoring the Divinity of Christ; it is
most manifestly true, whereas Faith teaches us that the Host truly consecrated
is God and man, Jesus Christ really present. If you do not understand our
doctrine its intollerablerashness in you to censure what you do not understand.

Half Communion.
We will declare our Tenet by a comparison of the Communion, with the Sacrament
of Baptism; both are commanded by Christ: if one be not born again by water
and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the King dom of Heaven Io. c. 6. and in
the same chap. if you do not eat the sllesh of the son of Man, and drink his
blood you shall not have life in you.

In the Sacrament of Baptism, you must distinguish the substance and essence of
it, from the circumstances and manner of receiving it. The substance and
essence of it consists, in being regenerated by water; for that is required by
Christ expressly in the text; the manner how this regeneration is made, is by
one total immersion of the Body in water; or by three distinct immersions; or
without any total immersion, but by sprinkling some principal part of the Body
with water* what concerns the essence of this Sacrament, to be by water, is
indispensably requisite; cannot be altered: what concerns the manner of
receiving it; Christ left that arbitrary to the Church, and did not oblige
either to one total immersion, nor to three, nor to sprinkling but to either of
the three ways. Hence it is, that though Christ did baptize the Apostles with
a total immersion of their Bodies; as Ancient Authors do auerr, (if by three or
one immersion we know not) though this manner of Baptizing by a total
immersion was practiced by the first age; and some ages of the Church; and that
we do not read that Baptism should have been administered in those ages by a
sprinkling of the Body with water; yet the Church in succeeding ages, for just
reasons requiring it, has several times altered this manner; some time they
ordained that Baptism should be given with three total immersions; in hatred of
the Heresy of them that denied three persons in God; and to signify that there
was in God, but unity as well in Person as in Nature, would not baptize but
with one immersion. Some time, the Church commanded Baptism to be given with
one immersion, in opposition of Heretics, that would not baptize but with
three: to signify that the three Persons were of different Natures. Thus you
will find that in the 50. Canon of the Apostles three immersions are commanded;
in the 4. Council of Toledo, but One: S. Gregory writing to S. Leander, says
it may be administered either of both ways: and lastly the Church in
consideration that many Infants especially in the Northren Kingdoms through the
Coldness of the Climat, dyed by the total immersion of their Bodies, commanded
the Sacrament should be administered with the sprinkling of some principal part
of the Body with water; and this manner is used, also by the Protestants; who
do not rebuke the Church for omitting the triple immersion practiced by the
Apostles.

Thus in the Eucharist we must distinguish the essence of it, from the
circumstances: That consists in eating and drinking the Body and blood, either
under Accidents of bread alone, or wine alone, or bread and wine together; this
is indispensably requisite: to neither in particular did Christ oblige us, but
left it arbitrary to the Church to determine as times, and just occasions
required: and that Christ did not oblige us to any of those different manners:
in particular, but left it arbitrary to the Church; first the text it self
declares it, for when he gave the Cup, he did not absolutely command the use of
it saying Do this in commemoration of me, but, Do this, as often as you shall
drink, in commemoration of me; which is not a command of Drinking, but when we
shall drink, to do it in commemoration of him. Secondly we have a positive
example of Christ himself, that once gave the Communion in the accidents of
bread alone, to his disciples in the way toward Emaus: we have no positive
example in Scripture that Christ should baptize some times by sprinkling the
Body with water, sometimes by one total immersion, and yet we confess, that
Baptism may be administered any of these three ways, as the Church shall
ordain; we have no positive example that Christ should have given the
Eucharist, sometimes in Leven, sometimes in Azim bread; and yet the Church may
give it in either: and having a positive example that he gave the Sacrament
once in bread and wine, and once, at least, in bread alone, why cannot we
conclude that the Church may do so also. Christ gave the Sacrament at night; is
it therefore it cannot be given in the morning? Christ gave it after the
corporal repast; is it therefore it cannot be received fasting? Christ washed
his Apostles feet when he gave it, is it therefore needful to wash the
receivers feet?

That non obstante of the Council of Constance that so much surprises poor Mr
Sall, as if the Council had been presumptious in prohibiting the use of the
Chalice, having confessed that Christ and the Apostles gave it to the
faithful, argues nothing of presumption; for as the Council knew that Christ
and the Apostles gave the Cup to the Layty, so it knew also that sometimes they
gave only the Bread, and thereby did understand that it was left in the power of
the Church to give the Sacrament in either of both kinds. Upon this ground did
the Council of Constance, and does the Church now prohibit the Chalice, just
reasons moving them to it. First, that if the Cup should be given, that would
hinder the frequent Communion, to which the Church does exhort us much; for
wherethe wine is scant and dear, and the Communicants thousands in number; the
expenses would be great: secondly People would conceive a horror against the
Communion, if they were obliged to drink out of the same Cup with sickly
Persons, perhaps with contagious diseases. Thirdly the Communion would be
morally impossible to many, that can not endure the taste of wine. Fourthly the
danger of the effusion of some drops in a great multitude of Communicants,
these and many other reasons have moved the Church to command the use of the
bread alone.

Here indeed comes very pertinently Mr Salls argument against the real
Presence. The Communion under both kinds is not needful; neither for the
verifying of Christ's words in the institution of the Sacrament; nor for the
effects, which by it are conveyed unto us: not for the effects conveyed, whereas
what Christ promised to the Receivers of the bread and Cup, he promises to the
Receivers of the bread alone. He that eats this bread shall live for ever, Io.
6.38. which he repeats three times in that chap. is not this all that is
promised to the Receivers of the Bread and Cup? not for the verifying of Christ
his words, for that text Io. 6. (which is the strongest that our adversaries
can allege) if you do not eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood
you shall not have life in you. The particle and, which seems to require the
taking of the Cup, as well as the bread, Bellar. l. 4. de Euch. c. 25. and
Suar. in 3. par. disp. 71. sect. 2. do manifestly prove that it must be
understood disiunctiuly, and signify or, and the sense of the text is, if you
do eat the flesh of the son of Man or drink his blood, etc. And that in the
Hebrew or Syriach language, (wherein Christ did speak) it signifyes so, and
that the Apostle S. John writing in Greek, retained the Hebrew Phrase,, Now
that the particle and which usually is Copulative, somtymes in Scripture
signifyes disiunctiuly, they prove it by several examples of Scripture, as when
S. Peter was asked an alms Act. 3. he answered, I have no silver and Gold,
meaning that he had neither silver nor Gold, otherwise the excuse was
frivolous. Ex. 15. and 21. He that will kill his Father and Mother, let him
dye, the sense is Father or Mother, Psalm. 1. the impious shall not rise in
judgment, and the sinners in the Council of the Just. The sense is nor the
sinners. So in that text if you do not eat the flesh of the son of Man, and
drink his blood, etc. The word and, must be taken in a disjunctive sense, and
signify, he that will not eat his flesh nor drink his blood; which is declared
by Christ his subsequent words, He that eats this bread, shall live for ever;
signifying, that eating alone, and consequently, or drinking alone was
sufficient.

But say you Christ Mat. 26. after giving the bread, and commanding to Eat,
gave the Cup and said, drink ye all of this. If the Apostles only, were
commanded to drink, they only were commanded to eat, and so as the Layty is
excluded from drinking, they must be also excluded from eating: and if the
command of eating did reach to the Layty, the command also of drinking did
extend to them.

For to answer this Objection, you must observe the difference betwixt a
sacrifice, and a Sacrament; a sacrifice is a worship of God by the oblation of
some visible thing which we offer in homage of his greatness; so that a
sacrifice is directed to God, and consists in an Action exhibited to his honor
A Sacrament is a sensible sign given to a Creature for some spiritual invisible
effect: so that the Nature of a Sacrament consists in the Reception of a
visible sign by Gods Creatures; and is directed to them for a spiritual effect*
The Eucharist is a Sacrifice, a Sacrament. Its a sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood under the Accidents of bread and wine, offered to God in representation
of Christ's body sacrificed on the Cross; and that the representation should be
full and complete, it was ordained in bread to signify his body broken for us,
and in the liquid species of wine to represent his blood effused. This
sacrifice is offered not only by the Priest, and for the Priests that
consecrats but by and for the whole congregation; but because each Person of
the multitude is not the immediate Minister of the sacrifice, but all do offer
it by the hands of consecrated Persons, on whom Christ laid the commend of
sacrificing, Do this in commemoration of me, commanding them to do, as then he
did; it is not need full that each particular of the congregation should
receive, either the bread or the wine consecrated, as it is a sacrifice; but
that the immediate Minister who offers it for all, should receive both. Hence I
confess that Christ in the institution of this Sacrifice in the last supper*
directed his commands of eating and drinking only to the Apostles and their
successors; which he then consecrated Ministers of the Sacrifice; and that
neither the word Drink nor eat in those texts extend to oblige the Layty.

But the Eucharist is also a Sacrament, for that very body and blood of Christ,
which he ordained to be a sacrifice to God under the accide^ts of bread and
wine, he ordained them to be given under the same Accidents to man for the
spiritual nourishment of his soul. I say under the same Accidents, not that
both kind of Accidents of bread and wine are needful for the perfect
receiving of a Sacrament but either; for the Eucharist in the Accidents of
bread alone, is a sensible sign containing the body and blood of Christ, which
nourishes the soul and gives life everlasting, He that eats this bread shall
live for ever therefore its a perfect Sacrament: whence I conclude, that since
it is given to Creatures as a Sacrament, and not as a Sacrifice, its sufficient
they receive under the sensible signs either of bread alone or wine alone; for
in either its a perfect Sacrament; and only in both a perfect Sacrifice. If you
ask where then (if not in the words of the last supper) was there any
obligation laid on us to receive the Eucharist Sacramentally? I answer, Io. 6.
if you do not eat the flesh of the son of Man, etc.

Mr Sall concludes, that by Suarez his confession, 3. p. disp. 42. s. 1. the
Accidents of bread and wine are the constitutes of the Sacrament: consequently
by taking away the Cup, we deprive the Layty of the Sacrament. Suarez says,
that the Accidents of bread and wine, and either of bread or wine, are
constituts of the Sacrament, and throughout the whole disput. 71. largely
proves in three sections that the whole essence of the Sacrament is contained
in either kind.

VVorshipp of Images.
Mr Sall says the worship of Images is expressly prohibited in the 20. Chap.
Ex. which text also expressly prohibits the making of graven Images, or the
lyknefs of any thing that is in heaven above, and on the earth, or under the
earth or in the waters, and then adds in a distinct verse thou shall not adore
nor worship them. If Mr Sall will admit no interpretation of that text, but
understand it literally; the Protestants are also transgressors, who make
pictures of the King, Queen and several other things, and yet the text
prohibits the making of the likness of any thing. If he will interpret the text
to signify, no image must be made to be adored; we say the text does not only
prohibit the adoring of them, but the making of them; if notwithstanding he
will still insist upon his interpretation; then he must give us also leave to
give our interpretation, which is, that God prohibited Images to be adored as
Gods, or as the representations of false Gods (which are properly I dols) and
then enters thequestion which of both interpretations, his, or ours, is the
true one, which none can decide but an infallible living Judge, to which we
both must be bound to submit.

That God did no prohibit the making of Images, or the lykness of things Divine
and Human (as the letter of the text sounds) our adversaries must confess; for
he commanded the Ark of the Testament should be made Ex. 25. the Brazen Serpent
to be set up. Number. 21. which Christ says, (Io. 3.) was a representation of
himself; That he did not prohibit all manner of worship and adoration of Images
representations, and lykness of things, which are in heaven above and earth,
its also manifest; for he commanded the Brazen Serpent to be set up, that the
people looking on it, should be healed; and though Mr Sall would persuade us,
that no adoration was to be given to it, yet certainly none can deny, but, That
looking on it, was with an inward reverence and veneration, as on an instrument
of Gods merices to them: and Adoration or worship consists properly, in the
inward affection of the mind. Besides, the Ark of the Testament, which Calvin
himself, super Psalm. 105. confesses to be an image of God Arca erat imago Dei
was still religiously worshipped by the Jews, none permitted to touch it but
consecrated persons, carried often in Procession by David, Reg. 4.3. Reg. 8.
and Iosue 6. adored by Iosue and the Israelits prostrated on the ground be fore
it; Iosue 7.6. But what the Protestants will never answer; that the Lords
supper is a representation of Christ his passion, a figure of his Body and is
religiously worshipped by them, if they do what S. Paul requires 1. Corin.
11.28. by this we see, that the text must not be understood literally,
prohiting all worship, but prohibiting to be worshipped as Gods, the world
being then plunged in Idolatry, some adoring the very statues and Images as
Gods, others adoring the statues and images, as the pictures of several things
which they believed to be Gods, as Jupiter Venus etc.

Azor, says he, instit. Mor. to. 1. l. 9. c. 6. declares it to be the constant
judgment of Diuins, that the Image is to be honored with the same worship
vvhervvith that is worshipped, vvherof it is an Image. Azor has no such words;
and you add falsely that it is our constant Tenet. Our Doctrine is declared by
the 7. Genesis Council which is Nicen. 2. (and after by Trent and others) that
Council decrees Images must be adored, and, does not determine how that
adoration must be called; but only excludes the Adoration of Latria, which is
that, which we give to God. The Diuins after this Council dispute, what
adoration is it that must be exhibited to them: some say only a Relative,
others, an Absolut Adoration, some say an Adoration of Latria improperly and
for Gods sake, to whom only a proper Latria is due; and these that speak of
this improper Latria, are checked by others, because though by scholastical
subtilities they may be understood in a Catholic sense, yet that expression
sounds harsh to pious ears, and generally all Diuins do censure any that
should out of the school propose those subtilities to vulgar ears. But what
they all agree in, and we believe, that they must not be adored with that
Adoration, wherwhith God is adored, and we all say with Epiph. who was present
at that Nicen Council: Act. 6. non indignas habemus imagines honor veneratione
ac salutatione, debitamque adorationem illis dare debemus, sieve igitur (observe
these words) placebit adorationem, sieve salutationem appellare; idem erit, modo
sciamus excludi Latriam; haec enim est alia, a simplici adoratione. we judge
Images worthy of honor and adoration, and we ought to exhibit it to them:
call that adoration as you please, so it be not Latria, its all alyke what you
call it: for Latria is different from an ordinary and simple adoration. Let
some particular Diuins therefore discourse as they please, its not our
obligation to excuse them, we believe with the Church an Adoration, but no
Latria.

Petauius, says he, agreat Antiquary, declares, that for the four first
Centuries there was little or no use of Images, in the Oratoryes of
Christians; I cannot imagine, to what purpose does Mr Sall bring these
quotations of Petauius, Azor, Iacobus de Graffys, if it be not to let his
Auditorie or Reader know, that he is versed in Authors. This proves that the
Primitive Church, did use Images, though not so much as now they do: and
Petauius gives in that very place Dogm: Theol. to 5. l. 15. cap. 13. the
reason, why they were not more frequently used; because the world converted
from Paganism, that believed in stocks and stones, and some of them, that their
Gods were Bodies and not pure Spirits; to shun the occasion of a relaps into
these errors, and to withdraw the people from any apprehensions of Corporality
in God, Images were but little used, nay in some places where the danger was
greater they were absolutely prohibited; and Sanderus l. 2. de cultu imaginum c.
4. says this was the reason why the Council of Elibert prohibited the use of
Images. S. Gregory, whose words you cite, would have the people, kept from an
Idolatrous worship of Images and pretended no more. Not only Nichephorus
Calixtus, but many this day of the Catholic Church do hold it absurd to paint
Images of the Father, son and Holy Ghost, as they are in their proper substance
and Nature; nor does the Catholics use it as you falsely criminat them, but
they paint the Father in the form of an Ancient Man, as he appeared to the
Prophet Daniel, the son in human shape, and the Holy Ghost in the figure of a
Dove as he appeared in the River Jordan.

Vasquez speaks not a word of Images in the place cited by you 3. p. disp. 94.
but 3. p. Disp. 103.5.4. he says Images also, as well as Idols, are prohibited
in the first Commandment: and what then? Vasquez was mistaken as well as you:
but you far more; for he says in that place, it was not because the adoration
of Images was in it self naught, as you say; for you say its Idolatry; but
because it was obnoxious in those times to the danger of falling into Idolatry;
and therefore prohibited: but this danger ceasing (as in the Law of Grace,
Images may and ought to be adored, and not prohibited by that commandment: if
he speaks consequently or no its not my business to examine it. You say God
commanded the Brazen serpent to be broken, because the people worshipped it: 2.
Reg. 13.4. but the text will inform you well, if you set prejudice aside, that
they began to adore it for God, as they did the molten Calf: and therefore it
was prohibited. You say our people commits many disorders in adoring I mages; y
deny any such abuses that may reach to Idolatry: and that the Authority which
God has given to govern us, and which we are bond to obey, is to take
cognizance of that, which when they do, and prohibit Images, we will obey
them; in the mean time we will give you and your Church leave to bark at the
Moon.

But I must mind you of one mistake for to conclude this discourse, Clemens
Alexandrinus, say you, Hom. 7. (I pray where have you seen, or any other,
Homilies of Clemens Alexandrinus? but this is not the mistake that I am to
advertise you of) and in his Paraenesis, speaking of Images in general
declares thus: we have no Images in the world, it is apparently forbidden
to us, to exercise that deceitful art for it is written etc. you are mistaken
Mr Sall, and it cannot be but maliciously, if you have read his Paraenesis, for
he does not speak of Images in general, but of Idols, and such as were adored
for Gods by the Gentiles, to whom he directed that Paraenesis dissuading them
from Idolatry, to the worship of one true God. This is a matter of fact, let
the Reader peruse the Author himself, and he will find that you are mistaken.

Hence we conclude that Images of Christ and his saints cannot be called
Idols. For an Idol is a representation of a God that is not, or a Deyty that
has no being; Images of Christ and the saints are representations of things
that have a real Being: and to say that Christ his image is an Idol, is to say,
that Christ, who is the Prototype has no real Being. we conclude that the
making of Images was never prohibited; for God made man to his own Image,
commanded many Images to be made; the Ark of the Testament, the Brazen serpent,
and several others mentioned in Scripture: and the Protestants them selves make
many Images of Kings, Queens, and saints. we conclude, that all worship to
Images is not prohibited for we worship the King particularly, because he
represents Gods Power and greatness; nor all religious worship of Images is
prohibited, for we give a Religious worship to the Holy name of Jesus, to the
Bible beyond all other Books, because it is the word of God, and the
Protestants to the Sacrament, which they say is but a figure of Christ's body:
Reason proves we ought to worship the Images of Christ and his saints; for it
is apparent, that there is such a relation and connection, betwixt the image and
the thing whereof it is an image, that the honor or deshonor don to the image
for being a representation of the Prototype, is esteemed to be don to the
Prototype: as when a man is by public justice burnt in Effigy his person is
branded by the execution don in his image, and no man but will think the injury
don to his picture, an affront to his own person. we therefore must worship
the Images of Christ and the saints, because they are their representations,
and in this undoubtedly we worship them, for the relation and connection that
is betwixt the representation and thing represented: this worship rests not
in the Image, but passes to the Prototype for whose sake we worship it. And
therefore it may be called a transitiue, or relative worship; The adoration of
Latria due to God we deny to Images, and detest it as much as you: and when
we declare our Doctrine and Faith so clearly, its malice and known prejudice,
to accuse us of Idolatry, which consists in adoring as God, what is not God.

Inuoeation of Saints.
Mr Sall I hope does not forget that Maxim of the schools, argumentum multum
probans nihil probat, that an argument which proves more than the disputant
pretends, or can pretend to prove; proves nothing, but must be fallacious; and
doubtless any Christian will say that an argument that proves directly against
the Scripture, is but a Sophistry. Let us hear his argument against the
Invocation of Saints. God says he Romans 8.34. has appointed his son Jesus to
make intercession for us, who is more compassionat, better able, and more
willing than any Saint or Angel to help us, and his prayers are efficacious;
for, says he, Io. 5.16. Whatsoever we ask the Heavenly Father in his name,
he will give it us.

This argument proves directly against Scripture; for it proves that we must
not ask the Saints on earth to pray for us, nay it proves we must not pray for
ourselves, but remit all to Christ; who knows ourwants, is more compassionat
toward us than the Saints on earth are, nay than we are of ourselves; loves
us better than they love us, or we love ourselves; is better able, and more
willing to help us, than they are, and than we are ourselves; on the other
side his prayers are more efficacious, why then should we ask the prayers of
Saints on earth, or pray for ourselves. Yet Scripture commands us to pray for
ourselves, and recommends unto us, that we should ask the prayer of our
Brethren, and the Protestant Church also does practice it. Therefore this
argument proves directly against the Scriprure and against the practice of the
faithful.

Its certain Christ loves us better, than the Saints or Angels do, and is more
able and willing; but it is also certain, that he loves the Saints of heaven,
better than he loves us, poor sinners on earth; (I know not what opinion Mr
Sall may have of himself) and so what he would not do for us on earth, for our
sakes; we may expect, he may do it for the sake of those that he loves most,
which are the Saints and Angels in heaven. For we have examples in Scripture
of some Blessings conferred on the living on earth, not for the sake of any
living on earth, but of Saints departed. 3. Reg. 11.15. God shown mercy to
Salamon, in differring the punishment which he deserved sor his Idolatry, not
for Salamons sake, but for David his Fathers sake, (who was dead) 4. Reg.
19.34. God protected Jerusalem against the Assyrians, nor for Ezechias the
Kings sake, though he loved him; nor for Isaias his sake that then lived, and
was a Holy Prophet, but for his own sake and David's sake his servant. Thus
we see, that though God loves us more than the Saints departed love us, yet he
loves them more than us, and gives us for their sake what he would not grant us
for our own.

He brings the words of S. Peter Act. 4.12. that there is no salvation in any
other, and no other Name under Heaven, whereby we may be saved; all which we
acknowledge, and yet Protestants as well as we do ask the prayers of their
Brethren on earth; and why may not we ask the prayers of the Saints in
heaven? for what we expect by their intercession, and the value and worth of
their prayers, is altogether grounded, and springs from the Merits of that name
of Jesus. This is all that Mr Sall alleadges against this Tenet of ours, iugde
you what strong considerations moved him to desert our Church. He ads the folly
of two Spanish friars that beyond all measure, even of the Catholic Principles,
as he grants, page 75. exceeded in the praises of Saints, and he would be no
longer a Catholic, since there were such madmen amongst us, and perhaps some
Protestants will have the like encouragement for to leave that Church, since Mr
Sall is entered into their Congregation. But if, by your acknowledgment, these
excesses are against our Principles; therefore you grant, that our Principles
do not wrrant any excesses in the Invocation of Saints; why therefore did you
leave the Church, whose Principles are sound? because some friars played the
fool? a pretty reason.

Now that I have answered your objections Mr Sall; y pray answer me to this
discourse; that the Saints in Heaven do pray for us, I prove it thus; and, if I
be not mistaken, evidently in the Principles of Religion.

The Saints in Heaven know evidently that there is a Militant Church on earth,
for they evidently know that the Resurrection or general Judgment is not as yet
come; whereas they know that they have not assumed their Bodies; consequently
they know the world is not ended, and that there is a militant Church on earth.
Also they know evidently that this militant Church is in continual warfare,
still assaulted by Satan with temptations, beset with spiritual dangers: for
this is the Essence of a Militant Church; and in this it is distinguished from
the Triomphant; that This, is out of all danger; That is in continual battle:
by this it appears that the Saints in Heaven, are not altogether ignorant of
our affairs on earth, as our Adversaries would have them to be. Now I proceed
in my discourse, can it be imagined that the Saints in Heaven, knowing our
temptations, and battles with so fierce an enemy as Satan, should be so deuoid
of Charity, as not to pray for us? I know not what you may answer, but I know
what some answer: that they can not pray; for, being ravished with the
possession of an acomplisht Bliss, they cannot mind any thing else, but the
glory of the object which they see. But this is in credible, that the Devils in
the bitterness of their torments should not forget us, nor the hight of
miseries should not allaytheir malice, but still tempt us; and the saints and
Angels should abate their Charity in the greatness of their glory: specially
that Christ (says S. Paul Romans 8.) prays inessantly for us; the possession
therefore of the glory, cannot hinder the saints prayers for us.

But I prove that their glory obliges them to pray for us: you cannot deny, but
that in the possession of that glory, they ardently desire, the exaltation of
Gods name, the increase of his glory, the confusion of his enemy Satan; and
what greater confusion of Satan, what greater exaltation of Gods name and
glory, than the victory of men against Satan, the victory of those that are
tempted by him, and finally men's salvation; undoubtedly then, whereas they
evidently know that the Militant Church is in continual battle against that
enemy, in continual temptations, and dangers of damnation; the very possession
of that glory makes them desire ardently, and wish our victoryes, and
salvation: this wish and desire of theirs, you cannot deny but that it is
manifest to God; and what else, I ask you, is a Prayer, but a pious desire of a
thing, represented to God? it is evident therefore that the saints and Angels
pray for us to God.

This discourse, you will say, proves that the triumphant Church, and each
particular of it, knows the wants of the Militant Church in general, but not of
each particular, or of any particular person of the Militant Church, therefore
we particular Persons ought not to pray to any of the Triumphant Church,
whereas they do not know if we pray, or any of our particular affairs.

But the argument proves at least that the saints departed and Angels are
Mediators for the Militant Church in general; and so all Mr Salls discourse,
for the only Mediatourship of Christ, falls to ground: more over I will prove
by Scripture and reason that they know the temptations, and dangers of
particular Persons of the Militant Church and consequently the former discourse
proves, that they pray for particular persons, and hear their prayers.

Lu. 15. its said that the Angels rejoice at (and consequently know) the
conversion of a sinner; the Devils know the state and condition of particular
persons, and by their temptations allures them to sin: the glorious Spirits
therefore, who in their natural knowledge are equal to, and in supernatural
surpass them, do know no less; neither is it credible that God should permit
the Devil to know man's condition to tempt him, and should not permit the
glorious Spirits, especially our Angels keepers to help and defends us: the
Protestants ought not to question this; whereas in their Common Prayer Book,
they have this Collect on S. Michael the Archangels day the 29. of Sept: God
who in a vvonderfull manner dispenseths the Ministeries of Men and Angels,
grant, that as they do thee constantly assist in heaven, so by thy appointment,
they may succor and defend us on earth. God therefore uses the Ministry of
Angels to help men, and consequently Angels know men's particular affairs. That
there are witches in the world may not be denied, if we will not condemn most
Commonwealths of folly and injustice, which punish many for such, and if we
will not laugh at Scripture which relates 1. Reg. 28. that Saul by the help of
a witch raised the Spirit of Samuel; that the witchs inuoke and are heard by
the Devils its out of doubt; and shall the Glorious Spirits be deaf to them
that inuoke them? lastly many examples are recorded in Scripture of the
ministry exhibited by Angels to men. 3.19.6. Reg. 1. Genesis 48.16. and 16.4.
Reg. 19.34.

And that saints also departed know our affairs and do assist us, the Scripture
does witness it: Saul, all fraught with afflictions, finding no comfort in the
living, betook himself to the Spirit of Samuel deceased, 1. Reg. 28. this
proves that men in those days did believe that the saints departed know our
aflairs, and can help us, and Samuels answer to him does evidence the same.
Elias departed this world, that's to say all commerce with human kind, the 18.
year of Iosaphas Reygn, as appears 3. Reg. 22. and 4. Reg. 2. and 3. Iosaphat
dyed about seven years after, which was the 25. year of his reygn, as appears
3. Reg. 22. Ioram succeeded to Iosaphat, and Elias that departed from all human
commerce seven years before, writ a letter to him, rebuking him for his
wickedness, and threatening him with Gods indignation. can there be amore
manifest proof that the saints departed know our affairs, and do help us? S.
Peter 2. epist. c. 1. tells the Christians to whom he writ, that his death was
at hand, and that he would be mindful of them after his departure from life,
and help them to be mindful of his Doctrine.

Can it then be doubted but that we may prudently, and ought to pray to them,
by whose means the Scripture assures us that others did receive Gods blessings?
either directing our prayers immediately to God, praying that for his B. Mothers
sake, for S. Peter's sake, for David's sake (this prayer is often made by the
ancient Prophets in Scripture, Propter David seruum tuum non auertas faciem
Christi tui. Psalm. 131. Memento Domine David and omnis mansuetudinis eius. ps.
131.) he would have compassion of us? or directing our prayers immediately to
the saints and Angels, beseeching them to help us, and pray for us; as Jacob
Genesis 48. prayed that God, in whose sight he walked, and the Angel, who
delivered him from evils, should bless his children. This is it that is
understood in that Article of our Creed, The communion of saints, that the
saints of the Triumphant Church in heaven, of the Militant on earth, and the
Patient in Purgatory, have a Communication of prayers and merits betwixt them,
that those of heaven pray for us, and we by our prayers and suffrages, do help
them in Purgatory.

Mr Sall thinks it extrauagancy, that we call the B. virgen our Sauioress and
Redeemer; and if he be impartial he must call the Prophet David extrauagant
also, when he says (speaking of the saints) Psalm. 81. I have said, ye are
Gods, and the sons of the highest all: And perhaps he will not stick to blame
God himself, who says to Moses Ex. 7.1. behold I have made thee a God to
Pharaoh? we call the B. V. so, because those names may be given in an improper
sense to the chief Instrument of our Redemption, as she was, being the Mother
of him who is truly our Redeemer. we build more Churches says Mr Sall, and
say more prayers to some saints than to God: we answer that all the honor we
exhibit to saints is given to God, for whose sake we honor them. To them we
build Churchs for his sake because they are his great servants. He assures us
in the Ghospel that what we do to one of his little ones we do it to him;
much more we may be assured, we do to him and for him, what we do to, and
for his saints in heaven, whereas himself tells us, Io. 12 26. if any will
serve me, my Father will honor him. Much more ought they to be honored by us.

Purgatory and Indulgences.
Mr Sall rallyes about the situation of Purgatory and the nature of the
torments that there are suffered, if cold, heat, rain, or tempest etc all which
is to no purpose, for what is controuerted betwixt Protestants and Catholics
is not, what place is Purgatory in, or what are the payns inflicted there; but
if there be any such thing as Purgatory: the Protestants deny any third
receptacle of souls departed, but must go either to heaven or Hell, for where
the tree falls, there it remayns. The orthodox Doctrine is that there is a
Purgatory, where souls departed with venial sins only, or that after the
remission of their mortal sins in this life by the Sacrament of Confession, or
by an act of Contrition, have not don sufficient penance in this life for
their transgressions; must suffer until they satisfy Gods justice to the last
farthing. This is an Article of Faith; but the Church has not determined in
what place is Purgatory; that is a school question: as for the Nature of the
torments there inflicted; its an Article of Faith that they are tormented with
the privation, or banishment from Gods sight: also its of Faith that they are
tormented by fire: but the Church has not determined, what kind of fire is
that, or how it torments; and though Diuins and Fathers speak of other
torments, yet its no Article of Faith, that they suffer this or that, of Cold,
snow or tempest.

To prove our Catholic Tenet, I will first prove; that there is some other
receptacle of Souls departed besides Heaven and Hell of the Damned; secondly I
will prove that there is a Purgatory.

The first is proved by the Article of our Creed, he descended into hell, which
cannot be understood to be the Hell of the damned, for all Christians abhor
the blasphemy of Calvin that says Christ his soul suffered the payns of the
damned: the Protestants give a most obscure interpretation to that clear text;
by the word Hell, say they, is understood the Grave and the sense of the
Article is, that Christ his Body descended into the grave. This is most absurd,
for in the next word before this Article, the descent of his Body to the Grave
is expressly declared, He was crucified, dead, and buried: to be buried what
elss is it, but his Body to descend into the Grave? and after telling us in the
word buried, that his Body was put in the grave, would they again repeat the
same in a distinct Atticle, when they pretended to give us a brief abridgment
of the article of Faith?

S. Peter expounds that Article, 1. ep. 3.19. Being dead in flesh, he descended
in Spirit, to the Spirits that were detained in prison, to preach to them that
were incredulous in the days of Noe. Behold the Article of our Creed
expounded; his Spirit descended after his death, surely it did not descend into
the grave) to the Spirits that were detained in prison; (there was a prison
therefore, where Spirits were detained;) and preached to them, (certainly he
did not preach to them that were in the prison of the damned;) therefore there
was some other prison besides that of the damned, where spirits were detained.

We find Genesis 37.35. that Jacob persuaded by his children that his son Joseph
was killed, and devoured by a Beast, lamented and said, I will descend
mourning unto my son to Hell. Certainly he did not intend to descend unto him
to the grave, for he was persuaded he had none, but was devoured by a Beast;
neither can it be imagined that he intended to descend unto him, to the Hell of
the damned, or believed that his son descended thither; Jacob therefore
believed that there was an other Hell, where his son descended, and he expected
to go after his death. This shocks the whole fabric of the Protestant
dostrin, of no Purgatory; grounded chiefly on the persuasion of no other
receptacle of souls, but Heaven and Hell of the damned.

Now that there is a Purgatory, I prove it: the Protestants deny it, because
that if the sin be forgiven in this life, then all the punishment due of man
for that sin is also forgiven, and so there is no Purgatory: if the sin was not
forgiven, then it carries the soul to Hell, for in the other world no sin is
forgiven. But I prove that though the sin be forgiven by the Sacrament, or
Contrition, yet some temporal punishment is due of the sinner to God, to
satisfy his justice, is it not the daily practice of Preachers, to exhort
sinners, even the reconciled sinners, to do penance, for their sins? what
penance did not Magdalen do, even after that Christ had told her, that her
sins were forgiven? what great penance did not David, S. Peter, and other
reconciled sinners do? this shows that the Faithful were allways persuaded
that penance must be don, though the sin be forgiven: and it is no aswer to
say, that these austerityes practiced by them were not for the sins they
committed, and were forgiven; but for to arm them against future temptations;
for we have many passages of Scripture which shows punishments inflicted by
God on the reconcilied sinners, for their sins, after they were forgiven.

For example original sin is forgiven by Baptism, yet the corporal death, which
is a punishment inflicted on mankind for that sin, as S. Paul says Romans 6. and
5. is not forgiven, but inflicted on all. The Prophet Nathan declared to David
that his sin of Adultery was forgiven him, yet in punishment of that sin, the
Child got by that Adultery, should dye. 2. Reg. 12 Iask, was that puuishment
justly due of David after his sin was forgiven or no? If not, why should God
inflict it for that sin? if it was due; let us suppose that David had dyed
before that punishment was inflicted, (which might have happened, and daily
happens to others; who dye before they do any penance for the sins that by the
Sacrament were forgiven) surely he must have paid that debt in the other life,
before he could enter into Heaven; where no soul, guilty of any thing, can
enter. Therefore there must be some other place where sinners, whose sins have
been forgiven, and that have not don sufficient penance in life must be
punished in the other world. A Prison I say where the last farthing may be
paid, and that being paid, the prisonner may get out, for our Savior mentions
such a prison after this life. Mat. 5. and Luc. 12. but the last farthing
cannot be paid in the Hell of the damned, for the debt is due there, for
Eternity; therefore there must be some other prison for souls departed besides
the Hell of the damned.

Now if you read Mr Salls discourse upon this subject, you shall not find that
he brings any text of Scripture, that as much as seemingly says there is no
Purgatory; and yet the Reformers did separate themselus from the Church of
Rome, whereof they were members, upon pretext of errors (whereof Purgatory is
one) which they would prove by clear Scripture to be errors, and contrary to
Gods written word: and not one text does Mr Sall, nor can he bring any clear
text to prove no Purgatory; much less will you find any evident, or conuincing
reason in his discourse to impugn our Tenet: what he does is to answer some
texts (the chief he says, but he is mistaken) wherewith Bellarmin proves it,
and gives only Bellarmins own answers, and thus he would persuade us out of our
Doctrine.

But first allow those texts that Bellarmin brings, do not convince the
existence of a Purgatory; allow that texts which I here allege, do not
manifestly prove it: This, no man of judgment will deny, but that these texts
and glosses upon them, have as much probability, as much appearance of truth,
as any that you bring or can bring against Purgatory: that your answers to
those texts are not evidently true, for they are Bellarmins own answers, for
the most part at least, and he reiects them very plausibly, since therefore we
were for so many ages in the actual belief of the doctrine, before you and your
Reformers came to the world, why shall we be bet from it, if you cannot show
stronger reasons or texts against it, than we have for it. Nay though we
brought no reasons at all to prove our doctrine, but this that we received it as
the word of God from so many precedent ages; is it reason that for you, or your
Reformers pleasure, without a conuincing text or reason to prove it false, we
must disclaim it? allow that those texts do not clearly prove Purgatory, that's
nothing; we are not Actors but Defendants, its not our obligation to prove,
but yours; we will defend ourselves against your proofs, and so hold our old
doctrine.

But now I prove that those texts, which Mr Sall judges inconclusiue, do prove
what Bellarmin intended the first is out of 2. Match. 12. a collection being
made, he sent 12000. drachmas of silver to Jerusalem, to have sacrifice offered
for the sins of the dead because he did consider that these, who received death
with piety, would have a very good reward it is therefore a holy and holsom
thought, to pray for the dead, that they may be delivered from sins. This is
the text though these Books were Canonical Scripture, says he, yet the text
proves not Purgatory, for prayers for the dead, may be made for other ends,
than that of drawing souls out of Purgatory; first because that God being still
present to all spaces of Eternity, foreseeing now, what prayers will be made
many years and ages hence, for persons that are now, at this present, dying,
and being a good Paymaster that oftentyms gives before hand, the rewards of
what services will be don for the future, may now give to the person dying the
assistance of his grace and mercy, which he foresees will be in future times
asked for them by friends that will pray for them: which Doctrine, says he, is
taught by the Romish writers, and acording to this Doctrine we may say, that
the effect of those prayers made for the Jews by Judas Machabeus, was not do
draw them out of Purgatory after thy were dead, but that God should have given
them for reward of those prayers a Good death.

Observe, Reader, what is it that Bellarmin intended to prove by that argument,
l. 1. de Purg. c. 3.. ad sextum dico he speaks thus. Our consequence proceeds
not thus: they prayed for the slain; therefore there is Purgatory: but thus.
They prayed for the remission of the sins of the dead: therefore they judged,
that after their death they might be in Purgatory; that they might after death
have some sins that needed expiation: and this praying for the dead, to deliver
them from sin after their death, is commended by Scripture: consequently sins
may be forgiuin after death, consequently there is a Purgatory after death,
otherwise the Scripture would have erred in praising, prayers for the remission
of the sins of the dead. And what man of common sense does not see, that these
conclusions follow out of that text. For what Bellarmin pretended and we
pretend to prove out of that passage, is that it was the practice of the Jewish
Church, and the belief of the People of God (and consequently no new invention
of the Catholic Church) that sins may be expiated and forgiven after death and
that prayers were used to be made for the dead, not only for to praise God, for
the rest of the Faithful departed, nor for the mutual comfort of the living in
the death of our friend, nor for our spiritual instruction reflecting on our
own mortality at the sight of death, but as this text expressly says, for the
sins of the dead, that the dead may be delivered from their sins.

That subtility of the Catholic Doctors alleged by Mr Sall, that God
foreseeing the prayers that will be made, may, as a good Paymaster, pay before
hand, is very good, but is not to the purpose: for allow those prayers made for
the slain might have had that effect in this passage, but still returns the
conclusion, pretended by Bellarmin, that the passage proves it was the belief
and practice of the People of God, and praised by Scripture, to pray for the
expiation of the sins of the dead. Moreover it might, and does, lykely, happen
that some dye for whom no prayers are or will be made after death, which our
foreknowing God cannot reward before hand, because they are not in Being nor
will not; if those men dye in venial sin, or without having don sufficient
penance, there must be a Purgatory for them, consequently that subtility
proves not the non Existence of a Purgatory.

Again, says he, that passage, though true, proves not Purgatory, because
those Men dyed in mortal sin, whereas they were found to have under their coats
things consecrated to the Idols. (As the text relates (nor is it true, says
he, what Bellarmin says, that their sin was only venial, because it deserved
Gods vengeance and their death: as if a venial sin, did not de serve that
punishment. Neither does Bellarmin say absolutely it was but a venial sin, but
that perhaps it was no more, because it was committed through ignorance, or
though it might be mortal, yet at the hour of death, especially dying for so
pious and glorious a cause, they might have obtained of God an act af
contrition. And whereas Judas Machabaeus did not know certainly that they were
guilty of Motal sin, he might have prayed for them.

He alleadges other considerations why prayers might be made for the dead,
though there were no Purgatory, first for to praise God for the rest given to
the departed, secondly for our mutual comfort in the death of our friend,
thirdly for our instruction to mind us of our mortality, and says that when in
Ancient Authors we meet prayers to be made for the dead, we must understand,
they were made for these ends, and not for the drawing of souls out of
Purgatory. we confess that those considerations are very good, and that they
were practiced by the Ancient Church (as those words of the Commentaryes upon
Job, futhered on Origin relat) and are still practiced, but we deny that these
are the only considerations for praying for the dead but also for the
remission of their sins, as the former text does evidence; for their ease and
delivery from the payns they suffer after death: and in the Ancient Fathers we
meet (contrary to what Mr Sall auers) prayers for the dead to be made for this
end: nothing more frequent: two examples only I will produce: S. Denis,
Disciple of S. Paul Apostle, I. de Ecc. Hierar. c. 7. p. 3. the venerable
Bishop approaching prays for the dead, and that prayer beseeches the Divine
Clemency, that he may forgive to the dead, all the sins that through human
fraylty he committed: and that he may place him in the light, and region of the
living. Isidorus l. 1. de off. Diu, c. 18. if the Catholic Church did not
believe that sins are forgiven to the Faithful departed, it would neither
make alms, nor offer sacrifice to God for their souls. This is the unanimous
Doctrine of all antiquity, to all which Mr Sall will answer with Calvin, Gchinus
and Peter Martyr that the Ancient Fathers erred: and this is all the answer we
can expect.

He values nothing the text out of Tobias 4. alleged by Bellarmin, yet it
proves clearly what Bellarmin pretended, that it was the practice of the People
of God, to offer alms for the dead. The words fire and water (says he) in the
ps. 66.12. we passed through fire and water, but thou broughtest us out into
a vvealthy place. signify tribulations and crosses of this life, and so that
text proves nothing of Purgatory. Bellarmin aknowledges, it might be thus
interpreted, and in other senses, but says Bellarmin, Origin Hom. 25. in Number.
and S. Ambrose ser. 3. in Psalm. understand by water Baptism, and by fire
Purgatory. And you, Mr Sall, should have told us, what you thought of Origin
and S. Ambrose his interpretation. You will say what your Predecessors of the
Reformation have said, that they erred.

Bellarmin brings the words of Christ Mat. 12. that a sin against the Holy
Ghost, shall not be pardoned in this world nor in the world to come. And
says that S Augustine, S. Greg. Beda, and S. Bernard, draw from this text a
consequence that some sins are pardonable in the other world, nay that this was
the only text wherewith S Bernard did prove Purgatory. M^ Sall says that
consequence does not follow, because, says he, (he takes this reason from
Peter Martyr) a positive does not follow out of a negative, as from saying, the
Duke of venice is not Earl of Dublin, it follows not, therefore some other is
Earl of Dublin. See you Reader, which interpretation you like best if you will
choose to stick to Mr Sall, and Peter Martyr, or to S. Augustine, S. Greg. Bid,
and S. Bernard. His example is frivolous. For it were a ridiculous proposition
to say, the Duke of Venice is not Earl of Dublin, if there were not a Dublin
extant whereof some one may be Earl; so it were ridiculous to say, this sin
shall not be forgiven in the other world itself: if there were not an other,
world where sins may be forgiven; therefore we say, that either we must
acknowledge sins to be pardonable in the other world, or Christ his words to be
sense less: as it were a sense less assertion, to say, pride shall not be
punished in this world, nor in Heaven. When all the world is persuaded before
hand, that Heaven is no place of punishment for pride or any other vice. So we
also grant, that were we to consider the letter only of the text; out of the
words of the Evangelist, Mart. 1.25. we ought to conclude that Joseph knew
Marie after her Chilbirth; but the Scripture interpreted by the Church expounds
unto us by several other texts the sense of that text not to be, as the letter
founds; and Mary to have remained a Virgen continually; and so you bring that
text to no purpose.

Now Mr Sall I will prove, that not only acording to the rule of Prudence, but
also acording to the rules of Faith and Logic, the consequence of Purgatory,
is manifestly euinc'd out of that text: Thus says the text: He that will
speak a word against the son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but he that
will speak against the H. G. it shall not be forgiven him, either in this
world, nor in future. I argue thus: the text denies to a blasphemy against the
H. G. what it grants to a blasphemy against the son of Man. But what it denies
to That, is remission in this life and the other: therefore what it grants to
This is remission in this life, and the other: The text says again in this
place. Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to men, but a blasphemy
against the H. G. Is it nor an evident sequel out this text, that as a
blasphemy against the Spirit is unpardonable so all other sins are pardonable;
but a blasphemy against the Spirit is unpardonable in this world, and in the
future; therefore other sins are pardonable in both.

You will reply, that this argument proves too much; for it proves that as a
blasphemy against the H.G. is unpardonable in the other life, not only as to
the punishment, due to the sin, but also as to the guilt, or fault; so other
sins are pardonable in the other life, not only as to the punishment due to
sin, which is what we pretend; but also as to the fault or guilt of sin; which
is more than we pretend; for we teach that Mortal sins are not forgiven as to
the guilt or fault, in the other world: therefore this argument proves too
much. Answer: that a sin may be said unpardonable, its requisite that Nothing of
it be pardonable; for, as the school Maxim says Negatio totum destruit:
whereas therefore the text imports, that a blasphemy, against the H. G. is
unpardonable in this life and the future, it follows, that nothing either the
guilt or fault of it, or the punishment due to it, be pardoned, either in this
life or the future. But that a sin may be said pardonable it suffices that some
part of it at least may be pardoned; whereas therefore our argument proves, that
sins are pardonable in the other life, its requisite that some part of it be
pardoned or pardonable in the other life; either the guilt of sin, or the
punishment due to it: Not the guilt or fault; as we believe and prove by many
evident arguments: therefore the punishment due to it.

He tells us the doctrine of Purgatory makes men negligent of true repentance,
and satisfaction for their sins in this life, for the hopes it gives of the
Remission of them in Pugatory. But this is incredible, that men being
instructed of the bitterness of the torments of Purgatory, far exceeding all
that can be suffered in this world, should be encouraged to omit the small
penance and pains of this life, for to fusser the far greater and more
excessive pains of Purgatory. It gives (quoth he) occasion to pitiful abuses
of Simony in the valuation of Masses, of cruelty and injustice: and what is
there in the world so sacred and Holy, but the malice of man may abuse? is it
therefore all sacred things must be renounced and abolisht? we condemn the
abuses as well as you; but we must not therefore condemn the Doctrine, but
correct the malice of man that abuses it.

From this of Purgatory he descends to exclaim against Indulgences; which he
pretends to be groundless because Suarez, l. de Defen. fid. c. 15. says that
Indulgences is a remission of the pains of Purgatory, and most falsely auers
that Suarez doubts, if this power be in the Church, whereas in that place he
affirms it is undoubtedly certain the Church has it, and grounds this certainty
on the infinitness of Christ's Merits, which even our Adversaries grant, and on
the power given to the Church, Mat. 18.18. of binding and unbinding; which
power says he, cannot be doubted, but it extends to the Remission of the pains
of Purgatory; for which in that place he brings no other proof but the constant
practice of the Church, which he says is an unquestionable proof; and remits
the more ample proof of this doctrine to To. 4. in 3. p. disp. 48.

Mr Sall judges the doctrine not sufficiently proved, because Suarez alleadges
in this place no other warrant but the ancient custom of the Church, which
Suarez and we hold to be an undoubted proof; This proof and no other does S
Augustine bring to prove Infants Baptism, sermon. 4. de verbis Apost. c. 18. This,
the Authority of our Mother the Church has, against this strenght, against
this invincible wall, whosoever rusheth, shall be crushed in pieces. By the
same he proves the validity of Heretics Baptism, l. 1. contr Crescon. c. 32.
and 33. for which, he says, No examples is brought out of Canonical Scripture,
but that which recommends unto us the Authority of the Church, who teaches
it. S. Chrysostom. upon the words of S. Paul's 2. These. 2. Stand and hold the
Traditions, etc. Hom. 4. speaks thus: Let us account the Tradition of the
Church worthy of belief: it is a Tradition seek no more. And again S. August.
Epist. 118. If the Church through out the whole world practice a thing; to
dispute, whether such a thing can be don, is a most insolent madness. I
conclude then that Suarez sufficiently proved the truth of the doctrine of
Indulgences, having grounded it on the constant practice and custom of the
Universal Church.

You say the doctrine of Indulgence is not so Ancient: and that the first who
began to give these Grants was Gregory the seventh, to the Emperor Henry the
fourth to encourage him and the Christians to war against the Sarazens; as
Baronius relates an. Dom 1084. if all this were true; its older notwithstanding
than Protestancy by many hundred years: But if you have no more skill in
Divinity or Moral Theology, (your Treatise shows well what you know in
Controversy) than you seem to have in History, you are but a fresh water
scholar. That Indulgence you speak of, nor no other to any such purpose, was
not granted by Gregory the seventh, but by Urban the second; nor to Henry the
fourth, who made no war against the Sarazens, but to Henry the Third; not in
the year 1084 but 1095. Neither is this the first grant of Indulgences which
you could meet, if you had read the Histories; Baronius related by you, tells
us that Indulgences were granted by Leo the third the year 847. and by John
the Eight the year 878. Nor is it a good argument; we do not read that
Indulgences were given before; therefore the Power of granting Indulgences
was not in the Church before.

You add that private Bishops granted Indulgences for gathering of Moneys to
build Churches; that is very true, but if Nostre-Dame of Paris was built upon
that account, is not so certain: by that you may see Indulgences are not so
slightly granted as your Ministers do persuade their flock; but on Condition
that the Receivers endeavor to put them selves in the state of Grace by true
repentance of their sins, and that they exercise some pious works of fasting,
Prayers, Alms, deeds, and such others as they, who give the Indulgence,
require: and that the Alms which are enjoined in such cases (though by the
malice of some they may be turned to sinister uses) are designed for pious
uses. You mention some words of the 92. Canon of the Council of Lateran, under
Innocent the Third, and that Council has but 70. Canon in all, nor does the
Council speak any thing in any Canon of Indulgences, its no new practice of
your fraternity, to coin new Canons and texts as you want them.

You cite S. Thom. and S. Bonauen. who relate, some were of opinion, that
Indulgences were but a pious fraud of the Church to draw men to charitable
Acts; its true those saints relate that opinion; but relate not who were the
Authors of it; but only that some did say so, and they condemn it as impious,
and injurious to the Church. S. Bon. in 4. did. 20. q. 6. sed hoc est
Ecclesiae derogare, dicendo eam sub specie mentiri, quod abhorret men's recta.
Thus you only prove by this argument that there were some impious people that
accus^d the Church of being a cheat. And do not you do the like? we embrace
most willingly the aduertisment of Bellar de amiss: Gratiae l. 6. which you
relate (but nothing to your purpose) that in things depending of the freewill
of God, we must affirm nothing but what he has revealed in his Holy Scripture;
but you are mistaken in asserting that God has not revealed the Doctrine of
Indulgence in the Scripture, for that text Mat. 18.18. vvhateuer ye shall
unbind on earth, shall be vnbinded in Heaven signifyes the Power of unbinding
from the pains of Purgatory; you say it does not; and you cite Durandus and
Mayor, who say it does not, and that Indulgences are not found expressly in
Scripture; but I say that though they be not expressly found in scripture, they
are implicitly found there; and you confess in the beginning of your discourse
that we are bound to believe not only what is contained in Scripture, but the
undeniable consequences out of it; out of that text, the Power of untying from
the pains due to sin, is an vndeninable consequence; the Church declares it and
interprets the text so; to whose Authority Dur. and Mayor must yield. And
though there were no text in Scripture, that either explicitly or implicitly
did import Indulgences in particular; yet by Scripture it self we are bound to
believe it, it being the Doctrine of the Church, as S. August: said of Heretics
Baptism l. 1. cont. Crescon. c. 32. and 33. Observe his words, which comes very
appositly to our present subject: Although verily there be brought no example
for this Point (he means the validity of Heretic Baptism, for which he says
there is no text in Scripture) yet even in this Point the truth of the same
Scripture is held by us, while we do that, which the Authority of Scripture
does recommend unto us: that so, because the Holy Scripture cannot deceive us,
who soever is afraid to be deceived by the obscurity of this question, must
have recourse to the Church Concerning it, which without ambiguity the Holy
Scripture does recommend unto us. By which sentence of S. Augustine, you find
that we follow Scripture whylst we follow the Doctrine of the Church, which
the Scripture commands us to hear and obey.

You will perhaps infer out of this discourse a consequence, which may seem to
you absurd, thus: therefore we are bound to believe as an Article of Faith,
what Doctrine the Church proposes to us, though that point in particular be not
contained either explicitly or implicitly in any text of Scripture, only upon
the testimony of the Church: This consequence is true: and the reason is; that
the Church, being Gods infallible Oracle, cannot propose to us as a revealed
Truth but only that Doctrine, which truly is revealed by God: God revealed all
Truths of Religion to the Apostles as we have discoursed in the 6. Chap. the
Apostles delivered all those truths to the Church, to be handed from age to age
to Posterity; the Apostles did not deliver all those Truths in writing, as we
have discoursed in the 2. and 3. chapter but part in writing, and this is
Scripture, part by unwritten Tradition, and this is the Depositum that S. Paul
speaks of to Timothy, the Church is the keeper of this Depositum, and as by
the Scripture we know what written Truths the Apostles delivered; so by the
Church we know assuredly what unwritten Truths they delivered. Now we say
that the Church cannot propose to us as a revealed Truth, but what was
delivered by the Apostles (who doubtless knew and taught to their Disciples all
truths of Religion) to the Church, for we do not say nor believe, that the
Church can coin new Articles of Faith, but only deliver the Old, that, through
carelessness, came to be confusedly known, and almost forgotten; we do not
pretend that the Church has new revelations of new Doctrine, which God did not
deliver to his Apostles, but that she has the assistance of Gods Spirit to know
certainly, and find out the truths that were formerly revealed and taught by
the Apostles, not only in writing but by word of mouth. what truths therefore
the Church proposes unto us, we are obliged to believe them as revealed
truths, though they be not in Scripture particularly mentioned; for if they be
not there, they were taught verbally by the Apostles, they are of Apostolical
tradition, and if the tradition be obscure or doubtful, the declaration of the
Church renders it certain. Thus it matters not that Indulgence is not
expressed, nay nor implicitly contained in Scripture; if it be not, it must of
necessity have been taught verbally by the Apostles, since that the Church
proposes this Doctrine as a revealed Truth, and no truth is a revealed truth,
but has been revealed to them, and by them delivered unto their Disciples.

Public Prayer in an unknown Language.
Ex ore tuo te iudico serve nequam: your own position is the strongest argument
I can allege for Public service in an un known language: you say thus: the
purpose of Nature by speaking is to communicate the sense of him that speaks
to the hearer; but how can that be if the hearer perceives not the meaning of
the words he speaks. Therefore we must speak in a known language. I ask,
to whom do we speak in the Liturgy, or Public service of the Church? Sure
its not to the congregation, but God: its to him we direct our Prayers, for to
praise him, and implore his Mercy. The Hearer is God properly, and not the
Cougregation; and therefore where there is no Congregation present, the Psalms
are sung in the Oyre and Public service don: if therefore we communicate our
fence (when we say Mass or public service) to God, who is the hearer we
satisfy the purpose that Nature intends by speaking, and whereas God understands
our fence in whateuer language we speak though unknown to the Congregation;
we may say the public Prayer in a language unknown to them.

Is not Prayer, say you, (you see how your arguments recoyls against yourself)
a raising up of our minds to God to praise him or ask favors of him? will it
not be conducent and necessary for this to understand the Psalms and Prayers?
But Sr do you think it necessary that a Polander, who presents a Petition to
the King of England in the English language, ought to be blamed, because he
does not himself understand that language? or is it not enough for his purpose,
that the King does understand it? cannot he prudently rely in the Faith and
honesty of the Notary or Clerk that writ it, who being instructed of what he
pretends gives him the petition drawn to be presented? If therefore Prayers,
by your acknowledgment, are but our request to God for the obtaining of his
Mercy, is it not sufficient for me that he understands them? and may not I rely
on the Faith, and honesty of the Church, who gives me these Prayers, as so many
petitions wherein my request is contained?

You bring a text of S. Paul 1. Cor. 14.17. against this Tenet, and you will
not have us to consider the object or end to which he directed his discourse;
but the reasons and instances he alleadges: as if his reasons, or any man's
reasons, could be of force to prove any thing, but in relation to the object,
or subject of his discourse. To the contrary, for to understand the Apostles
reason in the genuin fence, we must observe to what end he directed his
discourse, and the subject he treated of; and no vnpreiudiced man will read
that Chapter, but will manifestly preceiue that he did not speak of Prayers to
God, but of preaching and instruction of the congregation, which he some times
in that Chap. calls Prayer, but the context shows plainly, that what he means
is Exhortation, or instruction of the people: for all a long he disproues that
Praying or speaking in an unknown language; and gives for reason, because the
Hearers did not understand it: does not this reason apparently prove that he
meant what was spoken unto the people, which was what we now call Sermon or
exhortation? For S. Paul could not condemn Prayers made to God in an unknown
language, and gives that for reason, because the Hearers did not understand it:
for the Hearer of the Prayers made to God, are not the people but God, to whom
the prayer is made; and of him, S. Paul could not say, that he did not
understand: therefore he could not condemn speaking to him in an unknown
language.

To be brief; I propose this syllogism. S. Paul in that Chap. condemned
speaking in a language that the Hearers could not understand; this is evident
out of the tetx. But in the public Prayer of the Church, we only speak to
God, he only is the Hearer of those Prayers, for to him they are made and
directed and not to the people, and he can understand in any language:
therefore S. Paul did not condemn the public Prayer of the Church in any
language. Again S. Paul condemned speaking in an unknown language, that the
Hearers, to whom one did speak, did not understand: But in the Church nothing
is spoken to the people, but what is preached, or taught by exhortations,
sermons, exposition of the Gospel, etc. then, and only then, the Congregation
are the Hearers: therefore what S. Paul condemned was preaching exhorting, or
expounding the Gospel unto the people in unknown languages, because then the
Hearers could not understand what was spoken to them.

He tells us what great blessings the Protestants enjoy by having the Public
service in Common language, how much it conduces for the increase of devotion
and how unhappy the Catholics are in wanting this comfort; but, alas, we have
but too great an experience of the contrary; that the putting the Lyturgy in
common language, has caused the decay of devotion* the contempt of the public
service, the desrespect of sacred things sullyed by every Cobblers mouth; your
men of understanding and zeal are sufficiently sensible of this, and would
wish that these sacred things were kept at a distance from the common people.

The words of S. Augustine, l. 4. de doctr. Christ. c. 10. that he thinks do
favor him, proves what we teach, what profits any excellency of speech, if
not understood by the Hearer? (when we pray, God is the Hearer, and he
understands any language: and when we preach or exhort, the congregation is
the Hearers, and must speak to them in the language they understand) No cause
being for speaking, if what we speak be not understood by them, for whose
sake we speak, that they may understand what we speak. Could he speak
in plainer terms of a preacher? to let him understand that he must preach in
the language that his Auditory understands.

The Antiquity of their practice (of praying in the Latin language) goes thus,
says he: and when I expected he should tell us when it began; (for this would
be to declare the Antiquity) he bids that task farewell, and only tells us the
motive and cause why it was introduced; not because the Latin or Greek were
more Holy than other languages, but because they were more universally
understood: and do you approve that reason? if not why do not you say some what
against it; if you do? why therefore do you check the practice?

Now let us briefly show the lawfullness of praying in an unknown language, (I
say the Public Prayer of the Church as for private prayers, its confessedly
lawful and commendable to pray in vulgar language) and the necessity of it.
The Lawfullness is proved The Jewish Church had their Public service in the
Hebrew language, which was not understood by the People, the common language
was the syriak: And Christ having assisted somtymes at their Public service,
as we find in the Gospel, though he reprehended often the abuses of that
Church, never did he reprehend this, by what we may gather out of the
Evangelists: nay he publicly approved it for when he hung on the Cross
exercysing the function of a High Priest in the sacrifice of his life for
mankind he prayed publicly Eli Eli Lammasabacthani which being Hebrew, was so
far from being understood by the people* that they thought he called for Elias.
Therefore it is lawful in the public Sacrifice and Lyturgy of the Church to
pray in an unknown language. Moreover its not necessary that the people
understand the Priest or Minister who prays, as the public Minister of the
Church, for the Congregation: how many of your Congregation that do not
understand agreat part of your psalms, though they be in vulgar language? many
Phrases of them being so hard and obscure, that the learned Men must have the
help of Interpreters to find out their true meaning: And the Deaf, and such
that are at so great a distance that they cannot hear, do not they reap any
benefit by your public Prayers because they cannot understand what is said?
And if a Hugonot of France came to Dublin, who did not understand your
language, would not you admit him to your Communion and public service? by
this you see its lawful of its self, to make public Prayer in an vnkwnowen
language.

You will say, and I believe the Protestant Church will pretend no more, that
it is not so convenient for the edification of the people; but more needful,
it should be in the language that is commonly used. To this I answer that the
Public Prayer of the Church may be in any language which is thought the most
convenient for the glory of God, and spiritual profit of the flock; but I say
also, that it is not you, or I, or this, or that kingdom or Province must be
the judge to determine in which language is it most convenient it should be; God
has given us a Church who will govern us, its to her it belongs to judge what
Rites, Ceremonies, and manner of Divine worship we must practice, and as the
particular subjects of each Kingdom, cannot question the Customs, Laws, or
Decrees of the Government, so the Christian Kingdoms and Provinces must not
question, nor judge of the conueniency of what Rites or practice the Church
does establish; let us suppose that in relation to this kingdom of Ireland, it
might be thought, and realy may be some what more aduantagious for the flock, to
have the Public service in English or Irish, is it therefore it must be
lawful for this kingdom, without the approbation of the Church or suprem
Pastor of it, to vsurp that practice? no, but you are to represent that
conueniency to the Church, and acquiesce to her resolution. But say you why
would the Church of Rome stick on so inconsiderable a thing as that; but rather
than to be a cause of Schism or separation, grant the public service may be in
vulgar language? and I ask also, why would not you, or this Province, or that
rather becontent to want that particular comfort which you propose to yourself
in doing this or that which is not conformable to the approved practice of the
Church, rather than to run in desobedience against the Church whose command and
Authority, is a sufficient warrant for you to allay what scruples your reason
may suggest against it? The Church ought not to condescend with you, and
dispense with you in the observance of the public practice and Ceremonies;
though they be but bcclesiastical and human institutions: for if it shoud grant
you license to say Mass in English, why should it not grant France leave to
Communicate in both kinds, if France did ask it: and if Spain did ask to
Christean with three immersions of the Body and not otherwise why should not
the Church grant it; and if Germany did ask the validity of Clandestin
Marriages, why should it be denied; and so (each Kingdom, desiring their
respective privilege) the uniformity in Divine service, Administration of
Sacraments* and Ecclesiastical Rites so much commended in the Church, would be
quite overthrown.

Its the Church therefore must judge and determine in what language is it most
convenient to worship God by Public Prayers* and we are to acquiesee to the
Decree and commands of the Church. And therefore Luther, who under pretense of
greater conueniency and spiritual comfort of the congregation condemned Public
service, in vulgar languages, against the practice of the Church;
schismatically separated himself from her; in which separation you continue by
adhering to his Doctrine.

The Church established Public service in the Latin language; behold why?
because it is the common language of the Church: as in respect of England
English is the common language, and spanish in respect of spain; so in
relation to the Church spread throughout all Nations, the Latin is the most
universal and common. Therefore it was convenient the Public Prayer of the
Church, which is said in all parts, should be in the public and most
universal language which is the Latin. And as each kingdom* has a language
proper to it self, so the Church which is the kingdom of Christ, has its proper
language which is Latin; which is so universally known. Secondly for to
preserve uniformity in the manner of Divine worship; if the Mass had been in
English three hundred year agon, how different would the Mass be now from what
it was then? the language being wholly an other, from what then is was:
doubtless, it would have caused great alteration in the public service.
Thirdly if the Mass were not in Latin or some language universally known
throughout the world, but in the particular language of each kingdom, when
Priests would come from their own Countries to ours in Pilgrimage, (or for
other occasion,) they would not be premitted, (or not without great
difficulty) to say Mass, and so would be deprived of that spiritual Comfort.

Scripture prohibited.
I pray Sr what do your People learn in their houses by reading the Bible? is
it not Rebellion against their Church, and contempt of all Spiritual Authority,
each one obstinatly adhering to that sense, of the text which he judges the
best, and thus your Church is divided into a numberless number of sects? this
is small encouragement for us to permit to our common people the use of the
Bible, judging it better to know to sobriety, as S. Paul counsels, than, by
pretending to know more than behooves, to run into those inconueniencies,
wherein you have fallen. You accuse the Catholic Church for exposing Images to
the adoration of the flock, for the danger of falling into Idolatry; and this
is the reason that Calvin also gives: you have lived many years in Spain, where
Images are in great veneration: you have been much acquainted with the
Inquisition, as you would have us believe; you know the severity of that
Tribunal against Heretics, Jews and Idolaters; how many have you seen in
spain, that by adoring Images came to fall into Idolatry? doubtless had there
been any, the Inquisition would have taken holt of him; for though the
Inquisition permits Images, it would never leave Idolatry, occasioned by the
adoration of Images, unpunished. And not one, I dare say, did you ever see, or
hear of, to have been punished on this account.

Now consider, how many have fallen into Heresies, and errors quite opposite
even to your Church, by the liberty granted for reading of Scripture; hence has
proceeding all the Sects that are in our kingdoms and elsewhere. Does not this
demonstrat, that there is far greater danger of Heresy in the usual reading of
the Bible, than of Idolatry in adoring of Images? ought not you rather
therefore, to decry the liberty of reading the Bible, than the adoration of
Images?

But, reply you, this proves that even the Priests and friars ought to be kept
from reading it, for its they that have abused it, and broached all heresies:
and things must not be prohibited (that are in themselves good) because they
are abused but the Abusers must be punished: And this good consideration, Mr
Sall, will not persuade you to admit the use of Images: we grant Mr Sall that
principle to be good, that things, in themselves commendable, must not be
probited, because they are abused; when the use of then is absoluty needful,
or convenient; and the abuses are not very frequent and pernicious; as in this
case of reading the Bible; its not needful, nor can it be proved to be very
profitable for the common people; on the other side the abuses are most
apparent, frequent, and pernicious; for thence comes all these sects and
heresies; therefore it ought to be prohibited: but Mr Sall, you must mind, what
I advertised you in my discourse of Prayers in an vnknowe^n language, that it
is not you or I nor any other, but the Church, that must judge of the
conueniency or inconueniency, the advantage or desaduantage of reading of
Scripture; she must declare that, and acording what she judges, who is
constantly directed by Gods infallible Spirit in the government of the flock,
must permit or prohibit it.

This, your Church will not say, that the vulgar people are bound in conscience
to read the Scripture; for many cannot read any thing; others do not read all
Scripture, nor do they think that they sin, by not reading; others do never
read any thing of it: what you can justly pretend is, that it is convenient and
profitable, and therefore ought to be permitted: and here returns what I
discoursed of Praying in an unknown tongue. Let any vnpreiudic'd man judge if
it does not belong to the Church to determine, what is convenient, or most
convenient; since that God has given a Church to govern us? Let any man judge,
if a particular man, that against the established authority, under which he
lives, and is bound to obey; should rise against that authority and make
himself judge of what is convenient or inconvenient for the government, and
under pretense of a greater conueniency that appears to him, should alter the
established practices of the Commonwealth, should not such a man, I say, be
esteemed a seditious Reuolter, and be punished? what therefore shall we say of
Luther? he lived under the authority of the Catholic Church; he was a private
person, he found the use of the Bible prohibited, and publik service in Latin;
he did not pretend that it was absolutely necessary for salvation, to pray in
known languages, nor to read the Bible; but judged it to be most convenient,
and therefore condemned the Church for prohibiting it; is not this man to be
esteemed a schismatic, that opposes himself to the public authority, and
makes himself judge of the practices established by it? and must not we rang
you with him that persists in the same rebellion?

Priests and friars have abused Scripture, its very true; but for one that has,
thousands have not, and for one of the vulgar that has not, many have: besides
priests and friars, being the Pastors of the Church, are obliged to read, and
when a Priest or friar abuses the Scripture, its easy to punish him; but when a
multitude of popular people abuses it, the remedy is not so near at hand. He
quotes upon Mr Stillingfleets word, a Council of Bishops at Bononia, that
prohibited the Scripture giving for reason that it discouers the corruptious of
the Catholic Doctrine: but this Council must be of the same coin of the 92
Canon of the Council of Lateran, which we mentioned above, no such Canon of
Lateran or Council of Bononia is, or was extant, but in Mr Stillingfleet and
Salls imagination.

I conclude with these two Assertions: first its needful that the Pastors,
Prelates, and Doctors of the Church do read the Scripture; and that the flock
receive from them the sense of it, and the Doctrine contained in it. Its for
this end that God placed in his Church some Prophet, some Apostles, some
Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, to keep us in Unity of Faith by teaching
what we ought to believe S. Paul Ephesians. 4. Act. 20.18. he commands the Pastors
to watch over the flock, in which the H. G. has placed them to govern the
Church. Its therefore Christ laid his command on the Apostles and their
successors, to teach all Nations, to preach the Gospel: and therefore says
S. Basil. q. 25. Superiorum est ista scire, etc. its the obligation of the
Superiors (to say the Pastors) to know and learn these thing, which they may
teach to others; but of the others, not to konovv more, than behooves them to
know. And Leo Pope writing to the Patriarck of Alexandria epist. 62. and
epist. 82. ad Iul. You must have care that none, who is not a Priest of the
Lord, may presume to vsurp the authority of teaching or preaching, whether he
be a Monk, or a layman though a learned man. And S. Aug. l. 1. de moribus Eccl.
c. 1. what man of judgment does not understand, that the exposition of
Scripture, is to be asked of them, who by their profession are their Doctors.
And if to proceed wisely, we must consult the Lawyers, for the true meaning of
the Law, and that each Commonwealth has men whose profession it is to study
it, and deliver the true sense of it, to those that are not Lawyers by
Profession, how much more, it is needful, that there be Doctors in the Church
whose obligation is to study the Scripture, and find out by the Fathers and
Interpreters the true sense of it, and teach it to the people.

This and no more does the authorities of Fathers produced by Mr Sall prove;
the reading of Scripture is recommended unto us, says he, by S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom* and S. Augustine: its very true; but to whom? to the learned men of
the Church, whose obligation it is to teach the Doctrine it contains, and to the
Layty no further, than to hold that sense of them, which the Pastors deliver to
be the sense of the Church.

The second Assertion, that it is not convenient, nor lawful for the Layty to
read them further, than with a total submission of their Judgment to the sense
given to them by the Church. This is manifestly proved by the multitude of
sects, wherein to the world is divided through the liberty assumed of reading
the Scriptures, and understanding them, as the Readers think best. Secondly by
the obscurity of Scripture which we have demonstrated in the 2 and 3. chapter S.
Peter, says Mr Sall, 2. Epist. 1.19. exhorts us to read, we have also a sure
word of of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed etc. but S. Peter, by
that sure word of Prophecy, means, not only the written word of God, but also
the unwritten word, which is the Tradition, by which the Church delivers to us
the true sense of the written word; which he bids us to take heed of. S. Paul
recommends unto us the reading of Scripture Romans 15. and 2. Tim. 3. as being
written for our comfort and instruction. That is not denied; but the Apostle
speaks to Timothy, and the Pastors of the Church; and so of the rest of the
texts alleged by Mr Sall; which are directed only to the Pastors and Prelates,
or at most to such of the Layty, as are knowing in the Fathers and
Interpreters, with a total submission to the sense of the Church. For if even
the very learned themselves, are puzl'd with the difficulties of Scripture, and
often do wrest them to their perd^tion as S. Peter says 2. Epis. 3.16. what
will the vulgar people do?

THE IMMACVLAT CONCEPTION of the B. Virgen; and the Sacrament of Confession.
It Is not my intention to discourse at large of the Immaculat Conception of the
B. Virgen; but neither can I omit to speak somewhat of it, whereas Mr Sall in
the Conclusion or Third part of his sermon, accuses our Church of Tyranny in
forcing the belief of this Doctrine upon the Faithful; they force them to the
belief and defense of Doctrins repugnant to their Judgment, and not established
by Catholic Faith; as may appear in their violence in forcing all to believe
and declare for the Conception of the Virgen Mary without Original sin, so
many clear testimonies of Scripture being against it, as affirm that all Men
did sin in Adam; that Christ was universal Redeemer from sin, and Savior of
all mankind. And pursues complaning that none is permitted to preach in
Churchs, or receive Degrees in universities, but such as will protest publicly
for the immaculat Conception.

I admire Mr Sall that you so confidently auerr that many clear testimonies of
Scripture are against the immaculat Conception, and mention none, what did you
expect we would believe a Bankrrupt in Religion only upon his bare word? you
should have produced those clear testimonies; and if you call that a clear
testimony against this Doctrine, which S. Paul has Romans 5. all have sinned in
Adam, as if the B. Virgen were also included in that universal Proposition All
have sinned; its rather a clear testimony of your little insight in Scripture,
which if you had, you might know that very often such universal Propositions,
admit exceptions, because they are not Logically universal signifying every
Indiuiduum or Particular of the kind; but Morally universal signifying the
greatest part or number of the kind; That Proposition All men have sinned in
Adam, is true, because generally men did sin in Adam, though Christ who is a
Man, nor Mary did not. we could give many instances of the like Propositions
in Scripture, these will suffice; Christ Io. 10. saying himself was the true
Pastor, ads; all that ever came before me were thieves and Robbers, but the
sheep did not hear them. Does not this General Proposition admit no exception?
was the Baptist, Moses and Elias thieves and Robbers? when Jesus was in the
house of Simon and Andrew, the text says, they brought unto him all that were
diseased, and possessed with Diuils, And in the next verse. All the City was
gathered together at the door. what think you? was there none, Man, woman, nor
child of the whole town but was there? it is morally certain some was absent,
yet the Proposition is still true, because that universal Proposition
signifies that the Generality of the town flockt thither.

Christ you say is the universal Redeemer from sin; whence you would infer,
that the Virgen Mary was in sin, or could not be Redeemed: but you ignore, or
affect to ignore that there are two manners, or ways of redeeming; the one
delivering a man from the sin wherinto he has fallen, the other preserving him
from falling into the sin. Marie was redeemed by the Merits of Christ from sin,
because by his Merits she was preserved from falling into sin, wherinto she had
fallen had she not been preserved by him; and this is the most noble way of
Redemption, as it is a greater benefit, to save a man from being wounded, then
to permit him to be wounded and afterward to cure him.

Now Mr Sall to show you that our Church is not cruel in this Doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception, I hope you will not say its a sin to profess publicly
that Doctrine, for at least you cannot deny but that it is very probable, though
it be not an article of Faith; as it is no sin to profess publicly the Doctrine
of the Thomists, or that of the Scotists: nor will you deny but that its
lawful to any Community to require certain conditions, such as they think fit,
so they be not unjust and sinful, from any that will pretend to be a member of
that Community, or partake of their favors, or privileges; does not the
College of Dublin require some conditions from them that are to be admitted to
their Community; and is it cruelty to deny them admittance if they will not
embrace those conditions? why then will you censure it to be cruel, that some
universities will not admit to Degrees, nor Churchs admit to preach but those
that will protest for the Conception? why will not you also accuse of cruelty
some universities which will admit none to Degrees but such as will profess and
teach the Doctrine of Thomist? But say you they oblige men to protest for the
Conception* against their Judgment: and dare you to condemn this to be cruelty
when the Church of England obliges to swear the spiritual supremacy of the
King, which in opinion of Calvin (as I have shown above) is a Blasphemy, in
the judgment of most learned Protestants is false, an in the opinion of
Catholics, which you ob^ige to swear, is an Heresy? The opinion of the
Immaculat Conception is notheretical, even in the judgment of those who appose
it; and when an opinion or Doctrine is not heretical, a Spiritual or Temporal
Prince, or any Community may lawfully oblige their subjects, for reason of
state, and the peaceable government of their People, to conform themselves
exteriourly and profess that Doctrine, leaving them the Liberty of judging
interiourly what they please: and such as makes that exterior profession its
their part to correct their judgment, and conform it to their exterior
profession, which they can lawfully do, when the Doctrine is not heretical or
erroneous. why may not the universities and Churchs exact the outward
profession of the imaculat conceptio^, which without heresy or error a man may
in wardly judge to be true? and why can the Protestant Church exact the
swearing of the spiritual Supremacy of the King from them, who cannot in
conscience submit their judgment inwardly to that Doctrine?

In the Conclusion of his Sermon also Mr Sall accuses our Church of cruelty in
the exercise of the Sacrament of Confession* And I observe that he does not
condemn the Doctrine of Confession which our Church belieues to be a Sacrament,
necessary for such as have fallen into sin; perhaps he was conuinc'd to believe
the necessity of it by that unanswerable text Mat. 18.18. what soever ye shall
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and what soever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven, which words are also expressed Mat. 16.19.
sins therefore may be bound or unbound on earth by the Apostles and successors,
and the text marks (observe well) that their binding, or unbinding on earth by
them, must precede to their hinding and unbinding in Heaven, whence the
necessity of Confession of sins to the Priests is absolutely concluded. But let
us see wherein are we guilty of cruelty in the practice of Confession.

First, says Mr Sall, in obliging to the minut expression of the most loathsome
circumstances of secret thoughts and deeds, which renders it the most heaure
of Christian duties. The man would have a pretty sweet manner of Confession, to
declare what each one is pleased, and no more. How? the Protestants did hither
to accuse us that we did facilitat sin* and gave and easy way for forgiving
it, by granting the Priest power of forgiving and now Mr Sall accuses us, that
we require too much? by this we may see which of us* Protestants or
Catholics, does encourage most to sin by an easy forgiving it: for the
Protestant for to be reconciled from sin requires no more but a Lord have mercy
upon me, for I am as sinner, and that betwixt him and God: the Catholic
requires the declaring of each particular sin and circumstance to a Priest,
with an act of sorrow for having sinned, a firm purpose of a mendment, the
fullfilling the Penance that the Priest shall enjoin, and the restitution of
what he has taken from his neighbor: this indeed is severe, but no cruelty; its
needful and convenient: Convenient, because that severity justly deserved by
sin, is a bridle which keeps us within compass, and makes us fear sin; and
experience teaches that though some who confess, do persevere in their
wickedness; yet generally such as make a good Confession are reclaimed, and
those that frequent this Sacrament, are the most reformed in their lives.
Needful because that the Judicature of consciences, and power of binding and
unbinding being given to the Priest; how can he exercise that Judicature, or
know when, or what to bind, if the Penitent does not declare the state of his
conscience, no more than a judge in a secural tribunal can give sentence, if he
knows not the fact and circumstances of it: the fore said S. August. hom. 49.
Nemo dicat, occulte ago paenitentiam, in cord meo ago, coram Deo ago, ergo
sine causa dictum est quae solueritis super terram, etc. Let none say, I make
penance privately, in my heart, in the sight of God; in vain then was it said,
whatsoever ye shall unbind, etc. And S. August. also lib. de vera and falsa
poenitentia: Consideret qualitatem criminis, in loco, tempore, perseuerantia
and varietate personarum. Let him consider the quality of the sin, reflecting
on the place, time, continuance, and diversity of Persons. You see Mr Sall,
what a Confession S. Augustine requires, of the sin, of it is circumstances.
Which yet he more expressly declares, l. 2. de Visit. Infirmorum, c. 5. Astantem
coram te Sacerdotem Angelum Dei existima, aperi ei penenetralium tuorum
abditissima latibula, nihil obscurum dicens, culpam nullis ambagibus inuoluens,
designanda sunt in quibus peccasti, loca, tempora, cum quibus personis, etc.
Haec autem omnia si taceantur, aut dicta callide pallientur animam iugulant.
Look on the Priest as on Gods Angel: disclose to him the most hidhen secrets
of your heart; not speaking obscurely, nor telling your fault with vvheeling
and vvinding expressions, declare the place, time, and persons with whom;
these if silenced, or craftily palliated, kill the soul. Several other Fathers
of the Church speak no less pertinently to this purpose, but S. Augustine
suffices for all.

The second thing wherein he accuses us of cruelty in the exercise of this
Sacrament, is the reservation of cases not to be absolved but by certain
Persons. Which is so far from being cruelty, that it appears to be most just,
either because that every priest is not so learned as to be able to manage the
consciences of all people and therefore are justly denied the exercise of that
power; or because that some sins are so horrid that to withdraw men from them,
it is very just to restrain the power of forgiving them, that by that
restriction and difficulty men may be freighten'd.

The Third thing wherein he accuses us of cruelty in this Sacrament, is that some
Pastors make their flock believe they cannot confess but to their own Curats,
and extort by sordid avarice moneys from them, for the Absolution. To this M^
Sall himself answers, whereas (quoth he) this is the fault of some corrupt
members, and he will not cast the dirt of the feet of the Church upon her face,
and confess the Church to be so much an enemy to this practice, that there are
Decrees of Councils and Pop's against it. Mr Sall if you did know that the
Church is not guilty of this crime, but some corrupt members, why did you
therefore forsake the Church, but detest that abominable practice? because, he
says, he did endeavor to reform the abuse, and the persons guilty were so
haughty and headstrong, that he could not prevail: so that if he cannot reform
what abuses he finds in some members of the Protestant Church, he must also
forsake her, and he must be of no congregation, but of that which has no
corrupt members.

CONCLUSION. Against the Third Point of Mr Salls discourse.
Monstrous errors you say, obliged you to a separation from the Catholic
Church, (the vain pretext of heretics of all ages, whose Names she has crushed
to infamy, still Triumphant against the Gates of Hell) and I must believe they
were errors that obliged you; but imaginary only in her, and real in yourself
we have asserted her unspotted; and what renders you eternally criminal, is,
that you know in your own conscience, they were no errors of the Church, which
you style by that name: I say you know it well in your own conscience; for you
that was so many years a Catholic, and a Professor (as you say) in
Scholastical and Moral Divinity in Controversies, and what not? You could not
but know that the Pop's supremacy in temporal affairs over Princes, was no
article of our Faith; but a School-question denied by many Catholics: you knew
also the Pop's infallibility was but and opinion of some diuins and that what
we believe as an article of Faith, is not the infallibility of the Pope alone
(of which only you speak) but of the Church Universal, as it is diffused, or
representative in the Pope and Council together, was it not then known malice,
and prejudice that made you reckon as errors of the Church, these points, which
are not Church Doctrine? was it not wicked and damnable in you to separat from
her for errors (if they be such) which are not her errors, but of some or many
Doctors? which you could have denied, and not only remain a Catholic, but
oblige Catholics in refuting them!

But you had a mind to depart, and to render your separation more acceptable to
our Adversaries, you took for pretense those two points, which though you know
well they were no points of our Religion, yet you knew they were very odious to
our Adversaries, and them you resolved to please upon any account. was it not
therefore that you exclaim against the Church of Rome saying it is but a part of
the Church, and not the Church Universal. page 24. as if you did not well know,
that we do not plead for the Bishopric of Rome, and that we do confess it
is but a part of the Church. Lastly you allege for a cause of your separation
the forbidding of the Bible to the common people and the public Prayers in an
unknown language: in this your first Reformers erred damnably in departing, as
you do, from the true Church for this cause; for nothing can justify separation
from the Church but errors and practices inconsistent with salvation, which as
well our Diuins as yours do confess; and it is confessed by any man of common
sense, that it is not needful for salvation, (whateuer you may say of its
conueniency) to read the Bible, or have prayers in a known language:
therefore that could be no just cause of separation to them nor to you. But
much more criminal are you than they in separating for that cause: for you had
a sad experience (which they had not when they began) of the confusion and
multitude of sects, occasioned by the liberty granted to all people for the
reading of Scripture: and therefore you were obliged rather to condemn that
liberty than to assert it. You were forced to forsake our Church, you say for
her errors: but S. Augustine tells you ( lib. cont. Parmen. c. 11.) there is no
just necessity to divide Unity* and epist. 48. It is impossible that any may
have a just cause to forsake the communion of the Church. Our Church therefore,
which was the only Church extant before, and in Luthers days, and is now the
same that then it was, had no errors which might be a iustcause, or necessity
for him, or for you to depart from her, and divide Unity of Religion. If her
errors, whereof you accuse her, are fundamental errors inconsistent with
salvation; then there may be a just necessity and cause to separat from the
Church, which S. Augustine absolutely denies; if they were but small, inferior
and not fundamental errors, as generally all sectaries say, then there is a
just necessity also to separat from all Congregations and Churches in the
world; since that in the opinion of all Sectaries, there is no Church or
Congregation free from some inferior and not fundamental errors, the
Protestants accuse the Catholics of many, the Presbyterians accuse the
Protestants, the Anabaptists accuse the Presbyterians, and so of all the rest.

And is it not a pretty jest that you would make un believe, it is the desire of
security of your salvation, which forced you to separat from the Roman Church,
wherein S. Thomas Aquinas dyed, who in the acknowledgement of your own Doctors
is a Saint, where S. Bernard dyed, who in the judgment of your own Doctors was
a Saint says your whitaker de Eccl. page 369. a very pious Man, says your
Osiander cent. 12. a Saint of the Roman Church says your Gomarus in speculo
Eccl. p. 23. one of the lamps of Gods Church, says your Pasquil in his Return
to Eng. page 8. could not you secure your salvation in that Church wherein S.
Gregory the Great, dyed and lived a Pope, that Blessed and Holy Father, says
your Godwin, in his Catal. of Bish. page 3. that holy and learned Bishop of
Rome says Mr Bell in his Survey of Pop. page 189. these have been, as your
Authors freely confess, of the Roman Church, and have been great Saints; and, I
hope, you are not so impious as to deny that Xauerius that great Apostle of the
Indies, S. Dominik, S. Francis, and S. Ignatius were Saints, nor so impudent as
deny that they were of our Church. And can we believe that you were forced for
to secure your salvation to forsake that Church, wherein these have not only be
saved, but dyed Saints, for the Protestant Church, whereof there was never yet
any Saint. Let us suppose, that both the Catholic and Protestant Church is a
saving Church; yet for to secure his salvation will not any wise man, rather
choose that Church wherein there are so many Saints than a Church which never yet
afforded any? as you would choose to study in school, where many learned
Doctors are bred, rather than in a school, where never any learned man was
known what wise man, tender of his salvation, would not choose that Church and
Religion* which generally all persons who know both Religions, do choose to dye
in? for, certainly, the election of that last hour, when men are most earnest
to secure their salvation, and setting interest and Pleasures aside, end eauour
to provide for eternity, is a great argument of the goodness of a Religion:
that Church therefore wherein generally all men, who know both Religions, choose
to dye in, ought to be embraced by him who endeavors to secure his salvation;
This is the Catholic Religion; for there have been many who being born and
bred Catholic, flincht to the Protestant Religion; there have been many also
who being born and bred Protestants, were converted to the Catholic Religion;
and thus they knew both Religions; and what Man did you ever hear of, who
becoming from a Protestant to be a Catholic, and lived so until his dying
hour, that desired to dye a Protestant, or called for a Minister to be
reconciled to the Church? but to the contrary, generally all those who of
Catholics become Protestants, and live so until their dying hour, then they
call for a Priest, for to be reconciled to the Catholic Church, then they dye,
or desire to dye Catholics and we know by many experiences, that the friends
of those dying Persons do watch the doors, to hinder the access of any Priest:
is not this a strong proof, that it is not devotion made them become
Protestants, and that the Catholic Religion is the securest for salvation? did
you desire to secure your salvation? why did not you observe what Counsel
Christ gave us for to be saved with advantage, and then you would know which
Religion to choose? Consider how much did Christ recommend unto xs voluntary
Powerty, if thou vvilt be perfect (said he Mat. 1921.) go and sell what thou
have, and give it to the poor. And in the same chap. exhorts us to forsake
Estats, Lands, houses etc. for his sake; this has been practiced by the
Primitive Christians. Act. 5. in our Church Kings, Princes, Noble Men, and rich
men have followed this Doctrine: I confess many of our Church do not follow it,
but the quite contrary, but the Doctrine is not only practiced by many, but the
Church exhorts the Faithful unto it, and that to great effect, whereas our
Conuents and Monasteries are in habited by many who changed their plenifull
estates for powerty, their Silks end sattins for rags, their delicat dishs for
a friars portion, their liberty for retyrement, and their wordly pleasures for
a continual mortification: you know this to be true, who knows the Order of the
Carthusians, to speak nothing of other religious orders* how much the
Protestant Church is a stranger to this Doctrine and practice, the world knows:
what Protestant did you ever hear of, that forsook a plentiful estate to become
a poor Minister? did ever any Minister or Preacher of your Church exhort his
flock to this practice, or would not he be esteemed a Mad man, that would do
it? How then Mr Sall? did you for to secure your salvation, choose that Church,
where this Counsel of Christ is neglected, and which laughs at us for following
it? did you for to secure your salvation, forsake powerty which Crist
recommended as a means to be saved, and to which you were by solemn vovv
obliged, and go to a Church where you may have, and does expect to be rich,
Christ having branded Richs as dangerous to salvation? This manner of securing
salvation was ever yet unknown to all Saints, who esteemed Richs and Honors
sworn enemies to the soul; they to secure their salvation, forsook Richs and
Honnors, and you to secure yours, you forsake powerty (Powerty I say to which
you are obliged by solemn vow) and seek for Richs.

Had you changed the Catholic Religion for an other more austere we might
believe, that your aim was to secure your salvation; for Christ recommended
Austerity of life, and the mortification of our flesh and senses, as a most
powerful means for to ouercom vice. I doubt not but that there are many
Libertins in our Church, who do indulge and cherish their Bodies too much to
the prejudice of their souls; but look to the Doctrine and Maxims of the Church;
Penance, austerity of life, mortifications of the Body is not only taught, as
good and aduantagious to the soul, but is practiced by innumerable Catholics
of all sexes, ages and conditions in disclplins, hair-cloaths, fasting sleeping
on the bare ground rising at midnight for to praise God, abstaining from
delicat meats and wearing of Linen and several other chastisements of the
Body; Christ has recommended this austerity of life, and Corporal
mortifications by S. Paul 1. Cor 9.17. the great Baptist did practice them Mar.
1. the Prophet David ps. 148. S. Paul himself, and all the saints of the
Primitive Church; and the Church did ever yet esteem these means very powerful
for to purchase virtue and ouercom vice; and you to secure your salvation, you
have forsaken the Church, where this Doctrine is taught, and practiced, for the
Protestant Church; did you ever hear of any Protestant, who disciplins
himself, who sleeps on the bare ground, who ryses at midnight to sing psalms to
God, who abstains from wearing of Linen? I do not wonder that many Libertins
of your Church, should set these exercises at naught, but that the whole Body
of that Church by their Doctrine and Principles should condemn them, as
fruitless, Idle, nay and injurious to Christ's Passion: is this the Church Mr
Sall, which you have chusen for to secure your salvation? a Church whose
Doctrine is so carnal, which will not smart the flesh, but cherish the Body?
it is lykly indeed that your aim was, in your change of Religion, to secure your
salvation; when you left a Religion where you in particular, were obliged to
Austerity for a Religion, which obliges you to none, but to enjoy pleasures; a
Religion where you were by vow obliged to Powerty, for a Religion where you
expect to be, and may be rich; a Religion where by your Profession you were
incapable of Honors, for one where you may have Preferments. No Mr Sall, you
will not persuade the world, that it was any advantage to your soul which moved
you: your resolution will appear to any impartial man, to be unjust and
damnable; and attended particularly in you, by innumerable sins; for though the
Precepts of the Church, of fasting, annual Confession and Communion, and
keeping Holy days, reach not to oblige Protestants who are such by education;
but it is out of controversy that they oblige you, to whom her Power for
commanding, and your obligation of obeying, is sufficiently known; wherefore
there is not a fasting day which you infring, an Annual Confession which you
omit an Easter Communion that you neglect, or a holy day Mass, but you commit a
heinous sin. Reflect on these monstrous effects of your resolution; and amuse
not your self with the hopes that you will be of the number of them, who at the
last hour will be reclaimed, and call for a Priest to be reconciled. It Is our
duty to beseech God he may be so merciful unto you; but it is yours not to
abuse Gods patience, least that in punishment of not answering now to his
inspirations, you may hear then those dreadful words of the Proverbs chapter 1.
v. 24. I have called and ye refused-ye have set at naught my Counsels, and
would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock
when your fear cometh-Then shall you call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me earnestly, but they shall not find me, for that they had
knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

FINIS.

