A DESCRIPTION OF Mr. D -- n's FUNERAL A Poem.

The Third Edition, with Additions.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in VVarwicklane, M.DCC. Price 6 d.

A DESCRIPTION, etc.
OF Kings Renowned and Mighty Bards I write,
Some slain by Whores, and others killed in Fight;
Some starving lived, whilst others were preferred;
But all, when dead, are in one place interred.
A Fabric stands by Ancient Heroes built,
Designed for Holy Use to atone their Guilt;
Here sacred Urns of Majesty they keep,
Here Kings and Poets most profoundly sleep;
Here Choristers in Hymns their Voices raise,
And charm the dreadful Goblins from the Place.
Tho thronged with Tombs, no Specter here is found,
They sing the very Devil off the Ground:
No Nightmare dances amongst the ancient Tombs,
Nor sulphurous Incubus dispenses Fumes;
Nor let no subterranean Hag afright
My Muse, whilst of the Funeral I write.
A Bard there was, who whilome did command,
And held the Laurel in his potent Hand;
He over Parnassus bore Imperial Sway,
Him all the little Tribes of Bards obey:
But Bards and Kings, how ever approved and great,
Must stoop at last to the Decrees of Fate.
Fate bid him for the stroke of Death prepare,
And then removed him to the Lord knows where.
If to the Living we such Tributes owe,
We on the Dead must pious Rites bestow;
To our Assistance all the Wits must call,
To grace the Glory of the Funeral.
Who is the first appears unto our View,
But haughty, proud, imperious M --
Who cocks his Chin, and scarce affords a Word,
But looks as big as any Belgic Lord;
In the best Dairies fed, grown sleek and fat,
The creeping Mouse is turned into a Rat:
Of others brows he licks the toilsom Sweat,
And by our Sins grows impudently great:
As chief of Wits he does himself prefer,
And with our Gold bribes every Flatterer;
But Men of Sense and Honor does despise,
And crushes such as would by Virtue rise,
Whilst each lewd Rakehel of the nauseous Town
He fills with Coin, and does with Honors crown.
The Nation's Wealth he most profusely spends,
But not on such as are the Nation's Friends;
But such as wrote our Country to inslave,
His Kindness follows even to the Grave.
He the great Bard at his own Charge Inters,
And dying Vice to living VVorth prefers.
Some others too in the Affair are joined,
Alike in Morals, and alike in Mind;
But these my Muse must here forbear to name,
Scarce worthy Honor, or deserving Fame.
The Day is come, and all the Wits must meet
From Covent Garden down to Watling-street;
They all repair to the Physicians Dome,
There lies the Corpse, and there the Eagles come:
No Corpse an Entrance has within this Gate,
None are admitted here to lie in State,
But such as Fate a noted Death has carved,
A Cutpurse hanged, or a poor Poet starved;
One is anatomized when he is dead.
The other in his Life for want of Bread.
A Troop of Stationers at first appeared,
And Jacob T -- n Captain of the Guard;
Jacob the Muses Midwife, who well knows
To ease a laboring Muse of Pangs and Throws;
He often has kept the Infant-Poet warm,
Often licked the unweildy Monster into Form;
Often do they in high Flights and Raptures swell,
Drunk with the Waters of our Jacob's Well.
Next these the Playhouse Sparks do take their Turn,
With such as under Mercury are born,
As Poets, Fiddlers, Cut-purses, and Whores,
Draps of the Playhouse, and of Common-shores;
Pimps, Panders, Bullies, and Eternal Beaux,
Famed for short Wits, loug VVigs, and gaudy Clothes;
All Sons of Meter tune the Voice in praise,
From lofty Strains, to humble Ekes and Ays:
The Singing-men and Clarks who charm the Soul,
And all the Traders in fa la fa sol:
All these the Funeral Obsequies do aid,
As younger Brothers of the Rhyming Trade.
The tuneful Rabble now together come,
They fill with dolesome Sighs the sable Room;
Some groaned, some sob'd, and some I think there wept,
And some got drunk, loll'd down, and snoar'd and slept.
Around the Corpse in State they wildly press;
In Notes unequal, like Pindarick Verse,
Each one does his sad Sentiments express.
The Player says, My Friends, we are undone,
See here, the Muses best and darling Son
Is from us to the blessed Elysium gone:
What other Poet for us will engage
To be the Prop of the declining Stage?
All other Poets are not worth a Louse,
There fell the Prop of our once glorious House:
But now from us by Fate untimely torn,
Leaves the dull Stage a Desert and forlorn.
A dismal Sadness in each Face appears;
And such as could not speak, burst out in Tears*
His Death, alas! affected every Body,
And fetched deep Sighs and Tears from every Noddy:
It much affected every tuneful Ringer,
But most of all the jolly Ballad-singer,
Who now at a Street's Corner must no more
A Playhouse Song in equal Numbers roar:
Nay, I am told, when he his last Gasp groaned,
The Bel-rope trembled and the Organ ton'd:
And as great things affect a little thing,
This was the Death of many a Fiddle-string.
No Chronicles I read of do relate
Such a sad Hurricane in Church and State.
The charming Songsters at our great S. Paul's
Could scarce sing Prayers to save their very Souls;
The Boys were dumb; the Singingmen were wounded,
All the whole Choir disabl'd and confounded;
And when the Prayers were ended, alas then
The Clark could hardly sob out an Amen.
Not a Crowdero at a Bawdy House,
Who used in racy Liquors to carouse,
But with sad haste unto the Burial ran,
Forgets his Tipple, and neglects his Can.
With Tag-Rag, Bob-Tail was the Room full filled,
You Would think another Babel to be built;
Not more Confusion at St. Batt's famed Fair,
Or at Guild Hall for choice of a Lord Mayor.
But stay my Muse, the learned G -- th appears,
He sighing comes, and is half drowned in Tears;
The famous G -- th whom learned Poets call
Knight of the Order of the Urinal.
He of Apollo learnt his wondrous Skill,
He taught him how to sing and how to kill;
For all he sends unto the darksom Grave,
He honors also with an Epitaph.
He entertained the Audience with Oration,
Tho very new, yet something out of fashion:
But 'cause the Hearers were with Learning blessed,
He said it in the Language of the Beast:
But so pronounced, the Sound and Sense agrees,
A Country Mouse talks better in a Cheese,
Or Iack-at-a pinch, when reeling he repairs
To neighboring Church to mumble over his Prayers.
The Sense and Wit they say was very good,
Tho neither seen, felt, heard, nor understood.
Thus we must all, as common Rumor says,
Believe the Doctor by implicit Faith:
Next him the Sons of Music pass along,
And murder Horace in confounded Song;
Whose Monument, more durable than Brass,
Is now defaced by every chanting Ass.
No Man at Tyburn, doomed to take a swinging,
Would stay to hear such miserable Singing,
Where all the Beasts of Music try their Throats,
And different Species use their different Notes:
Here the Ox bellows, there the Satyr howls;
The Puppies whine, and the bold Mastiff growls;
The Magpys chatter, and the Night-Owls screek;
The old Pigs grunt, and all the young ones squeek:
Yet all together make melodious Songs,
As Bumpkin Trols to rusty pair of Tongs.
Now, now the time is come, the Parson says,
And for their Exeunt to the Grave he prays:
The Way is long, and Folk the Streets are clogging,
Therefore my Friends away, come let us be jogging.
Assist me thou who, clad in Sunbeam Weeds,
Driv'st round the Orb each Day with fiery Steeds;
Who neither art with Heat nor Cold oppressed,
Art never weary, tho thou take no rest:
Assist me to describe the Cavalcade,
What mighty Figure through the Streets they made.
Before the Hearse the mourning Hautboys go,
And screech a dismal sound of Grief and VVo;
More dismal Notes from Bogtrotters may fall,
More dismal Plaints at Irish Funeral.
But no such Flood of Tears ever stopped our Tide
Since Charles the Martyr and the Monarch died.
The Decency and Order first describe,
Without regard to either Sex or Tribe.
The sable Coaches lead the dismal Van,
But by their sides I think few Footmen ran,
Nor needed these, the Rabble fill the Streets,
And Mob with Mob in great Disorder meets.
See next the Coaches how they are accouter'd
Both in the inside, eke and on the outward.
One pocky Spark, one sound as any Roach,
One Poet and two Fiddlers in a Coach;
The Playhouse Drab, that beats the Beggars Bush,
And Bawdy talks, would make an old Whore blush,
By every Bully kissed, good truth, but such is
Now her good Fate to ride with Mrs. Duchess.
Was ever Immortal Poet thus buffoon'd?
In a long Line of Coaches thus lampoon'd?
A Man with Gout and Stone quite wearied,
Would rather live than thus be buried.
What greater Plague can Heaven on Man bestow,
Who must with Knaves on Life's dull Journey go?
And when on to other Shore he is landed safe,
A Crowd of Fools attend him to the Grave,
A Crowd so nauseous, so profusely lewd,
With all the Vices of the Times endu'd,
That Cowley's Marble wept to see the Throng,
Old Chaucer laughed at their unpolished Song,
And Spencer thought he once again had seen
The Imps attending on his Fairy Queen;
Her little Tib, and Tom, and Mib, and Mab,
Come to lament the Death of Poet Squab.
But Burying is not all the Rites we owe,
Some other Obsequies we must bestow:
Must so religious, so profound a Wit,
Be tossed like common Dust into the Pit?
The Fates forbid! We Will surely fill the Plains
And neighboring VVoods with Elegiack Strains:
Even Newgate's Chaplain, who in's Office fell,
Instructing Villains in the way to Hell;
He had the Muses Passport on his Hearse,
His Praises sung in Everlasting Verse.
Nay, a Dutch Mastiff late in State did lie;
My Lady's Lap-dog had an Elegy;
And shall not Dr -- n have one Oh! Fie, fie?
Yes, say the Oxford and the Cambridg Sparks,
We'll sing his Death as sweet as any Larks;
Oxford and Cambridg, the renowned Schools,
Famed for a Breed of wise Men and of Fools,
Where Infant Wits, with water gruel fed,
And little puny sucking Priests are bred;
Where Conjurers employ their Time in Vision,
Whence many a Learned Saffold has his Mission?
These always march in Verse in rank and file,
In Company pursue Poetic Toil;
Here a Battalion does in English lead,
While one in Latin dos the Troopers head:
But such the Wit and Sense, you would think the Elves
Did only write but just to please themselves:
Pl -- rd laments that he their Lines bespoke,
And swears the Bookseller is almost broke.
FINIS.
Books sold by A. Baldwin in VVarwicklane.
THE Dream. A Poem, addressed to Sir Charles Duncomb. By R. Gold.

The Foreigners. A Poem. Part I.

A Letter to his Majesty K. William, showing, 1. The Original Foundation of the
English Monarchy. 2. The Means by which it was removed from that Foundation. 3.
The Expedients by which it has been supported since that Removal. 4. Its
present Constitution as to all its integral Parts. 5. The best Means by which
its Grandeur may be for ever maintained. By the Reverend Mr. Stephens Rector of
Sutton in Surrey.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament, showing that a Restraint on the Press is
inconsistent with the Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of
the Nation.

A short Account how the Kingdom of Denmark was changed from a Popular
Government to an Hereditary and Absolute Monarchy, through a Difference betwixt
the Lords and Commons.

An Answer to a Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, containing seven
Queries relating to the present Ministry, and Men in Employments. 1699.

The State of the Navy considered in relation to the Victualling, particularly
in the Straits and the West Indies. With some Thoughts on the late
Mismanagements of the Admiralty, and a Proposal to prevent the like for the
future. School.

Remarks on the present condition of the Navy, and particularly of the
Victualling. In two Parts. The first exploding the Notion of fortifying of
Garrisons, and proving that the only Security of England consists in a good
Fleet. The second containing a Reply to the Observations on the first Part,
with a Discourse on the Discipline of the Navy; showing that the Abuses of the
Seamen are the highest Violation of Magna Charta, and of the Rights and
Liberties of Englishmen. 1699.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament concerning Clandestine Trade; showing how
far the evil Practices at the Custom-house at London tend to the Encouragement
of such a Trade. Written by a fair Merchant.

A Dialogue between a Director of the New East India Company, and one of the
Committee for preparing Bylaws: in which those for an impartial Rotation of
Directors, and the preventing of Bribes, are particularly debated.

Memoirs of Sir John Berkely, containing an Account of his Negotiation with
Lieutenant General Cromwell, Commissary General Ireton, and other Officers of
the Army, for restoring K. Charles the First to the Exercise of the Government
of England.

Memoirs of Secret Service. Containing the fullest and most early Discovery, 1.
Of the late intended Assassination of his Majesty King William, with the
Consultations and Meetings in order thereunto. 2. Of the intended Invasion from
France. 3. Of the arrival of the Thoulon Fleet at. Breast. 4. Of a Number of
Arms concealed in Warwickshire by Sir William Parkyns, which his since lodged
in the Tower: With other Affairs of great moment. To which is added, A
Character of Rob. F -- n. By Capt. Matthew Smyth, who kept a private
Correspondence for several years with a great Minister of State.

Two Pamphlets in vindication of the said Memoirs; the one in answer to the D.
of S's Letter, the other against R. K.

Books written against a Standing Army.
AN Argument showing, that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English
Monarchy. In 2 Parts.

A Letter from the Author of the Argument against a Standing Army, to the
Author of the Ballancing Letter.

Some Queries for the better understanding K. James's List of 18000 Irish
Heroes published at the Savoy, in answer to what had bin, and what should be
writ against a Standing Army.

A Discourse of Government with relation to Militias.

The Militia Reformed, or an easy Scheme of furnishing England with a constant
Land Force, capable to prevent or to subdue any Foreign Power, and to maintain
perpetual Quiet at home, without endangering the Public Liberty.

A short History of Standing Armies in England.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament concerning Guards and Garrisons.

A 2 d Letter concerning the four Regiments commonly called Mareeners.

The Seaman's Opinion of a Standing Army, in opposition to a Fleet at Sea as
the best security of the Kingdom. In a Letter to a Merchant written by a Sailor.

The State of the Case, or the Case of the State.

A Confutation of a late Pamphlet entitled, A Letter ballancing the Necessity
of keeping up a Land Force in times of Peace with the Dangers that may follow
on it. Part I.

The second Part of the Confutation of the Ballancing Letter; containing an
occasional Discourse in vindication of Magna Charta. In which is shown, 1. That
Magna Charta is much older than K. John. 2. That the Confirmations procured to
it in his and Henry the 3 d's Reigns, were far from being gained by Rebellion.
The whole containing an Historical Account and Defense of the Proceedings of
the Barons against those Kings for their open and notorious Violations of Magna
Charta, and the English Laws and Liberties.


