A WORD IN SEASON To this Present GENERATION.

OR A SOBER AND SERIOUS DISCOURSE About the favorable, Signal and eminent
Presence of the LORD with his PEOPLE, in their greatest Troubles, deepest
Distresses, and most deadly Dangers. WITH THE Resolution of several Questions,
concerning the DIVINE PRESENCE, as also the Reasons and improvements of this
great and glorious Truth.

All tending to encourage Christians in the way of their Duty, in the face of
all Afflictions, Oppositions, and Sufferings that they may meet with for
Righteousness sake from the Serpents seed, or from Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing.

By THOMAS BROOKS, the Author of the Golden Key to open hidden Treasures.

But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this House that I have builded. 1
Kings 8. 27. Deus unus est, and ubique totus diffusus. Cyprian. Maximilian the
Emperor was so delighted with that Sentence of PAUL, Si Deus nobiscum; If God
be with us, who shall be against us, that he caused it to be written upon the
Walls in most rooms of his Palace.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Sign of the Kings Arms in the
Poultrie.

THE SIGNAL PRESENCE OF GOD With His PEOPLE, In their greatest Troubles,
deepest Distresses, and most deadly Dangers.
2. Tim. 4. 17. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me,
that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might
hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion.
IN my Text you have three things that are most remarkable. Preached in March
and April, 1675.


First, you have Paul's commemoration of that singular experience that he had
of the favorable presence Acts 23. 11.
of Christ with him, and of his strengthening of him. Notwithstanding the Lord
stood with me, or (...), 1 Timothy 4. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 15.
by me, and assisted me; though I was deserted by men, yet I was aided and
assisted by Christ; though all men left me to shift for my self, yet the Lord
stood by me, and strengthened me with wisdom, prudence, courage, and constancy,
in the want of all outward encouragements, and in the face of all outward
discouragements.

Secondly, here is the end for which the Lord stood by him, assisted;
strengthened, and delivered him, viz. Romans 11. 13. Phil. 4. 22.
That he might preach the Gospel to the Nations. That he might have more time,
and further opportunity, to spread abroad the everlasting Gospel among the
Gentiles, whose Apostle he was. Rome at this time, was the Queen of the World,
and in its most flourishing condition, people from all parts of the World
flockt to Rome. Now when they should hear and see Paul's prudence, courage,
constancy and boldness, in professing of Christ, and in preaching and
professing the Gospel; even before that grand Tyrant, that monster of mankind
Nero, they could not but be wrought upon, and the fame of the glorious Gospel
could not but by this means be spread all the World over.

Thirdly, here is the greatness of the danger, from which he was delivered;
viz. From the mouth of the Calv. In. Esti^^. etc.
Lion. Some Authors do conceive these words (and I was delivered from the mouth
of the Lion) to be a Proverbial speech, noting some eminent, present, devouring
danger; I was delivered from the extremest hazard of death, even as a man
rescued out of a Lions Beza. A Lapide. Vide Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 22.
mouth, and pulled from between his teeth. Others more genuinly and properly by
the mouth of the Lion, do understand Nero's rage and cruelty, who for his
potency in preying on the flock of Christ, is here fitly compared to a Lion,
which devoured and destroyed the flock of Christ. This cruel Lion Nero put a
world of Christians to death, and made a bloody Decree, That whosoever
confessed himself a Christian, he should without any more a do, be put to death
as a convicted enemy Dedicator damnationis Christianoru^. Tertul.
of mankind. Tertullian calls him, The Dedicatour of the condemnation of
Christians. This bloody Monster Nero raised the first bloody Persecution. To
pick a quarrel with the Christians, he set the City of Rome on fire, and then
charged it upon the Christians, under which pretense he exposed them to the
fury of the People, who cruelly tormented them, as if they had been common
burners and destroyers of Cities, and the deadly enemies of mankind; yea Nero
himself, caused them to be apprehended and clad in wild beasts skins* and torn
in pieces with Dogs; others were crucified; some he made bonefires off to light
him in his night-sports* To be short, such horrid cruelty he used toward them
as caused many of their enemies to pity them: But God found out this bloody
Persecutor at last, for being adjudged by the Senate an enemy to mankind, he was
condemned to be wipt to death, for the prevention whereof he cut his own throat.

The words being thus briefly opened, the main point I shall insist upon is
this, viz.

That when the People of God, are in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers, then the Lord will be most favorably,
most signally, and most eminently present with them.

The Schoolmen say that God is five ways present. 1. In the Humanity of
Christ, by hypostatical union. 2. In the Saints, by knowledge and love. 3. In
the Church, by his essence and direction. 4. In Heaven by his Majesty and
Glory. 5. In Hell, by his vindictive Justice.

Hemingius says, There is a fourfold presence of God. 1. There is a presence
of Power in all men, even in the Reprobates. 2. A presence of Grace only in the
Elect. 3. A presence of Glory in the Angels and Saints departed. 4. An
hypostatical presence of the Father with the Son. But, if you please you may
take notice, that there is a sixfold presence of the Lord:

First, there is a general presence of God, and thus he Psalm. 139. 7. N^; quam
est Deus, etc. ubiqu^ est. C^rysost. in Col. 2. H. (...). 5.
is present with all Creatures; Whither shall I flee from thy presence?
Empedocles the Philosopher said well, That God is a Circle, whose center i^
every where, and whose circumference is no where. God is included in no place,
and excluded from no place, says another, Non est ubi, ubi non est Deus. They
could tell us that God is the soul of the World: and that as the soul is Tota
in tot^, and tota in qualibet part, so is he; his eye is in every corner, etc.
To which purpose they so pourtrayed their Goddess Minerva, that which way
soever one cast his eye, she always beheld him. Though Heaven be Gods Palace,
yet it is not his prison. Diana's Temple was burnt down, when she was busy at
Alexander's birth, and could not be at two places together, but God is present
both in Paradise, and in the Wilderness at the same time. 1 Kings 8. 27. But
will God indeed dwell on the Earth, behold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens
God is higher than the Heaven, deeper than Hell, broader than the Earth, and
more diffuse than the S^a. Bern.
cannot contain thee, how much less this House that I have builded. By the
Heaven of Heavens is meant that which is by the learned called the Empyreal
Heaven, where the Angels and the Saints departed do enjoy the glorious and
beatifical vision of God; and it is called the Heaven of Heavens, both because
it is the highest, and does contain the other Heavens within its orb, and also
by way of excellency, as the most holy place in the Temple Isa. 66. 1. Prove. 5.
21. Heb. 4. 13. Job 26. 6.
is called the Holy of Holies, because it far surpasses all the rest in
splendor and glory. Jer. 23. 24 Can any hide himself in secret places that I
should not see him? says the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the
Lord. Prove. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil
and the good. God is (...), All-eye. The poor Heathen couly say, Deus intimior
nobis intimo nostro. God is nearer to us than we are to our selves. Repletively
he is every where, though inclusively no where. Job 34. 21. For his eyes are
upon the ways of man, and be sees all his goings. V. 22. There is no
darkness, nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Sinners shall never be able to shroud themselves, nor their actions
from Gods all-seeing eye. The Rabbis put Makom, which signifies Place, among
the names of God. Bith^er brings them in expounding that Text in Esther 4. 14.
Deliverance shall arise from another Place, that is from God, they called him
Place, because he is in every place, though in the Assemblies of his Saints
more eminently and gloriously. God is Math. 5. 45. Acts 17. ^7, ^8. Psalm 33
13, 14.
present with all his Creatures. 1. Via productionis, by raising them up. 2.
Via sustentationis, by staying of them upon they are his Family, and he foods
and clothes them. 3. Via inclinationi^^, by giving unto them power of motion,
man could neither live nor move unless the Lord were with him. 4. Via
observationis, by taking notice of them, he observes and marks both their
persons and their actions, he sees who they are, and how they are employed. 5.
Via ordinationis, by governing and ruling of Acts 4. 25. to 29.
them, and all their actions, to the service of his glory, and the good of his
poor People. But this is not that presence that we are to discourse of.

Secondly, there is a miraculous presence of Christ, Mat. 7. 22. Mark. 3. 15.
and this some of the Prophets of old had, and the Apostles and others had in
Christ's time, and by virtue of this miraculous presence of Christ with them,
they cast out Devils, healed diseases, and did many wonderful things. But this
is not the presence that falls within the compass of that main point we purpose
to speak to.

Thirdly, there is a relative presence of Christ, and See Psalm 46. 4. 5. Cant.
7. 5. Joel 3. 21. Zach. 2. 10. 11. cap. 8. 3. Ps. 135. 21.
that is his presence in his Ordinances, and with his Churches. Of this
presence the Scripture speaks very largly. Exodus 20. 24. In all places where I
record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. Exodus 25. 8. And
let them make me a Sanctuary, that I may dwell amongst them. Exodus 29. 45. And
I will dwell among the Children of Israel, and will be their God. Levit. 26.
11. And I will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you.
V. 12. And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my
People. Psalm 76. 1. In Judah is God known: his Name is great in Israel. V. 2.
In Salem also is his Tabernacle; and his dwelling place in Sion. Isa. 8. 18.
From the Lord of Hosts which dwells in mount Sion. Psalm 9. 11. Sing praises
to the Lord which dwells in Sion. The Churches are said to 1. Cor. 3. 16, 17.
2 Cor. 6. 16. Heb. 3. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Rev. 2. 1.
be the Temples, in which the Lord does dwell, and the House of the living God,
and the golden Candlesticks amongst which he does walk. O how much does it
concern all the Churches to prize their Churchstate, and to keep close
together; and to walk suitable to that gracious presence of God, that shines in
the midst of them! But this is not that presence that falls under our present
consideration. But,

Fourthly, there is a Majestical and glorious presence of Christ, and thus he
is said to be in Heaven. Psalm 2. 4. Job 16. 19. 2. These. 1. 9. Psalm 16. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15, 16. Rev. 3. 21.
He that sits in the Heavens will laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision. Heb. 1. 13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, sit thou
on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Cap. 9. 24. For
Christ is not entered into the boly Pl^oes made with hands, which are the figure
of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for
us. Not that Heaven is circulus concludens, a place wherein Christ is shut up,
but Palatium resplendens, the Court (as it were) where his Majesty in acts of
wisdom, and power, and mercy, and conjunction of grace and glory does most of
all appear. As the soul of man, though it be in every part of man, yet it does
principally appear and manifest it self in the heart and brain, so here, etc.
Manica, Austin's Mother, standing one day, and seeing the Sun shine, raised
this meditation, Oh if the Sun be so bright, what is the light of Christ's
presence in glory! But this is not the presence we design now to discourse of.

Fifthly, there is a Judicial or wrathful presence of the Sea Exodus 9. 14. Isa.
6., 9, 10. cap 64. 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 81. 12. 2 These. 2. 11, 12. Psalm 68. 2.
Jer. 4. 26. Eze. 38. 20. Hab. 1. 12.
Lord, and thus he is present with wicked men, sometimes blinding of them,
sometimes hardening of them, sometimes leaving of them to their own hearts
lusts, sometimes giving them up to their own hearts lusts, sometimes filling
their faces with shame, and their Consciences with terrors. He is Judicially
present with wicked men, by a particular observation of their persons and
ways. Psalm 33. 13, 14. Job 34. 21, 22. He sees who they are, and how they are
employed against his honor, his interest, his Saints, his ways, and by a
special detestation of their persons and ways, etc. But this is not that
presence that at this time falls under our consideration, and therefore

Sixthly and lastly, there is a gracious, a favorable, a The compassionate
Parent is most with the sick child so here.
signal, or eminent presence of the Lord with his faithful People, in their
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, as the
Scriptures do every where evidence; Take a taste of some, Genesis 39. 20. And
Josep^'s ^aster took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the Kings
prisoners were bound, and he was there in the prison, Verse 21. But the Lord
was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and gave him favor in the Acts 16. 25.
sight of the keeper of the prison. A prison keeps not God from his, witness
the Apostles and Martyrs, whose prisons by Gods presence became Palaces, and
their stocks a Musick-school. Bradford, after he was put in prison, Act. and
Mon. f. 1489. ibid. 1457.
had better health than before, and found great favor with his keeper, who
suffered him to go whither he would, upon his promife to return, by such an
hour to his prison again. If men knew by experience the sweet that is in
suffering for Christ, they would desire with Chrysostom, if it were put to
their choice, rather to be Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, than Paul rapt up
in the third Heaven. Basil in his Oration for Barlaam, that famous Martyr,
faith, He delighted in the close prison, as in a pleasant green meadow, and he
took pleasure in the several inventions of tortures, as in several sweet
flowers. Luther reports of that Martyr S. Agatha, that as she went to prisons
and tortures, she said, she went to Banquets and Nuptials. The Sun enlightens
the World, says Cyprian, but he that made the Sun is a greater light to you in
prison, etc. Fire, sword, prisons, famins are pleasure, they are all delightful
to me, says Basil. Paul rattles his chain, which he bears for the Gospel, and
was Ephesians. 6. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 16. Act. 15. 26, 29. Phil. 1. 7, 13, 14, 16. Colos 4.
3. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 9. etc.
as proud of it, as a woman of her ornaments, says Chrysostom. Paul and Silas
in a prison found more pleasure than pain, more joy than sorrow, and when they
were whipped, it was with Rosemary branches, as I may say, Paul greatly rejoiced
in his sufferings for Christ, and therefore often sings out, I Paul a prisoner
of Jesus Christ, not I Paul wrapped up in the third Heaven; Christ showed his
great love to him, in wrapping him up in the third Heaven, and he showed his
great love to Christ in a cheerful suffering for him. Eusebius tells of one
that writ to his Friend from a stinking Dungeon, and dated his Letter from my
delicate Orchard. Mr. Glover the Martyr wept for joy of his imprisonment; An^
God forgive me (said Mr. Bradford, when a prisoner) my unthank fullness for this
exceeding great mercy, that among so many thousands, he chooses me to be one in
whom he will suffer. I was carried to the Cole-house, says Mr. Philpot the
Martyr, where I with my fellows, do Act. and Mon. fol. 16^3.
rouse together in the straw as cheerfully, we thank God, as others do in their
beds of down. Philip, Landgrave of Hesse, being a long time prisoner under
Charles the Fifth, was asked what upheld him in his long imprisonment? He
answered, that he felt the divine consolations of the Martyrs. Genesis 49. 23. The
Archers (or as the Hebrew here has it the Arrow-masters) have sorely grieved
him, and shot at him, and hated him. These Arrowmasters were his barbarous
Brethren that sold him, his adulterous Mistress, that harlot-like hunted for
his precious life. his injurious Master, that without any desert of his
imprisoned him, the tumultuating Egyptians, that pined with hunger perhaps
spoke of stoning of him, and the envious Courtiers and inchanters that spoke 1 Samuel 30. 6. Jun us. Mercer. Not that his arms were adotned with bracelets and
gold, as the Chalde says, etc.
evil of him, before Pharaoh, to bring him out of favor; but by divine
assistance, and Gods favorable presence, he proved too strong for them all.
Ver. 24. But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made
strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, etc. Joseph is likened to a
strong Archer, that as his other enemies as archers shot at him, so his bow was
steadfast, and his arms strong by the signal presence of God with him. Such an
eminent presence of God had Joseph with him, that he never wanted courage,
comfort, or counsel, when he was at the worst. The divine presence will make a
man stand fast and firm under the greatest pressures; 2 Cor. 1. 9, 12.
it made Joseph use his bow against his adversaries. As David did his sling
against Goliath, he slung, says one, Eucholc^r.
as if he had wrapped up God in his sling. Psalm 23. 4. Yea though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me,
thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. The prefence of the Lord with his People
in the most deadly dangers, fills their souls full of courage, confidence, and
comfort. That darkness which comes upon a dying man, a little before he gives
up the Ghost, is the greatest darkness; and yet let a Christian then have but
God by the hand, and he will not fear the most hideous and horrid
representations of death. Dan. 3. 24. Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was
astonished, and rose up in have, and spoke and said unto his Counselors, did we
not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said
unto the King, true O King. Verse 25. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men
loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of
the fourth is like the Son of God. The presence of the Son of God turned the
fiery Furnace into a garden of delights, a gallery of pleasure. This divine
presence in the midst of fire and flame, kept them from fainting, sinning, and
shrinking, and sill'd their souls with comfort, peace, ease, and heavenly
refreshing. One of the Ancients rhetorically speaking to Nebuchadnezzar,
Augustine.
who said, He saw one like the Son of God, whence came this (says he) who told
thee that this was the Son of God, what Law, what Prophet? he is not yet born
into the world, and the similitude of him, that was to be born, is known to
thee; whence came this? who told thee this, but the divine fire enlightening
thee within, that whilst thou beholdest these three as thine enemies in the
fire, thou might give testimony to the Son of God. This heathenish Prince
looked upon the fourth person, as one like a Son of the Gods, or like some
young God, most bright and glorious, exceeding fair and excelling in beauty, as
if he were not of humane but of divine offspring. But what ever notions or
apprehensions Nebuchadnezzar had, we may very safely understand this fourth to
be, as the words do literally bear, the very true Son of God, our Lord and
Savior, who is signally present with his People, in their greatest
extremities, and most deadly dangers. Zach. 1. 8. I saw by night, and behold a
man riding upon a red Horse, and he stood amongst the myrtle-trees that were in
the bottom and behind him were there red borses, speckled and white. The man
riding upon the red Horse, is the Man Christ 1 Timothy 2. 5. Josh. 4. 14. Heb. 2.
10. Among the Romans the Crown, or Garland of those that did shout for victory,
or ride in triumph was made of myrtle, Plin. lib. 15. cap. 29.
Jesus, it is the Captain of the Lords Host, and the Captain of our Salvation:
Christ is here represented in his Kingly state, under the Type of a Man riding
on a red Horse, and having his Royal Attendants; for under the Type of red
Horses, speckled and white behind him, is represented his having Angels for
Ministers, and all Creatures ready for every dispensation; whether sad,
represented by red; or comfortable, represented by white; or mixed of mercy and
judgment, represented by speckled Horses. Christ is here represented as a Man
on horseback, ready to make out, or sally forth for the good of his People,
when they are at the lowest: The low, afflicted, and suffering state of the
Church, is fitly compared to Myrtle-trees, that grow in a shady grove, in
valleys, and bottoms, and by waters sides: now when his People are in a very
low condition, then Christ appears on horseback, for his Peoples protection,
and their Enemies confusion. Christ will be sure to lodge with his People when
they are at lowest; when the Church is in danger Christ is not asleep, he is
always ready upon his red Horse, watching all opportunities and advantages, to
show his zeal and courage for his People, and his severity and fury against
their Enemies. The Man that stood amongst the Myrtle-trees, Verse 10. is that
Man Christ Jesus, whose special residence is with his People when they are in
the most low, dangerous, and forlorn condition; no troubles, no distresses, no
dangers can banish Christ from his People, or make him seek another lodging,
Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and
through the rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. The
Israelites went through the red Sea and were not drowned; and the three Children
walked up and Dan. 3. 27.
down in the fiery Furnace, and were not so much as singed: By fire and water
we may well understand the various troubles, distresses, and ^ngers that may
attend the People of God; now in all these various troubles, etc. the Lord will
be signally present with them, to protect and defend^ to secure and deliver
them out of all their various troubles, their deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, 2 Cor. 4. 9. Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed: Persecuted by Men, but not forsaken by God; the Saints may be shaken
not shivered; persecuted, not conquered; cast down, but not cast off. Luther
speaking of his ^nemies, says, They may thrust me, but not throw me; show
their teeth, but not devour me; kill me, but not hurt me, etc. because of that
favorable and signal presence of Christ that is with me. Now this is that
presence of the Lord, that falls under our present consideration.

But for the further opening of this important point, let us a little enquire,
how the Lord does manifest his favorable, his signal, his eminent presence to
his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers? Now to this Question I shall give these twelve Answers.

First, The Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, Exodus 14. 10. And when
Pharaoh drew nigh the children of Israel lift up their eyes; The faithful cry
unto God in their extremities, but the unbelievers became mad, Pelican.
and behold the Egyptians marched after them, and they were sore afraid: and
the children of Israel cried out un to the Lord, Verse 11. And they said unto
Moses, because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in
the wilderness? wherefore have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth of
Egypt? Verse 12. Is not this the word, that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying,
Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? for it bad been better for us to
serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness. Thus you see
their great troubles, deep distresses and most deadly dangers, they having a
Red Sea before them, an^ a cruel, bloody, and enraged Enemy just at the heels
of them. Now in this extremity see to what a high pitch Moses his Faith rises;
Verse 13. And Moses said unto the People, fear ye vide Joseph. lib. 2. cap. 6.
not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you
to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever. He says, they shall never see the Egyptians again, that is, in
that manner as they saw them that day, insulting against them and p^rfuing
after them, as the Septuagint do well interpret it, (...), after what sort ye
have seen them, for they saw them afterward, Exodus 14. 30.
but drowned, and lying dead upon the shore, Verse 14. The Lord shall fight for
you and ye shall hold your peace. A strong Faith will help a Christian at a
dead lift, though Moses had received no particular promise how the Israelites
should be delivered, yet he rested upon Gods general promise, before that he
would get himfelf honor upon Pharaoh and his Host. The Lord shall fight for
you, and ye shall be still; as if he had said, ye shall be merely passive, and
do nothing at all toward the subduing of your Enemies, neither in words, nor
deeds, the Lord shall fight against your Enemies, and defeat them himself by a
strong hand, and an outstretched arm, compose your selves, act faith and hope
in God, withour doubting, murmuring, grudging, fainting, or fretting; for God
deferreth his chiefest aid, until man's greatest need, when the Enemy is highest
Salvation is nearest, when the danger is greatest, the help of God is readiest,
as at this time they found it.

2 Chronicles. 13. 3. Abijah set the battle in array, with an Army of valiant men of
war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the Battle in
array against him, with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of
valor: Jeroboam had two to one; Verse 7. And there were gathered unto him vain
men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam
the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted and could not
withstand them. Rehoboam was no warrior, he was no expert Prince in the use of
2 Chronicles. 12. 13. He was one and forty years old when he came to the Crown.
Arms, he was but young (not in age) but in experience, policy, and valor, he
was hen-hearted, he had no courage, no mettle: Jeroboam takes hold of these
advantages and gathers eigth hundred thousand Racha's, brainless fellows, light
and empty, yoakless and masterless persons, men of no piety, civility,
ingenuity, or common honesty. Now see what a mighty spirit of Faith God raised
in the children of Judah, verse 17. And Abijah and his People slew them with a
great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand
chosen men. A monstrous and matchless slaughter, the greatest number that ever
we read slain in any battle: far beyond that of Tamerlan, when he took Bajazet,
or Aetius the Roman Prefect, when he fought with Attilas and his Hunnes in the
Fields of Catalaunia, where were slain on both sides one hundred sixty five
thousand. Verse 18. Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that
time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord
God of their Fathers; Faith at a dead lift never miscarrieth: God never has nor
never will fail those that place their confidence upon him in their greatest
dangers.

Esher 4. 14. For if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but
thou and thy Fathers house shall be destroyed: and who knows whether thou art
come to the Kingdom for such a time as this. Their great trouble, their deep
distress, and their most deadly danger you have in that 3. Esther 13. And the
Letters were sent by the posts into all the Kings provinces, to destroy, to
kill Here are great aggravations of his cruelty, in that neither sex not age
are spared; Rage and mallce knows no bo^nds.
and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little children and
women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month (which is
the month Adar) and to take the spoil of them for a prey. Haman that grard
Informer, with his wicked crew, would have spoiled them of their lives and
goods, but that they were prevented by a miraculous providence as you know; now
in this deep distress and most deadly danger at what a rate does Mordecai
believe. [For if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement (Heb. respiration) and deliverance arise. (Heb. Stand up as
on its basis or bottom so as none shall be able to withstand it.) This Mordecai
speaks not by a spirit of prophecy, but by the power and force of his faith,
grounded upon the precious promises of Gods defending his Church, hearing the
crics of his People, arising for their relief and succor, and grounded upon
all the glorious attributes of God, viz. his power, love, wisdom, goodness, and
allsufficiency, etc. all which are engaged in the Covenant of grace, to save,
protect, and secure his People in their greatest troubles and most deadly
dangers. Mordecai's faith in this black, dark, dismal day, was a notable faith
inde^d, and worthy of highest commendation. Faith can look through the
perspective of the promises, and see deliverance at a great distance, salvation
at the door; what though sense says, Deliverance will not come, and what
though reason says, Deliverance cannot come: yet a raised faith gets above all
fears, and disputes and says; Deliverance will certainly come, Redemption is
at hand.

Number. 13. 30. And Caleb stilled the People before Moses, and said, let us go up
at once, and passess it, for we are well able to overcome it. Cap. 14. 9. Only
rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the Land, for Number.
13. 32, 33.
they are bread for us; their defense is departed from them, and the Lord is
with us, fear them not. The Spies by their lies did what they could to daunt
and discourage the People, by crying up the strength of the Anakims, and ^um.
13. 23. to the 28.
the impossibility of the conquest, these hollow-hearted hypocritical Spies
blow hot and cold almost in a breath; First, they make a narrative of the
fruitfulness of the Land, and presently they conclude, that it was a Land that
was not sufficient to nourish the inhabitants, yea, a Verse 32.
Land that did devour the inhabitants. Liars have no Iron memories. But now
behold to what a mighty pitch Caleb's faith is raised. [Let us go up at once,
and possess it, for we are able to overcome it.] Or nearer the Hebrew, Marching
up, march up, subduing subdue. Let us, says believing Caleb, march up to the
land of Canaan courageously, resolutely, undauntedly, for the day is our own,
the Land is our own, all is our own. [They are bread for us,] we shall make but
a breakfast of them, we shall easily and as surely root them out, and cut them
down with our swords, as we cut the bread we eat. [Their defense is departed
from them.] In the Hebrew it Psalm 91. 1. Ps. 121. ^, 6.
is, Their shadow is departed from them; the shadow you know guards a man from
the scorching heat of the Sun. Caleb by faith, saw God with drawn from them, by
the eye of his faith he looked upon them as a people without a fence, a shadow,
a guard, a covert, a protection, and therefore, as a people that might easily
be subdued, and destroyed. His faith told him, that it was not their strong
Cities, nor their high walls, nor their sons of Anack, that could preserve,
shelter, secure, or defend them, seeing the Lord had forsaken them, and would
be no longer as a shadow or a shelter to them [And the Lord is with us,] to
make us victorious, to tr^ad down our enemies, and to give us a quiet
possession of the good Land.

So Dan. 3. 16. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the King:
O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Ver. 17. If
it be so, our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. In the fiery Furnace
they are protected by Josephus Antiq. p. 259, 260.
a divine providence, they escape death beyond all men's expectations, for the
fire touched them not, neither could it burn during their abode in the Furnace,
for God so fortified their bodies that they could not be consumed by fire;
which accident made them in great estimation with the King, for that he saw,
that they were virtuous, and beloved of God, and for that cause they were
highly honored by him. Here is a fiery Furnace before them, and a proud,
boasting, tyrannical, enraged Prince domineering over them, for not obeying his
Idolatrous will. Now to what a mighty pitch is their faith raised? [Our God
whom we serve, is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us.] Their faith was
bottomed upon their propriety in God. [Our God,] and upon the power,
providence, and all sufficiency of God. [Is able to deliver us,] and upon the
gracious readiness, and willingness of God. [And he will deliver us out of thy
hand, O King.] When dangers are greatest, then God commonly raises the faith of
his people highest, faith does most and best for us, when we are at a dead
lift. It Heb. 11. 34.
quenches the violence of fire, as the Apostle speaks, pointing at the faith of
these three Children, or rather Champions; though now the fiery Furnace was
heat seven times hotter, then it used to be at other times, yet such was the
strength, and might, and power of their faith, that it so quenched the flames,
that they had not one hair of their heads singed, nor their coats changed, Dan.
3. 27.
nor the smell of fire found upon them; and thus the blessed Martyrs may be
said by their faith, patience, and constancy to quench the violence of the
fire, though their bodies were consumed to ashes in the fire. So Dan. 6. 16.
Daniel is cast into the den of hungry, enraged Lions; innocent Daniel is
exposed to the cruel paws, and hungry jaws of Lions. This Kind of capital
punishment, was not unusual among the Babylonians, the Medes, and Persians, and
among the Romans also, with whom it was a common saying in Tertullian's time,
Let the Christians be cast to the Lions. The faces of the A^os ^. 8.
Lions are stern, and their voices are terrible, they are roaring and ravening,
they are greedy of their prey; they are vigilant and subtle, lying in wait to
get their prey, they sleep little, and when they sleep it is apertis Psalm 17.
12.
oculis, With open eyes; they mind their prey much, and are cunning to catch
it; the Lion hides himself, and when the prey comes near he suddenly surprises
it: they are proud and stately, they go alone, they eat not with the Lyonness,
much less with other creatures, they will not stoop to any, or turn away from
any, they do what Prove. 30. 3. Nah. 2. 12. 2 Kin 17. 6. Prove. 28. 15 1 Pet. 5.
8.
they list; they are most cruel, bloody, devouring creatures; they have
terrible claws, sharp teeth, and are strong and mighty to crush and break the
bones; and it is very dangerous to meddle with Lions. Number. 24. 9. He lays
down as a Lion, as a great Lion, who shall stir him up? Lions if offended and
provoked, are very revengful; in the hunting or taking of Lions, the Lion
observes who wounds him, and on him if possible he will be revenged. Aelian
tells of a Bear that came into a Lions den, and bit the whelps she found there;
the Lion returning, the Bear to shift for her self got up into a high tree, the
Lyoness watched at the foot of the tree: the Lion ranged abroad in the woods,
and meets with a man that had an axe, and used to fell trees; this man the Lion
brings to the den, showed him the wounded whelps, directs him to the tree where
the Bear was, which he cut down; the Bear being torn in pieces, the man was
safely dismissed. By these hints we may guess at the deadly danger, that Daniel
was in. Some Writers tell us, that if a cloth be cast upon the eyes of a Lion
Aristot. Pliny, Pererius.
to cover them, he will not hurt a man. 2. Or if he be full. Josephus, to
illustrate the History, says, that these Josephus Antiq. page 262, 263.
Princes pleaded before the King, saying, that the Lions were full and gorged,
and therefore they would not touch Daniel; which he hearing being displeased
with their injurious malice, said, that the Lions should now be sed, and then
they cast in to see, when they were gorged, whether they could likewise escape;
but this being done they were suddenly destroyed, before they came Dan. 6. 24.
to the bottom of the d^n. To what a fatal end came these Informers? as to
their wives and children, that were cast into the den of Lions; it is most
probable, that they were accessory to that wicked conspiracy against Daniel, by
stirring up and provoking their Husbands and Fathers, to engage all their
power, interest, and policy against him, and never to suffer a poor captive to
be advanced in honor and dignity above them; and how just and righteous a thing
was it with God, that they who had plotted together, and contrived together,
the ruin and destruction of a holy innocent person, that these should suffer
together, and go to the den together, and be torn in pieces together. Sinners
look to your selves: if you will sin with others, you must expect to suffer
with others. 3. Or if a man has been beneficial to him. 4. Or if a man lies
prostrate before him, in the manner of a supplicant; but Daniel was not safe,
he was not secured by any of these means, but God secured him in the midst of
these dreadful dangers by the ministry of an Angel. [My God has sent his
Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths, that they have not hurt me, Dan. 6. 22.]
Others say, that God secured Daniel, by taking away the Lions hunger from them,
at that time, and by causing in them a satiety. And some tell us, that God
secured him, by raising such a phantasy in the Lions that they looked upon
Daniel, not as a prey, but as on one, that was a friend unto them. But now in
the midst of this dreadful danger, how does Daniel's faith sparkle and shine,
Ver. 23. Then was the King exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they
should take Daniel up out of the den; So Daniel was taken up out of the den,
and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.
Daniel in a fiery Furnace, looks upon God as his God, in the midst of the
flames he acts faith upon the power of God, the promises of God, etc. Of all
living creatures Lions are most fierce, cruel, and irresistible, and yet such
was the strength and force of Daniel's faith, that it stopped their mouths;
though Daniel See Heb. 11. 33. Judge. 14. 6. 1 Samuel 37, 34.
was but one man, yet such was the power of his faith, that it stopped the mouths
of many Lions. As Luther says of prayer, so may I say of faith; it has a kind
of omnipotency in it, its able to do all things, est quaedam omnipotentia
precum. Thus you see by these famous instances to what a mighty pitch the Lord
has raised the faith of his People, when they have been in the greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers; And this is the first
way wherein the Lord does manifest his favorable, his signal, his eminent
presence with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers. But,

Secondly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, his signal, his eminent
presence with his People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers, Feri Domine, feri, said Luther, strike while thou please
Lord, only to thy correction, Add instruction, ut quod noceat, doceat.
by his teaching and instructing of them, Psalm 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom
thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. This divine presence
turns every lash into a happy lesson. In this Psalm the holy Ghost uses six
arguments to prove, that a man is blessed who is chastened; First, because he is
instructed by being afflicted as here. 2. Because the end why God lays
affliction on his People is to give them rest; from the days of adversity,
Verse 13. 3. Until the pit be dug for the wicked in the same Verse, until
the cold grave hold his body, and hot hell hold his soul. 4. Because God will
support them under all their afflictions, when God casts his People into the
Furnace of afflictions, his everlasting arms shall be underneath them; though
God may cast down his People, yet he will never cast off his People. 5. Because
there shall be a glorious restoration, Ver. 15. Judgment shall return unto
righteousness. 6. Because all the upright in heart shall follow it, in the same
Verse, viz. in their affections they are carried out after it; earnestly
desiring that dear day, when God will unriddle his providence, and clear up
his proceedings with the sons of men. Jerome writing to a sick friend, has this
expression: I account it a part of unhappiness not to know adversity, I judge
you to be miserable, because you have not been miserable. Demetrius says,
nothing seems more unhappy to me, than he to whom no adversity has happened.
Impunitas securitatis matter, virtutum noverca, Bern.
Religionis virus, tinea sanctitatis; Freedom from punishment is the mother of
security, the stepmother of virtue, the poison of Religion, the moth of
holiness. It was a speech of Gaspar Olevianus.
a German Divine in his sickness, In this disease (says he) I have learned how
great God is, and what the evil of sin is, I never knew to purpose what God was
before, nor what sin meant before; Gods corrections are our Schola cru^is,
schola lucis. Isa. 26. 9. Prove. 3. 12, 13. cap. 6 23.
instructions, his lashes our lessons, his scourges our schoolmasters, his
chastisements our advertisements; and to note this the Hebrews and Greeks both
express chastening and teaching by one and the same word (...) musar (...),
because the latter is the true end of the former, according to that in the
Proverb, Smart makes wit, and vexation gives understanding. Job 36. 8. And if
they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction. Verse 9. Then
be shows them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded.
Verse 10. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they
return from iniquity. Sanctified afflictions open men's ears to discipline, and
turn them from iniquity, which is a piece of learning that a Christian can
never pay too dear for; Affliction is verus Scripturae commentarius, An
excellent comment upon the Scripture; Afflictions make way for the word of the
Lord to come to Affliction sanctisied, is Lex practica, a practical Law.
the heart. Bernard had a brother of his, who was a riotous and profane
Soldier; Bernard gives him many good instructions, and admonitions, etc. but
his brother slighted them, and made nothing of them; Bernard comes to him, and
puts his hand to his side, One day (says he) God will make way to this heart
of yours by some spear or lance: and so it fell out; for going into the wars,
he was wounded, and then he remembers his brothers instructions and
admonitions, and then they got to his heart, and lay upon it to some purpose.
Job 33. 16. Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction.
Oculos quos peccatum claudit, poena aperit, Greg.
The eyes that sin shuts, afflictions open. The cross opens men's eyes, as the
^asting of honey did Jonathan's. By correction God seals up instruction, God
sets on the one by the other, as when a Schoolmaster would have a lesson
learned indeed, he sets it on with a whipping. As Gideon taught the Elders of
the city and the men of Succoth with the thorns and briars of the wilderness,
so Judge. 8. 16.
God teaches his People by affliction many a holy and happy lesson. By
afflictions, troubles, distresses, and dangers, the Lord teaches his People to
look upon sin as the most loathsome thing in the world, and to look upon
holiness as the most lovely thing in the world. Sin is never-so bitter, and
holiness is never so sweet, as when our troubles are greatest, and our dangers
highest. By afflictions the Lord teaches his People to sit loose from this
world, and to make sure the great things of that other world. By affliction God
shows his People the vanity, vexation, emptiness, weakness, and nothingness of
the Creatures; and the choiceness, preciousness, and sweetness of communion
with himself, and of inte^est in himself. Christ though he knew yet learned he
obedience, by the things which he suffered, that is, he Heb. 5. 8. (...),
N^cumenta documenta.
showed obedience more than before; Not as if Christ were to go to School to
learn, or as if by certain acts he were to fit himself for obedience; he did
not learn that which he knew not before, but did that which he did not before;
he that was put upon the trial of his obedience, he came to know by experience,
what a hard matter it was thus to obey God. By Gods favorable presence a man
comes to learn many lessons in a time of adversity, which he never learned in a
day of prosperity: for we are like idle boys and bad scholars, that learn best
when the rod is over us. Hezekiah was better Isa. 39. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5.
upon his sick bed, than when he was showing of his treasures to the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon; and David was a better man, when he was in
his wilderness Psalm 30. 6, 7.
condition, than when he set upon his Royal throne; the Jews are ever best,
when in the worst condition; the Athenians would never mend tell they were in
mourning. When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did, and how
he felt himself? he pointed to his sores and uleers (whereof he was full) and
said, These are Gods gems and jewels wherewith he decketh his best friends, and
to me they are more precious than all the gold and silver in the world. Here,
as that Martyr phrased it, we are but learning our A. B. C. and our lesson is
never past Christ's Cross, and our walking is still home by weeping cross.
Usually men are worst in a prosperous condition; in a prosperous condition God
speaks to us, Je^. 2. 21.
and we mind him not. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou would not
hear: and this has been thy manner from thy youth upwards. Pope Martin
reported of himself, that whilst he was a Monk, and lived in the Cloister, he
had some evidences for Heaven, when he was a Cardinal, he began to fear and
doubt, but after he came to be Pope, he utterly despaired. The Lord never shows
more of his favorable, signal, and eminent presence, than by teaching of his
People many gracious and Gospel lessons by their great troubles, deep
distresses, and most deadly dangers. But,

Thirdly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, his signal, his eminent
presence with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers, by raising, strenthening, and acting, their suffering
graces, viz. their faith, hope, love, patience, prudence, courage, boldness,
zeal, constancy. Thus in the Text, The Lord stood by me, and strengthened me.
He put new life, and strength, and vigor into all my graces; although there
are habits of grace always resident in the Isay 64. 7.
hearts of the Saints, yet those habits are not always in exercise. The habits
of grace cannot act of themselves, there must be renewed strength imparted to
set them on Psalm 119. 35. Christ is the diverse winds, both cold and hot, moist
and dry, binding and opening, North and South, and therefore what wind so ever
blows, it shall blow good to his People.
work. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein do I delight.
Though David had a spirit of new life within him, yet he could not actually
walk in the path of Gods precepts, till by an additional force he was set a
going. Cant. 4. 16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South wind, blow upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. By the garden we may safely
understand a sanctified soul, and by the spices in this garden we may
understand the several graces planted in the soul; now these spices can never
flow out, and send forth their fragrant smell, till the North and South wind
blows upon them. Habitual grace cannot operate and dilate, and put forth it
self into exercise, till by the concurrent presence and assistance of Christ it
is educed into act; no Saint can act that grace he has received by his own
strength, without the presence and assistance of Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 16. But by
the grace of God, I am what I am; and his grace, which was bestowed upon me,
was not in vain, but I labor more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God, which was with me. He does not say, the grace of God which was in
me, that habitual grace which I had: but, The grace of God which was with me.
So then it is not the strength of habitual grace, that will carry a man through
doing or suffering work, but the auxiliary, the assisting, the conquering grace
of Jesus Christ; it is his grace with us, more than his grace in us. So John
15. 5. Without me ye can do (...), separate from me, or apart from me. Erasm.
sine me. Beza, se^rsim a me. Members divided from the ^ead, cannot live, so
here.
nothing. Ye that are my Disciples, ye that have the spirit of Jesus Christ,
Without me ye can do nothing; the habits of grace, the actings of grace, and
the perfecting of grace are all from Jesus Christ. It is more emphatical in the
original, for there you have two negatives, cannot, do nothing; He does not
say, without me ye cannot do many things; but, Without me ye can do nothing;
nor he does not say, Without me ye can do no great thing; but, Without me ye
can do nothing; nor he does not say, Without me ye can do no difficult thing;
but, Without me ye can do nothing; nor he does not say, Without me ye can do no
spiritual thing; but, Without me ye can do nothing. What ever a Saint may do,
by the power of gifts, or habits of grace received, yet he can do nothing in a
lively spiritual acceptable way, without the presence of Christ, without a
constant dependence upon Christ, without a sweet and special communion and
fellowship with Christ; if we cannot put forth a natural action without him,
for in him, we live, move, and have our being; how much less can Acts 17. ^8.
we perform a spiritual action, in a spiritual manner, without his presence and
assistance? Let the King sit Cant. 1. 12.
but at his table, and then our spicknard will send forth a sweet smell; that
is, let Jesus Christ be but present with us, and then our graces, which are
compared to spicknard will send forth a sweet smell; sitting at the table with
King Jesus, intimakes the sweetest friendship 1 Kings 10. 8.
and fellowship with him. It was held a great honor and happiness to stand
before Solomon, what is it then to sit with Christ at his table? [My spicknard
sends forth the smell thereof,] that is, My faith is actuated, and all my
other graces are exercised and increased; Christ's presence puts life into all
our graces. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will Isa. 41. 10. Luke 21, 14, 15.
strengthen thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. 2 Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak then am I strong. When I am weak
in my self, then am I strong in Christ. If the Sun shine upon the Mary-gold,
Mal. 4. ^.
how soon does the Mary-gold open, so when the Sun of righteousness does but
shine upon a Christians graces, how do they open and act! To show how the
presence of Christ has acted the faith, love, courage, boldness, and patience,
etc. of the Saints in the Old and New Testament, the primitive Christians and
the Martyrs, in the latter ages of the world, when they have been in their
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, would take up
more than a little time, besides in my other writings, I have opened these
things more fully to you, and to them I must refer you. And therefore.

Fourthly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and eminent presence
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, by laying a Law of restraint upon every wicked man, and by
bridling and checking their fury and insolency, that they shall not add
afflictions to the afflicted as otherwise they would; as he did upon Laban,
Genesis 31. 24. And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, take heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad. Verse 29.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt; but the God of your Fathers spoke
unto me yester night, saying, take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob
either good or bad. See what a law of restraint God laid upon Esau, Genesis 33. 1,
2, 3, 4. and upon Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6, 7, 8, 17, 18. and upon Benhadad, 1
Kings 20. 1, 10, 29, 30. and upon Haman, as you may see by comparing the 3. and
6. chapters of Esther together; and upon Pharaoh, Exodus 15. 9, 10. and upon
Senacherib, Isa. 37. 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 36. and upon Herod, Acts 12, Maximinus
set forth a proclamation engraven in History of the Council of Trent page 417.
brass, for the utter abolishing of Christ and Religion: he was eaten up of
lice. Valens, being to subscribe an order for the banishment of Basil, was
smitten with a sudden trembling of his hand, that he could not subscribe the
order; afterward he was burned to death by the Goths.

Domitian, the author of the second persecution against the Christians, having
drawn a catalogue of the names of such as he was to kill, in which was the name
of his own Wife, and other Friends; upon which he was by the consent of his
Wife, slain by his own household servants with daggers in his privy Chamber; his
body was buried without honor, his memory cursed to posterity, and his Arms
and Ensigns where thrown down and defaced. Julian vowed to make a sacrifice of
the Christians upon his return from the wars, but in a Battle against the
Persians, he was deadly wounded, and throwing his blood in the air, in a high
contempt of Christ, he dyed with that desperate blasphemous expression in his
mouth, Vicisti tandem Galiaee, Thou Galilean (...) overcome me.

Faelix, Earl of Wurtenburg; was a great persecutor of the Saints, and did
swear, that ere he dyed he would ride up to the spurs in the blood of the
Lutherans; but the very same night, wherein he had thus sworn and vowed, he was
choked in his own blood.

The Judgments of God were so famous and frequent upon the persecutors of the
Saints in Bohemia, that it was used as a proverb among the Adversaries
themselves, That if any man were weary of his life, let him but attempt against
the Piccardines (so they called the Christians) and he should not live a year
to an end. By these short hints you may see, that all along God has made good,
that Word, that is more worth than a world: Psalm 76, 10. Heb. Gird, that is,
keep it within compass as with a Girdle.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain. Heb. Shall thou gird, that is curb, and keep within compass; or
as the Greek has it, It shall keep holy day to thee, that is, cease from
working, or acting outwardly, how restless soever it be within. [The remainder
of wrath shall thou restrain,] that is, those that are left alive of thy
wrathful enemies, that have still any malice against thy People, thou will curb
and restrain, and not suffer their wrath to be so great as formerly; or if they
go about to recruit their forces, and to set again upon thy People, thou will
set such bounds to their wrath, that they shall not accomplish their desires,
nor shall they proceed one step further, than shall make signally for thy glory
and thy Peoples good, so some carry the words. The more eager and furious the
enemies are against Gods People, the more honor and glory will God get in
protecting and securing his People, and in girding, binding, and tying up their
enemies: were it not for this favorable, signal, and eminent presence of God
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers. Wicked men would still be a multiplying of their sorrows
increasing their troubles, and adding of burden to burden, it is this favorable
presence of God, that binds wicked men over to their good behavior, and that
chains them up from doing that mischief, that they design and intend. But,

Fifthly, The Lord does manifest his favorable, signal and eminent presence
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, by guiding and leading them into those paths and ways, which
make most for their own peace and quiet, safety Exodus 13. 21, 22. Isa. 63. 12,
13, 14. Psalm 5. 8. The Apple of the eye is the tenderest piece of the
tenderest part. Heb. Ishon of Ish, as pupilla of pupa, because therein appears
the likeness of a little man, or because a man is to be prized above all other
Creatures, as so God esteems his people above all the world, Heb. 11. 38
and security, contentation and satisfaction, happiness here and blessedness
hereafter. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He found him in a desert land and in the wast bowling
wilderness: he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of
his eye. A Wilderness condition is, you know, a condition of straits, wants,
deep distresses, and most deadly dangers; now when his People were in this
condition, he instructs them by his words and works, and he takes them by the
hand (as I may say) and leads them with all care, tenderness, gentleness, and
sweetness, as a man would do a poor helpless Infant which he should find in a
desert, in a wast howling wilderness. God never left leading of his People,
till he had brought them at last through the wilderness, to the land of Canaan.
Ah this leading presence of God turns a wilderness into a Paradise, a desert
into a Canaan: let a Christians troubles, distresses and dangers be never so
many or never so great, yet as long as he has the guiding presence of God with
him, he is safe from dangers in the midst of dangers; the fire shall not burn
him, nor the waters overflow him, Isa. 43. 2. Psalm 107. 4. They wandered in the
wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell in. Verse 5. Hungry
and thirsty, their soul fainted in them: Verse 6. Then they cried unto the
Lord, in their troubles, and he delivered them out of their distresses. Here
you see their great troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers; and now
God gives them his hand, Verse 7. And he led them forth by the right way; that
they might go to a City of habitation; that is to a state of settlement say
some, to Jerusalem say others, or to that City which has foundations whose
builder and maker is Heb. 11. 10.
God, says another. In that 32. Psalm you may see David's great troubles, deep
distresses and most deadly dangers: Verse 3. When I kept silence my bones waxed
old, through my roaring all the day long, Verse 4. For day and night thy hand
was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought of summer, Selah: But
will God be his guide now? O yes, Verse 8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee
in the way which thou shall go: I will guide thee with mine eye. Let the hand
of the Lord be never so heavy upon a person, yet the presence of God guiding
and instructing Isa. 30. 21. Psalm 73. 24.
of him, will keep him from utter fainting and sinking under that hand. When
the People of God are Psalm 25. 9, 12. Psalm 5. 8.
in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, he
leads and guides them, 1. into supernatural ways, Prove. 15. 24. The way of
life is above to the Wise. He has his feet where other men's heads are, and
(like an heavenly Eagle) delights himself in flying high. 2. Into good ways,
Jerem. 6. 16. 3. Into strait and strict ways, Mat. 7. 14. Hence they are
called right or straight paths, which lie betwixt two extremes; or if you will,
which directly lead you to the view of Heaven: they are paths which lie level
with the rule, and with the end, a man may see Salvation and Heaven at the end
of them. 4. Into pleasant ways, Prove. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; such as were those of Adam before
his fall, strawed with roses, and paved with peace; some degree of comfort,
pleasantness and peace follows every good action, as heat accompanies fire, as
beams and influences issue from the Sun. 5. Into right paths, Prove. 4. 11. I
have taught thee in the way of wisdom: I have led thee in right paths. Hosea 1.
9. The ways of the Lord are right and the righteous shall walk in them: The
ways of his will, the ways of his Word, and the ways of his worship are all
right ways, they carry us on in a straight line unto a right end. 6. Into old
and ancient ways, Jer. 6. 16. Ask for the old paths, where is the good way and
walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls, Jerem. 18. 15. They have
caused them to stumble in their way from the ancient paths. The ways of
holiness are of the greatest, highest, and ancientest antiquity; the first
ways of Adam were ways of holiness; the ways of sin are of a later Edition,
than the ways of holiness; God stamped his Image of holiness upon Man, before
ever Satan assayed to tempt him: holiness is of the ancientest house, of the
greatest antiquity, sin is but an upstart, holiness is the first born: the way
of holiness is the eldest way, the way of holiness is gray headed, and of
ancientest institution, all other ways are but of yesterday, they are but new
ways to the ways of holiness. The stamp of Antiquity upon many things is a
praise and an honor to them, as old gold, old friends, old manuscripts, old
monuments, old scars, and old holiness; the stamp of Antiquity upon the ways
of holiness, is the praise and honor of the ways of holiness. 7. Into paths
of righteousness, Psalm 23. 3. He lead^ me in paths of righteousness for his
names sake; or in plain, smooth, easy paths, or in sheeps tracts, wherein I
may walk unweariedly and unblamably; herein he alludes to the Shepherds care in
leading his sheep gently, in fair and and plain ways, and not through deep
mire, brambles, and briars, or over craggy ways, that must needs be hard and
troublesome for them to go in: The word here used is Metaphorical; sometimes
respecting the blind, who cannot walk without a guide; sometimes little or weak
children, who cannot go without a leader; and here the weak and wandering sheep,
which stand in need of the Shepherd, to go in and out before them. 8. Into
paths of Salvation, Acts 16. 17. Th^se men are the servants of the most high
God, which show unto us the way of salvation. 9. Into ways of truth, 2 Petr.
2. 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way
of truth shall be evil spoken off. [The way of truth] that is the true
Christian Religion reveiled from heaven, which shows the way to true happiness,
to Eternal salvation. 10. Into ways of uprightness, Prove. 2. 13. Who leave the
paths of uprightness, to walk-in the way of darkness. Now when the People of
God are in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, the Lord by leading them 1. Into supernatural ways. 2. Into good
ways. 3. Into strict and straight ways. 4. Into pleasant ways. 5. Into right
ways. 6. Into old and ancient ways. 7. Into righteous ways. 8. Into ways of
salvation. 9. Into ways of truth; and 10. Into ways of uprightness does
gloriously manifest his favorable, his signal, and his eminent presence with
them. There is nothing below a mighty presence of God, that can enable a
Christian (especially when he is under great troubles, and in deep distresses,
and most deadly dangers) to do these five things: 1. To approve of the ways of
God. 2. To choose the ways of the Lord. 3. Highly to prize them. 4. To delight
and take pleasure in them. 5. To walk in them and to keep close to them; and
yet in all these five things the Lord does greatly and graciously help his poor
People, when they are as it were in the very mouth of the Lion. But

Sixthly, The Lord does manifest his favorable presence, 2 Chronicles. 13. 12.
Numb. 13. 32. 33. compared with 14. 9.
even in the very mouth of the Lion: Josh. 1. 6. Be strong and of a good
courage. Verse 7. Only be thou strong and very courageous. Verse 9. Be strong
and of a good courage: be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord
thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. Joshua was a sword-man as well
as a book-man, he had his name changed from Oshea to Joshua, from Number. 13. 16.
let God save, to God shall save. Christ will never want a Champion, tostand up
for his Church; if Moses dies Joshua shall stand up: There shall be a
succession of swor^ men, and book-men, of Rulers and Teachers, to ca^^y on
Christ's work in the world, till the top-stone Zach. 4. 7. M^iach. 2. 15.
be laid, with grace unto it. The residue of the Spirit is with the Lord, and
therefore he can and will put such an anointing of his Spirit upon one and
another, as shall fit them to carry on his works in the World. Joshua was very
valiant, and a man of singular good Moses had a special command from God to
charge Joshua to be courageous, Deuteronomy. 1. 38. cap. 3. 28. God himself also lays
the same command upon him, Deuteronomy. 31. 23.
mettle; yet because he was sure to meet with such troubles, deep distresses,
and dealy dangers, as would put him to it, therefore he is pressed so frequently
to be courageous, Verse 6. Be strong and of good courage. Verse 7. Only be thou
strong and very courageous. Verse 9. Be strong and of a good courage. Verse 18.
Only be strong and of a good courage. Deuteronomy. 31. 7. And Moses called unto Joshua
and said unto him, in the sight of all Israel, be strong and of a good courage,
etc. And why all this? not because Joshua had discovered any faint-heartedness
or cowardice, but because the work he was to undertake was so weighty and
perilous, in regard of those many and mighty Nations, whom he was to destroy,
and plant the Israelites in their room: the work that Joshua was to undertake
was attended with many great difficulties and dangers, in respect of the
Enemies he was to encounter, as being men of vast and Giant-like statures and
strength, and dwelling in Cities with high walls and strongly fortified. Now
the main Argument to raise his courage and mettle, is drawn from Gods special
presence and assistance, Joshua 1. 9. For the Lord thy God is with thee,
whithersoever thou go. We are not to understand it of Gods general presence
in all places, but of his special, favorable, signal, and eminent presence,
which God would manifest in his preservation and protection, notwithstanding
all the difficulties, enterprises, dangers and Enemies that he was to encounter
with. So 2 Chronicles. 32. 7. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed,
for the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there
be more with us than with him. Verse 8. With him is an arm of flesh, but with
us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight our battles, etc. At this time
the King of Assyria was the greatest Monarch in the world, and the most
formidable Enemy Israel had: he had a mighty Army, for there was a hundred
fourscore and five thousand of them slain in one night. Verse 21.
Now the great thing they were to mind and attend was, to look narrowly to it,
that the favorable, signal and eminent presence of God with them, did raise
all their hearts above all discouragements, fears and dismayedness, what is the
chaff to the whirlwind? what are thorns and briars to a consuming fire? what
is an arm of flesh, to the arm, strength; and power of a God? what is weakness
to strength, and the nothing Creature to the Lord of Hosts? Now if the special,
signal presence of God with his People in their greatest troubles, and most
deadly dangers, will not put singular courage, life, and mettle into them, what
will? Acts 23. verse 10. And when there arose a great dissension, the chief
Captain, fearing l^^^ Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded
the Soldiers to go down, and take him by force from among them, and to bring
him into the Castle. Verse 11. And the night following the Lord stood by him,
[namely in a vision, or in a dream, or in an ecstasy,] and said be of good
cheer Paul: for as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear
witness also at Rome. The favorable, signal presence of the Lord with him,
turned ^is Prison into a Palace. Mr. Philpot being a Act. and Mon. 1663.
prisoner for the testimony of Jesus, writes thus to his Friends: Though I tell
you, that I am in hell, in the judgment of this world, yet assuredly I feel in
the same the consolation of heaven, I praise God: and this loathsome and
horrible prison, is as pleasant to me, as the walks in the garden of the
King's Bench. When Paul was in See Act^ 27. ^3. 24.
great danger the Lord stood by him, to cheer, comfort, and encourage him: Now
God claps him on the back, and puts new life, and mettle into him.

When Dionysius was given up by the Executioner to be beheaded, he remained
constant and courageous, saying, come life, come death, I will worship none but
the God of Heaven and Earth.

When Chrysostom had told Eudoxia the empress that for her covetousness, she
would be called a second Jezebel she thereupon sent him a threatening message,
to which he gave this stout and resolute answer: Go tell her, Nil nisi peccatum
timeo, I fear nothing but sin.

When the Executioner had kindled the fire behind Jerome of Prague, he bad him
kindle it before his face, for (said he) if I had been afraid of it, I had not
come to this place, having had so many opportunities offered me to escape it;
At the giving up of the ghost, he said* [Hanc animam in flammis offero Christ
tibi,] This soul of mine in flames of fire, O Christ, I offer thee.

The Emperor coming into Germany, sent for Luther to Worms, but many of his
friends (from the danger they apprehended hanging over his head) dissuaded him
from going; to whom he gave this prudent, courageous, and resolute answer, That
these discouragements were cast in his way by Satan, who knew that by his
profession of the Truth in so illustrious a place, his Kingdom would be shaken,
and that therefore if he knew, that there were as many Devils in Worms, as
there were tiles on the houses, yet he would go.

The German Knight in his Apologetical Letter for Luther against the Pontifical
Clergy, says, I will go through with what I have undertaken against you, and
will stir up men to seek their freedom, I neither care nor fear what may befall
me, being prepared for either event, either to ruin you, to the great benefit
of my Country, of my self to fall with a good conscienee, etc.

William Flower (the Martyr) said, That the Heavens should as soon fall, as I
will forsake my profession, or budge in the least degree from it.

Apollonius being asked, If he did not tremble at the sight of the Tyrant? made
this answer, God which gave him a terrible countenance, has given also unto me
an undaunted heart.

When Gardener asked Rowland Tailor, If he did not know him? etc. To whom he
answered, Yea, I know you, and all you greatness, yet you are but a mortal man;
and if I should be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear ye not God the Lord of
us all?

Basil affirms of the primitive Christians, that they had so much courage and
magnanimity of spirit in their sufferings, that many Heathens, seeing their
heroic zeal, resoluteness, and undauntedness, turned Christians.

When one of the ancient Martyrs was terrifyed with the threatenings of his
persecutors, he replied, There is nothing of things visible, nor nothing of
things invisible that I fear, I will stand to my profession of the Name of
Christ, and contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints, come
on it what will.

By these instances (which may be of great use in this trying day) you may
clearly see, how the Lord has manifested his favorable, signal, and eminent
presence to his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers, by raising up in them a spirit of courage, magnanimity,
and holy gallantry. But,

Seventhly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and eminent presence
to his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, by preserving them from troubles in the midst of troubles, from
dangers in the midst of dang^rs. Dan. 3. 25. He answered, and said, Lo, I see
four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and
the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. The prefence of the Son of God
preserves these three valiant Champions from dangers in the midst of dangers;
They fell down bound in the fiery Furnace (says my Author) and Polanus.
they walked loose in the midst of the fire without any hurt, for the Angel of
the Lord descended together with them in the same moment, who shook the flames
of the fire forth out of the Furnace, and preserved the Servants of God safe
without any trouble, being cooled as it were with a de^ coming upon them in a
pleasant manner. But give me leave to say, that these words [One like the Son
of God,] does not argue that in this vision there was not a representation of
the Son of God to come afterward in the flesh; but rather, that this great
mystery was here showed for the greater comfort of the faithful, that they
might courageously bear all their sufferings, having the Prince and Head both
of Angels and men present with them herein to mitigate their pains and carry
them through with joy; this being a greater wonder of grace and love, then to
have the protection of a mere Angel; concerning whose power also, whether he
can change the nature of fire, that it shall not burn, is very doubtful and
questionable, seeing this argues omnipotency, which is in God alone, and not
communicable to any Creature. Where by the way you may observe a strong and
solid argument, to prove that Jesus is the Son of God, against all gainsayers,
thus: He whom Nebuchadnezzar saw in the fiery Furnace, was the Son of God in an
humane shape; but he was typically Jesus, Verse 22.
ergo, etc. The Major is proved, because he did that which none but God could
do, viz. he qualified the most fierce and raging fire, which burnt up some,
coming but near it, and had no power at the same instant of time, so much as to
sing a hair of the heads of others; The Minor is proved also, because God
appearing in a glorious humane. shape at any time, was not God the Father or
Holy Ghost, but God the Son; for no man 1 John 13. 1 Timothy 6. 16. 1 John 4. 12.
has seen God at any time, but the Son has revealed him; both when in him
appearing in a humane shape under the Law, and when, under the Gospel, showing
himself in the man Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, and hypostatically united
unto him. Exodus 3. 2. And the Angel of the Lord (that is Christ Christ is
called the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant. Mal. 3. 1.
the Angel of the Covenant) appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the
midst of a Bush; and he looked, and behold, the Bush burned with fire, and the
Bush was not consumed. Verse 3. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see
this great sight, why the Bush is not burnt. The Hebrew word Seneh which is he
used, signifies a Dry-bush, a Bramble-bush, whence the Mount and Wilderness is
called Sinai, of the store of brambles that grew there, or of this Bush or
Vision. Now for a Bush, a Dry-bush, a Bramble-bush to be all on fire and yet
not consumed, this must be a wonder of wonders: but all this is from the good
will of him that dwelt in the Bush. Out of these two Verses we may briefly
observe these few things:

First, the low, and weak, and brittle estate of the Church, represented by a
Bush, a Dry-bush, a Bramblebush; what more brittle, weak, base, low, and
despicable, than a Dry-bush, a Bramble-bush? What is such a Bush good for but
the fire, or to stop a gap, or some such inferior use? A Bush is a black,
deformed, and uncomely thing. Corruption and affliction, sin and suffering
renders the Saints very uncomely. The Church is compared not to a strong sturdy
oak, but to a we^k brittle Bush, and Elsewhere to a Vine, a Dove, a Lamb, a
Sheep, etc. all frail weak Creatures. It is good for all Saints to have low and
mean thoughts of themselves for here they are resembled to a Dry-bush, a
Bramble-bush. But,

Secondly, a Dry-bush, a Bramble-bush pricks, wounds and vexes them that handle
it roughly. This Bush is in Hebrew called Seneb, (as I have hinted before)
which the Hebrews describe to be a shrub full of pricks, and without fruit, and
so thick that a bird cannot enter without the ruffling and pulling off her
feathers. Let the proud enemies of the Church look to themselves, for this
Bramble-bush will vex, prick, wound, tear, and put them to the worst, when they
have done their worst. In all the Ages of the World this Bramble-bush, the
Church, has been a cup of trembling unto all the People Zach. 12 2, 3.
round about, and a burdensome stone; so that all that burden themselves with
it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the Earth be gathered
together against it. But,

Thirdly, consider the cruelties of the Churches enemies is signified and
represented by a fire; The Bush burns with fire: In this resemblance is
shadowed out the oppressed, afflicted and persecuted estate of the Israelites
in the Egyptian Furnace; and by fire here is meant the most painful terrifying
and tormenting afflictions and miseries that should attend them. Great
afflictions and persecutions are in Scripture commonly set out by fire, as the
fiery trial, the fire of affliction. Fire is very painful, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Lam.
2. 3, 4. Hab. 2. 13.
and tormenting (in which respects Hell Torments are compared to fire,) so are
great afflictions, miseries, and sufferings; they are very painful and
tormenting; they put persons into sore pain and travel. Next to the pangs of
Conscience, and the pains of Hell, there are none to these pains and pangs that
are bred and fed by sore afflictions, by terrible trials. It has been the lot
and portion of Gods dearest Children, to be exercised with very great and
griveous afflictions, and that in order to the discovery of sin, to the
imbittering of sin, to the preventing of sin, and to the purging away of sin,
and in order to the trial of grace, the discovery of grace, the exercise of
grace, and the increase of grace; and in order to the weaning of them from this
World, and to the completing their conformity to Christ, the Captain of their
Heb. 2. 10.
salvation, who was made perfect through sufferings; and to ripen them for
Heaven, and to work in them more, bowels of pity and compassion to those that
are in misery and that sigh and groan under their Egyptian task masters.

Fourthly, consider the eminence of their preservation, This fire was a super
natural fire for, 1. It continued without fuel to seed upon. 2. It kept below
and ascended not. 3. It burned and consumed not. All which shows it to be a
supernatural work.
though in the fire yet unconsumed. The Church of God was hot, yea all in
flames, and yet not consumed. Let the fire be never so hot, so fierce, so
furious, so spreading, the Church shall have a being, and live and bear up in
the midst of the flames. If the Church like the Sea loose in one place it gits
ground in another; when the worst of men, and Devils, and Informers have done
their worst, the Lord will have a name among his People on Earth. The Church
with the Lamp in the story laughes at all those winds, that would blow it out.
Well may we stand amazed and wonder, that so flaming and terrible a fire,
falling upon so contemptible a Bush, and so dry and despicable a shrub, should
not presently turn it into ashes, for why is the fire too weak? O no. Is the
Bush so strong, as to defend and secure it self against devouring flames? O no.
Or is the Bush not apt to burn and consume by so fier^e a fire? O no. It is not
from the impotency of the fire, nor from the strength or constitution of the
Bush; for a dry Bramble-bush in the matter of it is as combustible as any
chaff, and as easily destroyed as any stubble; but because the natural force
thereof was r^strained by the glorious power of God: for if God concur not with
the nature of things, they cannot work nor show their kind. There are two
inseparable qualities of fire: 1. To give light. 2. To burn; And yet Divine
power divides and separates these two: for this fire gives light, but burns
not. O what a mighty, what an astonishing preservation is here! The afflictions
and sufferings of the Church are not a consuming fire, but a trying fire, as
the fire in a Furnace consumes the dross, but tryes the gold, and puts a new
luster, beauty, and glory upon it. Hesiod speaks of thirty thousand Demy-Gods,
Psalm 121. 4, Isa. 27. 3. Mal. 3. 17. Zach. 2. 8. Psalm 31. 20.
that were keepers of men; but what are so many thousand Gods, to that one God
that neither slumbers nor sleeps, but day and night keeps his People as his
Jewels, as the apple of his eye, that keeps them in his Pavilion as a Prince
his Favorite. There is a Dialogue between a Heathen and a Jew; after the Jews
return from captivity (all Nations round about them being enemies unto them)
the Heathen asked the Jew, how he and his Contrey-men could hope for any
safety, because (says he) every one of you is as a silly sheep compassed about
with fifty wolves. I but, says the Jew, we are kept by such a shepherd, as can
kill all these wolves when he pleases, and by that means preserve his sheep.
But,

Fifthly, consider how this eminent preservation of his People from dangers in
the midst of dangers is effected and brought about, and that is by the presence
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Angel of the Covenant; for Moses says
expressly of this Vision, that the Lord appeared unto Moses, and God calls
unto him out of the midst of the Bush, and said Moses, Moses, etc. This calling
of Moses by his Verse 4.
name, and the doubling of his name, in such a familiar and loving manner, was
a sign of Gods singular favor to Moses. Choice Favorits God frequently called
by name, as Scipio by way of favor called the Citizens by their names, and so
Cyrus upon the same ground called his Soldiers by their names.
you may see in those instances of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. and so our
Lord Jesus Christ called Peter by his name, and Nathanael by his name, and Mary
by her name, etc.) The same presence of the Son of God, that preserved the
three Children (or rather Champions) in that furious furnace of Nebuchadnezzar
from burning or singeing, preserved the Bush, though not from burning, yet from
consuming, by restraining the natural force of the fire, and strengthening the
Bush against it. The Bush, the Church in the fire, came forth of the hottest
Furnace that ever was kindled, not blacker nor worser, but brighter and better,
and more glorious than the Sun in his strength; and all this from the presence
of the Angel of the Covevenant that dwelt in the Bush. Divine presence can
preserve a flaming Bush from being consumed. Witness our preservation to this
day, though we have been as a burning Bush. God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be Psalm 46. 5.
moved, God shall help her, and that right early. Heb. When the morning
appears; that is, in the nick of time, when help shall be most feasonable and
best welcome. The presence of the Lord in the midst of his Church, will secure
her from being greatly moved in the midst of all those great dreadful
confusions, that are abroad in the world. Hence the Church is called, Jehovah
shammah, The Lord is Ezekiel. 48. 35.
there. His presence in Heaven, makes it heaven, and his presence in the
Church, makes it happy and safe; Nothing shall disturb or harm them, that have
the presence of God in the midst of them. The Church is built upon Mat. 16. 18.
a rock, she is invincible. Jer. 1. 8. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am
with thee, to deliver thee, says the Lord. Opposition is as Calvin writes to
the French King Evangelii genius, the black Angel, that dogs the Gospel at the
heels.
Verse 17. Tho^ therefore gird up thy loins, and arise* and speak unto them all
tha^ I command thee, be not dismayed at their faces, lest I (...) thee before
them. Verse 18. For behold, I have made thee this day a defenced City, and an
iron pillar and brazen wall against the whole Land, against the Kings of Judah,
against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against the
people of the Land. Verse 19. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall
not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, says the Lord, to deliver thee.
Gods presence with his Messengers, is a guard, and a safeguard, all-sufficient
against all opposition whatsoever. Earthly Princes and Sovereigns are not wont
to go with those whom they send on Embassage, but God always goes along with
those whom he sends, and will by his powerful presence protect and defend them,
against opposers, at all times and in all places; when all others f^il and
forsake us, Christ's presence is security sufficient, for If he be with us who
can be against us? They must first prevail against him, before they can prevail
against them, that withstand and oppose those whom he stands by to back and
protect. How comes this to pass, that In some cases a man were better loose his
life, than be cowa^dly. Aristotle Eth., 3. cap. 1.
Jeremiah a man, a man alone, should bear up so stoutly, and stand so strong
against Kings, Princes, Priests and People? it is from the signal presence of
God with him. [I am with thee.] And what can all the great ones of the World,
and all the wicked ones of the World, do against one Messenger of the Lord,
that is armed with his glorious power? The Ambassadors of the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, must not be terrified with the multitude of opposers, nor
with the grandeur or greatness of opposers; but set the presence of the Lord
against them all, and say as that noble Soldier Paedarelus (in Erasmus) did,
to them that told him, of that numerous and mighty Army, which came against
him, Tanto plus gloriae referemus, quoniam ^o plures superabimus. The number of
oppose^^ makes the Christian conquests the more illustrious. The more the
Pharisees of old, and their Successors of late time have opposed the Truth, the
more it has p^evailed; and ^is observable that the Reformation in Germany was
much furthered by the Papists opposition, yea, when two Kings (amongst many
others) wrote against Luther* viz. Hen^y the eight of England, and Ludovicus of
Hungary; this kingly title being entered into the controversy (making men more
curious to examine the matter) stirred up a general inclination toward
Luther's opinion. So, Jerem. 15. 20. And I will make thee unto this People a
fenced brazen wall, and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not
prevail against thee; for I am with thee, to save thee, and to deliver thee,
says the Lord. When the Messengers of the Lord go on constantly and
courageously in the faithful discharge of their duties, not relenting, or
yielding, or complying with their greatest opposers, then they shall have such
a signal presence of the Lord with them, as shall sufficiently protect them
against all their enemies might and malice, wrath, and rage. Verse 21. And I
will-deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of
the hand of the terrible, or violent ones. Though thou should fall into the
hand of the wicked (id est, power) and into the hand of the terrible, and
violent ones, yet they shall not hurt thee, nor harm thee, they shall not have
their wills upon thee; when thou art in their hands I will lay a law of
restraint upon their hearts, that they shall not mischief thee, nor triumph
over thee; I will be sure to secure thee, and rescue thee from dangers in the
midst of dangers. A gracious Messenger of the Lord in the midst of all
oppositions (as Chrysostom said of Peter) is a man made all of fire walking in
stuble, he overcomes and consumes all opposition; all difficulties are but
whetstones to his fortitude. The Moon will run her course though the dogs
bark at it, so does the Traveller, and so will the faithful messengers of the
Lord hold on in their way and work, let men and devils bark and do their worst.

Moulin speaking of the French Protestants, said, When Papists hurt us for
reading the Scriptures, we burn with zeal to be reading of them; he is a fool,
we say, that will be laughed out of his coat; but he is a fool in folio that
will be laughed out of his skin, out of his profession, out of his Religion,
out of his principles, out of the ways of God, nay out of his soul, out of his
salvation: because he cannot endure to be, opposed, derided, or laughed at by
lewd and wicked men. The Divine presence will make a man set light by such
paper-shot.

A gracious spirit is raised by opposition; the more opsition it meets with in
a way of duty, the more resolute he is for it: So far is he from being afraid
of the threatenings of men, of the frowns of men, or of losing this man's favor,
or of incurring such a man's displeasure, that his spirit rises far more for
it. It is with such a man as it is with the fire in Winter, the fire burns the
hotter, because of the coldness of the air; So it is with all the Messengers of
the Lord, who are inflamed in the way of their duty. Come to David, and tell
him, O there is a Goliath, and he is come out with a spear like a weavers beam,
and 1 Samuel 17. 4. to the 11. compared with Ver. 26, 27.
there is one that bears his target goes before him; where is he? says David,
I will fight with him, says he. Difficulties and dangers do but whet and raise
his spirit, he is not afraid of any uncircumcised Philistin. Ah, my Friends,
this is a true noble spirit! Holy greatness of mind lies in this, when a man's
spirit is born up upon the greatness of his God, and the goodness of his cause;
and if that will not bear me out, says such a soul, let me sink in it. I am
content to perish. That Is a good word, more worth than a world in a faithful
Ministers eye, Ezekiel. 3. 8. Behold, I have made thy face strong against their
faces, and thy forhead strong against their forheads. Verse 9. As an Adamant,
harder than a flint, have I made thy forehead; fear them not, neither be
dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house. The Adamant is the
hardest of stones, it is Lapis servabilis, because it keeps it self by its
hardness from all injuries, no weather, no violence of hammer, or fire will
break it, or conquer it. God engages himself to give the Prophet such undaunted
boldness, and invincible courage and constancy, as neither shame nor fear
should prevail against. Divine presence, Divine assistance does always
accompany a Divine call; such whom God sends he seconds, such whom he calls, he
encourages, against all difficulties and discouragements, such as are called by
Christ, and sent by Christ, shall never want the strengthening, comforting,
coroborating, animating, and preserving presence of Christ: It is this Divine
presence, that makes them stand it out, and show themselves like men; like men
of courage, like men of God, and that secures them from dangers in the midst of
dangers; in the greatest storms the Adamant shrinks not, it fears not, it
changes not its hue, no not in the least; Divine presence will keep gracious
men from shrinking, fearing, and changing their way, their work, their Lord and
Master, in the worst of storms that can beat upon them; in all winds and
weather the Adamant is still the same, and so will all the faithful Messengers
of the Lord be, what ever wind may blow upon them: The signal presence of God
with them will keep them from fearing, fainting, flying, and preserve them from
dangers in the midst of dangers. But,

Eighthly, The Lord does manifest his favorable, signal and eminent presence
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, by frustrating and disappointing the plots, designs, counsels
and contrivances of their powerful, subtle, secret, and malicious Adversaries,
who would fain be multiplying of their troubles, sorrows, sufferings, The
Thebanes had a band of men they called Sacra C^hors, consisting of such only as
were joined in bonds of love, and resolved to live and dye together: these Jews
under Nehemiah's command were such, and were therefore insuperable.
and miseries upon them, Nehem. 4. 8. And conspired all of them together, to
come and fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it. Verse 11. And our
adversaries said, they shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst
amongst them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. Verse 15. And it came
to pass, when our Enemies knew that it was known unto us, and God had brought
their counsels to naught, etc. The craft of the Churches Enemies, is never but
accompanied with cruelty, and their cruelty is seldom without craft; the Devil
lends them his seven heads to plot, and his seven horns to push; but in the
things wherein they deal proudly God is above them, and by his presence with
his People, he brings all their plots, counsels, and enterprises to naught: The
Gunpowder Traitors betrayed themselves, and all came to light, though they had
dug as low as hell, to hide their counsels from the Lord. The Enemies of the
Jews in Nehemiah's time made great brags at first what they would do, but when
they saw their plots discovered, and their purposes defeated, they are
presently crest-fallen, and have no mind nor courage to advance at all; so that
to these Plotters may be fitly applied, that which Guicciardin says of Charles
the Eight, King of France, in his expedition against Naples: That he came into
the field like thunder and lightning, but went out like a snuff; more than a
Man at first,. and less than a Woman at last. In all the Ages of the World, the
heads, the wits, the hands, the hearts and the tongues of the wicked have been
engaged against the Just; they have been still a plotting and devising mischief
against the favorites of heaven (as if Rebels could meddle with none but the
Children of a King) and yet Gods signal presence with his People, in point of
affection and protection has blasted all their designs, and frustrated all
their counsels; as the rage of wicked Men against the Saints have been endless,
so it has been fruitless, because God has been in the midst of them. Haman
Esther 3. 8. -- ult.
plots against the lives, liberties and Estates of the Jews, but his plot was
timely discovered, and seasonably prevented, and the grand Plotter and Informer
detected, debased, condemned and executed. Esther 7. 10. So they hanged Haman
on the Gallows, that he had prepared for Mordecai, then was the Kings wrath
pacified. The Kings of Persia had absolute and unquestionable power, to do
whatsoever they listed: Quicquid libuit, licuit; all their Subjects, except
their Queens, where no better than Slaves, whom they would they slew, and whom
they Dan. 5. 19.
would they kept alive: whom they would they set up, and whom they would they
put down. Haman is here Esther 7. 9.
without order of Law, more than the Kings command, adjudged to be hanged; the
truth is, it was a clear case, and the Malefactor was self condemned: Hang him
therefore, says the King; a short and just Sentence, and soon executed. Ah how
soon is Haman fallen from the Palace to the Gallows, from the highest Stage o^
honor, to the lowest stair of disgrace; from feasting with the King, to be
made a feast for crows, and so lies wrapped up in the sheet of perpetual infamy:
So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord. It is a good observation of Josephus
Vnde mihi contigit mirari nomen Dei, and sapien^iam and justi^iam ejus
^gnoscere, etc: Joseph. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 6.
upon Esther 7. 10. I cannot (says he) but admire the Lords wisdom, and
acknowledge hi^ Justice, in that he not only punished him for his malice to the
Church, but by turning his own mischief upon himself, has made him an example
to all posterity; hanging him up in gibbets, that others may take warning. Let
all Plotters and Informers beware of making a match with mischief, they may
have enough of it in the end. Haman was a main stickler for the Devil, who paid
him his wages at last, with a witness, or if you will with a halter; Let all
the Enemies of the Saints tremble at such ends, and be careful to avoid them,
by flying such like foul and flagitious practices. The bloody plot being thus
laid by Haman, the Kings Minion, behold the footsteps of Gods favorable,
signal, and eminent presence for his People, and Esther 4.
with his People, in their deadly dangers, and that in raising up in them a
very great Spirit of faith, prayer, and mourning, and by raising an undaunted
courage and resolution in Esther: And so I will go in unto the Verse 16.
King, and if I perish I perish: This she speaks not rashly or desperately as
prodigal of her life, but as one willing to sacrifice the same for the honor
of God, his cause and People; saying as that Martyr (can I die but once for
Christ?) Esther had rather die than shrink from her duty; she thought it better
to do worthily and perish for a Kingdom, than unworthily and perish with a
Kingdom: here was a mighty presence of God, in raising Esther's heroical
courage and resolution, above all those visible dangers, that did attend her
attempt of going in to the King, against the known Law of the Land: (And the
King held out to Esther the golden Cap. 5. 2.
Scepter;) He did not kick her out of his presence, as some Cambyses would have
done; neither did he command her to the block, as Henry the Eight did his Ann
Bullen, upon a mere mispr^sion of disloyalty; neither yet did he cashier her,
as he had Vashti for a less offense, but by holding out his Scepter, shows his
gracious respects unto her: This was the Lords own work, and a great
demonstration of his signal presence with her, in giving her favor in the eyes
of the great King. (So Esther drew near and touched the top of the Scepter)
with her hand says the Chaldee; with her mouth says the Vulgar translation;
this she did either in token of submission, or as a sign of reverence and
subjection, or for the avoiding of danger: For as Josephus says, He that
touched the Kings Scepter, was out of the reach of evil; or according to the
custom of the times: Gods favorable presence is transparent; in the Kings
extended favor to her: (On that night could not the King Esther 6. ^.
sleep) Heb. the Kings sleep fled away; and like a shadow it fled away so much
the faster, as it was more followed* Crowns have their cares; thistles in their
arms, and thorns in their sides: lo he that commanded one hundred and twenty
seven Provinces, cannot command one hours sleep. The Kings head might perhaps
be troubled, with thinking, what great request it should be that Esther had to
make, that was so hardly drawn from her; but herein appeared the signal
presence of God, in keeping the King awake, for Mordecai might have been hanged
before Esther had known any thing of it, (Haman being come early the next
morning, Verse 4. to beg this of the King) had not God kept him from sleep, and
directed him to read in that place of the Chronicles, were Mordecai's service
was recorded, and so made way to his advancement, and Haman's ruin: Gods
favorable presence shined upon his People, in keeping the King from sleep, for
excellent ends, and in putting small thoughts into his heart for great
purposes. God will appear for his poor People, (...), in the nick and
opportunity of time, when there is but a step between them and death; and
further, the power, providence, presence and goodness of God was made evident,
in the behalf of his People, in directing the Reader to that very place, where
Mordecai's Esther 6. 2.
singular service, in discovering the barbarous and murderous plot, that was
laid against the Kings life and Crown, was recorded. That Mordecai should have
no present reward, but that it should be deferred till a fitter opportunity,
when God might be more glorified, in the signal preservation of his People, and
in the famous overthrow of their Enemies, was from that mighty hand of God,
that was stretched out for the good of his People. In this great Story we may
as in a mirror see, how the Lord by his wisdom, providence, presence, and
grace, brings about and overrules the wills of men, the affairs of men, the
counsels of men, the designs of men, the words and speeches of men, to the
fulfilling of his own will and decree* and the promoting of his own honor and
glory, and the good of his People, when vain men think least of doing his will,
or serving his providence. Here you may see the wisdom, prudence, and courage
of Esther, striking whilst the Iron was hot, charging the bloody decree upon
Haman to his face, and that before the King: that things might the better stick
and work, and painting him out in his own proper colors. (The adversary) Heb.
the man adversary; the Lycanthropos, the man of might that distresseth us. (And
Enemy) that is the cruel Enemy, the bloody Enemy, the Genesis 3. 15.
utter Enemy, the worst Enemy, that sworn sword-man of Satan, from whom Haman
has drawn his ancient enmity. (Is this wicked Haman) that is as wicked a
wretch as goes ^n two legs, a man of blood, a man made up of mischief and
malice, a sink of wickedness, a very mystery of iniquity, a breathing Devil.
Tiberius was rightly characterized by his Tutor Theodorus Gadareus, dirt knod
with blood; Haman was such another, if not worse; and now Queen Esther is plain
and round with him, and calls a spade, a spade, though others styled him,
Noble, Great, Serene, Magnificent, etc. Esther gives him his own with a
witness. (The Adversary and Enemy is this wicked Haman) but what a mighty
courage had Esther to speak at this rate before the King, and of his grand
Favorite and before his face? Surely all this was from the signal presence of
God with her Soul; this was a great work of Faith, and a singular fruit of
prayer. And now Haman stood up to make request for his life,) O what a strange
turn of things is here all upon a sudden! He that a little before was bowed
unto by all men, is now upon his knees before a wo^an; he that was the very day
before a professed Enemy of the Jews, is now suppliant to a Jewess; he that a
few weeks before had contrived the death and ruin of the Jews is now begging
hard for his own life; he that had provided a Gallows for Mordecai, fears
nothing more now than that himself should be hanged on it: Yesterday O the
caps, knees, and bows that Haman had, and now the same Esther 7. 8.
Man covers his face in token of his irrecoverable ruin. The Turks cast a
black gown upon such, as they sit at supper with the Great Turk, and presently
strangle them: Many of their Visiers or greatest Favorites die in this sort;
which makes them use this Proverb, He that is greatest in Office, is but a
Statue of glass. Plutarch wittily compares great Men to Counters, which now
stand for a thousand pound, and anon for a farthing; this was Haman's case: And
so Sejanus, the same Senators Courtiers shift their sails to the sitting of
every wind: A cubit was half a yard at least, in those parts, they had trees
very small, or they might piece one to another; but why so high a Gallows, but
for the greater disg^ace to M^rd^cai, and terror to all that should slight the
Kings grand Favourit.
who accompanied him to the Senate, conducted him to Prison; they which
sacrificed to him as to their God, which kneeled down to adore him, scoffed at
him, seeing him dragged from the Temple to the Gaol, from supreme honor to
extreme ignominy. When once the Emperor frowned upon him, they showed
themselves most passionate against him; saying, that if Caesar had clemency, he
ought to reserve it for men* and not to use it toward Monsters; this is
Courtiers custom to adore the rising Sun, and when great Favorites fall into
disgrace, all about Princes will be ready to pluck them up by the roots; if the
season be fair to clear the Court or Land of such noisome weeds. The Kings
indignation being up, the Courtiers point at the Gallows fifty Cubits high,
that Haman had set up for Mordecai. All are now for Mordecai, there is not a
Courtier that has one good word for Haman: Ah what a rare hand of God was there
in all these things, for the good of his People, and the utter overthrow of
their grand Enemy! To sum all up in a little room, the breaking of the Kings
sleep, was the breaking of one of the most bloody designs that ever was laid
against the People of God. Well, what though the King could not sleep, could he
not lie still in his bed? No, he must have a book, and that book must be the
book of Chronicles, and that book must be opened where accidentally (not by
turning to that place purposely) yet surely by Gods Providence directing him
that read, to that very story concerning Mordecai, where was registered his
faithfulness, in discovering and disappointing of a murder intended against
the King; whereupon God sets this act of faithfulness so close upon the Kings
heart, that he could not rest till Mordecai was nobly rewarded for it, and this
reward must be Haman's ruin; his advancement, Haman's abasement, and this was
the rise of Haman's disappointment. In this famous instance you may run and
read, the favorable, signal and eminent presence of the Lord, in the
miraculous preservation of his Church from a total ruin and destruction, and
in the disappointing the plots, designs, and counsels of their greatest
Enemies, and in taking of them in the very snares, that they had-laid for
others; suitable to that of the Psalmist: He made a pit and dug it, and Psalm
7. 16, 17
is fallen into the ditch which he made; his mischief shall return upon his own
head, and his violent dealing upon his own pate. Henry the Third of France, was
stabbed in the same Chamber, where he had helped to contrive the French
Massacre: And his Brother Charles the Ninth, had blood given him to drink, for
he was worthy; there is no end of Stories of this nature, so Psalm 9. 15. The
heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid, is
their own foot taken. The wicked are compared to Hunters for their cruelty, and
to Fowlers for their craft; but see their success, they are sunk down in their
own pit, caught in their own net; thus it befell Pharaoh, Jabin, and Sisera,
Exodus 9. 15. Judge. 10. 4. 2 Chronicles. 32. Eusebius. lib. 9. c. 9.
Senacherib, Antiocbus Epiphanes, Maxentius the Tyrant, who fell into the
Tiber, from his own false bridge laid for Constantine; the Spanish Azmado, and
our Powder-plotters. Ver. 16. The wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands. Higgajon, Selah. Goliath was killed with his own sword: Christ's justice
has two acclamatory Notes, Higgajon, Selah, the like is not found in all the
Scripture, as worthy of present admiration, and of deep and perpetual
meditation. I have been the longer a glancing at this famous Story of Esther,
because of its seasonableness, and sutableness to the days and times wherein
we live.

A further proof of this eight particular, that is under our present
consideration you have in Isa. 8. 9. Associate Counsel is the extract of
reason, the result of serious and sad debates, says Ci^ero.
your selves O ye People, and ye shall be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye
of far Countries: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: gird your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Heb. And be broken in pieces, And be
broken in pieces: And be broken in pieces. It is thrice repeated, to work it
the deeper into the minds and hearts of those, that should either hear or read
it; and to give the stronger assurance of the certainty of their being
inevitably broken in pieces, who were adversaries and conspirators against the
People of God: This speech is directed to the Kings of Assyria, and other
Nations that combined with him against the People of God; but especially
against the City of Jerusalem: It is an holy Ironie, or laughing to scorn the
associating Enemies of the Church. Well, says the Prophet, proceed as
unanimously as politickly, and as powerfully in your combinations,
consultations, and preparations as you can, yet be assured, that all your
associations shall be dissolved, and your counsels frustrated, and your
attempts returned back upon your selves, to your own ruin and confusion. Verse
10. Take See Isai. 7. 5, 6. Psalm 33. 3.
counsel together. [Heb. consult a consultation, to wit about invading Judab,
and surprising Jerusalem] and it shall come to naught: Speak the word and it
shall not stand, for God is with us: Consult, conclude, determine, resolve upon
what you please, you shall never be able by all your power and policy to
prevail against the People of God, for his favorable, signal, and eminent
presence, is constantly with them, to assist, counsel, and protect them against
all oppositions and assaults, Psalm 33. 10.
God brings to naught the council of the Nations; neither the Devil nor his
Imps, nor any of their counsels, or enchantments, shall ever be able to stand
before the presence of the Lord with his People. Charles the Fifth, and the
French King, had upon counsel taken covenanted and agreed, utterly to extirpate
the Lutheran Faction out of all their Dominions; but God found them other
employment, and by his signal presence with his People, he gave them an happy
Hal^yon. Let Men and Devils conspire, let them plot, consult and determine, all
shall be in vain, because there is no counsel against the Lord, there is no
possibility of carrying of it against the presence of the Lord with his People,
his signal presence will be their greatest safety and security in the midst of
all plots, designs, dangers, etc. The signal presence of God with his People,
marrs and frustrates all the plots, counsels, and curious contrivances of the
worlds wizards, as might be showed in those instances of Balaam, Pharaoh, Saul,
Herod, with many others. But I must hasten, and therefore.

Ninthly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and eminent presence
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, by his sympathizing with them in all their troubles, trials,
distresses, dangers, as you may clearly see by consulting the choice Scriptures
in the margin: So Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and
the Angel Exodus 2. 23, 24, 25. c. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 37. 28, 29. Ez. 35. 7,
8, 9, 10. Mat. 25. 4. ult. Deuteronomy. 32. 9, 10, 11 John 14. 9, 10, Col. 15. Heb. 9.
24. Romans 8. 34.
of his presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and
he bare them and carried them all the days of old. Christ is here in the Hebrew
called, The Angel of his face, either because he does exactly ressemble God his
Father, or because he appears before the face or in the presence of God for
us. This Angel took to heart their afflictions, he was himself grieved for
them, and with them. This Angel secured and safegarded them all the way through
the Wilderness from Egypt to Canaan. This Angel did not only lead them, but he
also lifted them up and took them in his arms, as Parents or Nurses are wont to
do with such Children, that are young, and weakly, and in danger. And this
Angel carried them, as the Eagle does her young ones, that are not fully
fledged, or that are unable yet to fly on her wings. O the pity, the clemency,
the sympathy, and admirable compassion of Christ to his People in their
suffering estate! Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches Ishon of Is^, it
is here called Bath, the daughter of the eye, because it is as dear to a man as
an only daughter. O^utus ^^ fama non patiuntur jec^s, The eye and the good name
will endure no jests.
the apple of his eye. The eye is the tenderest piece of the tenderest part;
the eye is kept most diligently, and strongly guarded by nature with five
tunicles. A man can better bear a thump on the back, the biting of his finger,
the cutting of his hand, the pricking of his leg, or a blow upon his arm, than
a touch on the eye. O that persecutors would be quiet, and let Gods People
alone, and take heed how they meddle with Gods eyes. There is no touching of
them, to wrong, or injure them, but you wrong and injure the holy one of
Israel, who will certainly revenge himself upon you; they that strike at Gods
eyes, do through them strike at God himself, which he will never put up. It Is a
dangerous thing, to molest and trouble, to afflict or annoy the People of God,
for God himself is very sensible of it, and accordingly he will certainly
requite it. Acts. 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? They that
persecute the Servants of Christ, they persecute Christ himself, who lives in
them, and is mystically united to them. Look as there is by virtue of the
natural union a mutual sympathy betwixt the head and the members, the Husband
and the Wife: so it is here betwixt Christ and his Saints, for he is a most Heb.
4. 15. c. 5. 2. Col. 1. 24. Heb. 13 13. Isa. 53. 4.
sympathizing, compassionate, tenderhearted Savior. Those that shoot at the
Saints hit Christ, their sufferings are held his, and their reproaches are
counted his. He that bore the Saints griefs when he was on Earth, (really and
properly) he ^ears them still now he is in Heaven, (in a way of sympathy)
Christ in his glorified state has a very tender sense of all the evil that is
done to his Children, his members, his Spouse, and looks upon it as done to
himself. A great Lord said to another great Lord of the Council in King Henry
the Eighths days, concerning Cranmer, Let him alone, for the King will See the
first part of my Golden Key, p. 277 278. 279. more of this.
not suffer his finger to ache. So say I to the persecutors of the day; Let the
People of God alone, for if you do but make their finger ache. God will make
your heads and hearts ache for it, before he has done with you. But,

Tenthly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and eminent presence
with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, by pouring out upon them a greater spirit of prayer and
supplication, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, than formerly they have had. Isa. 26. 16. Lord in trouble have they
visited Before they would say a Prayer, but now they poured out a Prayer.
thee, they poured out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. [They
poured out their still prayer.] The Hebrew word Lachus, signifies properly, a
soft or low kind of muttering, which can hardly be heard. The Prophet hereby
would intimate to us, that in their great troubles, and deepest distresses,
they sighed or groned unto God, and prayed in a still and silent manner. Saints
never visit God more with her prayers, than when he visits them most with his
rod. Saints never pray with that seriousness, that spiritualness, that
heavenlyness, that humbleness, that brokenness, that servency, that frequency,
as they do when they are under the mighty hand of God; and all this is from
that signal presence of God, that is with them, in their greatest troubles,
deepest distresses, etc. When it was a day of great trouble, of great distress,
of great danger to the People of God in Germany, God poured out a very great
spirit of prayer upon Luther; at length he comes out of his closet
triumphingly, saying to his Fellow Laborers and Friends: Vicimus, vicimus; We
have overcome, we have overcome. At which time it is ob^^rved, that there came
out a proclamation from Charles the Fifth, that none should be further molested
for the profession of the Gospel. In days of ^roubles and distress Luther was
so warm, zealous, and powerful in prayer, that made one of his best Friends
say, (Iste vir potuit, quod voluit) That man could have of God what he pleased.
Being once very warm in prayer, he let fall this transcendent rapture of a
daring faith, Fiat mea voluntas, Let my will be done; (and then falls off
sweetly) Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua, My will, Lord, because thy will. It is
reported in the life of Luther, that when he prayed it was tanta reverentia ut
si Deo, and tanta fiducia ut si amico, It was with so much reverence as if he
were praying to God, and with so much boldness as if he had been speaking to
his Friend. I have read of a fountain, that at noon day is cold, and at
midnight it grows warm; so, many Christians are cold in praying, in hearing,
etc. in the day of prosperity, but yet are warm and lively in praying and
wrestling with God in the day of adversity. Manasseh got more by 2 Chr. 33. 11,
12, 13. Jonah 2. Dan. 6. Ps. 84 Luke 23. 42. 2 Chapter 20. 1. to the 13. Isa. 37.
14. to the 12. Genesis ^2. 6. to the 13. and from v. 24. to 3^. now he oils the
Ke^ of prayers with tears, Hos. 12. 4.
prayer in his iron-chains, than ever he got by his golden Crown. Afflictions
are like the prick at the Nightingals breast that awakes her, and that puts her
upon her sweet. and delightful singing. A sincere Christian never prays so
sweetly, as when under the rod. One reports of Joachim, the Father of the
Virgin Mary, that he would often say, Cibus and potus mihi erit oration, Prayer
is my meat and drink. When a Christian is in trouble, then prayer is his meat
and drink. O what a spirit of prayer was upon Jonah, when he was in the Whales
belly! and upon Daniel, when he was among the Lions! and upon David, in his
wilderness-state! and upon the Thief, when he was on the C^oss! and upon
Jehoshaphat, when Moab and Ammon, and others, came against him to battle! and
upon Hezekiah, when Sennacherib had invaded Judah! and upon Jacob, when his
brother Esau came to meet him with four hundred bloody cut-throates at his
heels! As there be two kind of antidotes against poison, viz. hot and cold, so
there are two kind of antidotes against all the troubles of this life, viz.
fervent Prayer and holy Patience; the one hot, the otehr cold; the one
quenching, the other quickening. When a Christian under great troubles, deep
distresses, and most deadly dangers, prays more for the sanctification of
affliction, than the removal of affliction; when he prays more to get off his
sins, than to get off his chains; when he prays more to get good by the rod,
than to get free from the rod; when he prays more that his afflictions may be
a refining fire, than a consuming fire, and that his heart may be low, and his
graces high, and that all his troubles may wean him more from this World, and
ripen him the more for the glory of that upper World: It is a great
demonstration of the signal presence of God with him in all his troubles, and
deep distresses. But,

Eleventhly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and eminent
presence with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers, by drawing the hearts of his People nearer and closer to
himself, by all the afflictions, troubles, distresses, and dangers, that do
attend them in this World. Psalm 119. 67. Before I was afflicted I weut astray,
but now have I kept thy Word. God brought David nearer to Chrysostom.
himself, by weeping cross. Affliction is fire to purge out our dross, and to
make virtue shine. It is a potion to carry away ill humors, better than all
the benedicta Medicamenta, as Physicians call them. Master Ascham was a good
Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth: but affliction was a better, etc. By
afflictions God humbles the hearts of his People, and betters the hearts of his
People, and draws the hearts of his People nearer and closer to himself, V.
71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. The Laced emonians of old
grew rich by war, and were bettered by it, when all other Kingdoms were undone
by it. The Saints gain by their crosses, troubles, and distresses. Their graces
are more raised, their experiences are more Romans 5. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. 5.
Hos. 2. 14.
multiplied, and their comforts are more augmented, and their communion with
God is more heightened. The waves did but lift Noah's Ark nearer to Heaven, and
the higher the waters grew, the more the Ark was lifted up to Heaven. The
troubles and distresses that the Saints Psalm 73. 13, 14, 28.
meet with, do but raise them in their fellowship with the Father, Son, and
Spirit. When Tyribazus a noble Persian, was arrested, at first he drew out his
sword and defend himself; but when they charged him in the Kings name, and
informed him, that they came from the King to carry him to the King, he yielded
willingly: So when afflictions arrest a noble Christian, he may murmur and
struggle at the first; but when he considers, it is sent from God to bring him
to the sight of God, the King of glory, he willingly and readily subm^ts. to
the rod, and kisses the rod. All the stones that came thick about Stephens
ears, did but knock him the closer to Christ the Acts 7. 55. 60.
Cornerstone. Tiburtius saw Paradise when he walked upon burning coals. If
there be any way to Heaven on horse back, it is by the cross, said Bradford.
Hos. 2. 6. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a
wall, that she shall not find her paths. By afflictions, difficulties, and
distresses God hedges up his Peoples way. Well what then? Mark, v. 7. I will go
and return to my first Husband, that is to God; I have run away from him by my
sins, and now I will return to him again by repentance. The grand dessign of
God, in all the afflictions that befall his People, is to bring them nearer and
eloser to himself. The Church could have no rest at home, nor no comfort abroad
till by affliction she was brought into the presence and company of her first
Husband, Hos. 6. 1. Come and let us return unto the Hos. 5. 14.
Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; be has smitten, and he will bind
us up. The great design of God in playing the Lions part with his People, is to
bring them nearer and closer to himself; and behold, how sweetly this blessed
design of God did take [Come and let us return unto the Lord, etc.] The power
of God, the presence of God, and the grace of God, is most gloriously
manifested, by bringing the hearts of his People nearer and closer to himself
by all the troubles, distresses, and dangers that do attend them. In the
Winter-season all the sap of the tree runs down to the root, an^ when a man is
sick all the blood goes to the heart: so in the winter of affliction when the
soul is running out more and more to God, and a getting closer and nearer to
God; it is all most sure evidence of the signal presence of God with that soul.
But,

Twelfthly and lastly, the Lord does manifest his favorable, signal, and
eminent presence with his People in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers, by rendering them invincible and
unconquerable under all their troubles, distresses, and dangers, Rev. 12. 11.
And they overcame him by the blood of Rev. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 2 Chr. 32. 7, 8, 21,
22.
the Lamb, and by the word of their t^stimony, and they loved not their lives
unto the death. By virtue of Christ's blood, the Saints are made victorious
both over Satan and all his instruments, they set little by their lives in
respect of Christ and his truth, yea they despised them in comparison
Sulpitius. Rupertus says, that God did more gloriously triumph in Saint
Low^ence his patience and constancy, when he was broiled on the Gridiron, than
if he had saved his body from burning by a miracle. His faith and patience made
him invin^ible.
of Gods glory, and the great things of the Gospel; they made so little account
of them, that they exposed them to all hazards and dangers for the cause of
Christ. In the days of that bloody persecutour Diocletian, the Christians
showed as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdom, as in the faith of
Miracles. The valor of the patients, and the savagness of the persecutors,
striving together, till both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and
astonishment in beholders and readers. It was a good saying of Cyprian,
speaking of the Saints and Martyrs in those days, Occidi poterant, sed vinci
non poterant; They may kill them, but they cannot overcome them. Rev. 17. 14.
These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are with him are called and
chosen, and faithful. The presence of the Lamb has and will make the Saints
victorious in all the ages of the world. Modestus, Lieutenant to Julian the
Emperor, said to Julian, While they suffer they deride us (says he) and the
torments are more fearful to them that stand by, than to the tormented; there
is no end instances of this nature. There is nothing more clear in Scripture
and in History than this, that the signal presence of the Lord with his People,
in all their great troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers, has
made them invincible and unconquerable. But now others that have been destitute
of this favorable, signal, and eminent presence of the Lord, in times of great
troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers, how have they fled when
none have pursued them! how faint-hearted, how greatly daunted, and how sadly
discouraged have they been! how have they turned their backs, and quitted the
field, and run from their colors, without striking one stroke. Many in
Cyprian's time, were overcome before the encounter, for they revolted to
Idolatry, before any persecution once assailed them. In the Palatinat, when
there was a warm persecution, scarce one Professor of twenty stood out, but
fell to Popery, as fast as leaves fall from the trees in Autumn. And so in the
persecution under Decius, many Professors that were rich and great in the
World, they soon shrunk from Christ, and turned their backs upon his ways. It
is Gods favorable, signal, and eminent presence with his People, that makes
them stand to it in an evil day. Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be
against us? That is, none; but this is a more forcible denying, Who can? Do
thou Paul ask, Who can? I Will tell thee: The Devil can, and Tyrants can, and
Informers can, and Persecutors can, and the whole World can; but ridendus est
furor inanis, They are as nothing, and can do nothing against us. Wicked men
may set themselves against the Saints, but they shall not prevail against the
Saints. What if all the world should strive to hinder the Sun from rising or
shining, or the wind from blowing, or the rain from falling; or like those
Pigmies, which went with their arrows and bows to repress the flowing of the
Sea: Ludibrious acts, and mere follies. All that wicked men can do against the
People of God, will be but as throwing stones against the wind. [If God be with
us, who can be against us?] Me thinks these are words of great resolution; as
if he should say, we have many enemies, and powerfulenemies, and daring
enemies, and malicious enemies, and designing enemies, and enraged enemies, yet
let the proudest of them show their faces, and lift up their banners, I fear
them not, I regard them not: Who can? who dare be against ^^? Let me give a
little light into this precious Scripture [If God be for us, who can be against
us?] that is none.

First, None can be so against us, as to hurt us or harm us; therefore Aquinas
well expounds that, Quis contra Dan. 3. 25. 27. Cap. 6. 22.
nos? (i. e.) Quis efficaciter? and others, Quis laesive and prevalenter? who
can be against us, so as to hurt us? Acts 18. 9. Then spoke the Lord to Paul in
the night by a vision, be not afraid but speak, and hold not thy peace. Verse
10. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to burt thee, for I have
much people in this City. God had many Souls in this (ity to convert, and What
said Justin Martyr to his murderers, in the behalf of himself and his
fellow-Mortyrs? you may kill us, but you can never hurt us.
to bring in to Christ, and therefore he animates and encourages. Paul to
preach boldly and to go on in his work undauntedly. I but Lord there be many in
the City, that will set themselves against me. I but I am with thee. I but Lord
there be many in the City, that will hate me. I but there is no Man that shall
set on thee, to hurt thee. They may kill me, said Socrates of his Enemies, but
they cannot hurt me. It was the speech of Anaxarchus a Heathen, when as he by
the Tyrant he was commanded to be put in a Mortar, and be beaten to pieces with
an Iron pestel, he cries out to the Persecutors, you do but be at the vessel of
Anaxarchus, you do not beat me, nor hurt me; you do but beat the case, the
husk, the vessel that contains another thing: his body was to him but as a
case, a husk, he counted his soul himself, which his persecutors could not
reach nor hurt. Though there were many in the City of Corinth that would be
ready furiously to set on Paul, yet there should not be a man that should be
able to hurt Paul; God would be his life guard to protect him, and he would
make void all the mischievous designs, and endeavors of his adversaries
against him. When in a City the Lord has those that are ordained to Salvation,
he will bless the labors of his faithful Servants with happy success: so that
faithful Ministers may not, yea must not, for fear of the invincible malice of
some, neglect the Salvation of others. All the Arrows that Men of might and
malice should shoot at Paul in the City of Corinth, should never reach him,
they should never hurt him, nor harm him, 1 Pet. 3. 13. And who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? They may oppose you, but
they cannot harm you; they may hate you, but they cannot harm you; they may
plot and devise mischief against you, but they cannot harm you; they may
persecute you, but they cannot harm you. I know Caesar told Metellus, that he
could as easily take away his life, as bid it be done; but these were only
bravado's, for that is a Royalty which belongs to God only (To whom belong the
issues Psalm 68. 20.
of death;) or the goings out from death, that is deliverances from death and
deadly dangers. It is an allusion to one that keeps a passage or a door, that
is God has all the ways which lead out from death in his own keeping. Christ
has the keys of death, the sole Revel. 1. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 9.
dominion and disposal of it; the Lord knows how to deliver his People from the
most desperate and deadly dangers, he can deliver them out of the mouth of the
Lion, he can pull them out of the jaws of death, and so secure them from all
harm or hurt, none can be so against the People of God as to harm their souls,
as to hurt their happiness: But

(If God be with us, who can be against us?) I answer, Secondly, None can be so
against us, as to prevail 2. Matthew. 16. 18. Heb. 2. 10. Jer. 1. 19. Cap. 20. 11.
over us; the Gates of hell may fight against us, but the Gates of hell cannot
prevail against us: Christ is the Captain of your Salvation, God has made him
General of the Field, and therefore you may be sure that he will stand by you,
and bring you off with honor; you need never fear having the day, who have
Christ your Captain for your second; though your persecutors are as so many
roaring Lions, yet Christ who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judab, will make you
victorious over Revel. 5. 5. Psalm 129. 2.
them all. In all storms and tempests the Church will stand fast, because it
stands upon a rock. God is on Zions side, and the Enemies of Zion must first
prevail against Zions God: Before they can prevail over Zion her self, Zions
God will be a wall of fire about her, and Zach. 2. 5, Dent. 33. 26, 27, 28, 29.
therefore Zions Enemies shall never prevail over her: Were Zions shelter
stones, these might be battered; were it walls of lead, these might be melted;
were it a defense of waters, these might be dried up; were it garrisons of
mighty men, these might be scattered; were it engines of war, these might be
defeated; were it trenches, these might be stopped; were it bulwarks, these
might be overthrown: But Zion is guarded with a wall of fire round about her,
and therefore all her opposers can never prevail over her: The Enemies of Zion
2 Chronicles. 32. 7, 8 Romans 8. 37. Genes. 3. 12. Number. 14. 9.
are weak Enemies, they are infatuated Enemies, they are conquered Enemies,
they are limited Enemies, they are chained Enemies, they are cursed Enemies,
and they are naked Enemies, and therefore they shall never be prevalent Enemies
over Zion Pharaoh followed the Exodus 14.
Israelites, but he and his mighty men were drowned, and Israel delivered, for
God was with them. Saul 1 Samuel 26. 20.
hunted David as a Partridge i^ the Mountains, but Saul perishes, and David
was crowned, for God was with him. Haman hated Mordecai, and plotted against
Mordecai, Hesther 6. 7.
but Haman is hanged and Mordecai advanced, for God was with him. The
Presidents and Princes inform Dan. 6.
against Daniel, and plot against Daniel, but they are by the Lions torn and
devou^ed, and Daniel is delivered and exalted, for God was with him. Herod
kills Acts 12.
James with the sword, and imprisons Peter, but Herod is devoured by worms, and
Peter is delivered out of prison by an Angel, for God was with him. Let
Atheists, Papists and Persecutors cease from plotting against Zion, from
persecuting of Zion, for it is utterly impossible to prevail against Zion. Let
all Zions Adversaries remember once for all, that if any Policy, counsel,
lying, cursing, strength or cruelty could have prevailed against Zion, Zion had
been rooted out of the world long ago. If Balaam was at our Enemies elbows, he
would tell them roundly and plainly, That it is in vain to curse those whom God
blesses. It is hard to Number. 23. 8. Acts 9. 5.
kick against the pricks: It is high madness for men to run their naked Bodies
against a swords point. Let Zions Enemies remember that God, who takes pleasure
in Zion, sits upon the Circle of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants Isa. 40.
22. 15. 17.
are as Grasshoppers; yea all the Nations as a drop of a Bucket, and less than
the dust of the Balance, and therefore he can easily revenge all the wrongs
and injuries Some observe that Fauls Style is so beautified with wonderful
Eloquence and Rhe^orick, that not Tully, nor De^^o^^henes could ever have so
spoken, August. Erasmu^. Some report of Augustine that he wished for three
things: ^. To see Christ in the flesh. 2. To see Rome in the pride of it. 3. To
have heard Paul preach.
that is done to Zion, by those that would fain prevail over her, and triumph
in her ruin. But,

Thirdly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) I answer, None can be so
against us, as to be able to separate us from the love of God; and the love of
Christ. Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distresses, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword? Verse 36. (As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day
long: we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Verse 37. Nay in all these
things we are more than conquerers, through him that loved us. Verse 38. For I
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come. Verse 39. Nor height, nor
depth, nor any other Creature, shall separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus It is not the pleasures of life nor the pains of death, it is
not evils felt nor evils feared, it is not the height of prosperity nor the
depth of adversity, it is not bonds nor banishment, it is not power nor policy,
honor nor baseness, it is not violent persecutions nor multiplied
tribulations; it is not the scorns of men, nor reproaches of men, nor revilings
of men, nor designs of men, nor any thing else, that can separate us from the
love of the Father or the love of the Son. In the 35. Verse is a position, that
no crosses nor creatures can deprive us of the love of God, which is set down
in a double interrogation, that he might add the more force and life to it, and
ravish the Readers: Who shall separate us? That is none can: But he speaks with
contempt; Who shall? shall tribulation? as if he should say, I scorn it; As
Goliath defied David, saying, Do thou come to me with a staff? so Paul with a
better Spirit defies all crosses, sufferings, trials, etc. as things not able
to deprive sincere Christians of Christ's love; shall tribulation, etc. He had
before spoken of Persons, now here he speaks of things, because Satan and his
sworn Slaves think by such things to separate between God and his People.
Chrysostom observes Paul's wisdom in three things: 1. That he says not,
Shall the love of riches, pleasures, honors, etc. which have a mighty force in
them to bewitch us; but shall tribulation, distress, etc. 2. That he begins
with the lighter, and so rises to greater troubles, placing them in this order
not casually, but, by singular art. 3. That though these which he here
rehcarseth, consist of a certain number, yet every one as a General has
special Troops under it: As when he says Tribulation, he says,
imsprisonments, bonds, slanders, banishments, etc. Shall tribulation, distress,
persecution? etc. No: They are blessed which endure these Matthew. 5 10. 11.
things. Shall famine? He which feeds on Christ, shall never perish for hunger.
Shall nakedness? Christ's righteousness is my clothing; I shall willingly
follow him even naked, who when he was clothed with infinite glory as with a
garment* was content to be born naked, and to be stripped on the Cross for my
sake. Shall peril? I know the hardest. Shall the sword? Christ is to me in life
and death advantage. But,

Fourthly, [If God be for us, who can be against us?] I answer, None can be
against us so* as to bring us to their bow, their b^^k, their will, their
humor, their lusts. 1. Kings 19. 18. Yet I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which
has not kissed him: That is, I have Kissing was an outward token 1. of great
and entire affection. 2. of submissive reverence. 3. of willing and ready
subjection.
many thousands that have not worshipped Baal. Here a set number is put for an
indefinite number; he means a very great number. Idolaters used not only to bow
and kneel before their Idols, but also to kiss them, according to that Hos. 13.
2. Let the men that sacrifice kiss the Calves. Cicero says, that the chin of
the image of Hercules was much worn, with the kisses of them that adored him.
Now God had several thousands of true Israelites indeed, that had not in the
least kind polluted themselves with the Idolatry of Baal. The denial of bowing
the knee, and kissing with the mouth shows, that Gods faithful Servants were
so far from setting their hearts upon Baal, as that they would not make the
least show of any affection or subjection to him. These good souls had too
great spirits to be conformable to the Idolatry of the times. Jeroboam with his
eight hundred thousand 2 Chr. 113. 3, 20.
chosen men, his Popish Priests, and his golden Calves, could not bring Judah
to his bow. Nebuchadnezzar nor his Princely Informers, nor his fiery Furnace,
could never bring the three Children to his bow; the three Dan. 3.
Champions would be Non-conformists, though Court, City, and Country were
violent for Conformity. Neither Darius, his Presidents, nor Princes, could ever
bring Dan. 6.
Daniel to their bow; Daniel would keep off from idolatry, and keep close to
his God, and close to his duty, let all his enemies do their worst. The Rulers
and Elders of Israel charged the Apostles, and threatened the Apostles, and beat
the Apostles, and commanded the Apostles, Acts 3. ibid. 4. and 5.
that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus; but they could never bring
them to their bow: For they Acts 5. 41. 42.
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy, to suffer shame for his Name; and daily in the Temple, and in every
house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. Pharaoh by all his
oppressions could never bring Israel to his bow; Nor Saul by all his
persecutions, could never bring David to his bow; Nor Haman by all his plots
and designs could never bring Mordecai to his bow; and Paul will rather dye
upon the Acts 20. 21, 22, 23 24. cap. 21. 13.
spot, than be brought to his enemies bow. The ten persecuting Emperors could
never bring the primitive Christians to their bow; Nor the bloody, fierce, and
fiery Papists could never bring the Martyrs to their bow, as you may see
through out the Books of Martyrs. Among the many hundred instances that are
there, I shall only refresh your memory with this one: There were Endeavors to
bring Hawks to their bow, but all in Fox Acts and Mon. p. 1447.
vain; at last some of his Christian Friends desired him for their encouragment
and confirmation to give some token when he was in the flames (a strange time
one would think to attend upon signs by Friends) whether pains were tolerable,
or no. He was bound to the stake, fire put to the wood, it burns, it flames, it
consumes his flesh, his eyes start out of his head, his fingers are consumed
with the fire; and when every one thought him dead, expecting the fall of his
body: lo, suddenly he lifts up his stumps, and thrice as a famous conqueror,
he claps them over his head. In this he was more than a Conqueror.

In former times the sense of the love of God, made the Martyrs esteem Tyrants
as gnats and fleas, and torments as the fleabitings. Tertullian speaking of his
times says, Acc^satio votumest, and paena faeli^itas. Tert. advers. Gent.
that to be accused was the wish of Christians, and punishment for Christ they
counted felicity, A certain Woman ^unning in all have with her child in her
arms; being asked the cause, O, says she, I hear a great sort of Christians
are appointed to be martyred, and I am afraid lest I and my little one come too
late. When the Emperor Valens banished Basil, and the Tribune threatened his
death, I would (said Basil) I had any thing of worth, I would bestow it on him
that should cut Basil's windpipe; and when he had that night given him to
deliberate, he answered, That he should be the same man to morrow, and wished
that the Tribune would not be changed. Chrysostom being in banishment by the
means of Eudoxia the Empress, wrote to a Bishop called Cyriacus, and upon
occasion, tells of his resolution before he was banished, I thought with my
self (says he) that if she will banish me, the Earth is the Lords; if she will
saw me asunder, I remembered the Prophet ^say; if drown me, Jonas came to my
mind; if stone me, I thought of Stephen; if behead me, of John Baptist; if take
away my goods, Naked came I out of my mothers womb. By all which you may
clearly see, that let the wicked do their worst, they can never bring the
Saints to their bow. But,

Fifthly, [If God be with us, who can be against us?] I answer, none, so as to
hinder the operation of all things for our good. When men and devils have done
their worst, all the great troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers,
that do attend the Saints, shall work for their good. Romans 8. 28. And we know
that all I have read of a Jewish Rabbin, who would still say, it was good what
ever befell him, when he met with a cross, he would say, it was good, when he
met with a loss, he would say, it is good.
things work together, for good to them that love God, to them that are called
according to his purpose. In this Verse there are two things observable. First,
a proposition, or a glorious privilege, All things work together for good;
This word (...), Work together, is a physical expression; several poysonful
ingredients put together, being tempered by the skilful Apothecary, make a
sovereign medicine, and work together for the good of the Patient; they work
together, not invicem, between themselves, but together with God; not of their
own nature, for so they do not cooperate, but contra-operate, but being
sanctified by God. And therefore one takes the verb passively, are wrought; for
indeed take away God, and afflictions work for our hurt; but all Gods
providence ^eing divinely tempered and sanctified, do work together for the
best to the People of God. When the worst of men have done their worst against
the Saints, all things shall sweetly concur, yea conspire for their good; 2.
The proof which is double. 1. From the experience of all Saints, We know, it is
not a matter pendulous, or doubtful. The Apostle does not say, We think; but,
We know. Nor he does not say, We hope; but, We know. Nor he does not say, We
guess, we conjecture; but, We know. Nor he does not say, We desire that all
things may work together for good; but, We know all things work together for
good. Nor he does not say, We pray that all things may work together for good;
but, We know all Judge. 14. 12, 13, 14.
things work together for good. The wicked know not this secret, as the
Philistines understood not Sampsons riddles; but we know that all the world
shall not hinder the cross from working for our good. 2. From a d^scription of
them that love God; they are called according to Gods purpose: That is, God
has purposed the salvation of his People, he has chosen them to salvation,
and called them to it; and therefore it must needs be, that all these
afflictions that befall his People, must work together for their internal and
eternal good; otherwise he should do that which should cross his own purpose,
which wise men will not do; and, O how much less will the most wise God act
counter cross to his own purpose! So Jer. 24. 5. Thus says the Lord, the God
of Israel, Like these good Figs so will I acknowledge them that are carried
away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the
Caldeans for their good. To be carried captive to Babylon was doubtless a very
sore and matchless affliction. Dan 9. 12. And he has confirmed his words,
which he spoke against us, and against our Judges that judged us, by bringing
upon us a great evil, for under the whole Heaven has not been done, as has
been done upon Jerusalem. This may be the abridgment of Jeremiah's
Lamentations, Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Behold and
see, If there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. Cap. 4.
16. For the punishment of the iniquity of the Daughter of my People, is greater
than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment,
and no hands stayed on her. Sodom sustained not any siege from foreign forces,
they were not vexed and plagued with the Armies of the Chaldeans; there was no
hand of man in the destruction of Sodom, but a hand of Heaven only. Sodom was
not kept long in pains and misery as I and my People have been, but was
suddenly overwhelmed, and in an instant dispatched; all which shows that their
miseries and sufferings were incomparable and matchless, and that they were so
indeed will evidently appear, if you please but seriously to consider either
the antecedents of it, or the consequents of it. The antecedents of it: what
went before their captivity, viz. blood, and slaughter, and dreadful
devastations. Or if you consider the consequents of it: as, 1. The enslaving of
their persons, under a fierce and most cruel enemy. 2. The loss of their
estates. 3. The leaving of their Country, and the Land of their nativity. 4. A
deprivation of the ordinances and worship of God. 5. The scorns and reproaches,
the exaltations and triumphs of their adversaries, that pleased and delighted
themselves in their captivity and misery. These were the Sea Psalm. 137. 7.
Obadjah 12. 13, 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 25. 6. Psalm. 44. 13, 14.
woeful consequences of that captivity, and yet all the power and malice of men
in the world could not hinder these amazing and astonishing trials from working
together for the spiritual, and everlasting Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. Psalm. 119. 71, 75.
Heb. 12. 10.
good of his captive People. That God will do his People good by the most
terrible dispensations that they are under, you may see more and more evident
by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together. As the Apothecary of poison
makes Triacle, to drive out poison: so can God make the poison of afflictions
(which in themselves are the curse of the Law) to drive out the poison of sin.
All the world can never hinder the affliction, troubles, and evils that befall
the People of God, See my London's Lamentations, p. 34. to P. 53. See also my
Mute Christian under the smarting Rod.
from working for their good; for God does and wi^^ ^y these means, 1. Discover
sin. 2. Prevent sin. 3. Im^^tter sin. 4. Mortify sin. And God will by
afflictions, troubles, etc. 1. Revive, quicken, and recover his Childrens
decayed graces. 2. Exercise his Childrens graces. 3. Increase his Childrens
graces. 4. Make a further trial and discovery of his Childrens graces. Let the
enemies of Sion storm and rage, plot and combine, etc. yet they shall never be
able to hinder the greatest troubles, the deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, from working for the internal and eternal good of all the sincere
lovers of God. I have read a story of one Pereus, who running at another with a
sword to kill him, by accident the sword only run into his impostume, and broke
that; and so he was instrumental to save him, whom he designed to have killed:
And so all the afflictions and troubles that the righteous meet with, they do
but serve to cure them of the impostume of pride, or of the impostume of
earthly mindedness, or of the impostume of self love, or of the impostume of
hypocrisy. Look upon the revolution of the Heavens how every Planet moves in
its proper orb; their motions are not alike, but various, nay opposite each
unto the other, hence those different conjunctions, oppositions, and aspects of
the Planets, yet by the wheeling round of the primum mobile, they are brought
about to one determinate point. The People of God have many enemies in the
World, whose course and scope,. whose aims, and ends, and actions are not the
same, yea diverse, nay advers, one thwarting and crossing the other, yet the
overruling providence so swayes all subordinate and inferior instruments and
enemies, that in the midst of their mutual jars they conspire in a sacred
harmony, as if they were entered into a holy-league, or some sacred combination
for the good of his Chosen, where ever our Enemies be in respect of their
places, whosoever they be in regard of their Persons, and however they are
disjoined in regard of their affections, yet all their projects and prac^^^s
shall tend and end in the good of those that love God. But

Sixthly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) John 1. 3. That which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us:
and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
Nun^uem minus s^lus, quam cum selus, never less alone than when alo^e, said the
Heathen: and may not a Saint say so much more, that has communion with Father,
So^ and Spirit. My God and I are good company said famous Doctor S^^s.
Man's summum bonum stands in his Communion with God, as Scripture and
experience evidences. A Man whose soul is conversant with God, shall find more
pleasure in a desert, in a den, in a dungeon, in a fiery furnace, yea, and in
the valley of the shadow of death, than in the Palace of a Prince. There is a
sweet and intimate Communion which Believers have with God; hence they are said
to walk with God, Genes. 5. 24. cap. 6. 9. and to talk with God, as Moses
frequently did, and to dwell in God, 1 John 4. 15. And to sup with God, Rev. 3.
20. And to lodge with God, Cant. 7. 11. The nearness of this fellowship which
we have with the Father, is represented by a gradation of allusions in
Scripture, all which do excellently illustrate this truth. There is some kind
of participation that a Servant has with his Master, yet greater is that which
one Friend has with another, but yet greater is that which a Son has with the
Father, but greatest of all is that which the Bride has with the Bridegroom.
Now in all these relations we stand to the Father; we are his Servants and he
is our Lord, Exodus 12. 7. We are his friends, John 15. 14, 15. Jam. 2. 23. And
he is our friend, Cant. 5. 1. an able friend, a sure friend, a faithful friend,
a close friend, a constant friend. Plutarch's reasoning is good ((...)) Friends
have all things in common: But God is our Friend; Ergo we cannot want; a most
rare speech from a poor Heathen: He is our Father, Isa. 63. 16. cap. 64 8. And
we are his children, Isa. 63. 8. He is our Bridegroom, and we are his Bride,
Isa. 61. 10. Hosea 2. 19, 20. Isa. 62. 5. And therefore it is no pride nor
presumption for Believers to say, our fellowship is with the Father: Our
fellowship with Jesus Christ, is set forth by the Parable of Matthew. 22. 1, 2,
3. Luke 15.
the Wedding-Feast, and by the Entertainment of the Prodigal Son, and by such
relations or various similitudes, as carry communion in their bosoms, as of the
head and the members, root and branches, foundation and building, husband and
wife. The head has communion with the body by sense, influence, motion. The
root with the branches, by leaf, sap, and juice. The foundation with the
building, by support and strength. The husband with the wife, by love and
consent: Thus it is betwixt Christ and the Believers, 1 Cor. l. 9. God is
faithful by whom ye are called, to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. All
Believers have fellowship with Christ, whether they be strong or weak, rich or
poor, Gal. 3. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 2. John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.
high or low, ripe and well grown, or new born babes, and very tender. The head
has conjunction with all the members, and an influence into all the members,
even the little Toes, as well as into the strongest Arms; and the root (in the
virtue of it) extends to the weakest branches, as well as to the strongest
limbs of the Tree. Communion is as large as union, all Believers are united to
Christ, and all Believers have communion with Christ. Though one star exceeds
another in magnitude, yet all are alike seated in the heavenly Orb; and though
one member be larger in the body than another, yet every one has an equal
conjunction with the head: And as Believers have fellowship with the Father and
the Son, so they have fellowship with the Spirit also; every Believers
communion extends to all the Persons in the Trinity. 2 Cor. 13. 14. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Ghost be with you all. Amen. Now, no Men, no Devils, no wrath, no rage, no
malice, no enmity, no afflictions, no oppositions, do persecutions, no
troubles, no trials, no bonds, no banishment, can interrupt or hinder a
Believers communion with the three Persons in Trinity. But

Seventhly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) Psalm 3. 2, 3, 4. Psalm
6. 8, 9, 10. Psalm 138. 3, Lan. 3. 55. to 59.
A Christian ^an as well hear without ears, and live without food, and fight
without hands, and walk without feet, as he is able to live without secret
Prayer. Secret Prayer is the life of our lives, the soul, the sweet, the heaven
of all our enjoyments; of all the duties of Religion: Secret Prayer is the most
soul-sweetning, soulstrengthning, soul-nourishing, soul-fatning,
soul-refreshing, soul-satisfying, and soul-encouraging duty; in all the Ages of
the world, the Saints have kept the Trade, in spite of all opposers and
persecutors, in prisons, in dungeons, in dens, in bonds, in banishments, on
racks, and in the very flames, the Saints have still kept up this secret Trade;
as you may see at large in my Treatise on closet Prayer, called The privy Key
of Heaven, to which I refer you. But

Eighthly, (If God ^e with us, who can be against us?) Cor. 1. 12. For our
rejoicing (or boasting) is this the testimony of our conscience, (...),
boasting or glorying.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
youward. They were in great and pressing troubles in Asia, Verse the 8. and yet
they boasted in the testimony of their consciences; they were under a Sentence
of death in themselves, Verse 9: and yet gloried in the testimony of their
consciences. Joy of conscience is the greatest joy, as trouble of conscience is
the greatest trouble: when conscience bears its testimony with us, and for us,
how full of joy is the soul, even in the midst of the deepest sorrows, and
greatest sufferings! Conscientia pura semper secura, a good conscience has
sure confidence, and he that has it, sits Noah like -- mediis tranquillus in
undis:


Quiet in the greatest combustions; freed if not from the common destuction,
yet from the common distraction. A good conscience is an impregnable Fort; it
fears no colors, it will enable a man to stand against the fiercest batteries
of men and devils. A good conscience will fill a man with courage and comfort,
in the midst of all his troubles and distresses. Paul had enough to say for
himself, when standing before the Council, he could say: Men and brethren, I
have lived in all good conscience Acts 23. 1, 2.
before God, until this day. And though as soon as he had said so, Anani^s
commanded to smite him on the mouth, yet he bears up bravely, because his
conscience did not smite him, but acquit him. That man can never want music
whose conscience speaks in consort, and is harmonious with himself. A good
conscience is a Paradise in a wilderness, it is riches in poverty, and health
in sickness, and strength in weakness, and liberty Isa. 38. 3.
in bonds, and life in death. A good conscience will enable a man to triumph
over innumerable evils, yea over death it self: Death to such a person is not
the King of terrors, but the King of desires. A good conscience Phil. 1. 23.
will be a Christians best friend in the worst times; it will be a sword to
defend him, a staff to support him, a pillar of fire to lead him, a Joseph to
nourish him, a Dorcas to cloth him, a Canaan to refresh him, and a feast to
delight him: He that is of a merry heart has a Prove. 15. 15.
continual feast; Now there is nothing that can make a man Divinely merry,
below a good conscience. A good conscience (says one) is Thalamu^ Dei,
palatium Aug. Ser. 10. ad Fratres in E^em.
Christi, habitaculum Spiritus Sancti, Paradisus delitiarum: The bed of God,
the palace of Christ, the habitation of the holy Ghost, the Paradise of
delights; and wherein every Tree yields a Feast. Tranquillitas conscientiae,
Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 1.
and securitas innocentiae quaecunque mundus bona indicat excellunt: The
tranquillity of conscience, and the security of innocence, excel all the
things which the world counts good. He that has a good conscience enjoyes a
continual serenity, and sits continually at that blessed Feast, whereat the
blessed Angels are Cooks and Butlers (as Luther has it) and the three Persons
in Trinity glad Guests. All other Feasts to this of a good conscience are stark
hunger: the Feast of a good conscience is a full Feast, a noble Feast, a
lasting Feast: not for a day, as that of Nabal's; nor for seven days, as that
of Sampson's; nor of nine-score days, as that of Ahashuerus, but a durable,
continual Feast, without intermission of solace, or interruption of society:
The best way in this world for a man, to turn his whole life into a merry
festival, is to get and keep a good conscience. The Heathen Philosopher could
say, (...), A good man keeps holy day all the year about. It was the testimony
of a good conscience, that made the Apostles rejoice Acts 5. 40. 41. 42. Cap.
16. 25, 26.
when they were beaten and abused by the Council. It was the testimony of a
good conscience, that made Paul and Silas to sing in the prison. It was the
testimony of a good conscience, that made Moses prefer Christ's Cross before
Egypt's treasures. It was the testimony of a good conscience, that made those
worthies in that 11. of the Hebrews more willing to die than to live, to die
than Heb. 11. 35.
to dine. It was the testimony of a good conscience, that made the Martyrs to
kiss the stake, to hug their Executioners, to clap their hands in the flames,
and to tread upon burning coals as upon beds of Roses. Now it is not in the
power or policy of Men or Devils, to deprive a Christian of the testimony of
his conscience; and as long as that bird in the bosom sings, no troubles, no
trials, no oppositions, no persecutions, no dangers, no death can make a
Christian miserable. The testimony of a good conscience will make a man triumph
over the worst of men, and the worst of sufferings. But

Ninthly, (If God be with us, who can be against in?) Heb. 13. 5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, (or without the love of silver, as the
Greek word signifies) and he content with (...).
such things as you have. [Conten^i praesentibus, so Beza, Be content with
present things.] The Hebrews had been plundered of all they had, though they
had nothing, Heb. 10. 34.
they must be content. If Men cannot bring their means to their minds, let them
bring their minds to their means; a little will serve our turn till we get to
Heaven, till we come to our Fathers house: For he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. There are five Negatives in the Greek: I read not the
like throughout the New Testament. In that this promise is set down negatively.
[I will never leave thee,) this makes the (...)
promise to be of a larger extent; for it includes all times, all places, all
estates, all dangers, all needs, all distresses whatsoever, as if he had more
largely said, thou shall never stand in need of any of my help and protection,
but thou shall be sure to find it. Affirmative promises are not of that
extent, as negative promises are; for if a man should promise to assist, help,
succor or counsel me, if he do it now and then, or upon some special
occasions, he has kept his promise: But negatively for a man to say, I will not
fail thee, I will never leave thee, though he should help, assist, succor or
stand by me, a bundred, yea a thousand times; and yet fail me but once, that
negative promise is not punctually kept; it is not perfectly kept. It is
further considerable, that there is a great Emphasis in doubling and trebling a
negative particle in Greek: Doubling and trebling Negatives in Greek makes them
much the stronge^ the doubling of the Negative particle does in this place
carry the greater Emphasis, because in setting down the same thing, it is not
only twice doubled, but in the latter place it is trebled; so as there are in
all five Negatives, as I have already hinted. These two Phrases A general
promise compriseth all particulars of that kind.
never leave nor forsake, are so general as they include all the wants, all
dangers, all distresses, all necessities, all calamities, all miseries that can
befall us in this world. These two Phrases, God's not leaving, God's not
forsaking, implie all needful succors. It is more than if he had said, I will
supply all thy wants, I will heal all thy diseases, I will secure thee against
all sorts of dangers, I will ease thee of all thy pains, I will free thee of
all thy oppressors, I will break all thy bonds, I will bring thee out of
prison, I will vanquish all thine enemies, I will knock off all thy chains,
and I will make thee triumph over all thy sufferings; for these generals
comprise all manner of particulars under them. Verse 6. So that we may boldly
say, the Lord is Psalm 118. 6.
my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. In this Verse there
is an inference made upon the former promise of God's not leaving, nor
forsaking his; the conjunction (so that) implies an inserence, and such (...).
an inference in this place, as teaches us to make a good use of the forenamed
promise: The use here set down is double; the first is confidence in God (the
Lord is my helper.) Secondly, courage against Man, (I will not fear what man
shall do unto me.) Assurance of Gods presence to help at a dead lift, should
raise us up above all base and slavish fears of the power of men, of the
spoilings of men, of the designs of men, etc. God being with us, and for us,
and on our side, we may boldly, safely, and confidently rest upon it, that he
will freely, readily, graciously afford all needful help, assistance and
succor, when we are in the greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers. The Greek word (...), (Helper) according to the notation of it,
signifies one that is ready to run at the cry of another: This notation
implies, a willing readiness, and a ready willingness in God, to help and
succor his People, when they are at a dead lift. You know the tender Father,
the indulgent Mother, the careful Nurse, they presently run when any of them
hears the Child cry, or sees the Child in any danger or distress; so when God
sees his poor Children in any danger or distress, Exodus 2. 23, 24, 25* Cap. 3.
7, 8, 9, 10.
when he hears them complain, and cry out of their sufferings, their bonds,
their burdens, their oppressions, their dangers, etc. he presently runs to
their relief and succor. Psalm 33. Our soul waits for the Lord: he is our
help and our shield. Psalm 49. 17. Thou art my deliverer: God is the Lord of
Hosts, with him alone is strength and power, to deliver Israel out of all his
troubles. He may do it, he can do it, he will do it, he is wise in Psalm 9. 7,
8. Esaias. 43. 11. Psalm 5. 12. Psalm 22. 12. 2 Kings 6. 26, 27
heart and mighty in strength; besides him there is no Savior, no deliverer;
he is a shield to the righteous, strength to the weak, a refuge to the
oppressed; he is Instar omnium, All in all; who is like him in all the world,
to help his People at a dead lift? when Friends cannot help, when power cannot
help, when policy cannot help, when riches cannot help, when Princes cannot help,
when Parliaments cannot help, yet then God can and will help his People, when
all humane help fails. For the Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself
for his Servants, when he sees that their power (or hand) is Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
gone, and there is none shut up or left. When Gods People are at the very
brink of ruin, then God will come in seasonably to their help, their extremity
shall be his opportunity to succor his People, and to judge their Enemies: no
men, no devils, no power, no policy can hinder God from helping, aiding,
assisting, and succouring of his People, when they are at a dead lift. But.

Tenthly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) I 10.
answer, None, so as to hinder the springs of joy and comfort, from rising and
flowing in their Souls. Psalm 71. 20. Thou which have showed me great and sore
troubles shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of
the Earth. Verse 21. Thou shall increase my greatness and comfort me on every
side. The Psalmist was in those desperate dangers, that he seemed to be as a
man that was dead and buried, and yet he had faith enough to believe, that God
would surround him with cordials, and supply him with comforts from all sides;
there is no true comfort to be drawn out of the standing pools of outward
sufficiences, but out of the living fountains of the all-sufficiences of the
Lord Almighty. Thou shall comfort me on every side. Psalm 94. 19. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, (or of my careful, troubled, perplexed
thoughts, as the word properly signifies) thy comforts delight my soul. As the
Psalmist always found God a present help, so he always found him a present
comfort in the day of troubles; God never did, nor never will want a cordial,
to revive and keep up the Spirits of his people from fainting and sinking in an
evil day; when the Psalmist was under many griefs, cares, fears, and
perplexities of Spirit: God came in with those comforts that did delight his
soul, and cheer up his Spirits. The word of the Lord is never Psalm. 119. 49, 50.
more a word of comfort, nor the Spirit of the Lord is never more a Spirit of
comfort, than when the Saints are in their deepest distresses, and sorest
perplexities, John 14. 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Verse 26. But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name.
Hudson the Martyr being at the stake, he went from under his chain, and having
prayed earnestly, he was so comforted and refreshed by the Holy Spirit, that he
suffered valiantly and cheerfully. The Holy Ghost is called again and again the
Comforter, because his office is to work consolation in the hearts of Gods
People, in all their troubles and distresses. Spiritual comfort is therefore
called joy in the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost does. Romans 14. 17.
create it in the soul. When a man suffers for righteousness sake, God comes
with his cordials in the very nick of time, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
when a man's suffering is upon the account of Christ, God seldom fails to send
the Comforter for the refreshing and relieving of his Spirit. When a man is
under bodily confinement, Isa. 12. 3. cap. 66 11.
for the cause of Christ, God will never fail to be a Spring of life, a Well of
Salvation and breasts of consolation to him. When a Christian is brought to a
piece of bread, then is the season for God to feed him with heavenly Mann. I
have told you of Mr. Glover, who found no comfort in the time of his
imprisonment, but when he was going to the stake, he cried out to his Friend,
He is come, he is come, meaning the Comforter. Hab. 3. 17. Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of
the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls. Verse. 18. Yet
I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. In these
words you have these two parts: 1. A sad supposition. Although the fig tree
shall not blossom, etc. 2. A noble and comfortable resolution, yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Let me first hint a
little at the sad supposition, Although the fig tree should not blossom, etc.

First, though there should be a famine in that Land, that of all Lands was the
most plentiful and fruitful Land, yet Habakkuk would rejoice in the Lord, and
joy in the God of his salvation. The Land of Canaan of all Lands was the
fruitfullest; 'twas as the garden of God; 'twas a Land that flowed with milk
and honey, a Land of vineyards, the best of all Lands, as Moses describes it; A
Land that brought forth to Isaac no less than a hundred fold; It was so rich a
Land, that it was the granary of other Dent. 8. 7, 8, 9. cap. 32. 13, 14, Gen
26. 12. 1 King. 5. 11. Acts 12. 20.
neighboring Cities, and Countries, it had not only plenty for it self, but
bounty for others. Yet now when God shall turn a Paradise into a Wilderness,
Habakkuk will rejoice in the Lord, and ^oy in the God of his salvation. But,

Secondly; when the anger and wrath of God shall cause a dearth in those
fruits, that naturally are most yielding and pleasant, yet then Habakkuk would
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his salvation. The fig tree of all
trees is most fruitful, bringing forth of its own accord with the least care
and culture, fructifying in the most barren and stony places, bearing twice a
year, soonest ripening, and rarely failing; So the vine, that's a fruitful
plant, it is made the emblem of plenty and fruitfulness. Now when there shall be
a dearth upon these pleasant fruits, yet then Habakkuk will rejoice in the
Lord, and joy in the God of his salvation. But,

Thirdly, another print of Divine displeasure in the scarcity threatened is,
that it is a national famine, a general famine, an overspreading famine,
usually if one part of the Land suffers scarcity, other parts abound with
plenty; but when God calls for a famine, he turns a whole Land into a desert,
into a barren wilderness: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of
Lebanon Psalm. 107. 33. 34. Nahum. 1. 4.
languisheth; these were the richest soil of all the Country, yet these were
parched up, and fruitless by his displeasure, and yet for all this Habakkuk
will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his salvation. But,

Fourthly, another print of Divine displeasure is this, that the Lord makes it
an universal scarcity-upon all kind of foods, and supports of life; here is the
staff of bread broken, and the herds and flocks fail, and the refreshing of the
wine press, the seed and the vine, and the figtree and the olive tree, all
become fruitless; such a desolation is more than ordinary, usually when one
commodity fails, another abounds; if corn be dear, cattle will be cheap, that
weather often times, that hinders one kind of grain, helps another: but here God
blasts all the helps of the nature. Therefore God compares his judgments to a
fire that burns all before it. The Land is Joel 2. 3.
as the Garden of Eden, before it and behind it a desolate wilderness, and this
the Lord points at as a wonder, Joel 1. 2. Hear this ye old men (who can talk
of dear years) has this been in your days, or even in the days of your
Fathers? that which the Palmer-worm has left, has the catter pillars eaten.
When God begins in a way of judgment, he makes an end, he makes the decays of
nature excessive and violent; and yet Habakkuk will rejoice in the Lord, and
joy in the God of his salvation. In his resolution you have the first particle
(although) Verse 17. Now this particle is an act of forecast, these miscries
may befall us; And in the 18. Verse you have the particle (yet) and that is an
act of preparation against these miseries. That particle (although) forecasts
the misery and that particle (yet) forelayes the remedy; he foresees sorrows in
the first, and he provides against them in the second, yet I will rejoice in
the Lord, and joyin the God of my salvation.

So Paul comes with a Benedictus in his mouth (and (...), that is word for word
Let God be well spoken off. God blesses us really, signally, greatly; and we
bless him verbally, mentally, practically.
surely it was in his heart before it was in his mouth) 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be
God, even the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort. Verse 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may
be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God. Verse 5. For as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ. The Apostle begins here
with thanksgiving, according to his accustomed man ner in all his Epistles; but
contrary to his custom does he apply this thanksgiving wholly to himself. The
reason was (says Beza) because the Corinthians did begin to despise him for
his afflictions. (It being the common course of the world to d^spise the People
of God when they are under sufferings) Therefore he answered confidently for
himself, that though he had been much afflicted, yet he had been much
comforted, and rejoiced the more in his comforts, because God had comforted him
for that very cause, that he might be able and willing to comfort others. God
is the God of all sorts and degrees of comfort, who has all comforts at his
dispose. This phrase, The God of all comforts, intimates to us, 1. That no
comfort can be found any where else, he has the sole gift of comfort. 2. Not
only some, but all comfort; no imaginable comfort is wanting in him, nor to be
found out of him: Look as the air lights not without the Sun, and as fuel heats
not without fire, so neither can any thing soundly comfort us without God. 3.
All degrees of comfort are to be found in him in our greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers. The lower the ebb, the higher the tide;
the deeper the distress, the greater the comforts; though the Apostle was
greatly afflicted, yet his comforts did exceed his afflictions. 2 Cor. 7. 6.
Nevertheless God that comfort those that are cast down, comforted us by the
coming of Titus. This is a most sweet attribute of God a breast that we should
be still sucking at.
When the Corinthians were in a very low condition, when they were even spent
with grief, and swallowed up in sorrows, when they were destitute of all relief
and comfort, then the God of all comforts did comfort them. No tribulations, no
persecutions, no grievances, no prison doors. no boults, no bars can keep out
the consolations of God, from flowing in upon his People. God loves to comfort
his People, when all their outward comforts fail them. Gods comforts are not
only sweet, but seasonable; he never comes too soon, nor never stays too long.
If one drop of the joy of the Holy Ghost should fall into Hell, it would
swallow up all the torments of Hell, says Austin. The joy of the Holy Ghost
will certainly swallow up all the troubles and sufferings that we meet with in
a way of righteousness. None have 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14.
been more Divinely cheerful and merry than the Saints have been under their
greatest sufferings. John Noyes took up a faggot at the fire, and kissed it,
saying, Blessed be the time, that ever I was born to come to this preferment.
When they fastened Alice Driver to the stake to be burnt, never did
neck-kerchief (said she with a cheerful countenance) become me so well as this
chain. Mr. Bradford put off his cap and thanked God, when the Keepers wife
brought him word that he was to be burnt on the morrow. Mr. Tailor fetched a
frisk, when he was come near the place where he was to suffer. Henry and John
(two Augustine Monks) being the first that were burnt in Germany; and Mr. Rogers
the first that was burnt in Queen Mary's days, did all sing in the flames.
Thus you see, that it is not the greatest troubles, nor the deepest distresses,
nor the most deadly dangers that can hinder the joy of the Lord, from
overflowing the soul. But,

Eleventhly [If God be with us who can be against us?] I answer, none, so as to
deprive us of our graces, which next to Christ are our choicest jewels. 1 John
3. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin. That is, does not give
himself over to a voluntary serving of sin; he does not make a trade of sin; he
sins not totally, finally, maliciously, habitually, studiously, resolutely,
wilfully, delightfully, deadly, (...), He does not make it his work to sin, he
cannot follow his lusts, as a workman follows his trade) For his seed
remains in him, The seed of God, the seed of grace, is an abiding seed; grace
in it self is certain and unchangeable, though the feeling thereof be
uncertain; grace has an abiding excellency in it; grace has eternity stamped
upon it; it is durable riches; other riches make themselves wings, and fly
from us, but grace will keep us company till we get to Prove, 8. 18. cap. 27. 24.
Heaven, our last step in holiness will be into happiness; grace is a blossom
of eternity; it is an anointing that abides, 1 John 2. 27. John 4. 14. cap. 7.
38.
that is the principle of grace infused into you, which was typified by the
unctions, or anointings in the ceremonial Law, which was signified by the
precious ointment, poured upon the head of Aaron, that ran down to the skirts
of his garments; this principle will prove durable and lasting. Grace is a well
of water, springing up into everlasting life; grace is a river of living water:
Now this river can never be dried up, because the Spirit of God is the constant
spring that feeds it, and maintains it; grace is not a stream or a pond that
may run dry, but a well, yea a springing well of inexhaustible fullness,
sweetness, virtue, and refreshment; grace will still be springing up, and
flowing out in all the carriages and deportments of a Christian; grace will be
flowing out in all a Christians duties and services in his outward calling and
employments, in his trials and sufferings; grace will break out at a Christians
eyes, ears, tongue, hands, feet; where grace is a well of water, a river of
living water, there that Christian will see for Christ, and hear for Christ,
and talk for Christ, and do for Christ, and walk with Christ; grace is a well,
a river, that will be springing up to everlasting life; grace and glory differ
(non specie, sed gradu) in degree, not in kind; grace differs very little from
glory, the one is the seed, the other the flower; grace is glory militant, and
glory is grace triumphant; grace is a beginning of glory, it may be compared to
the golden chain in Homer, whose top was fastened to the chair of Jupiter; grace
and glory are individual, and inseparable; the Psalmist joins them together,
Psalm 84. 11.
The Lord will give grace and glory. Grace is a living spring that never
fails, a seed that never dies, a jewel which never consumes, a Sun that
never sets; all other gifts of whatsoever kind, worth or excellency, are but
like a cloud soon dispelled, a vessel of clay soon broken, a sandy foundation
soon sunk; grace is more excellent than gold: gold draws the heart from God,
grace draws the heart to God; gold does but enrich the mortal part, the ignoble
part, but grace enriches the Angelical part, the noble part; gold perishes, but
grace perseveres; if grace were not permanent, it could not be excellent; 1
Pet. 1. 7.
if grace were not durable, it could not be pleasurable; if grace were not
lasting, yea everlasting, it could not be a Christians comfort in life; his
support in death and his glorious crown in the great day of account; grace in
it self is permanent, incorruptible; it fades not away; it is a birth that
shall never dye; it is a plant of renown that shall never wither, but grow up
more and more till grace be turned into glory: upon which account one of the
Ancients had rather have S. Paul's coat Hierom.
with his heavenly graces, then the purple of Kings with their Kingdoms: No
troubles, no distresses, no dangers, can deprive us of our graces, can rob us
of our spiritual treasure. But,

Twelfthly, [If God be with us who can be against us?] I answer none, so as to
deprive us of our inward peace, rest, and quiet, though it thunder and lighten,
and rain and blow abroad, yet a man may be at peace, and rest and quiet at
home. A man may have much trouble in the world, and yet rest and quiet in his
own spirit. John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give As bonum
Haered^arium.
unto you, not as th World gives, give I unto you; let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid. No men nor Devils, no troubles, nor
distresses, can deprive a Christian of that inward and blessed peace that
Christ has purchased and paid so dear for. Peace with God and peace of
conscience are rare jewels, that none can strip us Romans 5. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
of. The world may wish you peace, but it is only Christ can give you peace.
The worlds peace is commonly a dear bought peace, but Christ's peace is a cheap
peace, a free peace. [My peace I give unto you.] The worlds peace is commonly a
sinful peace, but Christ's peace is a holy peace; the worlds peace is a cursed
peace, but Christ's peace is a blessed peace; the worlds peace is but an
earthly peace, but Christ's peace is an heavenly Heb. 12. 14. Psalm 29. 11.
peace, Romans 14. 17. Some Christians thought that others could not come to
Heaven if they did not eat such meats at they, but Paul tells them, that the
kingdom of God consists not in meat or drink, but in righteousness and peace,
and joy of the Holy Ghost. The worlds peace is but an imaginary peace, but
Christ's peace is a real peace. The worlds peace is but a superficial peace,
but Christ's peace is a solid and substantial peace. The worlds peace is but 1
These. 5 3. 1 Pet. 3. 11. Jam. 3. 21. Isa 9. 6, 7. Ps. 37. Isa. 26 3. c. 27. 5.
a transient peace, but Christ's peace is a permanent peace. The Worlds peace is
but a temporary peace, but Christ's peace is an eternal peace; it is a peace
that all the world cannot give to a Christian, and it is a peace that all the
world cannot take from a Christian. When the tyrant threatened one of the
Ancients, that he would take away his house; he answered, Yet thou can not
take away my peace. I will break up thy school, yet shall I keep whole my
peace; I will confiscate all thy goods, yet there is no praemunire against my
peace; I will banish thee thy Country, yet I shall carry my peace with me. All
above a believer is at peace, the controversy betwixt God and him is ended,
Christ takes up the quarrel betwixt God and a believer; (We have peace with
God) All within a believer is at peace, a peaceable God makes all at peace^;
Romans 5. 1.
when our peace is made in the Court of Heaven (which is upon the first act of
believing) then follows peace in the Court of Conscience. Peace, which passes
all understanding; and all below a believer is at peace with him, Philip. 4. 7.
he has Peace with all the Creatures; when we are friends with God, then all
the Creatures are our friends. The stones of the field shall be at league with
thee, the beasts Job 5. 23.
of the field shall be at peace with thee, etc. The peace that Christ gives, is
the inheritance of Saints only, 'twas all the Legacy which the Prince of peace
l^ft to his subjects, and this Legacy none can take from them. Perfecutors may
take away my goods, but they cannot take away my peace; they may take away my
estate, but they cannot take away my peace; they may take away my liberty, but
they cannot take away my peace; they may take away my good name, but they
cannot take away my peace; they may take away my relations, but they cannot
take away my peace; they may take away my life, but they cannot take away my
peace. I grant that the best have no perfection of peace, because they have no
perfection of grace. If there were a perfection of grace, then there might be a
perfection of peace, but the perfection of both is reserved for another world;
and it must be granted that though sometimes a believer may want the sense of
peace, the sweet of peace, yet the grounds of his peace are still fixed, certain
and constant; they are like mount Sion, that cannot be removed. Now the grounds
of a Christians peace are these, viz. Interest in Christ, reconciliation with
God, justification, remission of sin, adoption, the Covenant of grace and
peace, etc. Now these are always sure and everlasting, though the sense of
peace may eb and flow, rise and fall in a believers breast, especially when he
is a combating with strong corruptions, or high temptations, or under sad
desertions, or when unbelief has got the throne, or when their hearts are
quarrelsom, for commonly a quarrelsom heart is a troublesome heart; or when they
have blotted their evidences for Heaven, or when they are fallen from their
first love, or when they have contracted eminent guilt upon their souls, or
when they are declined in their communion with God, etc. Now in these cases
though a believer may lose the sense of peace, yet the grounds of his peace
remain firm and sure, and though he may lose the sense of his peace, yet in all
these sad and dark conditions his soul is day and night in the pursuit of
peace, and he will never leave the chase till he has recovered his peace,
knowing that God Psalm 85. 8. 1 John 3. 9.
will first or last speak peace to his soul; yea, though he has lost the sense
of peace, yet he has that abiding seed of grace in his soul, that will in time
recover his peace; do your enemies threaten to take away this or that from you,
you may throw up your caps at them, and bid them do their worst, for they can
never take that peace from Isa. 9. 6.
you that Christ has given as a Legacy to you; when there are never so great
storms within or without, yet then a believer may find peace in the Prince of
peace; when his imperfections are many, a perfect Savior can keep him in
perfect peace in the midst of them all, though his sacrifices Isa. 26. 3, 4.
Heb. 7.
are imperfect, yet Christ a perfect Priest can speak peace to his soul. Peace
is that never-fading garland, which Christ will so set and settle upon the
heads of the upright, that none shall be able to take it off. A Christian can
never lose his inward peace, either totally or finally; it is true by Sin,
Satan, and the World, a Christians peace may be somewhat interrupted, but it
can never be finally lost. The greatest storms in this World that beat upon a
believer, will in time blow over, and the Sun of righteousness, the Prince of
peace, will shine as gloriously upon him as ever. Under this word Shalom the
Jews (...).
comprehend all peace, prosperity, and happy success; when the worst of men
have done their worst against the People of God, yet the issue shall be peace,
prosperity, and happy success. [My peace I give unto you,] That is that peace
with God, and peace with conscience, that I have purchased with my blood, I
give unto you. And what power or policy is there, that can deprive us of this
Legacy? surely none. The peace that Christ gives is bottomed upon his blood,
upon his righteousness, upon his satisfaction, upon his intercession, and upon
a Covenant of peace, and therefore it must needs be a lasting peace, an abiding
peace. But,

Thirteenthly, [If God be with us, who can be against us?] I answer none, so as
to hinder us from being hid, secured, guarded, and protected by God in an evil
day, or in a day of greatest trouble, distress, or danger. Jer. 39. 11. Now
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, gave charge concerning Jeremiah, to Neburazadan
the Captain of the Guard, saying: Verse 12. Take him, and look well to him,
[Heb. Set thine eyes upon him] and do him no harm, but do unto him, even as he
shall say unto thee. Here you shall see the admirable power, wisdom, and
goodness of God, inclining the heart of this great Monarch and Conqueror to
provide for the Prophets safety and security, he that was a dreadful scourge to
punish the wicked, is made by God the deliverer and preserver of the Prophet.
In the 12 Verse you have the Kings Royal Commission to the Captain of his
Guard, to be as kind to him as tender of him, and to carry it as courteously to
him, even as the Prophet himself should desire: Look well to him, do him no
harm, but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee. Let him have all the
content, all the satisfaction, and all the accommodation that himself shall
require. Jer. 15. 11. The Lord said, Verily I will cause the enemy to entreat
thee well in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction. Heb. If I do not
cause, etc. A defective speech in the nature of an oath, as if God had said,
Let me not be deemed a God of my word, let me not be accounted true, let none
reckon me faithful in my promise, if I don't turn his sufferings into his
advantage, and save him from danger in the midst of danger: If in the time of
the enemies invasion Zach. 2. 5.
I be not a wall of fire about him, if in the time of public calamity I don't
secure him; never trust me for a God more: If he don't find more favor at the
hand of his enemies than he has formerly found among his own Vide Jer. 40. 1,
2 3, 4, 5. and c. 26. 23, 24. Jer. 45. 4.
People, never own me for a God more. Verse 20. I am with thee to save thee,
and to deliver thee, says the Lord. Verse 21. And I will deliver thee out of
the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.
God engages himself to protect him against all the might and malice of his most
terrible enemies; and though he should fall into their hands, yet he would
deliver him out of their hands. Psalm 33. 3. They have consulted against thy
hidden ones. The Saints are, 1. Hid in Gods decree, 2. Hid in Christ's wounds,
3. Hid in the chambers of Divine providence, 4. Hid in common dangers, as Noah
was hid in his Ark, and as Lot was hid in Zoar, Isa. 26. 20.
and as Daniel was hid in the Lions den, and as the three Children were hid in
the fiery Furnace, and as Jonah was hid in the Whales belly, 5. Hid with Christ
in God, in Colos. 3. 3.
times of greatest trouble the Saints are hid under the hollow of Gods hand,
under the shadow of Gods wing. Psalm 27. 5. For in the time of trouble he shall
hide me in Psalm. 91. 1, 4.
his Pavilion. The Hebrew Succoh is written with a little Samech, to show, say
some, that a little pavilion or cottage where God is, shall be sufficient to
save-guard the Saints in the day of adversity. He shall hide me in his hut, as
a Shepherd does his sheep in a stormy day. [In the secret of his Tabernacle
shall he hide me.] I shall be as safe, as if I were shut up in his holy Ark,
Tabernacle, or Temple, whither they use to flee for shelter to the horns of the
Altar, yea as if a man were hid in the most holy Place, where none might enter
but only the High Priest once a year, which is therefore called Gods secret
place. A Ezeck. 7. 22.
Shepherd should not be more careful to shelter his sheep in a Tent or
Tabernacle from the heat of the Sun, nor a King should not be more ready to
protect a Favorite in his pavilion, whence none durst venture to take him, than
God would be careful and ready to shroud and shelter his People from the rage,
madness, and malice of their enemies. How did God hide his Church in Egypt!
Exodus 3. 2, 3.
the Bush was still burning, and yet was not consumed; and how did he hide
seven thousand in Eliah's 1 Kings 19. 18.
time, that had not bowed their knees to Baal. Though the Woman (the Church) be
driven to flee into the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6.
yet there she is hid, and there she had a place prepared of God, that they
should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. Let our
Enemies do their worst, they shall not hinder us of Divine protection; no
power, nor policy can hinder our being preserved and secured by God, in the
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers that can attend
us. But

Fourteenthly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) I answer, None, so
as to deprive us of our union with Christ, as to dissolve that blessed union
that is between Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Christ and our souls. When Men and Devils have done their worst, our Marriage
union with Christ holds good, this union is indissoluble; this union between
Christ and Believers is not capable of any separation, they are so one, that
all the violence of the world, nor all the power of darkness, can never be able
to make them two again. Hence the Apostle's triumphant challenge, Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? If the question Romans 8. 35.
did not imply a strong Negation; the Apostle himself does give us a negation
in words at length, Neither death, Verse 38, 39.
nor life, nor Angels, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us, etc.
Here you have a long Catalogue, consisting of a large induction of various
particulars; But none of all these can dissolve the union between Christ and
Believers. None can untie that knot, that is tied by the Spirit on Christ's
part, and by Faith on ours. Christ and Believers are so firmly joined together,
that all the powers on earth, and all the united strength of Hell, shall never
be able to put them asunder or to separate them one from another, look as no
distance of place can hinder this union, so no force or violence from Devils or
Men, shall ever be able to dissolve this union, and herein lies the peculiar,
transcendent blessedness of this union above all other unions, they all may
cease, be broken and come to nothing, every one of them is soluble: The head
may be separated from the members, and the members from the head; the Husband
must be separated from the Wife, and the Wife from the Husband; the Parents
must be separated from the Children, and the Children from the Parents, and
bosom friends must be separated one from another. The foundation and the house
may be separated, and the branches may be cut off from the vine, yea the soul
and body may be disunited by death, but the mystical union stands fast for
ever: Christ and a gracious soul can Matthew. 19. 6.
never be separated, God has joined them together, and no mortal shall ever be
able to put them asunder; there is not only a continuation of it all our life,
but also in death it self: Our very bodies sleeping in the dust, are (even
then) in union with Christ. There are two abiding things in the Saints, their
unction, and their union; their unction abides, But the anointing 1 John 2. 27.
which ye have received of him abides in you; and their union abides, for it
follows, and ye shall abide in him. Christ earnestly prays, that we might be
one, as he John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.
and his Father are one; not essentially, nor personally, but spiritually, so
as no other Creature is united to Christ. There can be no Divorce between
Christ and Malach. 2. 19.
the believing Soul; Christ hates putting away: Sin may for a time seemingly
separate between Christ and the Believer, but it can never finally separate
between Christ and the Believer. Look as it is impossible for the leaven, that
is in the dough, to be separated from the dough, after it is once mixed, for it
turns the nature of the dough into it self; so it is impossible for the
Saints ever to be separated from Christ: for Christ is in the Saints as Romans 8.
10. Coloss. 1. 27. 1 John 3. 21. John 17. 23.
nearly and as really, as the leaven is in the dough. Christ and Believers are
so incorporated, as if Christ and they were one lump: Our nature is now joined
to God by the indissolvible tie of the Hypostatical union in the second Person;
and we in our persons are joined to God, by the mystical indissolvible bond of
the Spirit, the third Person. Our union with the Lord Jesus, is so near, so
close, and so glorious that it makes us one spirit with him. In this blessed
union the Saints are not only joined to the graces and benefits which flow 1
Cor. 6. 17.
from Christ; but to the Person of Christ, to Christ himself, all the powers on
Earth, and all the powers in John 1. 16. Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
Hell, can never separate Christ from the Believer, nor the Believer from
Christ, when all other unions are dissolved, this union holds good.

I readily grant that the sense and apprehension of this union may (in this
life) be much interrupted, and many times greatly darkened, but the substance of
the union still remains: And I readily grant that a Believer may be much
assaulted and tempted to doubt of his union with Christ, and to question his
union with Christ, and yet nevertheless a Believers union with Christ,
continues and abides for ever. And I readily grant that the influences of it
for some time may be suspended, but yet the union it self is not, nay cannot be
dissolved. As it was in the Hypostatical union, for a time there was a
suspending of the comforting influences of the Divine nature in the humane, in
so much that our Savior cried out: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Yet for all this the union between the two natures, was not Matthew. 27. 46.
in the least abolished; so here in the Mystical union, the sensible effects,
comforts, and benefits of our union with Christ, may sometimes be kept in and
not appear, but yet the union it self abides, and shall abide firm and
inviolable for ever; it is an inseparable and insuperable union. Look as no
power on earth is sufficient to overpower the Spirit of Christ, which on
Christ's part makes John 10. 27. 31. 1 John 4. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Luke 22. 31, 32.
the union, so no power on earth shall be able to conquer Faith, which on our
part also makes the union: Satan and the world may make attempts upon this
union, but they will never be able to break this union, to dissolve this union;
yea though death be the bane of all natural unions, yet death can never be the
bane of this Mystical union, though death puts a period to all other unions,
yet death can never put a period to this union; when the Believer is in his
grave his union with Christ holds good. But

Fifteenthly, (If God be with us, who can be against us?) I answer, None, so as
to deprive us of our crowns, there is no power nor policy on Earth or in hell
that can deprive a Christian.

First, Of his crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. It Is a Metaphor (say several) from the Estius, Scultetus, etc.
custom in war, who used to crown the Conquerors with honor, etc. It is a
similitude taken from fighters or Combatants, who for a prize received a Crown,
when they had contended lawfully. The reward of Eternal life here, is called a
Crown of righteousness. 1. Because it is purchased for us by the righteousness
of Christ, by his perfect and complete righteousness and obedience, dear Jesus
has merited this for us, and so in Christ it is due to us by way of merit;
though in respect of us it is of mere grace, of rich grace, of sovereign grace,
of infinite grace, of glorious grace. 2. Because he is righteous that has
promised Rev. 2. 10. Rev. 3. 21. 1 John 2. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7 10.
this Crown: Though every promise that God makes, is of free and rich grace,
yet when once they are made, the truth and justice of God obliges him to keep
touch with his People; for as he cannot deny himself, so he cannot do any thing
unworthy of himself: Men say and unsay, they promise one thing and mean
another; men many times eat their words as soon as they have spoke them, but
thus God can never, thus God will never do; God can never ^epent of his
promises, he can never waver, he can never go back from his word: God is not a
man, that he should lie, neither the Son of man that he should repent: Has he
said, Number. 23. 19.
and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? All
the promises that refer to this life and a better; are sure, firm, Faithful,
unchangeable, immutable. All the promises are the word of a God, and given upon
the honor of a God, that they shall be made good. O my Friends, the
all sufficiency of God, the Promissa haec tua sunt Demi^e, (says Austin) and
quis falli timet, cum promittit ips^ veri^as.
omniscience of God, the omnipotency of God, the loving kindness and
faithfulness of God, yea, and the Oath of God may fully, yea abundantly
satisfy us, and socure us, that God will certainly make good all his precious
promises to us. We commonly say, when an honest man passes his word for a
little money: O it is as sure as if it were in our purse; but Gods word of
promise is abundantly more sure, for as his Nature is Eternal, so his word of
promise is unchangeable: the promises are a firm foundation Hab. 2. 3. Je^. 32.
41. Psalm 89. 3^.
to build our hopes and happiness upon; they are an Anchor both sure and
st^dfast. Memorable is that saying of David, Psalm 138. 2. For thou have
magnified thy word above all thy Name: Which words are to be understood (as
David Ki^hi says) Hysteron proteron, that thou have by thy word (that is by
performing thy word and promises) magnified thy Name above all things. 3.
Because it is a just and righteous thing with God, to crown them with glory at
last, who have been crowned with shame, reproach and dishonor for his Name and
interest in this world; so that Eternal life is a Crown of righteousness, ex
part Dei, God has promised it to such as overcome; and ex part rei, it is
just with God to give unto his suffering Servants rest and peace. 4. Because it
is given only to righteous men; all that wear this crown come to it in a way of
righteousness; a righteous Crown cannot be had but in the use of righteous
means. The Chaldean, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman Princes commonly
gained their Crowns by fraud, flattery, policy, blood, etc. so that their
Crowns were bloody Crowns, and not righteous Crowns. 5. and lastly, The Apostle
calls it a Crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall give him;
the more fitly to follow the Metaphor taken from Runners and Wrestlers, for
prizes at their solemn e^^ercises or games in Greece, in which there were
certain Judges appointed to observe those that proved masters, and give just
Sentence on the Conquerors side, if he strove lawfully, and fairly won the
prize. Now this Crown is laid up, the Greek word (...), importes two things, 1.
A designation of that which is laid up to some peculiar person. 2. A
reservation and safe keeping of it, to the use of those it is designed to.
Earthly Crowns have been often pulled off from Princes heads, but this Crown of
righteousness is so safely laid up, that none can reach it, none can touch it,
none can pull it from a Believers head. Xerxes ^rowned his steers-man in the
morning, and beheaded him in the evening of the same day. And Andronicus the
Greek Emperor crowned his Admiral in the morning, and then took off his head
in the afternoon. Rosse^sis had a Cardinals hat sent him, but his head was cut
off before it came to him. Does the Crown (says Prove. 27. 24.
Solomon) endure to every generation? It is a question which implies a strong
negation. O, no, there is nothing more uncertain than Earthly Crowns. Henry the
Sixth was honored with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, France and England: The
first was lost by the faction of his Nobles; the other was twice pulled from
his head. Princes Crowns are withering things; Earthly Crowns may be soon put
on, and as soon be pulled off: Most Princes Crowns do but hang on one side of
their heads. All the Powers on Earth, and all the Devils in Hell, can never
reach this Crown of righteousness, though wicked men have long reaches, yet
they can never reach a Believers Crown, which is his joy and Basi^. ad 40.
Martyr, etc.
and comfort in the midst of all his sorrows and sufferings. Thus Basil
speaks of some Martyrs, that were cast out all night naked in a bitter cold
frosty season, and were to be burned the next day, how they comforted
themselves in this manner; The winter is sharp but Paradise is sweet; here we
shiver for cold, but the bosom of Abraham will make amends for all. The
Philosopher could say to the Tyrants face: You may kill me, but you cannot hurt
me; you may take away my head, but you cannot take away my Crown. O Christians,
let this be your joy and triumph, that the Crown of righteousness is laid up
safe for you; no Tyrants arm is long enough to reach that Crown. But

Secondly, There is no power nor policy on Earth or in Hell, that can deprive a
Christian of his Crown of life, James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. (The Crown of life) that is Eternal
life whereby after P^seat.
the fight and conquest he shall be glo^^fied as with a Crown; as there was a
Crown to him that overcame in their exercises among the Grecians. Blessedness
is the general reward, the Crown of life is the particular reward: In these
words as Chrysostom obse^ves there is a great Emphasis, they are both
Emphatical; for life is the best of all natural things, and a Crown is the best
of all civil things: Here is the best and the best, words are too weak to
express what a rare blessing a Crown of life is. The Crown of life is in the
other World, says Gregory, this life is the life of conflict, that of crowns
and wreaths; but you will say, what does this Crown of life signify. I answer,

First, The Crown of life signifies, solid and substantial, honor and glory;
as a Crown is a solid and substantial thing: Heaven admits of no honor and
glo^^^, but what is solid and substantial; the Crown of life is a massy Crown,
a ponderous Crown, to show that the glory above is a massy glory, substantial
glory. That you 2 Cor, 4. 17.
may see it is massy and substantial, observe what a word the Apostle uses:
The weight of glory, the exceeding eternal (...)
weight of glory: Such a weight as infinitely overpoyseth all afflictions. The
Apostle alludeth to the Hebrew and Chaldee wor^^, which signify both weight
M^do emin^^^issim^ and largissin^.
and glory. The Arabic version renders it, Works for us a weight of glory in
the most eminent and largest degree and measure. The Syriack reads it,
Infinitam gloriam, An infinite glory. Haymo reads it, Magnitudinem glory supra
omnem modum and mensuram, A greatness of glory, beyond all bounds and meas^^re.
Beza reads it, Excellenter excellens, Exceedingly excellent. Yet none of these
reach the height of the Apostle's Rhetoric, neither is any translation able to
express it. Glory is so great a weight, that if the Saints were not upheld by
the infinite power and strength of God, it were impossible they should be able
to bear it. To gold and preclous things the weight adds to the value; as the
more massy and weighty a Crown is, the more it is worth: The glory of Heaven
is not only Eternal glory, but it is a weight of glory; yea such a weight as
exceeds all expressions, all comparisons: The honor and glory of this world is
but like the cracking of thorns under a pot; it is but like a blaze, a shadow,
a dream, a vapor; it is but like a fading flower, or the picture of a Prince
drawn upon the Ice, with his purple Robes, and his glorious Crown, etc. which
melts away as soon as the Sun rises; the consideration of which, made one
Prince say of his Crown: O Crown! more noble than happy! A crown is the the
choicest and chiefest of all humane rewards: A among all terrene gifts none
more honorable and glorious than a Crown; this is the height of humane
excellencies, and for the attainment of which many have made most sad,
desperate and dangerous adventures; but alas! what are all earthly Crowns for
honor and dignity, to the Crown of life? No more than shadows to substances,
pebbles to pearls, or dross to gold. But

Secondly, The Crown of life signifies the greatest honor and glory; there is
nothing higher in the estimation, and in the admiration of men than a Crown, it
is the highest appendent of Majesty: A Crown is the Ps^lm 8. 7.
Emblem of Majesty, and so it notes that Imperial and Kingly dignity, to which
Believers are advanced by Ephesians. 1. 3.
Christ. There is nothing that Men esteem of above a Crown, oradmire than a
Crown, or are ambitious off than a Crown. The Crown is the top of Royalty; all
earthly Crowns have crosses hanging upon them; all earthly Crowns are stuffed
with thorns; which made a Xerxes.
great Prince say, You look upon my Crown and my purple Robes, but did you but
know how they are lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them up. Queen
Elizabeth is said to swim to her Crown through a Sea of sorrow: And so many of
the Princes of this world have swum to their Crowns through a Sea of sin, a Sea
of trouble, a Sea of sorrow, and a Sea of blood. The Crown of life is an
honorable Crown, and that is the reason why the Heavenly glory is expressed by a
Rev. 3. 21.
Crown; the Saints are heirs not only of Christ's cross, but also of his Crown,
that is of his honor and glory: The honor and glory of all earthly Crowns are
greatly darkened and obscured by the cares and troubles, the temptations and
dangers that are inseparably annexed to them; but no cares, no troubles attend
the Crown of life, the Crown of glory; Eternal life is a coronation day. But

Thirdly, The Crown of life signifies the reward of victory, a Crown is the
honor of those that strive; Crowns were always the rewards of Conquerours.
Gregory.
Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of
life. A Crown without cares, corrivals, envy, end; a Crown not of gold, silver,
pearls, laurels, or such like fading, perishing, corruptible things, but a
Crown of life, an everliving Crown, an everlasting Crown, a neverfading Crown.
It Is an allusion to a custom that was amongst the Grecians, for such as got the
mastery Dr. Raynolds against Heart p. 482
in their games of wrestling, or running, or the like, were crowned with a
Garland in token of victory, it is not he that fights, but he that conquers,
that carries the Crown: The Crown of life is for that man, and that man is for
the Crown of life, who holds on conquering and to conquer, as Christ his head
has done before him. The Heathens in their Olympicks had their Cups, and
Garments and Crowns that were the rewards of the Conquerors, yea if a horse did
but run a race and won, he had a Cup or a Crown; and thereupon Theocritus
says, See what poor things the world glories in, that bruit beasts are taken
with, their conquerours are crowned, and so are their horses: But what were all
their cups, garments, and crowns of ivy and laurel? etc. to this crown of life,
that is promised to the overcoming Christian; you must first be conquering
Christians, before you shall be crowned Christians. Why do you require that in
one place (says one of the Ancients) which Ambros.
is due in another? why would you preposterously have the crown before you
overcome? whilst we are in our warring state fighting against the world, the
flesh, and the Devil, a crown does not become us. I have read, how that upon a
triumph all the Emperor Severus his Soldiers, for the greater pomp, were to
put on crowns of bays, but there was one Christian among them that wore it on
his arm, and being asked the reason of it, he boldly answered (Non decet
Christianum in hac vita coronari,) It becomes not a Christian to wear his crown
in this life. That crown that is made out of the Tree of life, is a wreath of
laurel that never withers, a crown that never fades, a crown that will sit fast
on no head but the conquerours. But,

Fourthly, the Crown of life signifies a lasting Crown, a living Crown, to say
the Crown of life is to say a living Crown, and living Crowns are only to be
found in Prove. 27. 24. Eze. 21. 25, 26, 27.
Heaven. The word, Crown, notes the perpetuity of glory. A Crown is round, and
has neither beginning, nor ending, and therefore the glory of the Saints in
Heaven is called an immortal, an immarcessible, incurruptible, 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1
Cor. 9. ^4.
and never fading Crown. The Crown of life signifies the lasting honor and
glory of the Saints in Heaven. I have read of an Emperor that had three
crowns, one on his sword, another on his head, and then cries out, Tertiam in
Coelis, The third is in Heaven, and my hope See my String of Pearls.
(says he) shall be in the everlasting Crown. The life to come is only the
true life, the happy life, the safe life, the honorable life, the lasting, yea
the everlasting life, and therefore the Crown is reserved for that life. King
William the Conqueror was crowned three times every year, all his reign, at
three several places, viz. Gloucester, Winchester, and Westminster, but death
has long since put a period to his Crown. The Crowns of the greatest Monarchs
in the world (though they last long) yet are Hackwel.
corruptible, subject to wearing, cracking, stealing, they will be taken from
them, or they from their crowns suddenly. Witness that pile of crowns (as the
Historian speaks) that was piled up (as it were) at Alexander's gates, when he
sat down and wept, because there were no more worlds to conquer. All Scripture
and Histories do abundantly tell us, that there is nothing more fading than
Princes crowns. But,

Fifthly, the Crown of life notes a well entitled crown, a crown that comes by
a true and noble Title. A Christian has the best Title imaginable to the Crown
of life. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Luke 12. 32. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Heb. 1. 2. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Jer. 32. 40. 41.
1. He has a Title by Christ's blood. 2. By the new Birth. 3. By free and
precious promises. 4. By donation. 5. By marriage union, and communion with
Christ, who is heir apparent to all the glory of Heaven. 6. By a sure and
everlasting Covenant. King Henry the VII. of England, pretended a sixfold title
to the crown, 1. By conquest, 2. By the election of the Soldiers in the field,
3. By Parliament, 4. By birth, 5. By donation, 6. By marriage; but what was his
pretended Title to that real and full Title, that a believer has to the Crown
of life? But,

Sixthly and lastly, the Crown of life notes the perfection of the glory of the
Saints in Heaven; as the crown compasses the head on every side, so in Heaven
there is an aggregation of all internal and eternal good. One of August. de
Triplic^ Habitu, c. 4.
the Ancients, speaking concerning what we can say of the glory of Heaven,
says, It is but a little drop of the Sea, and a little spark of the great
Furnace, for those good things of eternal life are so many that they exceed
number, so great that they exceed measure, so precious that they are above all
estimation. Nec Christus, nec Coelum patitur hyperbolem, Neither Christ, nor
Heaven can be hyperbolized. Noscie quid erit, quod ista vita non erit. And
(says one of the Fathers) what will that life be, or rather, what will not
that life be, since all good either is not at all, or is in such a life? light
which place cannot comprehend, voices and music which time cannot ravish away,
odours which are never dissipated, a feast which is never consumed, a blessing
which eternity bestows, but eternity shall never see at an end. Do you ask me
what Heaven is, says one, when I meet you there I will tell you. The world to
come (say the Rabbis) is the world where all is well. I have read of one that
would willingly swim through a Sea of brimstone to get to Heaven, for there,
and only there is perfection of happiness. What are the silks of Persia, the
spices of Egypt, the gold of Ophir, and the treasures of both Indies to the
glory of another world? Augustine tells us, that one day when he was about to
write some thing upon the eighth Verse of the thirty sixth Psalm, Thou shall
make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures; and being almost swallowed up
with the contemplation of heavenly joys, one called unto him very loud by his
name; and enquiring who it was, he answered, I am Hierom, with whom in my life
time thou had so much conference concerning doubts in Scripture, and am now
best experienced to resolve thee of any doubts concerning the joys of Heaven,
but only let me first ask thee this question: Art thou able to put the
whole-Earth, and all the waters of the Sea, into a little pot? Can thou
measure the waters in thy fist? and mete out Heaven with thy span? or weigh the
mountains in scales? and the hills in a balance? If not, no more is it
possible that thy understanding should comprehend the least of the joys of
Heaven; and certainly the least of the joys of Heaven are unconceivable and
inexpressible. But,

Thirdly, there is no power nor policy on Earth or in Psalm 21. 3.
Hell, that can deprive a Believer of an incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. And
every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things, now, they
do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. He alludes to the
Olympic exercises; now, running and wrestling were two of the Olympic games;
now, in these Olympic games the reward was only a corruptible crown, a crown
made up of Laurels, or Olive-branches, or Oaken-leaves, or of Flowers and
Herbs, or at the highest of Silver and Gold, which soon faded; but we run for
an incorruptible Crown of glory. A man (says Chrysostom) would dwell in this
contemplation of Heaven, and be loath to come out of it. Nay (says Augustine) a
man might age himself in it, and sooner grow old than weary. 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you. Here are super-excellent properties of the Heavenly inheritance.

First, it is (...), an incorruptible inheritance. All earthly inheritances are
liable to corruption, 1 An incorruptible inheritance. Genesis 3. 18. Isa. 23. 9.
they are true gardens of Adoms, where we can gather nothing but trivial
flowers, surrounded with many briars thorns and thistles. O the hands, the
hearts, the thoughts, the lives that have been corrupted by earthly
inheritances! O the impure love, the carnal confidence, the vain boastings, the
senfual joys that have been the products of earthly inheritances. If a man's
estate lies in James 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat 6. 19, 20. Job 1. 14, 15, 17. See my
Londons Lamentation.
money, that may rust, or the thieves may break through and steal it; If in
cattle, they may dye, or fall into the hands of the Sabeans and Chaldeans; If
in houses, they may be burnt, witness the late dreadful fire that turned London
into a ruinous heap; If in Lands, a foreign enemy may invade them, and conquer
them. All earthly inheritances are no better than the Cities which Solomon 1
King. 9. 13.
gave to Hiram, which he called Cabul, that is to say, Displeasing or Dirty.
Earthly inheritances they do but dirt, laub, and dust the children of men; it
is only the Heavenly inheritance that is incorruptible.

Secondly, it is (...), an inheritance 2 An inheritance undefiled.
undefiled. There are few earthly inheritances, but some defilement, or other
sticks close to them; many times they are got by fraud, oppression, violence,
injustice, etc. and as they are often wickedly got, so they are as often
wickedly kept; They that will but go to Westminsterhall may every term
understand enough of these things. The Heavenly inheritance is the only
undefiled inheritance; there is no sin, no sinner, no Devil to defile or
pollute the heavenly inheritance, the incorruptible crown. The Greek word
(Amiantos) signifies a precious stone, which though it be never so much soiled,
yet it cannot be blemished nor defiled, yea the oftener you cast it into the
fire and take it out, the more clear, bright, and shining it is; The Apostle
may probably allude to this stone, and it is as if he should say, The
incorruptible Crown, that you shall receive, shall be studded with the stone
Amiantos, which cannot be defiled; no unclean thing shall Revel. 21. 27.
enter into Heaven to defile this Crown, this inheritance. The Serpent got into
the Earthly Paradise, and defiled Adam's crown, yea he robbed him of his crown,
but the subtle Serpent can never enter into the heavenly Paradise. But,

Thirdly, it is (...), an inheritance 3 An inheritance that fades not away.
that fades not away. A Metaphor taken from flowers, the beauty of flowers,
and the sweetness of flowers withers in a moment, and is quickly gone, and then
they are good for nothing, but to be cast upon the dunghill: So it is with all
Earthly inheritances, they soon lose their glory and fragrancy. Where is the
glory of the Chaldean, Dan. 7. 3. to the 8.
Persian, Grecian and Roman Kingdoms? Sic transit gloria Mundi, has been long
since written upon them all; Isa. 40. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 24.
yea all the glory of the world is like the flower of the field, that soon
fades away; How many great Men, and great Kingdoms have for a time shined in
great glory, even like so many Suns in the Firmament, but are now vanished
away, like so many blazing Comets! How has the Moon of great Men's honors been
eclipsed at the full and the Sun of their pomp gone down at noon! How soon is
the Courtiers glory eclipsed, if his Prince do but frown upon him, and how soon
does the Prince become a peasant, if God does but frown upon him! The Greek
word (Amarantos) say some, is the proper name of a flower, which is still fresh
and green, after it has hung up in the house a long time. It is, as if the
Apostle had said, Your incorruptible Crown shall be garnished or adorned with
the precious flower (Amarantos) which is always fresh, and green, and
flourishing; And indeed this is the excellency of the Heavenly inheritance,
that it fades not away, that it is a flower that never withers; all the
glory of that upper-world is like God himself lasting, yea everlasting. This
never fading Crown is like the flower we call Semper vivens, it keeps always
fresh and splendent; the glory of Believers shall never fade, nor wither it
shall never grow old nor rusty. Thrice happy are those souls, that have a share
in this incorruptible Crown. When Alexander heard the Philosophers discourse of
another World, in which he had no part, he 1 These. 4. 13.
wept, to speak with the Apostle, as one without hope. None on earth have such
cause to weep, as those that have no interest in that inheritance that fades
not away. But,

Fourthly and lastly, there is no power nor policy on Earth or in Hell, that
can deprive a sincere Christian of a Crown of glory. 1 Pet. 5. 4. And when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory, which fades
not away; as the garlands did, where with the conquerours at games, races, and
combats were crowned, which were made of herbs, leaves, and flowers. A Crown
imports perpetuity, plenty, dignity; It is the height of humane ambition. The
Greek word Amarantinon, comes from Amarantus, which is a flower that fades
not, of which garlands were made in former times, and wherewith they crowned
the Images of the Heathen Gods. A Believers Crown, his inheritance, his glory,
his happiness, his blessedness shall be as fresh and flourishing after he has
been many millions of years in Heaven, as it was at his first entrance into it.
Earthly Crowns are like tennis-balls, which are bandied up and down from one to
another, and in time wear out. When time shall be no more, when earthly Crowns
and Kingdoms shall be no more, yea when the world shall be no more, a
Christians Crown of glory shall be fresh, flourishing, and continuing; all the
Devils in hell shall never wrangle a Believer out of his heavenly inheritance,
nor deprive him of his crown of glory. The least thing in Heaven is better than
the greatest things in this World; all things on Earth are fading, but the
crown of glory never fades away: Thus you see why Heaven and the glory above
is expressed by a crown; sometimes it is called a crown of righteousness, to
note the grounds and rise of it; sometimes it is called a crown of life,
because it is only to be enjoyed in everlasting life; sometimes it is called an
incorruptible crown, to note the duration and continuance of it; and sometimes
it is called a crown of glory, to note the honor, splendor, and eternity of
it. Now let Devils, let oppressors, let persecutors do their worst they shall
never be able to deprive the Saints of their blessed and glorious crowns. But,

Sixteenthly [If God be with us, who can be Psalm. 89. 30. 35. Jer. ^1. 31. cap.
32. 38, 39, 40, 41. Isa. 54. 10. Heb. 8. 8. 10.
against us?] I answer, none, so as to make void our Covenant Relation, or our
covenant interest, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margin
together. The Covenant of grace is bottomed upon Gods free love, upon Gods
everlasting love, upon Gods special and peculiar love, upon Gods unchangeable
love, so that God can as soon cease to be, as he can cease to love those whom
he has taken into covenant with himself, or cease to keep covenant with them:
Those whom free grace has brought into covenant, shall continue in covenant
for ever and ever, once in covenant and for ever in covenant. The Covenant of
grace is bottomed upon Gods immutable counsel and purpose. The foundation Heb.
6. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
of God stands sure; that is, the decree and purpose of Gods election stands
firm and sure. Now the purpose of Gods election is compared to a foundation,
because it is that upon which all our happiness and blessedness is built and
bottomed, and because as a foundation it abides firm and sure. The Covenant of
grace is John 10. 28. 29, 30, 31, 32. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Jude 1.
bottomed upon Gods glorious power, upon Gods infinite power, upon Gods supreme
power, upon Gods invin^ible power, upon Gods independent power, upon Gods
incomparable power, and till you can find a power that can overmatch this
Divine power, the Saints covenantrelation holds good. The Covenant of grace is
bottomed upon the oath of God; To perform the mercy promised to our Fathers,
and to remember his holy Covenant, Luke 1. 72. 73.
the oath which he swear to our Fathers. Now to think that God will break his
oath, or be perjured, is an intolerable blasphemy. The Covenant of grace is
bottomed upon the precious blood of Christ; the blood of Christ Mat. 26. 28.
Heb 9 15. ^bid. 13. 20.
is called, The blood of the everlasting Covenant. Now the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant. Now by these hints it is most
evident, that the Saints covenant relation, their covenant interest holds good
at all times, in all cases, and in all conditions. It is not the indwelling
power of sin, nor spiritual desertions, nor violent temptations, nor heavy
afflictions, nor Divine delays, that can dissolve our covenant relation. Though
sin may work, and Satan may tempt, and fears may be high, and God may hide his
Isa. 8. 17. Lam. 3. 44.
face from his People, and stop his ears at the prayers of his People, yet God
will still maintain his interest in his People, and his Peoples relation to
himself. God has not cast away his People, whom he foreknew, Romans 11. 2. I am
the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. I will betroth thee unto me forever, Hos. 2.
19. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. It is not all the
powers of Hell, nor all the powers on Earth, that can make null, or void our
covenant relation, our covenant interest. But,

Seventeenthly and lastly [If God be with us, who can be against us?] I answer,
none, so as to hinder our growth in grace, or the thriving and flourishing
estate of our precious and immortal souls. The troubles, afflictions,
persecutions, and sufferings that the Saints meet with in a way of holiness,
shall but further the increase and growth of their graces; grace never rises to
so great a height as it does in times of persecution; Suffering times are a
Christians harvest times. Let me instance in that grace of Psalm 69. 7, 8, 9,
12.
of zeal: I remember Moulin, speaking of the French Protestants, says, When
Papists hurt us, and persecute us for reading the Scripture, we burn with zeal
to be reading of them, but now persecution is over, our Bibles are like old
Almanacks. Michal's scoffing at David 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22
did but inflame and raise his zeal; If this be to be vile, I will be more
vile. Look as fire in the Winter burns the hotter (by an Antiperistasis)
because of the coldness of the air, so in the winter of persecution, that
Divine fire, the zeal of a Christian, burns so much the hotter, and flames
forth so much the more vehemently and strongly. When one desired to know, what
kind of man Basil was, there was presented to him in a dream (says the
Historian) a pillar of fire, with this Motto (Talis est Basilius) Basil is such
a one, he is all on a light fire for God. Warm persecutions will but set
Christians all on a light fire for God, as you may see among the Apostles,
primitive Christians, and the Martyrs of a later date. Grace usually is in the
greatest flourish, when the Saints are under the greatest trials; the snuffing
of the candle makes it burn the brighter: God suffers wicked men to beat and
bruise his links, to make them burn the brighter; and to pound and bruise his
spi^cs, to make them send forth the greater aromatical savor; fiery trials are
like the Tezel, which though it be sharp and scratching, it is to make the
cloth more pure and fine. Stars shine brightest in the darkest nights, and so
do the graces of the Saints shine brightest in the darkest nights of affliction
and tribulation. God does sometimes more carry on the growth of grace by a
Cross than by an ordinance; yea the Lord will first or last turn all fiery
Trials into Ordinances, for the helping of grace in his Peoples souls. Commonly
the Saints spiritual growth in grace is carried on by such Divine methods, and
in such ways as might seem to deaden grace, and weaken it rather than any
ways to augment and increase it. We know that winter is as necessary to bring
on Harvest as the Spring; and so fiery Trials are as necessary to bring on the
Harvest of grace as the Spring of mercy is. Though fiery Trials are grievous,
yet they shall make the Saints more gracious: God usually by smart sufferings
turns his Peoples sparks of grace into a mighty flame, their mites into
millions, their drops into Seas. All the Devils in hell and all the sinners on
earth, cannot hinder the Lord from carrying on the growth of grace in his
Peoples Souls. When Men and Devils have done their worst, God will by all sorts
of Ordinances, and by all sorts of providence, and all sorts of changes make
his People more and more holy, and more and more humble, and more and more meek
and lowly, and more and more heavenly, wise, faithful, fruitful, sincere,
courageous, etc. Though the Church of Smyrna was outwardly Rev. 2. 9.
poor, yet she was inwardly rich, rich in grace, and rich toward God. I think
he hit the mark who said, it is far better to be a poor man and a rich
Christian, than to be a rich man and a poor Christian. Though the Corinthians
were under great trials and 2 Cor. 8. 7.
sufferings, yet they did abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance and
knowledge, and diligence, and in their love to Gospel Ministers. The storm beat
hard upon the Romans, and yet you see what a singular testimony the Apostle
gives of them. I my self also am persuaded of Romans 15. 14.
you my Brethren, that ye also are full of goodness filled with all knowledge
able to admonish one another. The Thessalonians were under great persecutions
and troubles, and yet were strong in the grace that was in Christ Jesus; they
were very growing and flourishing Christians* singular 2 Thessalonians. 3. ^ 10. 2 Thessalonians. 1, 3. 8.
Prophecies speak out the Saints growth and flourishing in grace. The Lord is
exalted, for he dwells Isa. 33. 5.
on high, he has filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. The Spirit
shall be poured upon us from on Isa. 32. 15. Cap. 35. 1.
high, and the wilderness shall be a fruitful field. The desert shall rejoice
and blossom as the rose, it shall blossom abundantly, the glory of Libanon
shall be given unto it: The excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the
glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. And as singular prophecies so
choice, and precious promises speak out the Saints growth in grace take a taste
of some of them. But the path of the Just, is as the shining light, that
shines more and more unto the Prove. 4. 18. Job 17. 9. Psalm 84. 7. Psa. 92.
12, 13, 14.
perfect day. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger. They shall go from strength to strength, every
one of them in Zion appears before God. The righteous shall flourish like the
palm tree, be shall grow like a Cedar in Libanon. Those that be planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, in old age they
shall be fat and flourishing. I have read of an Old Man, who being asked,
whether he grew in grace? Answered, I believe I do, for God has promised that
in old age his children should be fat and flourishing. So Isa. 46. 3. Hearken
unto me O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel which are
born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb. Verse 4. And even
to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made
and I will bear, even I will carry and will deliver you. Zach. 12. 8. And he
that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of David
shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. Hosea 14. 5. I will be
as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as
Libanon. Verse 6. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the
olive tree, and his smell as Libanon. Verse 7. They that dwell under his shadow
shall return, they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine, the scent
thereof shall be as the wine of Libanon. Malach. 4. 2. But unto you that fear
my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings, and
ye shall go forth and grow up as the calves of the stall. Psalm 1. 3. He shall
be like a tree planted by the (...) of waters, that brings forth his fruit in
his season, his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever be does shall
prosper. John 4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him
shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well
of water, springing up to Eternal life. The light and glory of the Church rises
by degrees. 1. Looking forth as the Cant. 6. 10.
morning with a little light. 2. Fair as the Moon, more light. 3. Clear as the
Sun, that is come up to a higher degree of spiritual light, life and glory: By
all which it is most evident, that all the powers of Hell, nor all the powers
on Earth cannot hinder the Saints growth in grace, nor the thriving and
flourishing estate of their precious and immortal souls.

But you will say, what are the reasons why God will be favorably, signally
and eminently present with his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses and most deadly dangers. I answer there are these ten great Reasons
for it.

First, To awaken and convince the Enemies of his People, 1 Reason.
and to render his suffering children glorious in the very eyes and
consciences, both of sinners and Saints, Dan. 3. 24. Then Nebuchadnezzar the
King was astonished and Ponder upon these Scriptures, Micha 7. 8, 9, 10, 16, 17.
Psalm 126. 1, 2. Exodus 8. 19. Isa. 60. 13, 14. Rev. 3. 8, 9. Acts 4. 13. Cap.
6. 15. John 7. 44, 45, 46, etc.
rose up in have, and spoke and said unto his Counselors, did we not cast
three men into the fire? They answered and said unto the King, True, O King.
Verse 25. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose walking in the midst
of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son
of God. Now see what a majesty there is in this presence of Christ with his
People in the fire, to convince Nebuchadnezzar, and to render the three
Champions very glorious in his eyes. Verse 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and
said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who has sent his
Angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the
Kings word, and yielded their bodies, that that they might not serve, nor
worship any God except their own God. Verse. 29. Therefore I make a decree, that
every people, nation and language, which speak (...)ing amiss against the God
of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses
shall be made a dunghill because there is no other God that can deliver after
this sort, Verse 30. Then the King promoted Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego in
the Province of Babylon. The presence of the Lord with the three Children
commanded favor, respect, reverence and honor from this great Monarch
Nebuchadnezzar. The presence of God with his People is very Majestical, the
greatest Monarchs have fallen down before it; not only Nebuchadnezzar, but also
Darius falls down before the signal presence of God with Daniel, Dan. 6. 20.
ult. Mark 6. 20. 2 Kings 11, 1, 2. 1 Samuel 24 17.
when he was in the Lions den. And Herod falls down before the presence of God
with John. And King Joash falls down before the presence of God with Jehojada.
And Saul falls down before the presence of God with David: Thou are more
righteous than I, etc. And Alexander the Emperor falls down before the
presence of God in Jaddus the High Priest. In the signal presence of God with
his People in their affliction, there is such a sparkling luster that none can
behold it, but must admire it, and bow before the graceful Majesty of it: such
has been the signal presence of God with the Martyrs in their fiery trials,
that many have been convinced and converted. I have read of a Citizen of Paris,
who was burnt for Protestantism, how the presence of God did so History of the
Council of Trent. page 418. 2. Edit.
shine in his courage and constancy, that many did curiously enquire into that
religion, for which he so stoutly and resolutely suffered, so that the number
of Sufferers was much increased thereby. I read that Cicilia a poor Virgin, by
her gracious behavior in her Martyrdom, was the means of converting four
hundred to Christ. It was the observation of Mr. John Lindsay, that the very
smoke of Mr. Hamilton converted as many as it blew upon. Alexandrinus cites
Platu, expressing Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 4. p. 495.
himself thus: Although a righteous man be tormented, although his eyes be
dug out, yet he remains a blessed Man. The same Plato could say, That no
gold or precious stone does glister so gloriously as the prudent Spirit of a
good man. And the very Hittites could say of Abraham, who had a very signal
presence of God with him: Thou art a Prince of God among us; Genes. 23. 6.
not that he was a King or had any Authority over them, as the Septuagint
reads, Thou art a King from God, among us: But he is called a Prince of God,
say some, because Lyran. Tostat.
he was as Gods Oracle (the Lord speaking to him by visions and dreams) unto
whom they had recourse for counsel in difficult matters. Others say, he is
called Prince of God, because God prospered him, and made him famous for his
virtue and godliness. But the Hebrews commonly speak so of all things that are
notable and excellent, because all excellency comes from God: As the Angel of
God, the Mount of God, the City of God, Exodus 3. 2. Cap. 4. 37. Psalm 26. 4.
Genesis 30. 8.
the wrestlings of God, etc. Thou art a Prince of God, that is thou art a most
excellent Person. Seneca saw so much excellency that Morality put upon a man,
that he could say (Ipse aspectus boni viri deleciat) The very looks of a good
man delights one. And why then may not the Sons of Heth call him a Prince of
God, from that majesty and glory that they saw shine forth in his graces, and
in his gracious behavior and conversation; and because they did observe a
signal presence of God with him in all he did, it being no higher observation
than what Abimelech had made before them. Chrysostom Genesis 21. 22.
speaking of Babylas the Martyr, says, Magnus atque admirabilis vir, etc. He
was an excellent and admirable man, etc. Tertullian writing to some of the
Martyrs (who had a mighty presence of God with them) says (Non tantus sum ut
vos alloquar, etc,) I am not good enough to speak unto you. Oh! that my life
and a thousand more such wretches might go for yours, etc. In Queen Marie's
days (not of blessed but of abhorred memory) the People of God met sometimes
40. sometimes 100. sometimes 200. together; the fiery persecutors of that day
sent in one among them, to spy out their practices, and to give information of
their names, that they might be brought to Smithfield F^x Acts Mon. 1881.
shambles: But there was such a presence of God in the Assembly of his People,
that this Informer was convinced and converted, and cried them all mercy. 1
Cor. 14. 24. But if all prophefie, and there come in one that believes not, or
one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. Verse 25. And thus
are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he
will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. It may be before
they came to the Assembly of the Saints, they had hard thoughts of the People
of God, they thought that folly was in them, or that disloyalty was in them, or
that madness and rebellion was in them, or that plots and designs against the
Government was in them, or that the Devil was in them. O but now such a
Majestical presence of God appears in the midst of his People, that the
Unbeliever is convinced and confesses that God is in them of a truth. Blessed
Bradford had such a signal presence of God with him in his sufferings, as begot
great reverence and admiration, not only in the hearts of his Friends, but in
the very hearts of very many Papists also. Henry the Second King of Acts and
Monum. page 1458.
France, being present at the Martyrdom of a poor Tailor; who was burnt by him
for his Religion, the poor Epist. Hist. Gal. 82.
man had such a signal presence of God with him in his sufferings, that his
courage and boldness, his holy and gracious behavior did so amaze and terrify
the King, that he swore at his going away, that he never would be present at
such a sight more. As the presence of God is the greatest ornament of the
Church triumphant, so the presence of God is the greatest ornament of the
Church militant. The redness of the Rose, the whiteness of the Lilly, and all
the beauties of Sun, Moon and Stars, are but deformities, to that beauty and
glory that the presence of God puts upon his people, in all their troubles and
trials. There is nothing in the world that will render the Saints so amiably
and lo^ely, so eminent and excellent in the eyes of their Enemies, as the
signal presence of God with them in their greatest trials. Demetrius Piutarch
in the life of Demetrius.
was so passing fair of face and countenance, that no Painter was able to draw
him; the presence of God with his People in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers, puts so rare a beauty and glory upon them,
that no Painter can ever be able to draw them. But

A second reason, Why God will be signally present 2. Reason.
with his People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, is drawn from the Covenant of grace, and those precious
promises that God has made to be with his People. Gods Covenant is, Jer. 32.
40, 41. Heb. 13. 5.
that he will be with his People for ever, and that he will never turn away
from them to do them good. That Is a branch of the Covenant: I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. And that is a branch of the Covenant: I am thy shield,
and thy exceeding great reward. The shield Genes. 15. 1. See Psalm 115. 9, 10.
11.
is between the body and the thrust. So says God, I will put in betwixt thee
and harm; though those Kings whom thou have even now vanquished, may rant high
and threaten revenge, yet I will shield off all dangers, that thou may be
incident to. Though Gods People be in the waters and in the fires, yet his
promise is to Isa. 43. ^. Psalm 91. 15. Psalm 50. 15. Job 5. 19. Hosea 2. 14,
be with them; so the Psalmist, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver
him, and honor him. God will not fail to keep his People company in all their
troubles, no storm, no danger, no distress, no fiery trial can keep God and his
People asunder. God is immutable in his nature, in his counsels, in his
Covenant, and in all his promises; though all Creatures are subject to change,
Malach. 3. 6.
yet God is unchangeable; though Angels and Men, and all inferior Creatures
are dependent, yet God is independent: He is as the Schoolmen say (omnino
immutabilis) Altogether immutable, and therefore he will be sure to keep touch
with his People. Precious promises are Pabulum fidei, and ^nima fidei, The food
of Faith, and the very soul of Faith. They are a Mine of rich treasures, a
Garden full of choice flowers, able to enrich a suffering Cristian with all
Celestial contentments, and to sweeten the deepest distresses. God has deeply
engaged himself, both by Covenant and promises, that he will be with his People
in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers; and
therefore he will not fail them, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore that the Lord thy
God, he is God, the faithful God which keeps Covenant, etc. or the God of
Amen. God will never suffer his faithfulness Psalm 89. 33.
to fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth: All his precepts,
menaces, predictions, and promises are the issue of a most wise, holy,
faithful, and righteous will, and therefore they shall certainly be made good
to his People. But

Thirdly, The Lord will be signally present with his 3. Reason.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because it makes most eminently for the advancement of his own honor
and glory in the world. God never gets more honor than by helping his People
when they are at a dead lift. Gods signal presence with Israel at the red Sea,
makes Moses sing a Exodus 15.
Song of praise. A great part of the revenue of Divine glory arises from the
special presence of God with his People in their deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Exodus 15.
Judges 5. Psalm 23. 4, 6. Isai. 43. 2, 5, 7.
Margin together. It Is the honor of a Husband to be most present with his Wife
in her greatest troubles, and the honor of a Father to be most present with
his Children in their deepest distresses, and the honor of Commanders to be
present with their Soldiers in the heat of Battle, when many fall on their
righ^ hand and on their left. Exodus 15. 3. The Lord is a man of war, (that is
an excellent warrior) the Lord is his name; according to the Septuagint,
(...), He breaks battles, and subdueth war. God like a brave Commander stands
upon his honor, and therefore he will stand by his Souldies in the greatest
dangers. The word Ish here used for Man, signifies an eminent man, a mighty
man, a famous warrior, or as the Chald^e Paraphrast has it, Victor bellorum,
An overcomer of Battles. Now eminent warriors, mighty warriors, famous
warriors, they always stick closest to their Soldiers, in their greatest
dangers, as all know that have read either Scripture or History. Now the Lord
is such a man of war, such a famous warrior, as that he will be sure to Isa.
52. 12. God is both in the Van and in the Rear.
stick closest to his People in the greatest dangers. And as th^re is nothing
that more raises the honor, fame, and renown of great warriors in the world,
than their presence with their Soldiers when the bullets fly thickest, so
there is nothing, by which God gets himself a greater name, fame, and honor in
the world, than by his signal presence with his People, in their greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers. But

Fourthly, The Lord will be signally present with his 4. Reason.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because then his people stands in most need of his presence. A
Believer needs the presence of God at all times, but never so much as in great
troubles; deep distresses and most deadly dangers: For now Job 2. 9. Job 19.
13, 14, 15, 16. 17. Psalm 38. ult. Isa. 41. 17, 18.
Satan will be stirring, he loves to fish in troubled waters; now earthly
Friends, and earthly comforts, and earthly succors will commonly fail us; now
cares, and fears, will be multiplied upon us; now unbelief which is virtually
all evil, will be raising doubts, and cavils, and objections in the soul; so
that if God does not stand by us now, what can we say? what can we do? how can
we bear up? how can we stand fast? What was Sampson that Judges 16. 19, 20.
man of strength when his hair was gone, but as weak as water? and what is the
strongest Christian when his God is gone, but as weak as weakness it self? all
our doing strength, and all our suffering strength, and all our bearing
strength, and all our witnessing strength lies in the special presence of God
with our souls; all our comforts, and all our supports, and all our ease* and
all our refreshments flow from the presence of God with our souls, in our
greatest troubles and deepest distresses, and therefore if God should leave us
in a day of trouble, what would become of us, and whither should we go, and
where should we find rest? When does a man need a Brother or Friend, but in a
day of adversity? A Brother Prove. 17. 17.
is born for adversity, though at other times Brethren may jar, and jangle, and
quarrel, yet in a day of adversity, in a strait, in a stress, birth, and good
blood, and good nature will be working. Adversity breeds love and unity. Ridley
and Hooper differed very much about Ceremonies in the day of their liberty, but
when they were both Prisoners in the Tower th^^ they could agree well enough,
and then they could be mutual comforts one to another; and when does a
Christian most need the strength of God, the consolations of God, the supports
of God, the teachings and quicknings of God, and the signal singular presence
of God, but when they are in the greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers? When the People of God are in a low and afflicted
condition, then the Lord knows that that Isa. 33. 9. 10.
is the season of seasons for him to grace them with his gracious presence:
When calamities and dangers break in upon us, and when all heads, and hands,
and hearts, and counsels are set against us; now is the time for God to help
us, for God to succor us, for God to stand by us. But.

Fifthly, the Lord will be signally present with his 5 Reason:
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because he dearly loves them. God Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. Amat qui^ amat,
Bernard.
entirely loves his People, and therefore he will not leave his People; persons
whom we entirely love we cannot leave, especially when they are in a distressed
condition. Prove. 17 17.
A friend loves at all times, says Solomon; and God is such a friend. God
loves not by fits and star^^, as many do, but his love is like himself sincere
and steadfast, because he loves them, he will not forsake them when they are in the
greatest troubles and most terrible dangers, 1 Samuel 12. 22. For the Lord will
not forsake his People, for his great Namessake; because it has pleased the
Lord to make you his People; He chose you for his love, and he still loves you
for his choice, and therefore he will not forsake you; Chide you he may, but
forsake you he will not: for it will not stand with the glory of God to leave a
People, to forsake a People of his love. Should I cast you off whom I love, the
Heathen Nations would say, that I was mutable in my purposes, or unfaithful in
my promises. Though David's Parents forsook him, yet God did not forsake Psalm
27. 10.
him, but took him up into his care and keeping. It is the deriding question
which the enemies of the Saints put Ps^lm 79. 10.
to them, in the time of their greatest troubles, deep distresses, and most
deadly dangers, Vbi Deus? Where is now your God? But they may safely and
groundedly return this answer, when they are at lowest, Hic Deus, Our God is
here; he is nigh unto us, he is round about Isa. 52. 12.
us, and he is in the midst of us: Witness that golden promise, that is more
worth than a world, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. God is a God of
bowels, a Heb. 13. 5, 11. Hos 8. 9. Mich. 7. 19. Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
God of great pity, a God of tender compassion, and therefore he will not leave
his People in a time of distress. Parents bowels do most yearn toward their
Children when they are sick, and weak, and most in danger; it goes to the very
heart of a man to leave a friend in misery; but what are the bowels of men to
the bowels of God! or the compassions of men to the compassions of God! There
is an Ocean of love in the hearts of Parents 2 Samuel 19. 6.
toward their children, when they are in distress; and this love makes them
sit by their children, and sit up with their children, and not stir from their
children: Gods love does so link his heart to his People in their deep
distresses, Psalm 91. 15.
that he cannot leave them, he cannot stir from them, Isa. 43. 4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee. Well,
and what then? This love so endeares and unites God to his People that he cannot
leave them, he cannot stir one foot from them, V. 2. When thou passest through
the Waters I will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. The Lord dearly loves his People, and he
highly prizes his People, and he greatly delights in his People, and therefore
he will be signally present with his People, both in the fire and in the water,
both in the fire of persecution, and i^ the waters of affliction. God loves the
persons of his People, and he loves the presence of his People, and he loves
the graces of his People, and he loves the services of his People, and he loves
the fellowship of his People, and therefore he will never leave his People, but
stand by them, and be signally present with them in their greatest troubles and
deepest distresses. Such is Gods singular love to his Vovenant People, that he
will neither forsake them, nor forget them in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers. The Jews were low, yea very low in
Babylon, their distresses were great, and their dangers many, they looked upon
themselves as so many dead Ezekiel. 37. 1. to 15.
men, Our bones are dry, our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts;
They looked upon themselves both as forsaken and forgotten by God. Behold,
captive Sion lamentingly says: The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord Isa. 49.
13. to 18. Psalm 84. 7. Isa. 1. 27. Heb. 12. 22.
has forgotten me. Sion is taken several ways in Scripture; 1. For the place
properly so called, where they were wont to me^t to worship the Lord, but this
place was long ago destroyed, 2. For the blessed Angels, Ye are come to mount
Sion, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels. 3. For
the congregation Psalm 87. 2.
of Saints, of Believers, of which it is said, The Lord loves the Gates of Sion
more than all the habitations of Jacob. The believing Jews being sorely
oppressed and afflicted by a long captivity, and by many great and matchless
miseries, that did befall them in their captive state, they Dan. 9. 22. Lam. 4.
6.
look upon God, as one that had quite forsaken them and forgotten them, but
they were under a very high mistake, and very erroneous in their complaint, as
appears by Gods answer to Sion, Verse 15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child,
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? yea, they may
forget, yet will I not forget thee. Verse 16. Behold, I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. In these words as
in a crystal glass, you may see, how pathetically, how sweetly, how
graciously, how readily, how resolutely God ^oth engage himself, that he will
neither forsake Sion, nor yet forget Sion in her captive state. Now let us a
little observe how this singular promise is amplified, and that, 1. By an
emphatical illustration, Gods compassionate remembering of Sion, far transcends
the most compassionate remembrance of the tendrest Mother to her dear sucking
Babe. Now this is laid down.

First, interrogatively, Can a Woman (the most affectionate sex) forget her
sucking Child, from having compassion on the Son of her womb? Can a Woman, can
a Mother so forget as not to compassionate a Child, which she naturally
inclines to pity? A sucking Child that hangs on her breast, such as Mothers
are wont to be most chary of, and to be most tenderly affected toward? her
sucking Child, which together with the milk from the breast draws love from her
heart? her sucking Child of her own womb, which her bowels do more yearn over
than they do over any sucking Nurs-child in the world? and this the Son of her
womb, which the Mother usually embraces with more warm affections, than the
Daughter of her womb. Can a Woman, yea can a Mother forget to exercise love,
pity, and compassion to such a poor Babe? surely, very, rarely.

2. Affirmatively, Yea they may forget. Its possible that a Woman may be so
unwomanly, and that a Mother may be so unmotherly in some cases, and in some
extremities, as to forget her sucking Child, yea as to eat the fruit of 2 Kings
6. 24. to 30. Lan. 4. 10.
her womb, as the pitiful Women did boil and eat their own children in the
siege of Samaria and Jerusalem. Extremity of hunger overmastred natural
affections, and made the pitiful Mothers require of their children those lives,
which not long before they had given them, laying their children not in her
bosoms, but in their bowels.

Thirdly, negatively, Yet will I not forget thee. God will be more constantly,
unmovably, and unchangeably mindful of Sion, and tender of Sion, and
compassionate of Sion, and watchful over Sion, than any Mother could be over
her youngling, yea he would be more motherly to his poor captives in Babylon,
than any Mother could be to her sucking Babe. 2. This precious promise is
amplified by a convincing argumentation, and that par^ly from his engraving of
them upon the palms of his hands. This is an allusion, say some, to those that
carry about with them engraven on some tablet, or on the stone of some ring,
which they wear on their finger, the mark, name, or picture of some person they
entirely affect; their portraiture, their memorial was like a signet graven
upon his hand. God will as soon blot out of mind, and forget his own hands as
his Sion; and partly, from his placing their walls still in his fight; the
ruined demolished walls of Jerusalem were still before him as to their
commiseration, and to their reparation, God being fully resolved in the fittest
season, to raise and reedifie them. Look, as the workman has his model, or
pattern, constantly either before his eye, or in his thoughts, or in his brain,
that he is for to work by: So says God, Sion is continually in my eye, Sion is
still in my thoughts; I shall never forsake her, I shall never forget her. But,

Sixthly, the Lord will be signally present with his 6 Reason.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because of his propriety and interest in them, and his near and dear
relation to them. Isa. 43. 1. But now thus, says the Lord that created thee, O
Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I
have called thee by thy name thou art mine. Thou art mine for I have made thee,
thou art mine for I Esa. 15. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
have chosen thee, thou art mine for I have bought thee, I have purchased thee,
thou art mine for I have called thee, thou art mine for I have redeemed thee,
thou art mine for I have stamped mine image upon thee, thou art Ph. 4. 23, 24.
36. 26, 27.
mi^^ for I have put my Spirit into thee. Now mark what follows Verse 2. When
th^^ passest through the Waters, I will be with thee, and through the Rivers,
they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. God will certainly keep
his own People, his own Children company, both in the fire and in the water;
that is, in those various trials and troubles, that they are incident Isa. 54
5. P. ^ 103. 13, 14. Exodus 15. 3. Mal 4. 2. Mat. 9. 12. Psalm 23. 1.
t^ in this World. When should a Husband be with his wife, but when she is in
greatest troubles? and a Father with his child, but when he is in deep
distresses? and a General with his Army, but when they are in greatest dangers?
When should the Physician be most with his Patient, but when he is most
desperately sick? and when should the Shepherd be nearest his sheep, but when
they are diseased, and the wolf is at hand? Now God you know stands in all
these relations to his People, and therefore he will not fail to be near them,
when troubles, distresses, and dangers are growing upon them. But,

Seventhly, the Lord will be signally present with his 7 Reason.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers; because such times are commonly times of great and sore temptations;
when ^ods hand is heaviest then Satan will be busiest; the Devil is never Job
2. 7, 8. Mat. 9 4. Heb: 2, 18.
more violent in his temptations, than when the Saints are under afflictions.
Jam. 1. 2. My Brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations
(that is, afflictions.) Verse 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation
(that is affliction.) 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptation (that is, out of affliction.) Now, affliction is called
temptation, not in the vulgar sense, as temptation is put for an occasion or
inducement to sin, but in its proper and native signification, as its taken for
probation and trial; thus God is Genesis 22, 1.
said to tempt Abraham, that is, he did try and prove the faith, the fear, the
love, the obedience of Abraham. Afflictions are called temptations, partly,
because as afflictions will try what me^tle we are made off, so will
temptations, and partly because as afflictions are burden me and grievous to
us; So are temptations. But mainly afflictions are called temptations, because
in time of affliction Satan will be sifting and winnowing of the Saints Now he
will make use of all his devices, methods, depths, Luk 22. 31. 2 Cor. 12. 7. 2
Cor. 2 11. Ephesians. 6. 11. Rev. 2. 24. Ephesians. 6. 16.
darts, yea fiery darts, that he may vex, afflict, trouble, grieve, wound,
torture, and torment those dear hearts that God would not have grieved and
wounded, and therefore now the Lord steps in and stands by his People, and by
his favorable, signal, and refreshing presence he bears up their heads above
water, and keeps their hearts from fainting and sinking, under Satan's most
dangerous and desperate temptations. When a City is besieged, and the enemies
have raised their batteries, and have made breaches upon their walls, and their
provisions grow low, O then if ever there is need of succor and relief! So
here. But,

Eighthly, the Lord will be signally present with his 8 Reason.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because he highly prizes them, and setts an honorable value and
esteem upon them, Isa. 43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee
(Heb. In thy room, or in thy stead) and people for thy life; That is, for thy
preservation and protection. God setts such a mighty price upon his People,
that to preserve them from ruin and destruction, he makes nothing of giving up
to the sword and destruction, the most rich, strong, populous, and warlike
Nations in the World. Now the high price and value that he sets upon Verse 3.
them, engages him to be present with them, Verse 2. When thou passest through
the Waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not
overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Them we highly prize, we will not leave
in a day of distress; no more will not God: God prizes his People as his peculiar
Treasure; Exodus 19. 5. As his Portion. Deuteronomy. 32. 9. As his pleasant Portion.
Jer. 12. 10. As his Jewels. Mal. 3. 17. As his Glory. Isa. 4. 5. As his Crown
and Royal Diadem. Yea, he prizes the poorest, the meanest, and the weakest
Saint in the World above a multitude, yea above a world of Sinners. Heb: 11.
37, 38. Of whom the world was not worthy. Though they did not rustle in silks
and velvets, but were clad in sheeps-skins and goats-skins; yet they had that
inward excellency, as that the world was not worthy of their company; and
though they did not dwell in cieled Houses, nor in stately Palaces, but in
Deserts and Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the earth; yet the vile sinful
persecuting World was not worthy of their presence, or prayers, or of their
prudent counsels, or pious examples, etc. God sets a higher value upon a Job,
though on a Dunghill, than upon an Abab, though on Job 1. 1. cap. 2. 3.
his Royal Throne. God values men by their inward excellencies, and not by
their outward dignities and worldly glories: He sets a higher pr^^e upon a
Lazarus in his tattered rags, than upon a rich Dives in his purple robes. Such
persons have most of our company, whom we prize most. Job's three Friends did
highly value Job 2. 11, 12, 13.
him, and therefore in his deepest distresses, they own him, they pity him,
they weep over him, they accompany him, and they keep close unto him; because
God highly prizes his People, he will be signally present with them in their
greatest troubles and deepest distresses. But,

Ninthly, the Lord will be signally present with his 9 Reason.
People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, because they will not leave him, but stick close to him, and to his
interest, Gospel, and glory; and will cleave fast to his Word, worship, and
ways, Josh. 24. Jer. 13. 11. Acts 11. 23.
in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, come
what will on it: You may take away my life (said Basil) but you cannot take away
my comfort, my head but not my crown; yea (says he) had I a thousand lives, I
would lay them all down for my Saviors sake, who has done abundantly more for
me. John Ardley professed to Bonner, when he told him of burning, and how ill he
could endure it, That if he had as many lives as he had hairs on his head, he
would lose them all in the fire, before he would lose his Christ, w^^ part with
his Christ, It was a common thing among the Martyrs to make all have to the
fire, lest they should miss of that noble entertainment. Gordius the Martyr
said, it is to my loss if ye bate me any thing of my sufferings. The sooner I
die, said another, the sooner I shall be happy. Psalm. 63. 1. O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee in a dry and thirsty
Land, where no water is. Verse 8. My soul follows hard after Dan. 9. 3. Psalm
119. 20.
thee, etc. This notes, 1. The strength of his intention. 2. The strength of
his affection. 3. The constancy of his pursuit; and all this in a dry and
barren wilderness, and in the face of all discouragements, and in the want of
all outward encouragements. What ever the danger or distress be, the Psalmist
is peremptorily resolved to cleave close to the Lord, and to follow hard after
the Lord, Psalm 44. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not See 2 Timothy 1.
11, 12. cap. 2. 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. Col. 4. 3, 18.
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Verse 18. Our
heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. Verse
19. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death. In the face of all dangers, deaths, distresses,
miseries, etc. Gods faithful Servants will own the Lord, and cleave to his
ways, and keep close to his worship and service, let Persecutors do their
worst. Verse 22. Yea for thy sake are we killed Romans 8. 36.
all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. It is a
question when, and upon what occasion this Psalm was written; Some think that
it was written upon occasion of the 70 years captivity in Babylon: but this
cannot Dan. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14.
be, because that captivity was the fruit and product of their high iniquities,
as the Scriptures do every where evidence. They could not say in Babylon: for
thy sake, we are killed all the day long; but for sins sake, for our wickedness
sake we are killed all the day long. It is more probable that this Psalm was
prenned upon the occasion of the horrible persecution of the Church under
Antiochus Epiphanes; unto which I guess Paul has reference toward the latter
end of that 11. to the Hebrews. In this 22. Verse you have three things
observable, 1. The greatness of their sufferings, They were killed; amplified
by a similitude, As sheep to the slaughter. 2. The cause, not for their sin,
but for thy sake. 3. The continuance how long, even all the day long. Their
sufferings are great and long; that Tyrant Antiochus made no more Dan. 11.
reckoning of taking away of their lives, than a Butcher does of cuting the
throats of the poor sheep, and as Butchers kill the sheep without making
conscience of the effusion of their blood, even so did that Tyrant Antiochus
destroy the Saints of the most high, without making the least conscience of
s^eding innocent blood; and as Butchers think well of their work, and are glad
when they have butchered the poor sheep, so did this Tyrant Antiochus, he
thought he did God good service in butchering of the holy People, and rejoiced
in that bloody service; and yet notwithstanding all the dreadful things that
these blessed souls suffered, they still kept close to God, and close to his
Covenant, and close to his ways, and close to his worship* And Austin
observes, Aug. li^. 22 de Civit. Dei. c. 6 Exodus 1. 12.
that though the Heathen sought to suppress the growth of Christianity by
binding, butchering, racking, stoning, burning, etc. yet still they increased
and multiplied, and still they kept close to God and his ways. The Church was
at first founded in blood, and it has thriven best when it has been moistened
with blood; it was at first founded in the blood of Christ, and ever since it
has been moistened or watered, as it were, with the blood of the Martyrs. The
Church of Christ in all Ages has been like the oak, which lives by his own
wounds, and the more limbs are cut off, the more new sprouts. O how close to
God his ways and worship did the Saints keep in the Ten Persecutions; they
have followed the Lamb, whither ever he went; If they would have complied with
the ways of the World, and the worship of Rev. 14. ^, 5. Heb. 11. 35.
the World, and the customs of the World, they might have had case, honor,
riches, preferments, etc. but nothing could work them off from God or his
ways, and therefore he will certainly stand by them, and cleave to them, and
be signally present with them in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses,
and most deadly dangers. But,

Tenthly, the Lord will be signally present with his 10 Reason. Mat. 5. 12. Lu.
6 23.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, that they may be joyful and cheerful under all their troubles, and
that they may glory in all their tribulations. It is good to have a patient
Spirit, but it is better to have a joyful Spirit in all our sufferings,
troubles, distresses, etc. that we meet with in a way of well-doing, Acts. 5.
40. And to him they agreed, Gre. Rejoice and leap for joy. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
and when they had called the Apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that
they should not speak in the Name of Jesus, and let them go. Verse 41. And they
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his Name. In the Original, (...), That they were
honored to be dishonored for Christ. They looked upon it as a high honor, to
be dishonored for Christ, and as a grace to be disgraced for Christ. It was
the Divine presence that made Acts 16. 20, 22, 23, 24.
Paul and Silas to sing, when they were accounted trouble-towns, and when they
were beaten with many stripes, and cast into prison, into the inner prison, and
laid neck Beza.
and heels together, as the word (...) notes. The Divine presence made Paul and
Silas to glory in all Ephesians. 6. 17. Romans 5. 3.
their stripes, sores, and wounds, as old Soldiers glory in their scars and
wounds, which they receive in battle for their Prince and Country. The Divine
presence might well make Paul and Silas to say of their stripes and sores, as
Muncer once said of his ulcers, Hae sunt gemmae and pretiosa ornamenta Dei;
These are the Jewels and the precious ornaments, with which God adornes his
dearest Servants. It was the Divine presence that made Ignatius say, in the
midst of all his sufferings, (...), I bear my bonds as so many spiritual
pearls. So 2 Cor. 7. 4. I am filled with comfort, Tam exceeding joyful in all
our tribulations. Gr. (...), I do over-abound with joy. Verse 5. For when we
were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every
side, without were fightings, within were fears. Verse 6. Novertheless, God
that comfort those that are cast down, comforted us. It was the Divine
presence that fills the Corinthians with exceeding comfort and joy when their
fiesh had no rest; and when they were troubled on every side, this signal
presence of God with them in all their tribulations filled their souls with
such an exuberancy of joy, that no good could match it, nor no evil over-match
it. It was the Divine presence that made the Martyrs, both ancient and modern,
so comfortable and cheerful under all their hideous sufferings. It was the
Divine presence that made Francisco Soyit say to his Adversaries: You deprive
me of this life, and promote me to a better, which is as if you should rob me
of counters, and furnish me with gold. Oh how my heart leapeth for joy (said
one) that I am so near the apprehension of eternal bliss! God forgive me mine
unthankfulness and unworthyness of so great glory. In all the days of my life
I was never so merry, as now I am in this dark Dungeon; believe me, there is no
such joy in the world as the People of Christ have under the cross Act. and
Mon. fol. 1668 1669. 1670.
(said blessed Philpot) that went to Heaven in flames of fire. Let God but
withdraw this fignal presence from his People in their sufferings, and you will
quickly find their hearts to droop, their spirits to fail, and they overwhelmed
in a sea of sorrows, as you see in Mr. Glover, the Martyr, and many others. It
was this Divine presence that made the primitive Christians to rejoice more
when they were condenmed, than absolved, and to kiss Magis damnati qu^m
absoluti gaudemus, Tert. in Apol.
the stake, and to thank the Executioner, and to sing in the flames, and to
desire to be with Christ. So Justin Martyr, Apol. 1. Adv. Gent. Gratias agimus
quod a m^l^stis Dominis liberemur, We thank you for delivering us from hard
Taskmasters, that we may more sweetly enjoy the bosom of Jesus Christ. The Be
gatheres the besthoney of the bitterest herbs, and Christ made the best wine of
water; certainly the best, the purest, the strongest, and the sweetest joys
spring from the signal presence of God with his People, in their greatest
troubles, and deepest distresses; only remember this, that that joy that flows
from the D^^ine presence, in times of troubles and distress, it is an inward
joy, a spiritual joy, a joy that Prove. 14. 10.
lies remote from a carnal eye; The heart knows his own bitterness, and a
stranger does not intermeddle with his joy. The joy of the Saints in sufferings
is a Jewel that falls not under a strangers eye. The joy of a Christian lies
deep, it cannot be expressed, it cannot be painted; Look as no man can paint
the sweetness of the Honeycomb, nor the sweetness of a cluster of Grapes, nor
the fragrancy of the Rose of Sharon: so no man can paint out the sweetness and
spiritualness of that joy, that the Divine presence raises in the soul, when a
Christian is under the greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers. Holy joy is a treasure that lies deep; and it is not every man that had
a Golden Key to search into this Treasury. Look as a man, standing on the Sea
shore sees a great heap of waters, one wave riding upon the back of another,
and making a dreadful noise, but all this while though he sees the water
rouling, and hears it raging and roaring, yet he sees not the wealth, the gold,
the silver, the jewels, and incredible treasures that lie buried there: so
wicked men they see the wants of the Saints, but not their wealth; they see
their poverty, but not their riches; their miseries, but not their mercies;
their conflicts, but not their comforts; their sorrows, but not their joys. O
this blind World cannot see the joys, the comforts, the consolations, that the
Divine presence raises in the souls of the Saints, when they are at worst! Holy
joy and cheerfulness under great troubles and deep distresses, is an honor to
God, a glory to Christ, and a credit to Religion; it stops the mouths of
sinners, and it encourages and strengthens weak Saints, and therefore the: Lord
will be signally present with his People in their greatest troubles, etc. that
they may grace their suffering condition with joy and cheerfulness. And let
thus much suffice for the reasons of the point.

But before I come to the useful application, to prevent the Objections, and to
allay the fears and doubts, and disputes that may arise in the hearts of weak
Christians, concerning this signal presence of God, I shall briefly lie down
these following propositions.

First, That Christ is many times really present, when 1. P^^ position.
he is seemingly absent: Genes. 28. 16. And Jacob said, surely the Lord is in
this place, and I knew it not. Choice Christians may have the presence of
Christ really with them, when yet they may not be kindly sensible of his
presence, nor yet affected with it. God is present every Psalm 139.
where, but especially with his Saints; and not only then when they are
apprehensive of him, but when they perceive no evidence of his presence: Being
awakened, he perceived that God had very graciously and gloriously appeared to
him; and therefore he falls admiring and extolling the singular goodness, and
the special kindness of God toward him: As if he had said, I thought that such
strange and blessed apparitions were peculiar to the family of the faithful; I
thought that God had only in this manner reveiled himself in my Fathers house:
I did not in the least think or imagine that such an Apparition, such a Divine
Revelation should happen to me in such a place; But now I find, that that God
who is every where in respect of his general presence, he has by the special
testimonies of his presence, manifested himself to me also in this place. So
Job. Lo, he goes by me, Job 9. 11. Consult these Scriptures, Luke 24. 32. John
20. 13, 14, 15. Psalm 31, 22. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Cap. 5, 6, 7, 8.
me, and I see him not: he passes on also, but I perceive him not. So Jonah,
Jon. 2. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again
toward thy holy Temple. In times of sore afflictions, Gods Children are very
prone to have hard conceits of God, and heavy conceits of themselves: Unbelief
raises fears, doubts, despondency, despair, and works a Christian many times,
when he is under deep distresses, to draw very sad conclusions against his own
soul, I am cast out of thy sight: But this was but an hour of temptation, and
therefore he soon recollects and recovers himself again: (yet I will look again
toward thine holy Temple.) Here now Faith has got the upper hand of unbelief:
In the former part of the Verse you have Jonah doubting and despairing, (I am
cast out of thy sight;) but in the latter part of the Verse you have Jonah
conquering and triumphing, (yet I will look again toward thine holy Temple.)
When sense says a thing will never be, and when reason says such a thing can
never be, Faith gets above sense and reason and says: I but it shall be; what
do you tell me of a roaring, raging Sea, of the belly of Hell, of the weeds
about my head, of the billows and waves passing over my head; for yet as low as
I am, and as forlorn as I am, I will yet look toward Gods holy Temple, I will
eye God in the Covenant of grace, though I am in the Sea, though I am in the
belly of hell, yet by Faith I will look toward thy holy Temple (toward which 1
Kings 8.
they were to pray) and triumph over all those difficulties, which formerly I
looked upon as insuperable, I will pray and look, and look and pray; all which
does clearly evidence a singular presence of God with him, even then when he
peremptorily concludes, that he was cast out of Gods presence, out of his
sight, out of his favor, out of his care, out of his heart. The Lord is many
times really present with his People, when he is not sensibly present with his
People. Judge. 6. 12. And the Angel God may sometimes appear terribly to those
whom he loves entirely. Job 9. 34.
of the Lord appeared to him, and said unto him, the Lord is with thee thou
mighty man of valor. Ver. 13. And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord; if the
Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his
miracles, which our Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up
from Egypt? but now the Lord bath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands
of the Midianites. God may be really present with his People, they may have his
favorable presence with their inward man, when it goes very ill with their
outward Man. Certainly we must frame a new Bible ere we can find any color out
of Gods afflicting us to prove that he does not love us, or that he has
withdrawn his presence from us. Christ had never more of the real presence of
his Father, than when he had least of his sensible presence, of his comfortable
presence: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken Matthew. 27. 46.
me? Here is first a compellation or invocaton of God twice repeated: My God,
my God. Secondly, the complaint it self, or matter complained of, touching Gods
forsaking of him: Christ was forsaken of God in some sort, and he was very
sensible of his Fathers withdrawing, though it was but in part, and for a time,
Why have thou forsaken me? This forsaking is not to be understood of his whole
person, but of his humane nature only according to which, and in the which he
now suffered on the Cross. Though the person of Christ suffered, and was
forsaken, yet he was not forsaken in, or according to his whole Person, but in
respect of his humane nature only. The Godhead of Christ could not be forsaken,
for then God should have forsaken himself, which is impossible. The personal
union of the God head with the Manhood of Christ, continued all the time of
his passion and death, it was never dissolved, nor ever shall be; yea the
Godhead did uphold the manhood all the time of Christ's sufferings, so that he
was not forsaken, when he was forsaken; he was not forsaken wholly, when he was
forsaken in part. The love and favor of God the Father toward Jesus Christ
did not ebb and flow, rise and fall; for God never loved Jesus Christ more, or
better than at the time of his passion, when he was most obedient to his
Fathers will. (Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life
John 10. 17.
for my Sheep.) Christ had never more of the supporting presence of his Father,
than when he had least of his comfortable presence; when Christ was in his
grievous agony, and distress of body and mind, the Godhead did withdraw the
comfortable presence from the manhood, and so far, and so far only was Christ
forsaken. Though the union was not dissolved, yet there was a suspension of
vision for the time, so as the humane nature did neither see or feel any
present comfort from God: Now so far as the Godhead did withdraw its
comfortable presence, so far our Savior was forsaken and no further, that was
but in part, and therefore he was but in part forsaken: God was really present
with Christ, when in respect of his comfortable presence he was withdrawn from
him. So here: The Husband may be in the house, and the Wife not know it; the
Sun may shine, and I not see it; there may be fire in the Room, and I not feel
it, so God may be really present with his People, when he is not sensibly
present with his People. But

The second Proposition is this, That the favorable, 2. Proposition.
signal, and eminent presence of God with his People, in their greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, is only to be extended
to his Covenant people, to those that are his People by special grace. Jer. 32.
38. And they shall be my People, and I will be their God. Verse 40. And I will
make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to
do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. Verse 41. Yea I will rejoice over them, to do them good. There
are many precious promises of the Divine presence, as I have already showed,
but they are all entailed upon Gods Vovenant People: We are all the People of
God by Creation, both good and bad, sinners and saints, bond and free, rich and
poor, high and low; and we are all the People of God by outward profession. All
that do make an outward profession of God, and perform external worship to God;
they are all the People of God in this sense; all the Carnal Israelites, are
frequently called the People of God, as well as the spiritual Seed; thus Cain
was one of Gods People as well as Abel, and Esau, as well as Jacob. Now such as
are only the People of God by creation, or by profession, these are strangers
to God, these are enemies Ephe. 2. 12.
to God, and will he be favorably present with these. Such as are only the
People of God by creation Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13
and outward profession, they are dead in trespasses and sins, and can the
living God take pleasure in being among Gal. 3. 10.
the dead; such are under all the threatenings of the Law, and under all the
curses of the Law, even to the uttermost extent of them, such are not one
moment secure; the threatenings of God and the curses of the Law Lev. 26. Deuteronomy.
28.
may light upon them, when in the house, when in the field, when waking when
sleeping, when alone when in company, when rejoicing when lamenting, when sick
when well, when boasting when despairing, when upon the Throne when upon a
sickbed; and will God grace these with his presence? surely no. Such say to
Job 21 1^, 15.
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray
unto him? Such queryings as this carry greatest contempt in them, and would lay
the Almighty quite below the required duty, as if Almighty were but an empty
Title, and will God ever honor such with his favorable presence, who bid him
be packing, who reject his acquaintance, and are willing to be rid of his
company? surely no. Such as are only his People by creation, and an outward
profession, such are under the wrath Psalm 7^ 11.
and displeasure of God. [God is angry with the wicked every day;] not with a
paternal, but with a Prove. 3. 32. cap 1^. 9.
judicial anger; even to hatred and abhorment. [The wicked is an abomination to
him, and he hates all workers of iniquity.] And therefore to these he will
never vouchsafe his signal presence, such may well expect that God will pour on
them the fiercen^ss of that wrath and indignation, that they can neither
decline nor withstand; such wrath is like the tempest and whirlewinds, that
breaks down all before it. It is like burning fire, and devouring flames, that
consumes all. This wrath will break down all the sinners arrogancies, and
strangle all his vain hopes, and mar all his sensual joys, and fill him with
amazing distractions, and make him drunk with the wine of astonishment. And
will God dwell with these? will he keep house with these? surely no. By these
short hints it is most evident, that the special presence of God is entailed
upon none out of Covenant; Joh 14. 21, 2^. 2 Cor. 1. 16, 17. 18
God loves to keep house with none but his Vovenant People; he will grace none
with his gracious presence, 1. Sam. 28. 15, 16, etc.
but those that are his People by special grace. When wicked men are in great
troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers, God either leaves them, as
he did Saul; or else pursues them to an utter overthrow, as he did Pharaoh; or
else cuts them off by an invisible hand, as he did Sennacherib's mighty Hosts,
and proud King Herod; Ex 14. Isa. 37. 36. Act. 12. 23.
or else he leaves them to be their own executioners, as he did Achitophel and
Judas, etc. But,

The 3. Proposition is this, that a sincere Christian may 3 Proposition. Psalm.
119. 117.
enjoy the presence of the Lord in great troubles, deep distresses, and most
deadly dangers, supporting and upholding of him, when he has not the presence
of God quickening, comforting, and joying of him, Psalm 37. 24. Though he fall he
shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth This is the upholding
Psalm.
him with his hand. [Somech Jado, Upholding with his hand.] There is not one
moment wherein the Lord does not uphold his People by the hand. The root
[Samach] signifies, to sustain and bear up, as the Nurse or tender Mother does
the little child, the weak child, the sick child. Gods hand is still under his,
so that they can never fall below supporting grace. Psalm. 63. 8. Thy right hand
upholdeth me; or, Thy right hand underprops me. God never did, nor never will
want a hand to uphold, a hand to underprope his poor People in their greatest
troubles, and deepest distresses. Though the Saints have not always the
comforting presence of God in their afflictions, yet they have always the
supporting presence of God in their afflictions, as Christ in his bitter and
Mat. 27 46. My Go^, my God, etc.
bloody Agony had much of the supporting presence of his Father, when he had
none of the comforting presence of his Father with him; So the Saints in their
deep distresses have many times much of the supporting presence of God; His
left hand is under their heads, and his right Cant. 2. 6.
hand does embrace them, when in respect of his comforting presence, they may
say with the weeping Prophet Lam. 1. 16.
The Comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me. When the lovesick
Spouse was ready to faint, Christ circleth her with amiable embracements. His
left hand is under her head, and his right hand does embrace her. It is an
allusion to their conjugal and mensal beds, on which the guests are so
bestowed, that the first laid his left hand under the head of him that was
next, and put him so in in his bosom, that with his other hand he might also,
if he pleased, embrace him, which was a posture and sign of the greatest love,
which the sick fainting Spouse here glories in. Christ's two hands are
testimonies and witnesses of his great power and might, who is able to preserve
his People (though lame creeples) from falling, and also to lift them up again,
when they are fallen never so low, and likewise to support and uphold them,
that they shall never finally and utterly be cast down. When the hearts of the
Saints are ready to faint and sink, then the Lord will employ all his power for
their support, bearing them up as it were with both hands. He has put his left
hand under my head as a pillow to rest upon, and with his right hand he has
embraced me, as a loving Husband Ephesians. 5. 29.
cherishes his sick Wife, and does her all the help he can. The best of Saints
would fail, and faint in a day of trouble, if Christ did not put to both his
hands to keep them up. In days of sorrow Gods People stands in need of a whole
Christ to support them and uphold them. My head sinks, O my Beloved, put thy
left hand softer than pillowes of roses, firmer than pillars of marable, under
it; my heart fails and dies, O let thy right hand embrace me. But,

The fourth proposition is this, that all Saints have 4 Proposition.
not a like measure of the presence of the Lord in their troubles and trials,
in their sorrows and sufferings; some have more, and others have less of this
presence of God in an evil day. 1. All Saints have not a like work to do in an
evil day. 2. All Saints have not alike temptations to withstand in an evil day.
3. All Saints have not alike testimony to give in an evil day. 4. All Saints
have not alike burdens to bear in an evil day. 5. All Saints have Lam. 1. 12.
cap. 4. 6. Dan. 9. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 11. 21. to the end. Heb. 11 25. to the end.
not alike things to suffer in an evil day. There are greater and there are
lesser troubles, distresses and dangers; and there are ordinary troubles,
distresses and dangers, and there are extraordinary troubles, distresses and
dangers: Now where the trouble, the distress, the danger is ordinary, there an
ordinary presence of God may suffice; but Dan. 3. Dan. 6.
where the trouble, the distress, the danger is extraordinary, there the People
of God shall have an extraordinary presence of God with them, as you may see in
the three Children, Daniel, the Apostles, the primitive Christians, and the
Book of Martyrs. Some troubles, distresses and dangers are but of a short
continuance, as Athanasius said of his banishment, Nubecula est, cito
transibit, It is but a little cloud, and will quickly be gone. Others are of a
longer continuance, and accordingly God suits his presence. All Saints have not
a like outward succors, supplies, reliefes, comforts, etc. in their troubles,
distresses and dangers; some have a shelter, a friend at hand, others have not;
some have many friends, and others may cry out with him, O my friends, I have
never a friend! some are surrounded with outward comforts, and others have not
one, not one penny, not one friend, not one days work, etc. in a storm some
have good Harbors at hand, others are near the rocks, and in danger of being
swallowed up in the sands: so here, and accordingly God lets out more or less
of his presence among his People, some need more of his presence than others
do, and accordingly God dispenceth it among his Saints. But,

The fifth proposition is this, that none of the Saints 5 Proposition.
have at all times in all afflictions, distresses and dangers, Some scores of
Psalms do evidence the truth of this proposition.
the same measure and degree of the presence of the Lord, but in one affliction
they have more, in another less of the Divine presence; in one affliction a
Christian may have more of the enlightening presence of God than in another; and
in another affliction a Christian may have more of the comforting presence of
God, than in another; in this trouble a Christian may have more of the awakning
presence of God, than in another, and in that trouble a Christian may have more
of the sanctifying presence of God, than in another; and in this distress a
Christian may have more of the supporting presence of God, than in that. No one
Saint does at all times, nor in all troubles need a like measure of the Divine
presence. The primitive Christians and the Martyrs had sometimes more and
sometimes less of the Divine presence with them, as their condition did
require. God who is infinitely wise, does always suit the measures and degrees
of his gracious, favorable, signal presence to the necessities of his Saints.
This is so clear and great a truth, that there are many thousands that can seal
to it, from their own experience; and therefore I need not enlarge upon it. But,

The sixth and the last proposition is this, that many 6 Proposition.
precious Christians in their great troubles, deep distresses and most deadly
dangers, may have this favorable, signal and eminent presence of God with
them, and yet fear and doubt, yea peremptorily conclude that they have Jo^ah 2.
4. Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm 88.
not this presence of God with them, Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9, 10. These sad
interrogatories argues much fear and diffidence; but let me evidence the truth
of this proposition by an induction of particulars; Thus, first: If Christ be
not signally with you, why are you in your troubles so fearful of offending of
him, and so careful and studious in pleasing of him? Genesis 39. 9, 10. Psalm 17.
3, 4, 5. Dan. 3. 16, 17. Dan. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13. Secondly, If Christ be not
signally with you, how comes it to pass that under all your troubles, deep
distresses and most deadly dangers, you are still a justifying of God, a
clearing of God, a speaking well of God, a giving a good report of God? Psalm
119. 75. Ezra 9. 13. Ne^. 9. 32. 33. Dan. 9. 12, 14. Thirdly, if God be not
signally with you, how come you to bear up so believingly, sweetly, stoutly,
cheerfully and patiently under your troubles, deep distresses and greatest
dangers, Genesis 49. 23, 24. 1 Samuel 30. 6. Hab. 3, 17, 18. Acts 5. 40, 41, 42.
Cap. 16. 25, 26. Acts 27. 22. -- 26. Heb. 10. 34. Fourthly, if Christ be not
signally present with you, how comes it to pass that your thoughts, desires,
hearts, thirstings and longings of soul, are so earnestly, so seriously, so
frequently and so constantly carried out after more and more of Christ, and
after more and more of the presence of Christ, and after more and more
communion with Christ? Psalm 139. 17, 18. Psalm 63. 1, 8. Psalm 27. 4. Psalm
42. 1, 2, 3. Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15, 16. Cant. 1. 2. Fifthly, if Christ be not
signally present with you, why are you so affected and afflicted with the
dishonours and indignities, wrongs and injuries that are done to the Lord by
others? Psalm 69. 9. Psalm 119. 53, 136, 158. Jerem 9. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6. 2
Pet. 2. 7, 8. None but such that have the presence of the Lord signally with
them, can seriously and sincerely lament over the high dishonours that are done
to the Lord by others. Sixthly, if the Lord be not signally present with you,
under all you troubles and deep distresses, Job 15. 4. Heb. 10. 25.
why do you not cast off prayer and neglect hearing, and forsake the assembling
of your selves together, and turn your backs upon the Table of the Lord, and
take your leaves of closset-duties? But, seventhly, if the Lord be not signally
present with you, under your great troubles and deep distresses, why don't you
say, with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? Exodus 5. 2. 2
Kings 6. 3^. (...). 7. 2. 1 Samuel 28. 15, 16 1 Kings 21. 20. 2 Chr. 28. 22. Isa.
51. 20. cap. 59 10, 11.
And with the King of Israel, Behold this evil is of the Lord, and why should I
wait for the Lord any longer? Or with that Noble Pagan, If the Lord would make
windows in Heaven, might this thing be? Or with Saul, why don't you run to a
Witch? Or with Ahab, why don't you sell your selves to work evil in the sight
of the Lord? Or with Ahaz, trespass most when you are distressed most? Why
don't you fret, and faint, and lie in the streets as a wild Bull, full of the
fury of the Lord? Why don't you grope for the wall, and stumble at noonday,
and rore all like Bears? But, eigthly, if the Lord be not signally present with
you in your greatest troubles and deepest distresses, why do you with Moses,
prefer suffering before Heb. 11. 25, 26.
sinning, and Christ's reproaches before Egypt's treasures? Why do you scruple
the sinning of your selves out of your Psalm 38. 4. Genesis 39. 9, 10.
sorrows? Why do you look upon sin as your greatest burden? Why are you so
tender in the point of transgression, and so stout in resistance of the most
pleasing temptation? But, ninthly, if the Lord be not signally Psalm 16. 3, 4.
Prove. 12. 26. Heb. 11. 38.
with you in your great troubles and deep distresses, why do you set so high a
price upon those that have much of the presence of God with them in their
troubles and trials? Why do you look upon them as more excellent than their
Neighbors? yea as such worthies, of whom this world is no ways worthy? But,
tenthly and lastly, Psalm 119. 67, 71 Hosea 5. 14, 15. cap. 6. 1, 2. Hof. 2. 6,
7.
if the Lord be not signally present with you, in your greatest troubles and
deepest distresses, how comes it to pass that you are some what bettered, some
what amended, some what reformed by the rod, by the afflictions, that have been
and still are upon you; when the heart is more awakened, humbled and softened by
the rod, when the will is more complyant with the will of God in doing or
suffering, when the mind is more raised and spiritualized, when the conscience
is more quick and tender, Ephesians. 5. 15.
and when the life is more strict and circumspect: then we may safely and
roundly conclude, that such persons do undoubtedly enjoy the signal and
singular presence of God with them, in their greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers. And thus I have laid down these six
propositions, which if well weighed and improved, may many ways be of singular
use to sincere Christians.

We shall now come to the application or useful improvement of this great and
seasonable Truth. Explication is the drawing of the Bow, but application is the
hitting of the mark, the white. Is it so, that when the People of the Lord are
in great troubles, deep distresses, and most deadly dangers, that then the Lord
will be favorably, signally and eminently present with them; Then let me
briefly infer these ten things.

First, that the Saints are a People of Christ's special 1 Inference.
care. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the
whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is
perfect toward him. The words contain. 1 The universality of Gods providence,
his eyes walk the rounds, they run to and fro through the whole Earth, to
defend and secure the sincere in heart. Diana's Temple was burnt down, when she
was busied at Alexander's birth, and could not be at two places together: but
God is present at all times, in all places, and among all persons, and
therefore his Church, which is 1 Cor. 3. 16. cap. 6. 19.
his Temple, can never suffer through his absence. The Egyptians had an Idol,
called Baal-Zephon, which is by interpretation, Dominus speculae, Lord of the
Watchtower; Exodus 14. 2.
his office was, to fright such fugitive Jews as should offer to steal out of
the Country; but when Moses and the People of Israel past that way, and pitched
their camp there, this drowsy God was surely fast a sleep, for they all marched
on their way without let or molestation. Psalm 121. 3, 4, 5 Isa. 27. 3, 4.
Whereas he that keeps Israel Neither slumbreth nor sleeps; he kept his
Israel then, and he has kept his Israel ever since; he made good his title
then* and will make good his title still, he ever was and he ever will be
watchful over his People for their good. 2. The efficacy of his providence, to
show himself strong; God fights with his eyes as well as his hands, he does not
only see his Peoples dangers, but saves them from dangers Zach. 2. 5.
in the midst of dangers. When the Philosopher in a starry night was in danger
of drowning, he cried out, Surely I shall not perish there are so many eyes of
providence over me. King Philip said, He could sleep safely, Psalm 3. 5, 6.
because his friend Antipater watched for him. O how much more may the Saints
sleep safely, who have always a God that keeps watch and ward about them. God
Prove. 18. 10.
is so strong a Tower that no cannon can pierce it, and he is so high a Tower
that no ladder can scale it, and h^ is so deep a Tower that no pioneer can
undermine it; and therefore they must needs be safe and secure, who lodge
within a Tower so impregnable, so inexpugnable. Now this is the case of all the
Saints, the fatherly care and providence of God is still exercised for the good
of his People. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He found him in a desert Land, and in Isa 49. 16.
c. 31. 5. and cap. 32. 1. 2. See my Heavenly Cordial after a wasting Plague,
much of the special care of God.
the wast howling wilderness, he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him
as the apple of his eye. Verse 11. As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth
over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her
wings. Verse 12. So the Lord alone did lead him, etc. The Eagle carries her
young ones upon her wings (and not between her talons as other birds do)
openly, safely, swiftly; and so did God his Israel, being choice and chary of
them all the way, securing them also from their enemies, who could do them as
little hurt, as any can Isa. 63. 4. 5. 6. cap. 59. 16.
do the Eagles young, which cannot be shot but through the body of the old one:
See at what a rate God speaks in that, Isa. 40. 27, 28. Observe how God comes
on with his high interrogatories, Have thou not known? What an ignorant People!
Have thou not heard? What a deaf People! what keep no intelligence with Heaven!
1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. I will now
with you sing away care (said John Careless, Act. and Mon. fol. 1743.
Martyr, in his letter to Mr. Philpot) for now my soul is turned to her old
rest again, and has taken a sweet nap in Christ's lap. I have cast my care upon
the Lord, which cares for me, and will be careless according to my name. It
was a strange speech of Socrates, a Heathen, Since God is so careful of you
(says he) what need you be careful for any thing your selves? Gods providence
extends to all his Creatures; it is like the Sun of universal influence, but
in a special manner it is operative for the safety of his Saints. In common
dangers men take special care of their Jewels, and will not God, will not God
take Mal. 3. 17. Heb. 3. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
special care of his Jewels? surely yes. The Church of God is the house of God,
and will not God take care of his house? surely that shall be well guarded,
whatsoever be neglected; his house is every moment within the view of his
favorable eye, and under the guard of his almighty arm, his thoughts and heart
is much upon his house: God has a peculiar and paternal care over his Saints,
that dis^ich of Museul^s comes in fitly:

Est Deus in caelis qui providus omnia curat,
Credentes nunquam, deseruisse potest.
A God there is, whose Providence does take
Care for his Saints, whom he will not forsake.
(His eyes run) implying the celerity and swiftness of God in hastening relief
to his People, (his eyes run through the whole Earth.) implying the
universality of helps there is not a Saint in any dark Corner of the world,
under any straits or troubles, but God eyes him and will take singular care of
him; God will always (...) his care, to his Peoples conditions, to which his
eminent appearances for them in days of distress and trouble, give signal
testimony. It is our work to cast care; it is Gods work to take care, let not
us then by soul dividing thoughts take the Lords work out of his hand. But

Secondly, Will the Lord be signally present with his 2. Inference.
People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly
dangers, then here you may see the true reason why the Saints are so
comfortable, cheerful and joyful, Acts 5. 40, 41. Cap. 16. 25. Romans 5. 3. 2
Cor. 7. 4. Cap. 12. 10. 1 Pet. 4 12, 13, 14 these Scriptures are already opened
and improved.
in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers; it is
because of that signal presence of God with them. It was this signal presence
of God with the Martyrs, that made them rejoice in the midst of their greatest
sufferings, and that made them endure great sufferings, without any sensible
feeling of their sufferings: As that young Child in Josephus, who when his
flesh was pulled in pieces with pincers, by the command of Antiochus, said with
a smiling countenance: Tyrant, thou losest time, where are those smarting pains
with which tho^ threatnedst me? make me to shrink, and cry out if thou can?
And Bainam, an English Martyr, when the fire was flaming about him, said: You
Papists talk of Miracles, behold here a Miracle, I feel no more pain than if I
were in a bed of down, it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses. Surely their
strength Job 6. 12.
was not the strength of stones, nor their flesh of brass, that they should not
be sensible of so great sufferings; but this was only from that signal presence
of God, that made them endure grievous pains without pain, Heb. 11. 33. to 35.
and most exquisit torments without torment, and sore sufferings without
feeling of their sufferings; and other choice souls there were, who though they
were sensible of their sufferings, yet by the Divine presence they were filled
with unspeakable courage, comfort and alacrity. Laurence when his body was
roasted upon a burning Gridi^on, cried out, This side is roasted enough, turn
the other. Marcus of Arethusa, a worthy Minister, when his body was cut and
lanced, and anointed with honey, and hung up a loft in a Basket, to be stung to
death by Wasps and Bees, he looking down cheerfully upon the the Spectators
said, I am advanced, despising you that are below; and when we shall see poor,
weak, feeble Creatures like our selves, defying their tormenters and their
torments, conquering in the midst of their greatest sufferings, and rejoicing
and triumphing in the midst of their fiery trials, singing in Prison, as Paul
and Silas did; kissing the stake as Henry Voes did; clapping their hands when
they were half consumed in the flames as John Noyes did; calling their
execution day, their wedding day as Bishop Ridley did. We cannot but conclude
that they had a singular presence of God with them, that made all their
sufferings seem so easy and so light unto them. Caesar cheered up his drooping
Mariners in a storm, by minding them of his presence; but alas! alas! what
was Caesar's presence to this Divine, this signal presence that the Saints have
enjoyed in their greatest troubles, and deepest distresses. But

Thirdly, Will the Lord be signally present with his 3. Inference.
People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers; then from hence you may see the weakness, madness, sottishness, and
folly of all such as Isa. 8. 9, 10. Cap. 27. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 25.
make opposition against the Saints; that affront, injure, and make head
against those that have the presence of the great God in the midst of them. O
Sirs! the weakness of God is stronger than Men. What then is the strength of
God? 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than
he? Ah who knows the power of his Psalm 90. 11.
anger! It is such that none of the Potentates of the world, who set themselves
against the Saints, can avert or avoid, avoid or abide: That God is a mighty
God, the Scriptures do abundantly evidence, and it appears also in the Epithet,
that is added unto El-, which is Gibbor, importing that he is a God of
prevailing might. By Daniel he is called El-Elim, the mighty of mighties. Now
what folly and madness is it for Dust and Ashes, for crawling Worms, to make
head against a mighty God; yea an Almighty God, who can curse them, and crush
Genes. 49. 25. Number. 24. 4. 16. Ruth 1. 20, 21.
them with a word of his mouth. 2 Chronicles. 32. 7. Be strong and courageous, be
not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that
is with him, for there be more with us than with him. Verse 8. With him is an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our
battles. The King of Assyria was at that time the greatest Monarch in the
World, and the most formidable Enemy the Church had, yet the Divine presence
was a sovereign Antidote to expel all base slavish fears, that might arise in
any of their hearts, concerning his greatness, power, or multitude. What was
that great multitude that was with the King of Assyria, to that innumerable
Company of Angels that was 2 Kings 6. 17. Psalm 34. 7, etc 91. 11. Heb. 12. 22.
Cap. 1. ult. Isa. 37. 29. 36, 37, 38.
with Hezekiah? And what was an arm of flesh to Gods supreme Soveraignity; that
had this proud Prince in chains, and that put a hook in his nose, and a bridle
in his lips, and cut off his great Army by the hand of an Angel in one night,
and left him to fall by the sword of his own Sons. The Lord of Hosts can crush
the greatest Armies in the world into Atoms at pleasure. When the Emperor
Heraclius sent Ambassadors to Chosroes, King of Persia, to desire Peace of
him; he received this threatening answer: I will not spare you, till I have made
Diac. Cedren.
you curse your crucified God, and adore the Sun; he was afterward (like
another Senacherib) deposed and murdered by his own Siroes: When the Divine
presence is armed against the great ones of the World, they must certainly
fall. In Dioclesian's time, under whom was the last and worst of the ten
persecutions, though then Christian Religion was more desperately opposed than
ever, yet such was the presence of God with his Ruffin.
People in those times, that Religion prospered and prevailed more than ever;
so that Dioclesian himself observing that the more he sought to blot out the
name of Christ, it became the more legible, and to block up the way of Christ
it became the more passable; and what ever of Christ he thought to root out, it
rooted the deeper and rose the higher, thereupon he resolved to engage himself
no further, but retired to a private life: This is a good copy for the
Persecutors of the day to Acts 5. 38, 39, 40 Psalm 76. 12. Psalm 110. 5. 6.
Rev. 6. 14, 15, 15.
write after. O Sirs! what folly and madness is it for weakness to engage
against strength, the Creature against the Creator, an Arm of flesh against the
Rock of Ages? What is the chaff to the whirlwind, stubble and straw to the
devouring flames? no more are all the Enemies of Zion to the great and glorious
God, that is signally present with his People in their greatest troubles, and
deepest distresses, etc. There was not one of those persecuting Emperors, that
carried on the ten bloody Persecutions against the Saints, but ca^e to
miserable ends, yea Histories tell us of three and forty persecuting Emperors,
that fell by the hand of revenging Justice; first or last the presence of God
with his People, will undo all the Persecutors in the world. But

Fourthly, Will the Lord be signally present with 4. Inference.
his People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then from hence you may see the Lords singular love and admirable
kindness to his People, in gracing them with his presence in their greatest
Isa. 43. 2. 4.
troubles; that is a Friend indeed that will stick close to a man in the day of
his troubles, as Jobs friends did Job 2. 11, 12, 13, 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31. 32, 33.
stick close to him in the day of his troubles, and as Jonathan did stick close
to David in his greatest dangers, and as the primitive Christians did stic^
close one to another, though with the hazard of their lives, and to the
amazement of their Enemies: Behold (said they) how the Christians love one
another, and stand by one another: The People of God in their greatest troubles
are a People of his special love; when they are in distress he lies them in his
very bosom, and his banner over Cant. 2. 4.
them is love. The love of God to his People is engraven upon the most
afflictive dispensation they are under: when he smartly rebukes them, even then
he dearly loves them. (Hear ye the rod.) Oh, the rod speaks love; Rev. 3. 19.
Micha 6. 9.
many of the Saints have read much of the Lords love, written in letters of
their own blood; they have read love in Pri^^ns, and love in flames, and love
in banishment, and love in the cruellest torments their Enemies could invent.
When a Christians wounds are bleeding, Mal. 4. 2.
then God comes in with a healing plaster; when a Christian is in a storm, then
the presence of the Lord makes all calm and quiet within. The presence of the
Lord Matthew. 8. 26.
with his People in their troubles and distresses, speaks out the reality of
his love, the cordialness of his love, the greatness of his love, and the
transcendency of his love. The truth and strength of Relations love one to
another, does best appear by their presence one with another, when either of
them are in the Iron Furnace, or in bonds, or in great straits or wants, or
deep distresses. The Parents show most of their love to their sick and weak
Children, by their daily presence with them; and the Husband shows most of his
dear and tender love, by keeping his Wife company when she is in greatest
straits and dangers; so here. But

Fifthly, Will the Lord be signally present with his 5. Inference.
People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then this may serve to justify the Saints, and to encourage the
Saints to write after this fair copy that Christ has set them: O visit them, O
stand by them, O stick close to them, in all their troubles, distresses and
dangers; let the same mind be in you one toward another as is in Christ
toward you all: Phil. 2. 5. Job 11. 12, 13.
Are there any Jobs upon the dunghill? visit them; are there any Paul's in
chains? find them out and be not ashamed of their chains: 2 Timoth. 1. 16.
The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and
was not ashamed of my chain. Verse 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me
out diligently and found me. Verse 18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at
Ephesus, thou know very well? [He often refreshed me.] Greek, Poured cold
water upon (...).
me. As that Angel did upon the wracked limbs of Theodorus the Martyr,
mentioned by Socrates and Ruffinus in the days of Julian the Apostat; it is a
Metaphor taken from those, who being almost overcome with heat are refreshed by
cooling. (And was not ashamed of my chain.) Learned Antiquaries observe, that
the Apostle at this time was not in prison with fetters, but in the custody of
a Soldier, with whom he might go abroad, having a chain on his right arm,
which was tied to the Soldiers left arm: Paul at this time was not in prison,
much less a close Prisoner, for then Onesiphorus needed not to have made any
great search to find him; but was a Prisoner at large, going up and down with
his Keeper to dispatch his affairs, and therefore he speaks not of chains in
the plural number, but of a chain in the singular, with which he was tied to
the soldier that kept him. It no ways becomes the Saints to be ashamed of the
bonds or chains, that may be found upon the Ambassadors of Christ in an evil
day. The primitive Christians were not ashamed of the Martyrs chains, but owned
them in their chains, and stood by them in their chains, and frequently visited
them in their chains, and freely and nobly relieved them, and refreshed them in
their chains: And will you, will you be ashamed to visit the Saints in bonds? O
let not this be told in Gath, 2 Samuel 1. 20.
nor published in the streets of Askelon, that the highflown Professors and
Christians of these times are ashamed to own, relieve, and stand by the Saints
in bonds. So Matthew. 25. 36. I was sick and ye visited me: I was in See Exo. 2.
11, 12. compared with Acts 7. 23. to 29. only remember the case was
extraordinary and his call was extraordinary.
prison and ye came unto me. It is very remarkable, that the last definitive
Sentence shall pass upon men, according to those acts of favor and kindness,
that have been showed to the Saints in their suffering state; and that the
Sentence of absolution shall contain a manifestation of all their good works:
In this great day Christ sees no iniquity in his People, he objects nothing
against them, and he only makes honorable mention of the good that has been
done by them. O, Sirs, all the visits you give to sick Saints, and all the
visits you give to imprisoned Saints, Christ takes as visits given to himself:
suffering Saints and you are Brethren, and will you not visit your own
Brethren? suffering Saints and Christ are Brethren, Matthew. 25. 40. John 20 17.
Psalm 119. 63. 2 Cor. 8. 19.
and will you not visit Christ's Brethren? suffering Saints and you are
Companions, and will you not visit your own Companions? suffering Saints and
you are traveling Heaven-wards, and will you not visit your Fellow-travellers?
suffering Saints and you are Fellow-citizens, and will you not visit your
Fellow-citizens? Ephesians. 2. 19.
suffering Saints and you are Fellow soldiers, Phil. 2. 25.
and will you not visit your Fellow Soldiers? suffering Saints and you are
Fellow-heirs, and will you not visit Romans 8. 17.
your Fellow-heirs? O never be ashamed of those that Christ is not ashamed of!
O never fail to visit those whom Christ daily visits in their suffering state!
O never turn your backs upon those to whom Christ has given the right hand of
fellowship! O be not shy of them, nor strange to them whom Christ lies daily in
his bosom! O be not unkind to them with whom one day you must live for ever. But

Sixthly, Will the Lord be signally present with his 6. Inference.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then never give way to base slavish Psalm. 51. 12, 13. Pfalm 46. 1, 2,
3. Matt. 10, 2^, ^^.
fears; there are as many fear nots in Scripture as there are fears; take a
taste of some of them, Hebr. 13. 5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Verse 6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I
will not fear what man shall do unto me: This Text is taken out of Psalm 118.
6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Some read
it by The Earl of M^rray speaking of Mr. John Knox, said, Here lies the body of
him, who i^ hi^ life time never feared the face of any man.
way of Interrogation; What can man do unto me? There is some difference in the
Apostle's quoting the Text, betwixt the Hebrew and the Greek. The Hebrew thus
reads it: The Lord is with me, or for me; or as our English has translated it:
The Lord is on my side. The Greek thus: The Lord is my helper; but the sense
being the same with the Hebrew, the Apostle would not alter that translation:
The alteration which is in the Greek, serves for an Exposition of the mind and
meaning of the Psalmist; for God being with us, or for us, or on our side,
presuppofeth that he is our helper: So as there is no contradiction betwixt the
Psalmist and the Apostle, but a clear interpretation of the Psalmists mind, and
a choice instruction, thence arises, viz. That Gods signal prefence with us,
for us or on our side, may abundantly satisfy us, and assure us, that he will
afford all needful help and succor to us; the consideration of which should
abundantly arm us against all base slavish fears: God is not present with his
Saints in their troubles and distresses as a stranger, but as a Father, and
therefore he cannot but take such special care of them, as to help them, as to
succor them, and as to secure them from dangers in the midst of dangers, and
therefore Isa. 43. 2.
why should they be afraid? The Greek word (...), that is translated helper in
that Hebr. 13. 6. according to the notation of it, signifies one that is ready
to run at the cry of another. Now this notation implies a willing readiness,
and a ready willingness in God to afford all succor and relief to his People
in their greatest troubles, and deepest distresses; herein God shows himself
like a tender Father, Mother, or Nurse, who presently runs when any of them
hear the Child cry, or see danger near. Isai. 8. 10. God is with us. Verse 12.
Fear ye not their fear, nor be afraid. The Divine presence should arm us
against all base slavish fears of men's power, policy, wrath or rage: Kings and
Princes compared with God, or with the signal presence of God, are Isa. 40. 2^.
but as so many Grasshoppers skipping, and leaping up and down the field; and
does it become Christians that enjoy this Divine presence to be afraid of
Grasshoppers? Isa. 41. 10. Fear thou not for I am with thee: be not dismayed for
I am thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold
thee with th^^^ht hand of my righteousness. God expects that his signal
presence with us, should arm us against all base fear and dismayedness. ^salm
23. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil for thou art with me. The Divine presence raised David above all his
fears. Psalm 27. 1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear?
the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Who is the
Enemy that I should be afraid of? where is the Enemy that I should be afraid
of? by what name or title is the Enemy dignified or distinguished that I should
be afraid of? I look before me, and behind me, I look round about me, and I
look at a distance from me, and I cannot see the man, the Devil, the Informer,
that I should fear or be afraid of, for God is with me. Where God is (said King
Herod in Josephu^ lib. 15
a speech to his Army) there neither wants multitude nor fortitude, we may
safely, readily, and cheerfully set the Divine presence against all our Enemies
in the world. When Antigonus his Admiral told him, that the Enemies number far
exceeded his: But how many do ye set me against, said the King? Look about you
and see who is with you. Ah Christians! Christians, look about you, look about
you, and see who is signally present with you, and then be afraid if you can.
But

Seventhly, Will the Lord be signally present with his 7. Inference.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then certainly there is no such great evil in troubles, distresses,
sufferings, etc. as many conceive, fear, dream, think, judge; many men look
upon troubles, afflictions, sufferings, in a multiplying glass, and then they
cry out, there is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22. 13. Cap. 26. 13.
a Lion in the streets: But, Sirs, the Lion is not always so fierce as he is
painted, nor afflictions are not always so grievous as men apprehend; there
are many who have been very fearful of Prisons, and have looked upon a Prison
as a Hell, on this side Hell, who when they have been there for righteousness
sake, and the Gospels sake, have found ^^^ns to be Palaces, and the imaginary
Hell to be a little Heaven unto them: Many fear afflictions and flee from
afflictions as from Toads and Serpents, as from Enemies and Devils, and yet
certainly there is no such great evil in affliction as they apprehend, for the
Lord is signally present with his People in their greatest troubles and deepest
distresses. Now what evil can there be in that condition, wherein a man enjoyes
the Divine presence, that makes every bitter sweet, and every burden light, and
that turns Winter nights into Summer days, etc. yea many times the Saints
enjoy more of the singular presence of God in their afflictions, in their day
of adversity, than ever they did in the day of prosperity, or in the day of
their worldly glory. What Bride is afraid to meet her Bridegroom in a dark
entry, or in a dirty lane, or in a narrow passage, or in a solitary wood; and
why then should a Christian be afraid of this or that afflicted condition? who
is sure to meet his blessed Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ in every estate,
in every condition; who is sure to enjoy the presence of Christ with him in
every turn or change that may pass upon him. How many Martyrs have ventured
into the Heb. 11. 34.
very flames to meet with Christ, and that have many other ways made a
sacrifice of their dearest lives, and all to meet with Christ. O the cruel
mockings, the scourgings, Rev. 12. 11. Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38
the bonds, the imprisonments, the stoning, the sawing asunder that many of the
Lords worthies have ventured upon, and all to meet with the presence of the
Lord; and why then should any of you be afraid to enter into an afflicted
condition, where you shall be sure to meet the singular presence of the Lord,
that will certainly turn your afflicted condition into a comfortable condition
to you? The great design of the Lord in afflicting of his People, is to meet
with them, and to draw them into a nearer communion with himself; it is that
they may see more of him than ever, and taste more of him than ever, and enjoy
more of him than ever; in order to which he subdues their corruptions by
afflictions, Isa. 1. 25. c. 27. 8, 9 Heb. 12^ 10, 11. Hos. 2. 14.
and strengthens their graces, and heightens their holiness by all their
troubles and trials. When ever he leads his Spouse into a wilderness, it is
that he may speak friendly and comfortably to her, or that he may speak to her
heart, as the Hebrew runs. The great design of the Lord in bringing her into a
wilderness, was that he might make such discoveries of himself, of his love,
and of his sovereign grace, as might cheer up her heart, yea as might even make
her heart leap and dance within her. Or as some sense it, I will take her alone
for the purpose, even into a solitary wilderness, where I may more fr^ely
impart my mind to her, that she having her whole desire she may come up from
the wilderness leaning upon her beloved, and so be brought into the bride-house
with all Cant. 8. 5.
solemnity. By all which it is most evident, that there is no such evil in a
wilderness estate, in an afflicted condition, as many imagine. But,

Eighthly, will the Lord be signally present with his 8 Inference.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then what a high encouragement should this be to poor sinners to study
Christ, to acquaint themselves with Christ, to embrace Christ, to choose Christ,
to close with Christ, to submit to Christ, Joh. 1. 12. Ps. 112. 2, 3. Ps. 2.
12. 2 Cor. 8. 5.
and to make a resignation of themselves to Christ, and to secure their
interest in Christ, that so they may enjoy his signal presence in their
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers. O how many
mercies are wrapped up in this mercy of enjoying the singular presence of the
Lord in all the troubles and trials of this life. It is a mercy to have the
presence of a Friend, it is Psalm 23. 4.
a greater to have the presence of a near and dear relation with us, in a day
of distress, in a day of darkness; But what a mercy is it then to have the
presence of the Lord with one in a dark day! That Is excellent counsel that the
wisest Prince that ever swayed a scepter gives in that. Eccles. 11. 8. Remember
the days of darkness for they shall be many. When light shall be turned into
darkness, pleasure into pain, delights into wearisomness, calms into storms,
Summer days into Winter nights, and the lightsome days of life into the dark
days of old age and death. O now the singular presence of the Lord with a man
in these days of darkness will be a mercy more worth than ten thousand worlds.
To have a wise, a loving, Psalm 71. 20, 21.
a powerful, a faithful Friend to own us in the dark, to stand by us in the
dark, to uphold us in the dark, to refresh us in the dark, to encourage us in
the dark, etc. is a very choice and singular mercy: O then what is it to have
the presence of the Lord with us in all those dark days, that are to pass over
our heads! What David said of the sword of Goliath in another case [There is
none 1 Samuel 21. 8, 9.
like that,] that I may say of the Divine presence with a man in the dark,
There is none like that. The Psalmist Psalm. 73. 26. The Greek says, The God of
my heart, etc.
hit the mark the whit, when he said. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is
the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. When his flesh, that is his
outward man, and when his heart his courage, that is his inward man failed him,
then God was the strength of his heart (or the rock of his heart, as the Hebrew
runs,) at the very last gasp God came in with his sovereign Cordial, and
revived him and recovered him, and brought new life and strength into him. When
a Saint is at worst, when he is at lowest, when he is even overwhelmed with
troubles and sorrows, and when the days of darkness so multiply upon him that
he seems past all hope of recovery, then the Divine presence does most
gloriously manifest it self, and display it self, in supporting, strengthening,
comforting, and encouraging of him. In the Rev. 4. 6. you read, that the world
is like a sea of glass, [I saw before the Throne a sea of glass.] The world is
transitory, very frail and brittle as glass, and it is instable, tumultuous and
troublesome as the sea. Here the world is shadowed out to us by a sea of glass;
and how can we stand on this sea, how can we live on this sea, how can we walk
on this sea, if Christ don't take us by the hand, and lead us, and support us,
and secure us? O Sirs, we cannot uphold our selves on this sea of glass, nor
others cannot uphold us on this sea of glass, it is none but dear Jesus, it is
no presence but his singular presence, that can make us to stand or go on this
sea of glass. And if this world be a sea of glass, oh what infinite cause have
we to secure our interest in Christ, who alone can pilot us safe over this
troublesome, dangerous and tempestuous sea! Oh that I could prevail with poor
sinners to take Christ into the ship of their souls, that so he may pilot them
safe into the heavenly Harbor, the heavenly Canaan. No Pilot in Heaven or
Earth can land you on the shore of a happy eternity from off this sea of glass
but Jesus. When on this sea of glass the winds blow high, storms arise, and the
bold waves beat into the ship, O then the sinner cries a Kingdom for a Christ,
a world for a Pilot to save us from eternal drowning. Oh that before eternal
storms and tempests do beat upon poor sinners, they Ps. 11. 6. Ps. 9. 17. Hos.
2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
would be prevailed with to close with Christ, to accept of Christ, and to
enter into a marriage-covenant, a marriage-union with Christ; that so they may
enjoy his singular presence with them, whilst they are on this sea of glass.
There is no presence so greatly desirable, so absolutely necessary, and so
exceeding sweet and comfortable as the presence of Christ, and therefore before
all, and above all, secure this presence of Christ, by matching with the person
of Christ; and then you will be safe and happy on a sea of glass.

Ninthly, will the Lord be signally present with his 9 Inference.
People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, then let me infer that unbelief, infidelity and despondency of spirit
in an evil day, does very ill become the People of God. Is the Lord present
with you in your greatest troubles, and will you flag in your faith, and be
crest fallen in your courage, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm
against the wall? Isa. 25. 4.
what is this but to tell all the world, that there is more power in your
troubles to sink and daunt you, than there is in the presence of the Lord, to
support and encourage you, when a Christian is upon the very banks of the Red
Sea, yet then the Divine presence should encourage him, To stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord. It would Exodus 14. 13.
be good for timorous Christians in an evil day to dwell much upon the Prophets
commission, Isa. 35. 3. [Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees, Say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not.] Ah, but
how shall weak hands be strong, and a timorous heart cease to fear and saint?
Why? Behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he
will come and save you; he is on his way, he will be suddenly with you, yea he
is already in the midst of you, and he will save you. If you cast but Isa. 41.
10. c. 43. 2 Heb. 13. 5. Jer. 32 40, 41. cap. 31. 31 to 38. Genesis 41. 35 36, 48,
49. Col. 1. 19. cap. 2. 3.
your eye upon precious promises, if you cast but your eye upon the new
Covenant, which is Gods great storehouse, there you will find all supports, all
supplies, all helps and all comforts laid up, and laid in for you, and
therefore never despond, never faint, never be discouraged in an evil day, in a
dark time. As Joseph had his storehouses to give a full supply to the
Egyptians in time of famine, so dear Jesus (of whom Joseph was but a type) has
his storehouses of mercy, of goodness, of power, of plenty, of bounty, out of
which in the worst of times he is able to give his People a full supply,
according to all their needs; and therefore be not discouraged, don't despond
in a day of trouble. O my Friends, how often has the Lord hid you in the secret
of his presence Ps. 27. 5. Ps. 31. 20
from the pride of men, and kept you secretly in his pavilion from the strife
of tongues! And therefore be strong, and lift up the hands that hang down, and
the feeble knees. When David was in a very great distress, Heb. 12. 12.
he does not despond nor give way to unbelief, but encourages himself in the
Lord his God. The Hebrew word is 1 Samuel 30. 6.
derived from Chazack, which notes, a laying hold on God with all his strength,
as men do when they are in danger of drowning, who will suffer any thing rather
then let go their hold? When David was almost under water, when he was in
danger of drowning, then by a hand of faith, he lays hold on the rock of ages,
and encourages himself in the Lord his God. What heavenly gallantry of spirit
did good Nehemiah show from that Divine presence that was with him in that
great day of trouble and distress, when the remnant of the captivity were in
great affliction and reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem broken down, and the
gates thereof burnt with Neh. 1. 3.
fire! You know Shemajah advises him to take Sanctuary in the Temple, because
the enemy had designed to fall upon him by night and slay him, and cause the
work to cease: but Nehemiah having a signal presence of God Cap. ^. 11. Cap. 6.
10.
with him, gives this heroic and resolute answer, Should such a man as I flee?
and who is there being as I am, would go into the Temple to save his life? I
will not go in. Should I flee into the Temple like a malefactor to take
sanctuary there? How would God be dishonored, Religion reproached, the People
discouraged, the weak scandalized, and the wicked imboldned to insult and
triumph over me! saying, Is this the man that is called by God, and qualified
by God for this work and service? Is this the man that is countenanced and
encouraged by the King to build the walls, and gates, and city of Jerusalem? Is
this the man, that is the chief Magistrate and Governor Neh. 2. 5. to the 10.
of the City? Is this the man, that is sent and set for the defense of the
People, and that should encourage them in their work? O what a mouth of
blasphemy would be opened should I make a base retreat into the Temple to save
my life? This is a work that I will rather dye, than do. I have found the face
of God, the presence of God, in bowing the heart of King Artaxerxes, to
contribute his Royal aid, and commission me to the work; and in the bending of
the hearts of the Elders of the Jews to own my authority, and to rise up as one
man to build; and therefore I will rather dye upon the spot, than go into the
Temple to save my life. Oh my Friends, it becomes not those that have the
presence of God with them, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and
most deadly dangers, to sink so low in their faith and confidence, as to cry
out with the Prophets Servant, Alas Master, what shall we do? Or with the 2
Kings 6 15. Mat. 8. 25. Ez. 37. 11. Lament. 3. 18. Isa. 49. 14.
Disciples when in a storm, We perish; Or with the whole house of Israel, Our
bones are dried, and our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts; Or
with weeping Jeremiah, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; Or
with Sion, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Oh it is
for a lamentation when Gods dearest Children shall bewray their infidelity by a
fainting, sinking, discouraged spirit in an evil day. But,

Tenthly and lastly, will the Lord be signally present 10 Inference.
with his People in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most
deadly dangers; then let the People of the Lord be very thankful for his
presence with them in their greatest troubles, etc. O Sirs, this Divine
presence is Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 4. 22. Ps. 16. ult.
a great mercy! It is a peculiar mercy, it is a distinguishing mercy, it is a
big-bellied mercy, it is a mercy that has many mercies in the womb of it, it
is a mercy greatning mercy, it greatens all the mercies we do enjoy, it is a
mercy sweetning mercy; it sweetens health, strength, riches, honors, trade,
relations, liberty, etc. It is a soul mercy, a mercy that reaches the soul,
that cheeres the soul, that lifts up the soul, that quiets the soul, that
satisfies the soul, and that will go to Heaven with the soul: And will you not
be thankful for such a mercy? will you be thankful for temporal mercies, and
will Ephesians. 1. 3.
you not be thankful for spiritual mercies? will you be thankful for
left handed mercies, and will you not be thankful for right-handed mercies?
will you be thankful for the mercies of the footstool, and will you not be
thankful for the mercies of the Throne? will you be thankful for the mercies of
this lower world, and will you not be thankful for the mercies of the upper
world? Ps. 103. 1. 2, 3. 4.
To enjoy the presence of God when we most need it, is a mercy that deserves
perpetual praises. O it is infinite mercy not to be left alone in a day of
trouble. It Is very Eccl. 4. 10, 11.
uncomfortable to be left alone. [Wo to him that is alone.] If a man fall, and
be left alone, who shall help him up? If a man be in danger and alone, how
miserable is his case! But this is the support and comfort of a Christian Heb.
13. 5. Ps. 37. 24. Ps. 31. 3. Ps. 73. 24. Exodus 33. 2. 14, 15, 16.
in all his distresses, that he is never left alone, but his God is with him
when he is at the lowest ebb: for God to afford us the presence of our Friends
in a day of trouble, is a very great mercy. But what is it then, to enjoy the
presence of God in a day of trouble? what is the presence of a Friend, a
Favorit in a day of distress, to the presence of a Prince? yea, what is the
presence of an Angel, to the presence of God in an evil day? To enjoy the
presence of God in an afflicted condition; is a more transcendent mercy, than
to enjoy the presence of twelve legions of Angels in an afflicted condition.
The Divine presence is the greatest good in the world, it is life eternal, it is
the bosom of God, the gate of glory, the beginning of Heaven, the suburbs of
happiness; and therefore be much in blessing of God in admiring of God for his
presence with you in a dark and trying day. There is no gall, no wormwood, no
affliction, no judgment to Lam. 3. 19, ^0^
that of Gods departing from a People, Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O
Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a Land not
inhabited. When God departs, nothing follows but desolation upon desolation;
desolation of persons, desolation of peace, of prosperity, of trade, and of all
that is near and dear unto us, Hosea 9. 12. Though they bring up their
children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; yea woe
also to them when I depart from them. All terrible threatenings are summed up in
this [Wo unto them, when I depart from them.] Surely even woe to them, he puts a
sureness upon this [Wo to them, when I depart from them.] As if the Holy Ghost
should say, What do I threaten this or the other evil? the great evil of all
the rise of all evils is Gods forsaking of them. Hell it self, is nothing else
but a separation from Gods presence, with the ill consoquents thereof, and were
hell as full of tears as the sea is full of water, yet all would not be
sufficient to bewail the loss of that beatifical vision. How miserable was Genesis
4. 1 Samuel 28. 15 16. They that are out of Go is care are under his curse.
Cain, when cast off by God! and Saul, when the Lord departed from him! it was
a most dreadful speech of Saul [I am sure distressed, for the Philistines make
war against me, and God is departed from me,] When God left the Israelites,
though for a little while, the Holy Ghost says, they were naked, Exodus 32. 25.
How naked? Non vest, sed gratia and praesidio Dei; Not for want of raiment,
Jun. in loc.
or weapons of war, but for want of Gods presence and protection. When God
departs from a People, that People lies naked, that is, they lay open for all
storms, tempests and dangers. Now if it be the greatest evil in the world to be
shut out from the gracious presence of Christ; then it must be the greatest
mercy in this world to enjoy the gracious presence of God, in our great
troubles and desperate dangers: And therefore let all sincere Christians be
much in thankfulness to the Lord, and in blessing and praising the Lord for his
signal presence with them, in their low and afflicted estate. O the light, the
life, the love, the holiness, the peace, the grace, the comforts, the supports,
that always attends the gracious presence of the Lord with his People, in
their deep distresses, etc. therefore let the high praises of God for ever be
in their mouths, who enjoy this signal presence of God. The 46 Psalm is called
by some Luther's Psalm, that is a Psalm that Luther was wont to call to his
Friends to sing, when any danger, trouble, or distress was near, when the
clouds began to gather, Come (says Luther) let us sing the 46 Psalm, and then
let our enemies do their worst. Observe the confidence and triumph of the
Church in the face of the greatest dangers, Verse 1. God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble. We may translate it, He is found,
that is, God is present at hand, as Genesis 19. 15. God is a present help. The
Hebrew word in a secondary sense, signifies Tobe sufficient, Number. 11. 22. A
sufficient help you need no other.
Verse 2. Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though
the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Verse 3. Though the waters
thereof rore, and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling
thereof, Selah. Verse 6. Though the Heathen rage, and the Kingdoms were moved,
to remove and root out the Church with great force and fury. Now mark by the
change of the Earth, and removing of the Mountains are often meant the greatest
alterations and concussions of States and Polities, Hag. 2. 22, 23. Jer. 51.
25. Revel. 6. 14. Now says the Psalmist, all these dreadful turns, changes,
shakings, and concussions of States and Kingdoms shall never trouble us, nor
daunt us, they shall never make us fret, faint or fear. Why, what is the ground?
The Lord of H^^ts is with us, The God of Jacob is our refuge, Verse 7. and so
Verse 11. The same words are repeated again, God is not gone, God is not
withdrawn, God is not departed from us, O no. [The Lord of Hosts is is with us,
The Lord of Hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge, the God of Jacob
is our refuge,] And therefore we are Divinely fearless, and Divinely careless,
though Hell and Earth should combine against us, yet we will bear up, and be
bold to believe that all shall go well with us, for God is in the midst of us,
The Lord of Hosts is with us; Even the Lord, who commands far other Hosts and
Armies than the enemy has any. The God of Jacob is our refuge, Heb. Our high
Tower. God is a Tower, so high, so strong, so inaccessible, so invincible, that
all our enemies, yea ^ll the powers of darkness, can never hurt, reach, storm,
or take; and therefore we, that are sheltered in this high Tower, may well cast
the gantlet to our proudest, strongest, and subtlest enemies. And let thus much
suffice for the inferences.

The next use is a use of exhortation, to exhort all the 2 Use.
People of God, so to order and demean themselves as to keep the Divine
presence, as to keep the signal, the singular presence of God with them in
their greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers. Now that
this may stick in power upon your souls, consider seriously of these following
motives.

First, the signal presence of God with his People puts 1 Motive.
the greatest honor, dignity and glory upon a People; imaginable. There are
many titles of honor amongst men, but this above all is the truly honorable
title, that Vide Isa. 43. 2, 4 Jer. 13. 11. Ezekiel. ult. and ult.
we have God so near unto us, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What Nation is there so great, who
has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is to us? Whiles he vouchsafed
his presence amongst them, how honorable, how renowned were they all the world
over! But when he departed from them, they became the scorn and contempt of all
Nations. It may be said of some men, they have large Estates, but not the
presence of God with them, they are highly honored and dignified in the world,
but no presence of God with them, they have great trades and vast riches, but
no presence of God with them, they are nobly related, but no presence of God
with them, they have singular parts and natural accomplishments, but no
presence of God with them; the want of the Divine presence gives a dash casts a
blot upon all their grandures and worldly glory, and like Coprice turns all
their wine (be it never so rich) into ink and blackness. What a deal of honor
and glory did the presence of God cast upon Joseph Genesis 39. 19, 20.
in prison! and upon Daniel in the Den! and upon the three Children in the
fiery Furnace! and upon the three Children in the fiery Furnace! and upon
David, 1 Samuel 24. 17. Mar. 6. 20. Acts 24. 25.
when a persecuting Sanl could cry out, Thou art more righteous than I! and
upon John, when a bloody Herod feared him, and observed him! and upon Paul,
when a tyrannical Felix trembled before him, as if Paul had been the Judge and
Felix the prisoner at the bar! Some write of the Crystal, that what stone so
ever it touches, it puts a luster and loveliness upon it: The presence of God
puts the greatest luster, beauty, glory and loveliness that can be put upon a
person. Now because the witness of an Adversary is a double testimony, let
Baalant (who as some write of a Toad, had a Pearl in his head, though his heart
was naught, very naught, stark naught) give Number. 24. 5.
in his evidence. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel? He speaks both by way of interrogation, and admiration; their Tents are
so comely and their Tabernaeles so lovely, that their grand enemy was affected
and ravished with them. But whence is it that Israel is so formidable and
terrible in his eye? how comes this about, that he who came to fight against
them, thinks them beyond all compare, nay does himself admire their postures
and order, their great glory and brave gallantry, why all is from the presence
of their Lord-General with them? The Lord their God is with Number. 23. ^1.
them, the shout of a King is amongst them. It is the highest honor, renown
and dignity of a People to have God in the midst of them, to have God near unto
them; Thus Moses sets out the honor and dignity of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 26. 18. The
Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar People, Verse 19. To make
thee high, above all Nations which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in
honor. When God reckons up the dignities of his People, this is the main the
top of all, Psalm 87. 5. And of Sion it shall be said, this and that man was
born in her, and the Highest himself shall establish her. If you would keep
your honor and dignity, keep the presence of God in the midst of you; when God
is departed from Israel, then you may write Ichabod upon Israel, The glory is
departed 1 Samuel 4. 21. 22.
from Israel. But,

Secondly, To move you so to order demean, and 2 Motive.
carry your selves as you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in
your greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, consider that nothing can make
up the want of this signal presence of God; it is not the presence of Friends,
of Relations, of Ministers, of Ordinances, of outward comforts, that can make
up the want of this presence; it is not candlelight, or torchlight, or
starlight, nor moonlight, that can make up the light of the Sun: When the Sun
is set in a cloud all the world cannot make it day, and when the presence of
God is withdrawn, nothing can make up that dismal loss: Thou did hide thy
face and I was troubled; that Psalm 30. 6, 7.
is thou did suspend the actual influence and communication of thy grace and
favor (the Chaldee calls it Shechinah, the Divine presence) an^ I was
all-amort. It was not his Crown, his Kingdom, his Riches, his Dignities, his
Royal attendance, etc. that could make up the loss of the face of God, neither
is it the presence of an Angel that can make up the want of the presence of
God. Exodus 33. 2. And I will send an Angel before thee. God here promises
Moses that he would send an Angel before them, but with all adds that he would
Exodus 33. 3.
not go up himself in the midst of them. I but such a Guide, such a Guardian,
such a Nurse, such a Companion, such a Captain General would not satisfy
Moses. Verse 14. And he said, my presence shall go with thee, and I will give
thee rest. Verse 15. And he said unto him, if thy presence go not with me,
carry us not up hence. Nothing would satisfy Moses below the presence of God,
because he knew that they were as good never move a foot further, as to go on
without Gods favorable presence. God engages himself that he will drive out
the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizite, Verse 2.
and the Hivite, and the Jebusite out of the Land. O but if thy presence go not
with me, carry us up not hence. I will bring the necks of all thy proud, stout,
strong, and subtle Enemies under thy feet: O but if thy presence go not with
me, carry us not up hence. I, but I will bring Deuteronomy. 32. 13, 14, 15, 16.
thee to a land flowing with milk and honey: I will make thee to ride on the
high places of the earth, and I will make thee to suck honey out of the rock,
and oil out of the flinty rock; and thou shall drink the pure blood of the
grape: O but if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. I will
bring thee to the Paradise of the world, to a place of pleasure and delight, to
Canaan a Type of Heaven: O but if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up
hence. O Lord, if I might have my wish, my desire, my choice, I had infinitely
rather to live in a barren, howling wilderness with thy presence, then in
Canaan wihtout it. It is a mercy to have an Angel to Guard us, it is a mercy to
have our Enemies sprawling under our feet, it is a mercy to be brought into a
pleasant Land: O but if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.
Lord nothing will please us, nothing will profit us, nothing will secure us,
nothing-will satisfy us without thy presence; and therefore if thy presence go
not with us, carry us not up hence. I have read of the Tyrians, that they bound
their Gods with chains, that they might not in their greatest need pass over to
the Enemy; and among the rest they chained and nailed their God Apollo to a
post, that they might be sure to keep their Idol, because they thought their
safety was in it. I am sure our safety, our comfort, our all lies in the signal
presence of God with us; and therefore let us by Faith and Prayer chain God to
us, if we let him go, a thousand worlds cannot make up his absence. I suppose
you have heard of the Palladium of the Heathens in Troy, they imagined that so
long as that Idol was kept safe, they were inconquerable, all the strength and
power of Greece were never able to prevail against them; whrefore the Grecians
sought by all the means they could to get it from them. O my Friends, so long
as you keep the presence of God with you, I am sure you are unconquerable; but
if God withdraw his presence, the weakest Enemy will be too hard for you, yea
wounded men will prevail over you. Jer. 37. 10. For though ye had smitten the
whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but
wounded men among them, yet should they rise up and burn this City with fire.
The Bush, which was a Type of the Church, consumed not while it burned with
fire, because God was in the midst of it. O do but keep God in the midst of
you, and nothing shall hurt you, nothing shall burn you; but if God depart,
nothing can secure ^ou, nor nothing can make up his withdrawing from you. But

Thirdly, To move you so to order, demean and 3. Moti^e.
carry yourselves as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you,
in the greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, consider, that if you do not
labor to demean, order and carry your selves so, as that you may enjoy the
favorable, signal, and eminent presence of God with you, in your greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, you have high reason to
question, whether ever you have really enjoyed this favorable, this signal
presence of God with you or no; for there are always four things to be found
in him that has really tasted, and in good earnest experienced the sweet, the
life, the power, the virtue that is in the favorable signal presence of God:
1. Such a person sets the highest price and value imaginable upon it, he prizes
it above all the honors, riches, dignities, delights, comforts and contents of
this world. Psalm 4. 6, 7. Yea he prizes it above life it self. Psalm 63. 3.
Thy loving kindness is better than life; the Hebrew is plural Chajim, lives:
The loving kindness of God, the presence of God in a wilderness is better than
lives, than many lives, than all lives with the appurtenances: There is a
greater excellency in the favor of God, in the presence of God, than in all
lives put together: There have been many Persons that have been weary of their
lives, but there 1 Kings 19. 4. Job 7. 15. Jona 4. 8. Prove. 28. 14.
never was any man that has been weary of the favor of God, of the presence of
God. 2. Such a Person keeps up in his soul an humble fear of losing of it. The
Divine presence is a Jewel more worth than all the world, and he that has
experienced the sweetness of it, had rather lose all he has in this world than
lose it. I have read of a Religious woman, that having born nine Children,
professed that she had rather endure all the pains of those nine Travels at
once, than endure the misery of the loss of Gods presence. 3. Such a person
keeps up in his soul a diligent care to maintain this presence, his head, his
heart is still a contriving how he may keep his God with him. Jerem. 14. 4. Why
should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet
thou, O Lord are in the midst of us, and we are called by thy Name, leave us
not. This Person had rather that his dearest Friends should leave him, that his
nearest Relations should leave him; yea that all the world should leave him
than that his God should leave him: The daily, yea the hourly language of his
soul is, Lord leave me not, though all the world should leave me, yet don't
thou leave me. 4. Such a Person will do all he can, that all under his John 1.
40. to the end. Cap. 4. 28. to 43. Acts 10. 24. to 36. Judges 14. 8, 9.
care and charge may partake of this signal presence of God, he will do his
utmost that Children, Yoak-fellow, Kindred, Servants may taste the sweetness of
the Divine presence. When Sampson had found honey in the Carcass of the Lion,
he did not only eat himself, but he gave of the honey to his Father and Mother,
and they did eat also; of all sweets the presence of God is the greatest sweet,
and when ever a poor soul comes to taste of this heavenly honey, he will do his
best that all others (especially those that are near and dear to him) may taste
of the same honey. But

Fourthly, To move you so to order, demean and carry 4. Motive.
your selves as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in
your greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, consider the excellent
properties, or qualities of this favorable, this signal presence of God with
his People, this I can but hint at because I must hasten all I can to a close.
1. It is the best presence, Ps. 63. 3. it is better than the presence of
Friends, of Relations, of Saints, of Angels, etc. 2. It Is the greatest
presence, it is the presence of the 1 Kings 8. 27. Revel. 17. 14. Cap. 19. 16.
Numb. 24. 4. 16. Ruth. 1. 20. 24.
great King, it is the presence of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, it is
the presence not only of a mighty, but of an Almighty God. 3. It is the
happiest presence, it is a presence that makes a man really happy, presently
happy, totally Psalm 144. 15. 1 Kings 10. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Prove. 3. 18.
happy, eminently happy, and eternally happy; he can never be truly happy that
wants this presence, he can never be truly miserable that enjoyes this
presence; true happiness is too great a thing, to be found in any thing below
this favorable, this signal presence of God; he that enjoyes this presence
enjoyes all, he that wants this presence enjoyes nothing at all, he that wants
this presence may write nothing or naught, upon his honors, riches, Amos 6. 13.
pleasures, dignities, offices, Relations, Friends, etc. All a man has are but
ciphers without a figure, if he be not blessed with this Divine presence: This
Divine presence was Jacob's enough, yea Jacob's all, Li-col. Genes. 33. 11. I
have all, Esau had much, Li-zab, I have much my brother. Verse 9. But Jacob had
all. Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia, He has all, who has him that is
Augnstine. Coloss. 3. 11.
all in all. Omne bonum in summo bono, All good is in the chiefest good: Secure
this Divine presence, and you secure all. 4. It is the most desirable presence,
consult these Psalm 42. 1, 2. Psalm 63. 1, 2, 8. Psalm 27. 4. Genes. 28. 20.
Psalm 84.
Scriptures in the margin. Job 23. 3. O that I knew where I might find him!
that I might come even to his seat. Exodus 33. 15. If thy presence go not with
me, carry us not up hence. Verse 16. For wherein shall it be known here, that I
and my people have found grace in thy sight, is it not in that thou go with
us? Cant. 3. 1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought
him, but I found him not. The presence of bad men is never desirable; the
presence Jer. 9. 1, 2. Job 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. Cap. 19. 3, 4, 5.
of good men is not always desirable, for there are cases wherein their
presence may be a burden to us, as Job and others have experienced. Job 16. 2.
Miserable Comforters are ye all. Cap. 19. 2. How long will you vex my soul, and
break me in pieces with words? But the presence of the Lord is very desirable,
most desirable, and always desirable, and the more any man has of this Divine
presence, the more his heart will be inflamed after more and more of it. A
sound sincere Christian can never have enough power against sin, nor never
enough strength against temptation, nor never enough weannedness from this
World, nor never enough ripeness for Heaven, nor never enough of the presence
of the Lord; enough of the Divine presence, he may have to quiet him, and cheer
him, and encourage him, but whilst he is out of Heaven, he can never have
enough of the Divine presence to satisfy him, so as not to cry out, Lord more
of thy presence, O a little more of thy presence! Prove. 30. 15, 16.
5. It Is the most joyful, refreshing, and delightful presence, Psalm 16. ult.
Acts 5. 40, 41. Cap. 16. 25. This Isa. 60. 1, 2. Psalm 46. 7.
Vincentius, and many thousand Martyrs, and suffering Christians have
experienced in all the Ages of the world, but of this before. 6. It Is a
peculiar and distinguishing Exodus 33 16.
presence; this favorable signal presence of God is a choice Jewel, that he
hangs in no breasts, a Bracelet that he puts upon no arms, a Crown that he sets
upon no heads, but such whom he loves with a peculiar love, with an everlasting
love. The general presence of God extends Jer 31. 3. Joh. 13. 1. Psalm 139. 7,
8, 9, 10.
and reaches to all Sinners and Saints; Angels and Devils, to all, both in that
upper and this lower world; But this favorable signal presence of God, is
peculiar to those that are the purchase of Christ's blood, and the travail of
his soul; 7. It Is an inflamming presence: Oh, how does it, 1. Inflame the heart
to duty? Psalm 63. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Isa 53. 11. Ruth 1^ 4. to 18.
2. How does it inflame the heart against sin? Job 31. 4, 5, 6, 7. Genes. 39.
9, 10. Romans 8. 10. 3. To long for the Majestical and glorious presence of God
in Heaven? Cant. 8. ult. Luke 2. 28, 29, 30. 2 Cor. 5. 8. Phil. 1. 23. Rev. 22:
20. 4. How does it inflame their love to the Lord, his ways, his worship, his
interest, his glory? Cant. 1. 3, 4. Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. Cap. 8. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
7. 5. It inflames against temptations, 10. 11. It was this Divine presence that
did steel and strengthen Basil, Luther, and a world of others against the worst
of temptations. 6. It Heb. 11.
inflames the hearts of the Saints into great freeness, readiness and
willingness to suffer many things, to suffer great things, to suffer any thing
for Christ, his Gospel, his interest, etc. O how did this Divine presence make
many Martyrs hasten to the flames! etc. 8. It Is a soul quieting, a soul
silencing, and a soul stilling presence, Psalm 3. 5. Psalm 4. 8. Cant. 2. 3.
Cap. 3. 4, 5. When Friends cannot quiet us, when Relations cannot quiet us, when
Ministers cannot quiet us, when Duties cannot quiet us, when Ordinances cannot
quiet us, when outward comforts cannot quiet us, yet then this Divine presence
will quiet us; when Babies and Rattles cannot quiet the Child, yet then the
breasts can, so here. 9. This Divine presence is a sweetning presence, 1. It
sweetens all duties and services, public and private, ordinary and
extraordinary. 2. It sweetens all personal afflictions, and trials. 3. It
sweetens all our sufferings for righteousness sake. 4. It sweetens all Gospel
Ordinances, Exodus 20. 24. 5. It sweetens all a man's outward mercies and
blessings, it sweetens health, strength, riches, trade, etc, 6. It sweetens all
interchangeable providence, here providence smiles, and there it frowns, here
it lifts up, and there it casts down; this providence is sweet, and that is
bitter, this providence kills, and that providence makes a live. O but this
Divine presence sweetens every providence. 7. It sweetens all other presences,
it sweetens the presence of Friends, it sweetens the presence of Relations, it
sweetens the presence of strangers, it sweetens all Civil Societies, it
sweetens all Religious Societies. 8. It sweetens the thoughts of death, the
arrests of death, it turns the King of terrors into the King of desires, Job
14. 5, 14. Cap. 30. 23. Job 17. 13, 14. How does Job court the worms, as if he
were of a family with them, and near of kin to them! How does he look upon the
grave as his bed, and makes no more to die than to go to bed. It was this
Divine presence that made the Martyrs as willing to die, as to dine. But,

Fifthly, To move you so to order demean and carry 5 Motive.
your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in
your greatest troubles and deepest distresses, consider that in great troubles,
deep distresses and most deadly dangers, you will most need the favorable
signal presence of God with you. We always stand in need of the Divine
presence, but never so much as when we are under great troubles and deep
distresses; For, 1. In days of trouble and distress men's affections are most
apt to be greatly disordered, and their hearts discomposed, as you see in Job
and Jonah. 2. Now their Job 3. Jonah 4.
fears, doubts, and disputes are apt to rise highest; when the wind rises high
and the sea roares, men are most apt Jonah 2. 2. to 7.
to be afraid. 3. Now Satan commonly is busiest, Satan Job 2. 9. Jam. 1. 12.
loves to fish in troubled waters; when the hand of God is heaviest upon us,
then Satan will shoot his most deadly Genesis 34. 25. Deu. 25. 17, 18, 19.
darts at us. The sons of Jacob fell upon the Shechemites when they were sore;
and Amaleck fell upon Gods Israel and smote them, when they were weak, and
feeble, and faint and weary; and Satan falls foul upon Christ, Mat. 4. 1. to 11.
when he was in the wilderness, and when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, and was a hungry; And as he dealt with the head, so he still deals
with the members. 4. Now unbelief is most turbulent, strong, and mighty in
operation, as you may see in the Spies, We be Number. 13. 31, 32.
not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we. The Land
through which we have gone to search it, is a Land that eats up the
inhabitants thereof, and all the Verse 33.
people that we saw in it are men of great stature; And there we saw the
Giants, the Sons of Anak, which come of the Giants, and we were in our own
sight as Grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight. So 2 Kings 6. 33. This
evil is Vide 2 Kin. 7. 1, 2. 19, 20.
of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? So David Psalm. 116.
11. I said in my have all men are liars, the Prophets have all deceived me, and
Samuel has deluded me, they have told me of a Kingdom, a Crown, but I shall
never wear the one, nor possess the other. So 1 Samuel 27. 1. I shall now perish
one day by the hand of Saul; Thus his fear is got above his faith, and his soul
wherried about with unbelief, to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the
wicked, besides his own particular disadvantage. 5. Now fainting fits will be
most strengthened, increased, and multiplied. Now fainting fits like Jobs
Messengers, or like the rolling waves, will come thick one upon another, Prove.
24. 10. Job 4. 5. Lam. 1. 12, 13. 6. Now conscience will be most startled and
disquieted, Genesis 42. 21. cap. 50. 15. 1 Kings 17. 18. Great troubles and deep
distresses are many times like strong physic, which stirs the humors and
makes the Patient sick, very sick, yea heart sick. Conscience commonly never
reads the soul such sad and serious lectures as when the Rod lies heaviest
upon the back. By all which you see, what high cause the People of God have so
to order, demean and carry themselves, as that they may find the gracious
presence of God with them in their greatest troubles, and deepest distresses,
for then they will certainly need most of the Divine presence. But,

Sixthly, To move you so to order, demean and carry 6 Motive.
your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you in
your greatest troubles and deepest distresses, consider, this Divine presence
will make you Divinely fearless in the midst of your greatest troubles and
deepest distresses, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me. Psalm 46. 2. We will not fear though the Earth be removed, and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Verse 3. Though the
waters thereof rore, etc. Why? God is in the midst of her, she shall not be
moved, God shall help her, and that right early. Verse 5. The Lord of Hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, Selah. Verse. 7. Number. 14. 9. Neither
fear ye the people, for they are bread for us, their defense is departed from
them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. Thou shall not be
affrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God and
terrible. So Heb. 13. 5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Verse 6. I
will not fear what man shall do unto me. There is no such way to keep down all
base slavish fears of men, as to keep up the presence of God in the midst of
you; you will not fear the power of men, nor the policy of men, nor the threats
of men, nor the wrath of men, if you do but enjoy this gracious, this signal
presence of God that is under our present consideration, men's fears are never
so rampant as when God withdraws his presence from them. 1 Samuel, 28. 15, 20. But,

Seventhly, To move you so to order, demean, and 7 Motive.
carry your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with
you, in your greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, consider, that there is
in God a very great unwillingness to withdraw his presence from his Isa. 1. 2,
3, 4, 16, 18. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cap. 33. 11. Jer. 3. 13, 14.
People, when they are in great troubles and deep distresses, Ezekiel. 8. 6. Son
of man, see thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of
Israel commits here, that I should go far off from my Sanctuary. Of all sins
the sin of Idolatry drives God farthest off from his Sanctuary; when God goes
off from a People, he goes not off rashly, he goes not off suddenly, but he
goes off gradually, he removes not at once, but by degrees, now a step, and
then a step, as Lot did when he lingered in Sodom, Genesis 19. 16.
Lot was not more loath to depart out of Sodom, than God is loath to leave his
People, he goes first to the threshold, Ezekiel. 9. 3. And the glory of the God of
Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon he was, to the threshold of the
house, Then over the threshold. Cap. 10. 4. Then the glory of the Lord went up
from the Cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house. Here is a second
step, this is the second time of resting before God departs. The Lord had his
ordinary dewlling place in the Holy of Holyes: Now Gods first remove was from
the most Holy place, his second remove was from the Holy place, 1 Samuel 4. 4.
Psalm 8. 10. Isa. 37. 16.
his third remove was higher toward Heaven, Verse 19. And the Cherubims lift
up their wings, and mounted up from the Earth in my sight, then to the door of
the East gate (or foremost gate) of the Lords house. To note Gods total remove
from his house. Then to the midst of the City, Ezekiel. 11. 23. And the glory of
the Lord went up from the midst of the City, and then he stood upon the
mountain, which is on the East Side of the City. This is Gods last stop in his
departure, by which is signified, that he was willing to make one try^l more,
to see if the People would in this present danger call him back by invitation
and lively repentance God is greatly troubled when it comes to parting, H^s.
118. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how
shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Reb^im? Mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. This is spoken per
anthrop^patheian and not properly, because diverse thoughts and repentance are
not incident to God, Jam. 1. 17.
who is without all variableness, or shadow of change. The Lord seems here to
be at a stand, or at strise with himself about the destruction of this People.
Howbeit God in the bowels of his mercy, yearning and taking pity of his Elect
amongst them, spares to lay upon them the extremity of his wrath, and is ready
to save them for his mercies sake. Observe how fatherlike he melts and mournes
over them, and how mercy interposeth her four several Hows. Here are four such
pathetical interrogations, as the like are not to found in the whole Book of
God, and not to be answered by any but God himself, as indeed he does to each
particular in the following words, My heart is turned within me, that is the
first answer; The second is, My repentings are kindled together; The third is,
I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath; The fourth is, I will not
destroy Ephraim. And why? First, I am God and not man. Secondly, the Holy One
in the midst of thee. God is mighty unwilling to break up house, and to leave
his People desolate. Now is God so unwilling to withdraw his presence, and
shall not we do all what we can to retain him in the midst of us? When dear
Friends are unwilling to leave us, we are the more earnest in pressing them to
stay and abide with us; God is marvellously unwilling to go, and therefore let
us with the Church cry out, Leave us not, Jerem. 14. 9. But,

Eighthly, To move you so to order, demean, and carry ^ Motive.
your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in
your greatest troubles and deepest distresses, consider, that troubles will be
no troubles, distresses will be no distresses, dangers will be no dangers, if
you can but secure the presence of God with you: Mountains will be mole-hills,
stabs at the heart will be but as scratches upon the hand, if the Divine
presence be with you; Gods signal presence will turn storms into calms,
winter-nights into summer-days, prisons into palaces, banishments into
enlargments; The favorable presence of God will turn sickness into health,
weakness into strength, poverty into plenty, and death into life. It can never
be night so long as the Sun shines, no afflictions, no trials can make it night
with a Christian, so long as he enjoyes the presence of God with his spirit. 2
Ti^ 4. 22.
That Courtier needs not complain that this man slights him, and that the other
neglects him, who enjoyes the delightful presence of his Prince. When Sampson
had the presence of God with him, he made nothing of carrying the gates of the
City with the posts and bars to the Judge 16. 3.
top of an hill: So whilst a Christian enjoyes the singular presence of God
with him, he will make nothing of this affliction and that, of this trouble and
that, of this loss and that; This presence makes heavy afflictions light, 2
Cor. 4. 16, 17.
and long afflictions short, and bitter afflictions sweet. It Heb. 11. 33. to
19.
was this presence that made the Martyrs set light by all the great and
grievous things, that they suffered for Christ's sake and the Gospels sake. Gods
gracious presence makes every condition to be a little Heaven to the believing
soul. A man in misery without this gracious presence of God, is in a very hell
on this side hell; there is nothing, there can be nothing but Heaven where God
is signally present. But,

Ninthly, To move you so to order, demean and carry 9 Moti^e.
your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with you in
your greatest troubles and deep^st distresses, consider that the worst of men
cannot fasten a curse upon you, whilst you keep the prefence of God with you.
Number. 23. 21. The Lord his God is with him, Number. 23. 23.
and the shout of a King is among them. There could be no enchantment against
them, for the Lord their God was with them, and the shout of a King was among
them; that is God reigns as a King among them: Hereby also is meant the
faith, joy, boldness, courage and confidence of Gods People in their King; as
when a King comes amongst the Armies of his People, he is received with joyful
shoutings and acclamations, and when he goes forth to battle with them, he goes
accompanied with the sound of trumpets and shouts of the People, signs of
their joy and courage: So it fared with the Israelites, because of that signal
presence of God, that was amongst them, which was evident by his protecting and
defending of them. 1 Samuel 4. 5. And when the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord
came into the Camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth
rang again. Here is a valorous shout of a puissant People, encouraging each
other to the battle, and a victorious shout as having obtained the victory in
the battle. So 2 Chronicles. 13. 12: And behold, God himself is with us for our
Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets, to cry alarm against you, O
Children of Israel. Number: 23. 23. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any Divination against Israel; That is, there is none against
Israel that shall be of force, or that shall take any effect, to do the
posterity of Jacob or Israel any hurt, any harm, any prejudice: But why?
because the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them.
The presence of God with his Israel blasts all Balaams enchantments, and makes
null and void all his Divinations; God is with his People to counsel them in
all doubtful and difficult cases, and to defend them, and secure them, Number. 23.
1, 13, 28 29. Cap. 24. 1. 2 Samuel 16. 7, 9, 11 12. Jer. 15. 10. Cap. 1. 17, 18,
19.
against all their enemies and opposers: Balaam had a months mind to curse the
People of God, as his wearied endeavors to that purpose do abundantly
evidence; But the presence of God with his People prevented all his mischievous
designs. Shemei curses David, but his curses could not hurt him, for God was
with him. The People generally cursed Jeremiah, but all their curses could not
harm him, for God was with him. The Jews in their prayers daily curse the
Christian Exodus 20. 24.
Churches, but all their curses cannot prejudice them, because God is in the
midst of them; And who will say that the reformed Churches are one pin the
worse for all the Popes excommunications and execrations with Bell, Book and
Candle? The signal prefence of God with his People is a most sovereign antidote
against all the curses and cursings of cursed men, and therefore what ever you
part with, be sure you don't part with your God, let him be but in the midst of
you, and then no curses shall be prevalent against you. This age abounds with
such monsters whose mouths are full of curses, but if every curse should stick
a visible blister on the cursers tongue, as it does insensible ones on the
cursers soul, their tongues would quickly be too big for their mouths, and they
would soon grow weary of cursing the People of God, the things of God, the
ways of God, the providence of God, and the faithful dispensers of the
mysteries of God; but the best of it is, when they have done their worst and
spit out all their curses, the curse causeless shall not come, for the ever
blessed God is in his People, Prove. 26. 2.
and with his People, and among his People, and a Zach. 2. 5.
wall of fire always about his People, and therefore they are safe and secure
enough, when men and Devils have done their worst. But,

Tenthly and lastly, To move you so to order, demean, 10 Motive.
and carry your selves, as that you may enjoy the gracious presence of God with
you, in your greatest troubles and deepest distresses, consider that the Divine
presence will make up the absence of all outward comforts, this gracious
presence will supply and fill up the place of a friend, a child, a father, a
husband. Some of the Rabbis write, that Manna had all sorts of tastes, and all
sorts of sweets in it: Sure I am, that the favorable presence of God has Psalm.
4. 6, 7.
all sorts of sweets in it, it has the sweet of all ordinances in it, it has
the sweet of all duties in it, it has the sweet of Prove. 4. 23.
all Church privileges in it, it has the sweet of all Relations in it, it has
the sweet of all your outward comforts in it, and therefore above all keeping,
keep the presence of God with you. Many in their distresses and miseries are
full of complaints; one cries out, he wants a faithful Friend; another cries
out, he wants an active Relation; a third cries out, that he wants necessaries
both ^or back and belly; a fourth cries out, he wants the means that others
enjoy, but he that enjoyes the gracious presence of God finds all these wants
made up to him, Yea he finds the Divine presence to be infinitely better 1 Samuel
1. 8.
than the presence of all outward comforts. As Elkanah said to Hannah, Am not I
better than ten Sons? So assuredly the presence of the Lord is wonderfully
better than all other things to every soul that has tasted the sweetness of it.
You know, that one Sun is more glorious, delightful, useful and comfortable
than ten thousand Stars, so here. Seneca tells a Courtier that had lost his Son
(Fas tibi non est, salvo Caesare, de fortuna tua queri, etc.) That he had no
cause to mourn, either for that or ought else, so long as his Sovereign was in
safety, and he in favor with his Sovereign, he had all things in him, and he
should be unthankful to his good fortune, if he were not cheerful both in
heart and look, so long as things stood so with him as they did: How much more
may we say to every sincere Christian, that enjoyes the gracious presence of
God with him. Let thy wants and thy crosses be never so great, thy afflictions
never so pressing, thy necessities never so biting, thou have no just cause to
be troubled or dejected, so long as thou art in favor with God, and enjoyest
the presence of God. All mercies, all comforts, all contentments, all
enjoyments they meet and center in the gracious presence of God, as all lights
meet in the Sun, and as all waters meet in the Sea, and therefore let not that
soul mourn or complain of the want of any thing, who enjoyes that gracious
presence of God, that is better than every terre^e thing. Thus much for the
motives.

But some may say, O Sir, what means should we use, that we may enjoy the
gracious presence of the Lord with us in our greatest troubles, deepest
distresses, and most deadly dangers? I answer first there are some things that
you must carefully shun and take heed off; As,

First, take heed of high sinnings, take heed of scandalous sins. High sinnings
do greatly dishonor God, wound conscience, reproach Religion, stagger the
weak, grieve the strong, open the mouths of the wicked, and provoke God to
withdraw his gracious presence, Psalm 51. 11, 12. Exodus 32. 8. Cap. 33. 3. Isa.
63. 10. Turn to these Scriptures, and seriously ponder upon them. Great
transgressions do eclypse the favor of God, as well as the honor of God; In
great transgressions we turn our backs upon God, and God turns away his face
from us. Gross sins will provoke God to withdraw his presence, both in respect
of vigor and strength, as also in respect of peace and comfort. But,

Secondly, take heed of impenitency. Next to our being preserved from sin, it
is the greatest mercy in the world, when we are fallen by our transgressions,
to make a quick and speedy return to God: When by your sins Hosea 6. 1. Exodus
3^. 9. to 15.
you have made work for repentance, for hell, or for the Physician, Souls,
immediately make up the breach, take up the controversy between God and your
souls, humble your selves, judge your selves, and speedily return to the most
high. Thus Peter did, and recovered the favorable Mat. 26* ^5. Mar. 16. 7.
presence of God presently. But if men will commit sin, and lie in it, if they
will fall, and have no mind to rise, God will certainly withdraw his favorable
presence from them, as you see in David and Solomon. This Psalm. 51. 11, 12. 1
Kings 11. 9. Josh. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
is further evident in that case of Achan, Josh. 7: The Israelites they came to
fight with the men of Ai, and fled before them, for the Lord was not with them.
Why, what was the cause of Gods withdrawing himself? See Verse 11. Israel has
sinned. And Verse 12. Therefore the Children of Israel could not stand before
their enemies, but turned their backs. Their sins having betrayed them into the
hand of Divine Justice, and into their enemies hands also; Mark what follows,
Neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from
amongst you. If we will not stone our Achans, our sins, by the lively exercise
of faith and repentance; If we will keep up our lusts in despite of all that
God does against us, we must never expect to retain the gracious presence of
God with us. But,

Thirdly, take heed either of neglecting Gospel Worship, or of corrupting
Gospel Worship. Omissions will damn as well as commissions, and omissions will
provoke God to withdraw his presence, as well as commissions. When persons are
careless in their attendance on Cant. 5. 2, 3, 6. Cant. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Gospel ordinances, no wonder if God withdraw his presence from them in their
distresses. Cain went off from ordinances, Genesis 4. 15, 16.
and the Lord set a mark upon him. O the black and dismal marks of misery, that
God has set upon many that have neglected Gospel Worship, and for profits sake,
and for Diana's sake are fallen roundly in with the 2 Timothy 4. 10. Acts 19. 24,
36.
worship of the world! O Sirs, the great God stands upon nothing more in all
the world than upon purity in his worship; There is nothing that does so
provoke and exasperate God against a People as corrupt worship; corrupt worship
sadly reflects upon the Name of God, the honor of God, the truth of God, and
the wisdom of God, and therefore his heart rises against such worship and
worshippers, and he will certainly withdraw from them, and be a swift and
terrible witness against them, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in
the margin together. Psalm. 106. 39. to 43. Psalm. 78. 58. to 64. 2 Chro. 7. 19,
20, 21, 22. Cap. 32. 16. to 21 Deu. 29. 22. to 29
Corrupt worship is contrary to the unity of God; Now deny his unity, and you
deny his Deity, For the Lord is one, and his Name is one, Zach. 14. 9. It Is
contrary to the sovereignty of God, He is the only Ruler, the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15. It Is contrary to the allsufficiency of God. The Heathen worshipped
several Gods, as thinking that several Gods did bestow several blessings; they
begged health of one God, wealth of another God, and victory of a third God,
thus imagining to themselves several Deities, for several supplies; their God
was but a Jupiter, a partial helper, an auxiliary God, but Our God is Jehovah,
who is abundantly able to Ephesians. 3. 20.
supply all our wants. Now if either we neglect his true instituted worship, or
fall in with a false worship, with a devised worship, with a humane worship,
with a worldly worship, he will certainly withdraw his gracious presence from
us. Will Worship accuses and charges God with weakness and folly, as if God
were not careful Heb. 3. 4, 5, 6. John 4. 23, 24.
enough, nor faithful enough, nor mindful enough, nor wise enough, to order,
direct and guide his People in the matters of his worship, but must be
beholding to the wisdom, prudence, and care of man, of vain man, of sinful man,
of vile and unworthy man, of weak and foolish man, to complete, perfect and
make up something that was wanting in his worship? Now assuredly, God will
never keep house with them, who give in such severe accusations and charges
against him. But,

Fourthly, take heed of a willing willful and presumptuous running cross to
Divine commands, to Divine warnings. The disobedient child is turned out of
doors, the disobedient servant shall have none of his Masters smiles, the
disobedient wife has little of her husbands company; a willing willful
presumptuous running cross to Divine commands speaks out much pride, Atheism,
hardness, blindness, and desperate security and contempt of the great God; It
speaks out the greatest disingenuity, stoutness, and stubornness that is
imaginable, and therefore no wonder if God turn his back upon such, and if he
disdains to be in the midst of such, Number. 14. 42. Go See Deu. 1. 42, 43, 44,
45, 46.
not up, for the Lord is not among you, that ye be not smitten before your
enemies. Verse 43. For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you,
(that is, on the top of the hill, lying in readiness to set upon you, and
therefore are said, To come down, Verse 45) And ye shall fall by the sword,
because ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with
you, Verse 44. But they presumed to go up to the hill-top, though they had not
the presence of God with them, nor the signs of his grace and favor with them,
nor the company of Moses with them, but mark, they paid dear for their
presumption. Verse 45. Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which
dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them even unto Hormah. When
men are without Gods presence, they are without Gods precincts, and so out of
his protection. To act or run cross to Gods express command (though under
pretense of revelation from God) is as much as a man's life is worth, as you may
see in that sad story. 1 Kings 13. 24. We frequently deny our presence unto
disobedient Persons, and so does God his; disobedience to Divine commands shuts
the door against the Divine presence, and will not suffer God to come in to
succor us, comfort us, or support us, under our greatest troubles, and deepest
distresses. But

Fifthly, Take heed of carnal confidence, of resting upon an arm of flesh.
Psalm 30. 6. And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved; that is, when
I was prosperously Adam in Paradise was overcome, when Job on the dunghill was a
conqueror.
settled in the Kingdom, I began to conclude within my self, that now there was
an end of all my troubles, I should now live all my days in a prosperous
estate. David having taken the strong Fort of Zion, and having vanquished his
Enemies round about, and all the Tribes having submitted themselves to him, and
having built a fair Palace, and being quietly settled in his Throne, he began
to be puffed up with carnal confidence. Oh the hazard of honor! Oh the damage
of dignity! how soon are we broken upon the soft pillow of ease? Flies settle
upon the sweetest perfumes when cold; and so does sin on the best hearts, when
they are dissolved and disspirited by prosperity. Oh how apt are the holiest of
men to be proud and secure, and promise themselves more than ever God promised
them, viz. Immunity from the Cross: He thought that his Kingdom and all
prosperity was tied unto him with ^ords of Adamant, he sitting quietly at
Jerusalem, and free from 2 Samuel 11. 1.
fear of all his Enemies; but God quickly confutes his carnal confidence, by
giving him to know, that he could as easily blast the strongest Oak, as he
could trample the smallest Worm under his feet. Verse 7. Thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled. God will quickly suspend his favor, and withdraw his
presence, when his Children begin to be proud and carnally confident. Look as
at the Eclipse of the Sun the whole frame of nature droops; so when God hides
his face, when he withdraws his presence, the best of Saints cannot but droop,
and hang down their heads. So Jerem. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. Verse
6. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes. But

Sixthly, Take heed of barrenness and unfruitfulness under Gospel Ordinances,
turn to these Scriptures, Isa. 5. 1, to 8. Matthew. 21. 34, to 42. 2 Chronicles. 32.
16. to the last. Of all spiritual judgments, barreness is the greatest; and
when men are given up to this judgment God withdraws; Ezekiel. 47. 11. Matthew. 13.
19. Hosea 9. 14. John 15. 2. Heb 2. 6. 7, 8. Jude 12.
he has no pleasure to dwell in a barren soil; what are barren grounds, and
barren wombs to barren hearts? he that remains wholly barren under Gospel
Ordinances, may well question his marriage union with Christ. For Romans 7. 4. We
are said to be married to Christ, that we may bring forth fruit to God. There
is a double end of Marriage. viz. Cohabitation and propagation, and therefore
there cannot be a greater and clearer evidence, that thou art not yet taken
into a married union with Christ, than a total barrenness uner Gospel
enjoyments. Christ's Spouse is fruitful; Cant. 1. 16. Our bed is green. Cap. 4.
1. Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair: thou have doves eyes
within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of Goats, that appear from mount
Gilead. Verse 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
come up from the washing: whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren
among them. Christ has no further delight in his People, nor will no further
grace his Cant 7. 11, 12, 13
People with his special presence, than they make conscience, of weeping over
their barrenness, and of bringing forth fruit to him. Now my Husband will love
me, now he will be joined to me, now I have born him this son also, Genesis 29. 34.
said Leah, so may the fruit-bearing soul reason it out with Christ: Now I know
dear Jesus will love me, now I know he will delight in me, now I know he will
dwell with me, now I know he will honor me with his presence, for now I bring
forth fruit unto him. Barr^nness under the means of grace, drives God from us,
and the Gospel from us, and trade, and peace, and prosperity from us, and one
Christian from another. Vrsin observes, that the sins and barrenness of the
Protestants under the Gospel in King Edward's days, brought in the persecution
in Queen Marie's days; and he tells us, that those who fl^d out of England in
Queen Marie's days, acknowledged, that that calamity befell them for their
great unprofitableness under the means of grace in King Edwards days. Among
other prodigies, which were about the time that Julian came to the Empire,
there were wild Grapes appeared upon their vines, with which many wise men in
that day were much affected, looking upon it as ominous. Ah England! England! I
look upon nothing to be so ominous to thee, as the barrenness of the Professors
of the day! no wonder if God leave his house, when the Trees that are planted
in it, and about it are all barren. The Nutmeg-tree makes barren all the ground
about it; so does the spice of worldly love make the hearts of Christians
barren under the means of grace. But I must hasten.

Seventhly, Take heed of pride and haughtiness of Spirit: Hosea 5. 5. And the
pride of Israel does testify to See my Unsearchable riches of Christ, p. 49.
to 58.
his face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: Judah
also shall fall with them. Ver. 6. They shall go with their flocks, and with
their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him, he has withdrawn
himself from them. Pride is the great master-pock of the soul, it will bud, and
Ezekiel. 7. 10. Isa. 3. 16. to 25.
blossom, it cannot be hid; it is the Leprosy of the soul, that breaks forth
in the very forehead, and so testifies to his face. Some have called Rome,
Epitomen universi, An Epitome, or Abridgement of the whole world: So it may be
said of pride, that it is the sum of all naughtiness, a Sea of sin, a
complicated sin, a mother sin, sin, a breeding sin, a sin that has all sorts of
sin in the womb of it; consult the Scriptures in the margin. Aristotle Hab. 1.
16. Isa. 48. 9. Cap. 26. 12. Hab. 2. 5, etc.
speaking of Justice, says, that in Justice all virtues are couched, (...),
summarily; so it may be truly said of pride, that in it all vices are as it
were in a bundle lapped up together; and therefore no wonder if God withdraw
his presence from proud persons, [He has withdrawn himself from them.] Heb.
Has snatched (...)
away himself; has thrown himself out of their company, as Peter threw himself
out from the rude Soldiers Mark 14. 72.
into a by-corner, to weep bitterly. God will have nothing to do with proud
persons, he will never dwell with them, he will never keep house with them; he
that dwells in the highest heavens, will never dwell in Isa. 57. 15. Psalm 138.
6.
a haughty heart. [The proud he knows afar of] He will not vouchsafe to come so
near such loathsome Lepers, he stands of from such as odious and abominable, he
cannot abide the sight of them, yea his very heart rises against Prove. 15. 25.
Cap. 16. 5.
them. James 4. 6. God resists the proud, (...), He sets himself in battle
array against him, as the Greek word emphatically signifies. Above all sorts of
sinners, God sets himself against proud persons, as invaders of his
territories, and forragers or plunderers of his chief treasures: God defieth
such as deifie themselves; God will arm himself against them, he will never
vouchsafe his gracious presence to them; and therefore as ever you would enjoy
the Divine presence arm against pride, watch against pride, and pray hard
against pride. But

Eighthly, Take heed of a flothful, lazy, trifling Spirit in the things of God:
Cantic. 5. 2. I sleep but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my Beloved that
knocks, saying, Open to me, my Sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. Verse 3. I
have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I
defile them? Christ's head is filled with dew, i. e. Christ came to his Spouse,
full of the dew of spiritual and heavenly blessings: Christ always brings meat
in his mouth, and a Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Revel. 22. 12.
reward in his hand: Christ never visits his People empty handed; he is no
beggarly or niggardly Guest, when he comes he brings every thing that heart can
wish or need require; and now stand and wonder at the silly excuse Cap. 3. 17,
19.
that the Spouse makes for her self: Trouble me not for I am in bed, my clothes
are off, my feet are washed, and I am composed to a settled rest: But are you
so indeed? (might Christ have replied) Is this your kindness 2 Samuel 16. 17.
to your friend? is this the part and posture of a vigilant Christian? would it
not have been much better for you to have had your loins girt, your lamp
burning, and you waiting for your Lords return? Is it so great a trouble? Is it
such a mighty business for you to rise out of your bed, to put on your clothes,
and to let in such a Guest, as comes not to take any thing from you, but to
enrich you with the best and noblest of favors? Now mark how severely Christ
punishes his Spouses sluggishness, lazyness, slothfulness, and delays to
entertain him when he knocked. Verse 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved
had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he spoke; I sought him
but I could not find him: I called him but he gave no answer; or he was gone,
he was gone, a most passionate complaint for his departure, or my best beloved
was departed, he was gone away: By the iteration or doubling of this sentence,
wherein the Spouse complains of the departure of her Bridegroom, is signified
her great trouble, her hearty sorrow, her inexpressible grief, that lay as a
heavy load upon her spirit, because by her unworthy usage of him, she had
foolishly occasioned him to withdraw his presence from her. Spiritual
desertions are of three sorts: 1. Cautional for preventing of sin as Paul's
seems to be. 2. Probational 2 Cor. 1. 2, 8, 9.
for trial and exercise of grace. 3. Penal, for chastisement of Spiritual sloth
and sluggishness, as here in the Spouse; now this last is far the saddest and
heaviest, and therefore as ever you would enjoy the gracious presence of the
Lord, take heed of a lazy, slothful, sluggish spirit, in the things of God, in
the concernments of your souls. That man must needs be miserable, that is lazy
and slothful, and had rather go sleeping to hell, than sweating to heaven. But

Ninthly, Take heed of a covetous worldly spirit, under the smarting Rod, under
the severe rebukes of God. Isa. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness I
was wroth and smote him; I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in
the way of his heart. Covetousness was the common sin of the Jews, this disease
had infected all sorts and ranks of men, this Leprosy did spread it self over
Isai. 56. 11. Jer. 6. 13. Cap. 8. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
Princes, Prophets and Prople, as you may see in comparing the Scriptures in
the margin together. Now covetousness being the root of all evil, as the
Apostle speaks, and the Darling sin of the Nation, God is so provoked by it,
that he first smites and then hides himself, as one that in displeasure, having
left one to the evil, and harsh usage of some other withdraws himself out of
the way, and having shut himself up in his closet, will not be seen or spoken
with. A worldly man makes the world his God, covetousness is flat Idolatry:
Coloss. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is Idolatry. Now though it be true that what ever a man
loves most and best, that is his Phil. 3. 19. Isa. 3. 16, to 25.
God, be it his belly, or his back; yet in a special manner covetousness is
Idolatry, so as no other sin is. Three things especially make a God: First, our
judgment, when we esteem it in our serious thoughts to be our chiefest good,
and that in which we place our happiness: Now the covetous man looks upon the
riches of the world, as his heaven, his happiness, his great all. Pope
Silvester placed so much happiness in riches that, to enjoy the Popedom for
seven years, he sold his soul to the Devil. The People of Constantinople placed
so much of their happiness in riches, and were so excessively covetous, that
they were buying and selling in their shops, even three days after the Turks
were within the walls of the City, and that was the reason that the streets run
down with the blood of them, their wives and children. Secondly, Our
confidence, that is a homage which makes a God, when we place our trust in any
thing, make it our rock, our fortress, our all-sufficient good, this the
covetous man does: He says to the wedge of Job 21. 34.
gold, thou art my confidence. The rich man's heart dances about his
Golden-calf, saying to his wedg of gold, thou art my confidence; and yet his
wedge of gold shall prove but as Achans wedge; a wedge to cleave his soul in
sunder, Joshua 7. 21. to ult.
and as that Babylonish garment to be his windingsheet. [The rich man's wealth
is his strong City.] Covetous Prove. 10. 15. See 1 Timothy 6. 27.
persons do really think themselves simply the better, and the safer for their
hoards and heaps of riches; but they may one day find themselves greatly
mistaken. Famous Herodot. lib. 1.
is that story of Croesus among the Heathens, he was a great King, and tumbled
up and down in his gold and silver, and Solon that wise man of Greece, coming
into his Country, he desired to speak with him, and when he saw him, after
Solon had seen and viewed all his wealth and glory, he asked him, whom he
thought to be the happiest man in the world, imagining that Solon would have
said Croesus: But Solon answered, I think Tellus was the most happy man.
Tellus, says he; why Tellus? Because, said Solon, though he was poor, yet he
was a good man, and content with that which he had; and having governed the
Commonwealth well, and brought up his Child honestly and religiously, he died
honorably. Well then, said Croesus, but who do thou think the second happy
man in the world? I think, said he, those two Brothers, that instead of Horses
drew their Mother in a Chariot to the Temple. Whereupon said Croesus, what
think thou of me? I think, says he, thou art a very rich man; but a man may
be happy though he be poor, and a man may be unhappy though he be rich, for he
may lose all his riches before he dye; and therefore Ante obitum nemo, I think
none truly happy, but he that lives well, and dies well: Whereupon that Wise
man Solon was dismissed the Court with neglect. But afterward this Croesus
making War against Cyrus, he was overcome by Cyrus; and being taken captive, he
was laid upon a pile of wood to be burned to death, then lying on the pile of
wood, he cried out and said: O Solon, Solon, Solon. Cyrus enquiring, what he
meant? He answered, this Solon was a Wise man of Greece, that told me, that
happiness did not consist in riches, for they might all be lost, and a rich man
might die miserable: Whose words, said he, I then neglected, but now I find
true; and therefore now I cry out, O Solon, Solon, Solon! Let us now tell the
covetous man, the worldly man, that his happiness lies not in riches, though he
looks upon his riches as his strong City; he will not mind us, he will not regard. O
but there is a time a coming wherein the worldling will cry out: O Solon,
Matthew. 6. 24.
Solon, Solon! Thirdly, Our service, that is a homage which makes a God, when
we devote all our pains, labor, and service to it, be it this or that, that
makes a God: Now the covetous man his heart is most upon the world, his
thoughts are most upon the world, his affections are most upon the world, and
his discourse is most about the world; he that has his mind taken up with the
world, and chiefly delighted with the world's music, he has also his tongue
tuned to the same Key, and takes his joy and comfort in speaking of nothing
else, but the world ard worldly things: If the world be in the heart it will
break out at the lips; a worldly minded man speaks of nothing but worldly
things. [They John 4. 5.
are of the world, therefore they speak of the world.] The water rises not
above the fountain; out of the warehouse the shop is furnished; the love of
this world makes men forget God, neglect Christ, slight Ordinances, refuse
Matthew. 19. 21, 22.
Heaven, despise holiness, and oils the tongue for worldly discourses: Ah the
time, the thoughts, the strength, the spirits, the words that are spent upon
the world, and the things of the world, whilst sinners souls lie a bleeding,
and Eternity is posting on upon them! I have read of a griping Usurer, who was
always best when he was most in talking of the world, being near his end he
was much pressed to make his will, at last he was overcome, and then he dictates
to the Scrivener after this manner: First, I bequeath my own soul to the Devil,
for being so greedy of the muck of this world: Item, next I give my wifes soul
to the Devil, for persuading me to this course of life: Item I give the Parson
of our Parish's soul to the Devil, because he did not show me the danger I
lived in, nor reprove me for it. O the danger of making the world our God, when
we come to die, and to make up our accounts with God. Now when men make the
world their God, and set up their riches, pleasures, and profits in the place
of God, no wonder if God withdraws his presence from them, and therefore as
ever you would retain the gracious presence of God with you, take heed of a
covetous spirit, a worldly spirit. But

Tenthly and lastly, As ever you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with
you in your greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers,
take heed of See my Mute Christian under the smarting rod.
a Cross, froward, and inflexible Spirit under the Rod: When the Child is
froward under the Rod, the Father withdraws; so here, Isa. 57. 17. I was wroth,
I smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart. Though I manifested my displeasure Isa. 47. 6.
by giving them up to their Enemies, and by giving them under the tokens of my
anger, they persisted in their own cross, crooked, and rebellious courses,
refusing to repent and turn to the most High; and therefore God changes his
countenance, hides his face, and withdraws his presence from them: Deuteronomy. 32.
20. And he said, I will hide my face from them, for they are a very froward
generation. Heb. A generation of perversnesses. When the sick man is froward,
Friends withdraw and leave him alone, Psalm 18. ver. 26. With the froward thou will show thy self froward. God will meet with froward persons in their own
way, and make them reap the fruits of their own doings. God will walk cross and
contrary to the froward, opposing and crossing them in all they do. God has no
delight to grace froward persons with his presence; when men begin to be
froward under a Divine hand, God commonly hides his face, and turns his back
upon them; Men sick of impatiency, are no fit company for the God of all
patience; men that Romans 15. 5. Prove. 11. 20.
are peevish and pettish under the Rod, will always see a cloud upon the face
of God; and thus you see that there are ten things that you must carefully take
heed of, as you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers.

But Secondly, As there are many things to be avoided, so there are several
things to be put in practice, as you would enjoy the gracious presence of God
with you, in your greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly
dangers, let me glance at a few.

First, Be sure that you are brought under the bond of the Covenant. This
gracious signal presence of God Ezekiel. 20. 37. Psalm 25. 14. Psalm 50. 5. Jer.
32. 40, 41. G^nes. 6. 8. 18.
with his People, under their greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, is
peculiar to those that are in Covenant with God. Noah was in Covenant with God,
and God was with him, providing an Ark for him, and preserving of him from
drowning in the midst of drowning. Lot was in Covenant with God-, and God was
with him, and secures him in Zoar, when he rained Cap. 19. 20, to 26.
Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah. Joseph was in Covenant with God,
and God was with Joseph Ge 39. 20, 21, 22. Jer. 1. 17, 18, 19. Cap. 37. 15.
ult. Dan. 3. 23, 24, 25. Cap. 6. 22, 23.
in prison. Jeremiah was in Covenant with God, and God kept him company in the
Dungeon. The three Children (or rather Champions) were in Covenant with God,
and God was signally present with them in the fiery Furnace. Daniel was in
Covenant with God, and God was wonderfully with him in the Lions Den. Job was
in Covenant with God, and God was with him in six troubles, and in seven. David
was in Covenant Job 3. 18, 19. Psalm. 89. 33, ^4. Psalm. 23. 4.
with God, and God was with him in the valley of the shadow of death. Take not
up in a name to live, nor in a form of godliness, nor in common convictions,
nor in an outward reformation, take up in nothing below a Covenant Relation, as
you would enjoy the precious presence De^t. 26. 17, 18, 19.
of the Lord with you in your greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, if you
choose him for your God you shall then assuredly find him to be your God; if he
be the God of our love and fear, he will be the God of our comfort and safety;
if God be your God in Covenant, then in distress the cities of refuge are open
to you; he will stick close to you, he will never leave you nor forsake you,
you have a Father to go to, a God to flee Heb. 13. 5, 6, 7.
to, a God that will take care of you, [Come my People, enter thou into thy
Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self, as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast.] Here are Chambers (withdrawing
rooms provided not open Chambers, but with doors, and doors shut round about,
intimating that guard of protection, which the People of God shall find from
him, even in a common inundation. But,

Secondly, if you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, then look to
the practical 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
part of holiness keep up the power of godlyness in your hearts and lives, Joh.
14. 21. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves
me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will manifest my self to him. Ver. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. He that frames his heart and life according This is evident
throughout the whole Bo^k of the Prophet E^eki^l. See Cap. 2. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12.
to Christ's rule, shall be sure of Christ's presence. Ezekiel was a man that
kept up the power of holiness and godliness in his heart and life; And O, the
glorious visions, and deep mysteries, and rare discoveries of God, and of his
presence, and of the great things that should be brought about in the latter
days, that was discovered to him! Daniel kept up the power of holiness and
godliness in his heart and life; And O, what secrets and mysteries did God
reveal to him! Many of those great and glorious things, which concerns the
destruction of the four last Monarchies, and the growth, increase, exaltation,
flourishing, durable, invincible and unconquerable estate of his own Kingdom
was discovered to him. Paul was a person that kept up the power of holiness and
godliness in his heart and life; And O, what a mighty presence of God had he
with him, in all his doing, suffering and witnessing work! And O, what glorious
revelations and discoveries of God had he, when he was caught up into the third
Heaven, into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, or wordless words, such as
words were to weak to utter, Such as was not possible for man to utter, and
that either because they transcended man's capacity in this life, or else
because the Apostle was forbid to utter them, they being revealed to him, not
for the public use of the Church, but only for his particular encouragment,
that he might be the better able to encounter with all hardships, difficulties,
dangers and deaths, that did or might attend him in his Ministerial 3 Cor. 1.
7, 8, 9, 10
work. Some of the Ancients are of opinion, that he saw Gods essence, for say
they, other things in Heaven might have been uttered, but the essence of God is
so great and so glorious a thing that no man or Angel can utter it. But here I
must crave lieve to enter my dissent from these learned men, for the Scripture
is express in this, That no man has thus ever seen the Lord at any time, and
that no man Joh. 1. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 16. 1 John 4. 12. Exodus 33. 20, 21, 22, 23.
can thus see the Lord, and live. And as great a Favorite of Heaven as Moses
was, yet he could only see the back parts of God, he could only behold some
lower repres^ntations of God. Some say, that he heard the Heavenly singing of
Angels, and blessed Spirits, which was so sweet, so excellent and glorious,
that no mortal man was able to utter it; and this of the two is most probable.
But no man is bound to make this opinion an Article of his Faith; This I think
we may safely conclude, that in this rapture, besides the contemplation of
Celestial mysteries, he felt such unspeakable delight and pleasure, that was
either like to that, or exceeded that which Adam took in the Terrestrial
Paradise; Doubtless the Apostle did see and hear such excellent things, as was
impossible for the tongue of any mortal man to express, or utter. John was a
burning and a shining Light, both in John 5. 35.
life and doctrine; he was a man that kept up in his heart and life the power
of holiness and godliness, and Christ reveals to him the general estate of his
Church, and all that should besal his People, and that from John's time unto
his second coming; Christ gives John a true representation of all the troubles,
trials, changes, mercies and glories, that in all times, and in all ages and
places should attend his Church, until he came in all his glory. About sixty
years after Christ's Ascension, Christ comes to John, and opens his heart, and
unbosomes his soul, It Is the general opinion of the learned, that this Book of
the Revelation was penned about the latter end of the reign of Domi^ian the
Emperor which was about sixty years after Christ's Ascension.
and makes known to him, all that care, that love, that tenderness, that
kindness and that sweetness, that he would exercise toward his Church, from
that very time to the end of the world. Christ tells John, that though he had
been absent, and seemingly silent for about threescore years, that yet he was
not so taken up with the delights, contents, and glory of Heaven, as that he
did not care what became of his Church on earth, O no! and therefore he opens
his choicest secrets, and makes known the most hidden and gloriou mysteries to
John, that ever was made known to any man; as there was none that had so much
of the heart of Christ as John, so there was none had so much of the ear of
Christ as John; Christ singles out his servant John from all the men in the
world, and makes known to him all the happy providence, and all the sad
occurrences that were to come upon the followers of the Lamb, that so they
might know what to fit for, and what to pray for, and what to wait for; Also he
declares to John all that wrath and vengance, all that desolation and
destruction that should come upon the false Prophet, and the Beast, and upon
all that wandered after them, and that were worshippcrs of them, and that had
received their marks, either in their foreheads or in their hands. Thus you
see, that they which keep up the power of holiness in their hearts and lives,
they shall be sure to enjoy the choicest presence of God, and the clearest,
fullest and sweetest discoveries of God, and of these great things that concern
the internal and eternal good of their souls. Nothing wins upon God like
holiness, nothing delights God like holiness, nothing engages the presence of
God like holiness. He shows his salvation to Psalm. 50. ult. Vide Muis in loc.
him that orders his conversation aright; He that puts every piece of his
conversation in the right order, he shall see and know that he shall be saved;
He that walks accurately and exactly, that walks as in a frame treading
gingerly, stepping warily, he shall have a prospect of Heaven here, and a full
fruition of Heaven hereafter, Jsa. 64. 5.
[Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways.] He that works righteousness and walks in
righteousness, shall be sure to meet with God, and to enjoy the precious
presence of God in his greatest troubles and deepest distresses. But,

Thirdly, If you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, then keep close
to instituted worship, keep close to Gospel ordinances, keep close to your
Church state, Exodus 20. 24. In all places where Isa. 64. 5. Rev. 2. 1 Cant. 7.
5. Ezekiel. 48. ult.
I record my Name, I will come unto thee and bless thee. Where God fixes his
solemn worship for the memorial and honor of his Name, there he will vouchsafe
his gracious presence. Mat. 18. 20. For where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. The promise of Gods
gracious assistance, presence, and acceptance is annexed to his Church, whether
it be great or small, numerous or few. Mat. 28. 20, Lo, I am with you always,
according to my Godhead, Majesty, grace and spirit; Lo, I am with you to own
Christ in his ordinances does as Mary open a box of ointments, which diffuseth
a spiritual savor among the Saints and this makes the ordinances precious in
their eyes.
you; Lo, I am with you to counsel and direct you; Lo, I am with you to cheer
and comfort you; Lo, I am with you to assist and strengthen you; Lo, I am with
you to shelter you, and protect you; Lo, I am with you to do all your works in
you, and for you; Lo, I am with you to strengthen your graces, and to weaken
your sins; Lo, I am with you to scatter your fears, and answer your doubts; Lo,
I am wirh you to better your hearts, and to mend your lives; Lo, I am with you
to bless you and crown you with immortality and glory. And what can the soul
desire more? Such as have low thoughts of Gospel Ordinances, such as slight
Gospel Ordinances, such as neglect Gospel Ordinances, such as vilify
Gospel Ordinances, such as decry Gospel Ordinances, such as oppose
Gospel Ordinances, such may talk of the presence of Christ, and such may boast
of the presence of Christ, but all such are out of the way of enjoying the
presence of Christ; Christ is only to be met with in his own worship and in his
own ways. Ah how many in these days are there that are like to old Barzillai,
that had lost his taste and hearing, and 2 Samuel 19. 35.
so cared not for David's feasts and music! How many are there that formerly
were very zealous for ordinances, but now are as zealous against them! How many
formerly have made many great, hard and dangerous ventures to enjoy Gospel
ordinances, who now will not venture a broken shin for an ordinance, no nor stir
out of doors to enjoy an ordinance, etc. How many in our days upon neglecting
and despising Gospel Ordinances, have grown from naught to be very naught, and
from very naught to be stark naught! He shall be an Apollo to me, that can show
me one man in the world, that ever grew better or holyer by neglecting or
slighting Gospel Ordinances. Many come to the ordinances too like the Egyptian
Dog, which laps a little as he runs by the side of Nylus, but stays not to
drink. How many in this great City run every Sabbath to hear this man and that,
and here they lap a little and there a little, but never stay to drink, never
fix in this Congregation or that, this way or that. These persons are neither
wise, serious, lovely nor lively in the ways of God. I think they are
judicially blinded and hardened, that are indifferent whether they enjoy
ordinances or not, or that can part with ordinances, with Zeph. 3. 18.
dry eyes. Surely the Child is either very sullen, or very sick that cries not
for the breast. As ever you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you
in all your troubles and distresses, make conscience of sticking close to
Gospel Ordinances. But,

Fourthly, If you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly dangers, then when you
are not in troubles, distresses, dangers, etc. be sure you make much conscience
of five things, 1. Of prizing his presence above all other things, so Moses
did; so Augustine Ex. 33. 13. to 17.
would willingly go through Hell to Christ, and Luther had rather be in Hell
with Christ, than in Heaven without him; and Bernard had rather have Christ in
a chimny corner, than be in Heaven without him. 2. Of improving this gracious
presence against sin, the world, the flesh, oppositions and temptations, etc.
3. Of walking suitable to this gracious presence. 4. Of lamenting and mourning
over those that want this gracious presence. 5. Of holding any secret
intelligence or correspondence with the professed and known enemies of Christ;
Princes will never vouchsafe their favorable presence to such subjects as hold
any secret intelligence with their professed and known enemies, either at home or
abroad, so here. But,

Fifthly, If you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, then in all
your troubles and distresses, etc. maintain uprightness and integrity of spirit
Psalm. 5. 12.
with God, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9 For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout
the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. Psalm 84. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield, the
Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly. This is the largest promise we find in the whole Book of God.
The Creature stands in need of two things, Provision and Protection; for the
first, the Lord is a Sun, as full of goodness as the Sun is of light; He is a
Sun, in that he does enlighten and enliven his Church, when as all the world
besides lie under darkness and the shadow of death; and in that he does cheer,
and warm, and comfort the hearts of his People by his presence and lightsome
countenance, and is the fountain from whence all external, internal, and
eternal blessings are derived to them; For the second, a Shield: Among all
inanimate Creatures the Sun Psalm. 18. 2.
is the most excellent, and among all artificial Creatures a Shield is
chiefest, and was of greatest use in those days; The Sun notes all manner of
excellency and prosperity, and the Shield notes all manner of protection
whatsoever, Isa 60. ^0. Psalm. 3. 4.
under the name of grace all spiritual good things are to be understood, and
under the name of glory all eternal good things are to be understood, and under
that phrase of, No good thing will he withhold, all temporal good things are to
be understood, so far as they make for his glory, and his Peoples real good.
Now this choice, this sweet, this full; this large promise is made over only to
the upright, and therefore as you would have any share in it, maintain your
uprightness, Psalm 11. 7. His countenance does behold the upright, Heb. His
faces. Every gracious discovery of God to the upright, is his face; God will
all manner of ways make gracious discoveries of his love and delight to
upright ones; No Father can so much delight to behold the countenance of his
child, as God delights to behold the countenance of the upright, Psalm 112. 4.
Unto the upright there arises light in darkness; Light commonly signifies joy,
Job 30. 26. Esth. 8. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 10.
comfort, peace, help, deliverance. The upright man shall have joy in
tribulation, plenty in penury; liberty in bonds, life in death, as the Martyrs
have frequently and gloriously experienced. Sometimes God turns the upright
man's adversity into prosperity, his sickness into health, his weakness into
strength, his night into day, his storms into calmes, his long Winter-nights
into pleasant Summer-days. Sometimes God hides his upright ones in the hollow
of his hand, in his pavilion, in his presence chamber; when his judgments are
abroad Isa. 26. 9, 20. Mal. 3. 17.
in the earth, he takes special care of his Jewels, and many times when the
upright are in darkness and in great Psalm. 94. 19. Psalm. 71. 20, 21.
distress, God chears their hearts with the consolations of his Spirit, and the
light of his countenance. By all which it is most evident, that Unto the
upright there arises light in darkness. O Sirs, do but maintain your
uprightness in all your troubles and distresses, and then you will be sure of
the gracious presence of God with you in all your troubles and distresses. God
values an upright Job Job 1. 8. Cap. 2. 3, 7, 8, 9. Luke 16.
upon a Dunghill, before a deceitful Jehu upon his Royal Throne; he sets a
higher price upon an upright Lazarus in rags, than upon a rich Dives in his
purple robes; And therefore when an upright man is in troubles and distresses
God will be sure to keep him company. The upright man's Motto is semper idem, he
is like the Philosophers Dye, cast him which way you will, and into what
condition you will, he is still upright, and therefore of all persons God loves
to grace the upright man with his gracious presence. But,

Sixthly, If you would enjoy the gracious presence of God with you, in all your
troubles, deep distresses and most deadly dangers, then you must be very
earnest and importunate with God not to leave you, but to stay with you, to
abide with you, and to dwell in the midst of you, Psalm 148. 18. The Lord is
nigh unto all that call upon him; (but to prevent mistakes, I mean) to all that
call upon him in truth. There are many that call upon Prove. 1. 28 Isa. 1. 11.
to 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 4. 2* Joh. 4.
God, but not in truth, from these God stands at a distance; There are others
that call upon God in truth, in plainness and singleness of heart, and these
God are near, not only in regard of his essence, which is every where, but also
in regard of the effects of his power, and the readiness of his will in
granting their requests. Abijah prays, and finds an admirable presence of God
with him, giving him a mighty victory over his most powerful enemy, 2 Chronicles.
13. 3, 10, 11, 17, 18. Asa prays, and finds such a singular presence of God
with him, as made him victorious over an host of a thousand thousand, and three
hundred Chariots, a huger host than that of Xerxes; J^sephus says, it
consisted of nine hundred thousand foot, and one hundred thousand horse, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. to the end. Jehoshaphat prays, and had such a signal presence of
God with him, that those numerous forces that were combined against him fall by
their own swords, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1. to the 11. Verse, with Ver. 22. They were
carried by such a spirit of rage and fury, that no man spared his Neighbou^,
but each one destroyed him that was next him.
23, 24, 25. The wrath of God wrought their ruin as by an ambuscado
unexpectedly and irresistibly; Some understand this ambushment of the holy
Angels sent suddenly in upon them to slay them; whereupon they mistaking the
matter, and supposing it had been their own Companions, flew upon them, and so
sheathed their swords in one another bowels. Others say, that the Lord did
suddenly and unexpectedly cut them off, as when men are cut off by enemies that
lie in ambush against them, and that by sending some unexpected strife among
those Nations, whereupon they fell out among themselves and slew one another,
and so accomplished that which the Levite had foretold Verse 17. Ye shall not
need to fight in this Battle, set your selves, stand ye still and see the
salvation of the Lord with you. O Judah and Jerusalem, fear not, nor be
dismayed, to morrow go out against them, for the Lord will be with you. It was
the presence of God with his People, that was their preservation, and their
enemies destruction; there is no power, no force, no strength, no combinations
that can stand before the powerful presence of God with his People, and a
spirit of prayer upon his People. Hezekiah prays and finds such a powerful
presence of God with him, as bears up his heart, and as strengthens his faith,
and as cuts off his enemies, Isa. 37. 14. to 21. with Verse 36. O beg hard of
the Lord that he will stay with you, do as they did when Christ made as though
he would have gone from Luke 24. 28. Equivocators abuse this place greatly, but
they must know, that Christ did not pretend one thing and intend another, but
as he made an offer to depart so without question he would have gone further,
if the importunity of the Disciples had not staid him.
them, Luke 24. 29. But they constrained him, saying, abide with us, for it is
toward evening and the day is far spent; and he went in to tarry with them. By
prayer and importunity lay hold on Christ; say, Lord night is near, the night
of trouble, the night of distress, the night of danger, the night of death is
near, stay with us, depart not from us. They over-intreated him by their
importunity, they compelled him by entreaty: Night is near, and the day is far
spent. Some conjecture, that Cleophas observing Christ to be very expert in the
Prophets, and to discourse so admirable well-of Christ's person, sufferings and
glory, his heart burning in him with musing, who this should be! he is
mavelous importunate with him to stay at his house, and at last prevails. O
lay a hand of holy violence upon God as Jacob did, and say (as he) Genesis 32. 25,
26. Hos. 4. 12.
I will not let thee go; Jacob though lamed and hard laid at, yet will not let
Christ go; Jacob holds fast with both hands when his joints were out of joint,
being fully resolved that what ever he did let go, he would not let go his Lord
till he had blessed him. O be often a crying out with Jeremiah, Leave us not:
Lord, though in our great Jer. 14. 9.
troubles and deep distresses, friends should leave us, and Relations leave us,
and all the world leave us, yet don't thou leave us, O don't thou leave us,
Lord; though all Creatures should desert us, yet if thou will but stand by us,
we shall do well enough: But woe, woe unto us, if God depart from us. O leave us
not. But,

Seventhly, keep humble and walk humbly with your Mic. 6. 8. Psalm. 25. 9.
God. The highest Heavens and the lowest hearts are the habitation of Gods
glorious presence, Isa. 57. 15. For says the high and lofty One that
inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. He that would in good
earnest enjoy the gracious presence of God with him in his great troubles, deep
distresses and most deadly dangers, he must keep humble, and walk humbly with
his God; God will keep house with none but humble souls, there are none that
feel so great a need of the Divine presence as humble souls, there are none
that so prize the divine presence as humble souls, there are none that so love
the divine presence and that are so enamoured with the Divine presence as
humble souls, there are none that so thirst and long for much of the Divine
presence as humble souls, there are none that so lament and bewail the loss of
the Divine presence as humble souls, there are none that make such a singular
and through improvement of the Divine presence as humble souls, and therefore
no wonder that of all the men in the worl God singles out the humble Christian,
to make his heart the habitation where his honor delights to dwell. Abraham is
but dust and ashes in his own Genesis 18. 27.
eyes, and what man on earth had ever more of the Divine presence of God with
him, than he? Genesis 15. 12. Genesis 32, 10.
to 19. Genesis 17. 1. to 10. Genesis 18. 17, 18, 19, etc. Jacob was less than the
least of all mercies in his own eyes, and he had a mighty presence of God with
him, Genesis 32. 24. to 31. etc. David in his own eyes was but a worm and no man;
Psalm. 22. 6.
The word in the Original Tolagnath, signifies a very little worm which
bre^deth in scarlet, it is so little that no man can hardly see it or preceive
it; and yet what a mighty presence of God had David with him in the many
Battles he fought, and in the many dangers he was in, and in the many
miraculous deliverances he had! See them all summed up in that 18 Psalm, it is
his triumphant song after many victories won, deliverances vouchsafed, and
mercies obtained, and therefore worthy of frequent perusal. Paul was the least
of all Saints in his 1 Cor. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
own eyes, yea he was less then the least of all Saints ((...)) this is a
double diminutive, and signifies lesser then the least, if lesser might be;
here you have the greatest Apostle descending down to the lowest step of
humility. Great Paul is least of Saints, least of the Apostles, and greatest of
sinners in his own eyes, and never had any mortal more of the gracious presence
of God with him in all his services, and in all his sufferings, in all his
afflictions, and in all his temptations, in all his trials, and in all his
troubles, which were many and great. See Acts 16. 23, 24, 25. Acts 23. 10, 11.
Acts 27. 23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 7. 4,
5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 11. 21 -- ult. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10. Is your condition low,
then let your hearts be low; he that is little in his own account, is great in
Gods esteem, and shall be sure to enjoy most of his presence. God can dwell,
God will dwell with none but those that are lowly in heart; and therefore as
ever you would enjoy the signal presence of God with you, in your greatest
troubles, and deepest distresses, be sure you walk humbly with your God. Many
may talk much of God, and many may profess much of God, and many may boast much
of God; but he only enjoys much of God, who makes conscience of walking humbly
with God. But

Eighthly and lastly, If you would enjoy the signal presence of God with you, in
your greatest troubles, deepest Ponder upon these Scriptures, Isa. 58. 8. 9,
10, 11 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. Cap. 7. 1. Deuteronomy. 23. 13, 14.
distresses, and most deadly dangers, then labor every day more and more after
greater measures of holiness; the more holiness you reach to, the more you
shall have of the presence of a holy God with you, in all your straits and
trials. If the Scriptures be narrowly searched, you will find that men of the
greatest measures and degrees of holiness, have always enjoyed the greatest
measures of the Divine presence; witness Enoch, Genes. 5. 24. Noah, Genes. 6.
8, 9, 17, 18. So Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, Daniel, John, Paul, etc.
they were all famous for holiness, and accordingly they had a famous presence
of God with them, as has been showed in part, and might more fully have been
discovered, but that the press calls upon me to hasten to a conclusion; and
therefore I shall now but hint at things, consider.

First, That the more holy any person is, the more excellent that person is,
all corruptions are diminutions of excellency; the more mixed any thing is, the
more abased it is; the more you mix your wine with water, the more you abase
your wine; and the more you mix your gold with tin, the more you abase your
gold: But the purer your wine is, the richer and better your wine is; and the
purer your gold is, the more glorious and excellent it is; so the purer and
holier any person is, the more excellent and glorious that person is. Now the
more Divinely excellent, and glorious any person is, the Dan. 9. 23.
more he is beloved of God; and the more he is the delight of God, and the more
he shall have of the presence of God. Consider

Secondly, The more holy any person is, the more that person pleases the Lord:
Fruitfulness in holiness fills Heaven with joy; the Husbandman is not so much
pleased with the fruitfulness of his fields, nor the Wife with the fruitfulness
of her womb, as God is pleased with the fruitfulness of his People in grace and
holiness. Now certainly the more God is pleased with any person, the more he
will be present with that person; they commonly have most of our presence, that
most please us. Heb. 11. 5. Genes. 5. 24. The Hebrew word '(...) from '(...) is
in Hithpael, and notes a continual walking with God without ceasing.
Enoch had this testimony, before his translation, that he pleased God, or gave
God content, as the original word (...) imports. Enoch eyed God at all times,
in all places, and in all companies, and this pleased God: Where ever Enoch
was, his eye was still upon God. Enoch walked constantly with God, his whole
life was but one continued day of walking with God, and this pleased God. Enoch
kept himself from the corruptions and pollutions of the times, which were very
great; he was not carried away with the stream of the times, he kept a constant
counter-motion to the corrupt courses of the times, and this pleased God. Enoch
maintained and kept up a clear, choice, and standing communion with God, and
this pleased God. Enoch made it his business, his work, his Heaven to approve
his heart to God, and his ways to God, and this pleased God. Enoch was very
serious, and studious to avoid every thing that might be a dishonor to God, or
displeasing to God, and this pleased God. Enoch had great, and high, and
honorable thoughts of God, and this pleased God. God was so pleased and taken
with Enoch, that he translates God took him up in a whirl wind, say the Hebrew
Doctors, as Elias was; he changed his place but not his company, for he still
walked with God as on Earth so in Heaven.
him from Earth to Heaven, from a gracious to a glorious presence. It was a
singular mercy for God to be with Enoch on Earth, but it was a far more
glorious mercy for Enoch to be with God in Heaven. The gracious presence of God
is very desirable, but the glorious presence of God is most comfortable. Enoch
pleases God, and God translates Enoch: We can never have those Friends near
enough to us, who take a pleasure and delight to please us; So here, Enoch was
a bright morning Star, a rising Sun for virtue and holiness; and therefore God
could not satisfy himself (to speak after the manner of men) that he should
live at so great a distance from him, and therefore translates him from Earth
to Heaven. Well my Friends, the greater measures of holiness you reach too, the
more you will please God; and the more you please God, the more you shall be
sure to enjoy of the presence of God. Consider

Thirdly, The more holy any person is, the more like to God he is; and the more
like to God he is, doubtless 1 Pet. ^. 15, 16. Le^ir. 11. 44. Can. 19. 2. and
20. 7.
the more he is beloved of God; it is likeness both in nature and grace that
always draws the strongest love: Though every Child is the Father multiplied,
the father of a second Edition; yet the Father loves him best, and delights in
him most, who is most like him, and who in feature, spirit, and action does
most resemble him to the life; and so does the Father of Spirits also, he
always loves them best who in holiness resemble him Heb. 12. 9.
most. There are four remarkable things in the beloved Disciple, above all the
rest: 1. That he lay near^st to John 13. 23. Cap. 18. 16. Cap. 19 26, 27. Mark
14. 50.
Christ's bosom at the Table. 2. That he followed Christ closest to the high
Priests Palace. 3. That he stood close to Christ when he was on the Cross,
though others had basely deserted him, and turned their backs upon him. 4. That
Christ commended the care of his Virgin Mother to him. Now, why did Christ's
desire, love, and delight run out with a stronger and a fuller tide toward
John, than to the rest of the Disciples? doubtless it was because John did more
resemble Christ than the rest, it was because John was a more exact picture,
and lively representation than the others were. Now the more any man in
holiness is like to Christ, the more any man in holiness resembles Christ; the
more that man shall enjoy of the presence of Christ, the more that man shall
lay in the bosom of Christ. The Father loves to be most with that Child that is
like him most: So here, As ever you would enjoy the presence of God in your
greatest troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, be sure that
you keep up holiness in your hearts and lives, be sure that you grow in
holiness, and flourish in holiness, and then you shall be sure of the presence
of God with you, in all your troubles, and deep distresses: A holy God will
never leave the holy Christian; and thus much for this use of Exhortation.

The last use of all, is a use of comfort and consolation to all the P^^ple of
God, in their greatest troubles, and deepest distresses. Now here consider

First of all, That God himself hands out this as a rare comfort of his People,
in all their troubles, distresses, and dangers, viz. That he will be graciously
present with them, in the midst of all their sorrows and sufferings. Isa. 43.
2. Psalm 91. 15. Josh. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 5. Exodus 3. 12.
Genes. 26. 3. Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless
thee. Cap. 28. 15. And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not
leave thee, etc. Don't talk of thy loss of Friends, for I will be with thee;
nor don't talk of thy Country, for I will give thee this Land, which is the
Paradise of the world; nor don't talk of thy poverty, for thou shall spread
abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the North, and to the South. Verse
14. Nor don't talk of thy solitariness and aloneness, for I will not leave
thee. Isa. 91. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am
thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee
with the right hand of my righteousness. Suppose a man was injuriously dealt
with, by this man or that, would it not be a comfort to him that a just and
righteous Judge stood by, and was an eye witness of all the violences that were
offered to him? Suppose a man were in exile with David, or in prison with
Joseph, or in a Dungeon with Jeremiah, or in the stocks with Paul and Silas, or
in banishment (for the testimony of Jesus) with John, yet would it not be a
singular comfort to him, to have the presence of a kind Father, a bosom Friend,
a wise Counselor, an able Physician with him? O Christian, be thou in what
place thou will, and with what Company thou will, and in what condition thou will, yet thy loving God, thy kind Father, thy bosom Friend, etc. will be still
with thee, he will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and O! what a spring of
comfort should this be to thee! But

Secondly, Know for your comfort, that there is always some special favors
and blessings annexed to this signal presence of God, as I will be with thee,
and bless thee. Genes. 26. 3. I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou go. Genes. 28. 15. I will be with him in trouble, and honor
him. Psalm 91. 15. I will be with him, and strengthen him. Isai. 41. 10. I will
be with thee, and the flames shall not kindle upon thee. Cap: 43. 2. I will be
with thee, and there shall not a man be able to stand before thee. Joshua 1. 5:
I will be with thee, to deliver thee. Jerem. 1. 19. I am with thee, to save
thee, and to deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and out of the hand of
the terrible. Cap. 15. 20, 21. Hushai's presence with David was a burden, Jobs
Wifes presence was but 2 Samuel 15. 33. Job 2. 9. 10. and Matthew. 8. 28. 34.
a vexation unto him, and Christ's presence among the Gergesens was a terror to
them, and the presence of talkative Friends is many times a trouble to us. O
but this signal, this favorable presence of the Lord with his People, in their
greatest troubles, and deepest distresses, is a sweet presence, a comfortable
presence, a delightful presence, a blessed presence, yea such a presence as has
many singular blessings annexed to it. But

Thirdly, Know for your comfort, that you shall have mercy and kindness, and
what ever good you need in due season, at that very instant, at that very nick
of time wherein you most need mercy. God will time your Psalm 145. 18. Deuteronomy. 4.
7. Genesis 22. 10, 11, 12, 13.
mercies, and your blessings for you, he is nigh and will not fail you at a
dead lift. When Abraham had bound his Son, and bent his sword, and the knife
was up, then comes a voice from Heaven: Abraham, Abraham hold thy hand. At that
very nick of time when the four hundred and thirty years were expired, Israel
was delivered Exodus 12. 41. 51.
out of their captivity and slavery. Deuteronomy. 11. 14. I will give you the rain of
your land in his due season, the first rain, and the latter rain, that thou
may gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.] God gives rain to all
by a Providence, but he gives rain to his Israel by virtue of Acts 14. 18. Job
38. 26.
a promise: God engages himself not only to give rain, but to give it in due
season; he will give the first rain after the sowing of the seed, that it might
take rooting in the Earth; and he will give the latter rain a little before
Harvest, that the cars might be full: O my Friends! it is wonderful mercy, that
God will time our mercies for us. When Jehoshaphat was put to a hard pinch, at
that 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
very nick of time God ownes him, stands by him, and gives him a great victory.
When David was at a great 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27, 28. Let him (says Augustin^)
choose his own opportunity that so freely grants the mercy.
plunge, Saul being at his very heels, at that very nick of time, tidings were
brought to Saul, that the Philistines had invaded the land, and so David
escapes: When all humane help failed, God came in and helped at a dead lift. So
Julian was cut of by the Persian War, at that very nick of time when he had
vowed at his return, to make a Sacrifice of the Christians lives. And so
Charles the Fifth was diverted from persecuting of the Protestants, by the
Turks breaking into Hungary, at that very nick of time when his heart was set
upon a warm persecution. And so Justice Gilford, a violent Papist Acts and Mon.
1880.
in Queen Marie's days, going up the stairs to Mistress Roberts her Chamber,
to compel her, will she or will she not, to go to Mass, at that very nick of
time he was suddenly taken with his old disease the Gout, and so grievously
tormented, that he swore he would never trouble her more. When Faux was giving
fire to the match, that should have given fire to the Powder, that should have
blown up King, Lords, and Commons, at that very nick of time, he that never
slumbers nor sleeps, Psalm. 121, 3, 4, 5.
prevented him; and so turned our intended Funeral into a Festival. O
Christian! are thy troubles many in number, strange in nature, heavy in
measure, much in burden, and long in continuance, yet remember that thy God is
near, whose mercies are numerous, whose wisdom is wondrous, and whose power is
miraculous. The nearness or remoteness of a Friend is very material and
considerable in our troubles, distresses, wants, dangers, etc. I have such a
Friend, and he would help me, but he lives so far off: And I have another
Friend that has a great love for me, that is able to counsel me, and to speak a
word in season to me, and that in my distress would stand close to me, but he
is so remote. I have a special Friend, that did he know how things stand with
me, would make my burdens his, and my wants his, and my sorrows his; but he is
in a far Country, he is at the Indies, and I may be undone before I can hear
from him. But it is not thus with you, O Christians! who have a God so nigh
unto you, who have the signal presence of God in the midst of you, yea who have
a God always standing by you. The Lord stood by me, etc. O my Friends, how can
you want comfort, that have the God of all consolation present with you? How
can you 2 Cor. 1. 3. Isa. 9. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Isa. 9. 6.
want counsel, that have the wonderful Counselor so near unto you? How can you
want grace, who have the God of all grace standing by you? How can you want
Peace, who have always the presence of the Prince of Peace with you? But.

Fourthly, Know for your comfort, that if God be with you, there is nothing,
there can be nothing but weakness against you. Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the
briars God holds the Churches Enemies in chains, having his hook in their
nose, and his bridle in their lips, Isa. 37. 29. he can easily rule and
overrule his proudest Enemies.
and thorns against me in battle, I would go through them, I would burn them
together? What are briars and thorns to a devouring fire, to the consuming
flames? no more are all the Enemies of the Church to the presence of God with
his People: God will be a burning and destroying fire to all the Enemies of
Zion; wicked men are chaff: Psalm 1. 1. And what is that to the wind, to the
whirl wind? they are stubble. Job 21. 18. They are as driven stubble to his
bow. Isai. 41. 2. They are as stubble fully dry. Nahum. 1. 10. They are as
stubble before the flame. Joel 2. 5. They arelike dust. 2 Kings 13. 7. Yea like
small dust. Isa. 29. 5. They are like a morning cloud, an early dew, a little
smoke. Hosea 13. 3. The morning cloud is soon dispelled, the early dew is soon
dried up, the rolling smoke out of the chimney is presently scattered. O the
weakness of man! O the power of God! No People on Earth have such a power on
their sides as the Saints have, consult these Scriptures, 2 Kings 6. 16. 2 Chronicles. 32. 6, 7. Isai. 8. 9, 10. Numb 13. 28, 30, 31, 32, 33. Cap. 14. 9. No
Christian can look upon the strong and mighty Enemies of Zion in a Scripture
glass, but must behold them as weak and impotent Persons: Who could but smile
to see weak Children to attempt to Zach. 2. 5.
besiege a wall of brass, or a wall of fire? as great a folly and weakness it
is for wicked men to make attempts, upon the Saints, who have been to this day,
and will be to the end, a trembling and a burdensome stone to all Cap. 12. 2, 3.
that gather together against them. Sense looks upon the Powers of the world as
strong, mighty, and invincible; but Faith looks upon them as poor, weak,
contemptible, gasping, dying Men. Thus heroical Luther looked upon them:
Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor, I care neither for Romes
favor nor fury; I am neither fond of the one, nor afraid of the other. It is
dangerous to look upon the Powers of the world in the Devils multiplying glass;
it is best and safest to look upon them in a Scripture glass, and then we shall
never fear them, nor sinfully shift them. But

Fifthly, If God be signally present with his People, in their greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, then know for your
comfort, that none can be against you but they must be against God himself; for
God is with you in all your troubles, as a Acts 9. 4, 5, 6.
Father is with his Child, a Husband with his Wife, a General with his Army,
and as a Confederate with his Allies, who is with them offensively and
defensively; hence they are said to rage against God, Isa. 37. 28, 29. And to
blaspheme God, 2 Kings 19. 3, 6. And to fight See Acts 23. 9. Prove. 21. 30.
against God, Acts 5 38, 39. To fight against God, is labor in vain; who ever
sought against God, and prospered? Some think that this Phrase of fighting
against God, is drawn from the Fable of the Giants, which were said to make war
with the Gods. The Church of Christ always flourishes most, and increases
most, when the Exodus 1. 12, 1.
Tyrants of the Earth oppose it most, and persecute it most. Diocletian laid
down the Empire in great discontent, because he could not by any persecution
suppress the true Christian Religion; the more violent he was against the
People of God, the more they increased and multiplied, and the more they were
emboldned and encouraged; and therefore in a rage he throws up all. But

Sixthly, If the signal presence of God be with his People, in their greatest
troubles, deepest distresses, and most deadly dangers, then know for your
comfort, that there is no presence like this presence, no presence to the
presence of God; let me evidence this by an induction of six particulars
bri^fly thus: For First, It is the presence of an Almighty God. Genes. 17. 1. I
am the Almighty Genes. 49. 25. Numb. 24. 4.
God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. Some derive the word Shaddai, here
used from dai, that signifies sufficiency. God is an all sufficient good, and
a selfsufficient good, he is an Independent good, an absolute good, an original
good, an universal good; some derive the word Shaddai from Shad, that
signifies a breast, a dug, because God feeds his Children with sufficiency
of all good things, as the loving Mother does the Child with the milk of her
breasts. God is the only satisfactory good, and proportionable good, and
suitable good to our souls; as the breast, the dug is the most suitable good to
the Child's stomach: And others derive the word Shaddai from Shaddad, which
signifies to spoil, conquer, or overcome, and so they say; that God did here
invert or overcome the order of nature, in causing the barren to bear: But most
Authors do translate it Omnipotent; God then is called Shaddai, that is
omnipotent and all-sufficient, for his omnipotency includes also
allsufficiency. Secondly, you have the presence of a loving God with you. Isa.
43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I
have loved thee. But that this may the better stick and work, you must
remember, First, that God loves you with a first See De^t. 7. 7, 8.
love. 1 John 4. 19. We love him because he first loved us. Our love is but a
reflex of his. God first cast an eye of love upon us, before we cast an eye of
love on him, and therefore God is no way indebted to us for our love. Mary
answers not Rabboni, till Christ first said unto her John 20. 16.
Mary. The pure nature of love is more seen in Gods first love to us, than in
ours to him; by nature we were Ephesians. 2. 12. 19. Romans 5. 10. Cap. 1. 30.
without God, and afar of from God, we were strangers to God, and enemies to
God, yea haters of God; and therefore if God had not loved us firstly, we had
been undone everlastingly. Secondly, As God loves you with a first love, so he
loves you with a free love. Hosea 14. 4. I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely: I know they are back-sliden, but I will heal their
backslidings; I know they have broken their bones by their fall, but I will
make those broken bones to rejoice; I know there is nothing at all in them that
is excellent or eminent, that is honorable or acceptable, that is laudable or
lovely, yet I will love them freely, Ex mero motu, of mine own, free, rich,
absolute, sovereign, and independent grace. Thirdly, As he loves you with a
free love, so he loves you with an everlasting love. Jer. 31. 3. I have loved
thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving kindness have I drawn
thee. Heb. I love thee with the love of perpetuity, or with the love of
Eternity. My love and my affections continue still the same to thee, and shall
do for ever; or as others carry the words, I love thee with an Ancient love, or
with the love of Antiquity; I love thee still with the same affection, that in
former ages I bare toward thee. Fourthly, As he loves you with an everlasting
love, so he loves you with an unchangeable love. Mal. 3. 6. I am the Lord I
change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed Men change, and
counsels change, and occurrences change, and Friends change, and Relations
change, and Kingdoms change, and Commonwealths change; but God never changes,
as Balaam confesses, who was the Devils Numb. 3. 19.
Hackney, and who had a mind to dance with the Devil all day, and then sup with
Christ at night. God is neither false nor fickle, he cannot like men say and
unsay, Psalm 89. 34.
he can nor alter his mind nor eat his words. [The Eternity of Israel cannot
lie nor repent, for he is not a man 1 Samuel 15. 29.
that he should repent.] Men are so mutable and changeable that there is no
hold to be taken of what they say; but God is immutable in his nature, in his
essence, in his counsels, in his attributes, in his decrees, in his promises,
etc. He is (as the Schoolmen say) Omnino immutabi lis, Altogether immutable.
Fifthly, As he loves you with an unchangeable love, so he loves you with a
special P salm 146. 7, 8
love, with a peculiar love, with a distinguishing love, with a superlative
love. The Lord executes judgment for the oppressed, he gives food to the
hungry, he loses the Prisoners, he opens the eyes of the blind, he raises
them that are bowed down, he loves the righteous, and this is more than all
the rest. Sixthly, and lastly, As he loves his People with a special love, with
a peculiar love, so he loves them with the greatest love with a matchless love.
[O Daniel greatly beloved.] John 3. 16. God so loved the world, etc. Here is a
sic without a sicut; there being nothing in nature wherewith to parallel it:
This sic without a sicut, signifies the greatness of Gods love, the vehemence
of his love, and the admirableness of his love. Now what an unspeakable comfort
must this be to his Saints, to have the presence of a loving God, to have the
presence of such a loving God with them, in all their troubles and deep
distresses? If the presence of a loving Friend, a loving Relation in our
troubles and distresses be such a mercy, O! what then is the presence of a
loving God. Thirdly, It is the Psalm 18. 2. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Prove. 18. 10. Jer
32. 40. 41. Isa. 30. 18, 19. Isa. 27. 3. Jer. 31. 23.
presence of an active God, who will be a defense to you, a Shield to you, a
Sword to you, a Buckler to you, a Sun to you, a strong Tower to you, a
Salvation to you; none can withstand him, none can equal him, none can out act
him. Fourthly, It is the presence of a wakeful God, of a watchful God, of a God
that never, no never slumbers or sleeps; God will be so far from sleeping that
he will not so much as slumber. Psalm 121. 3, 4, 5. The Phrase is taken from
watchmen, who stand on the walls in time of war, to discover the approaches of
Enemies and accordingly give warning; Now watchmen have been treacherous and
sleepy. The Capitol of Rome had been taken by the Gauls, if the Geese had not
been more wakeful then the watchmen of the walls. Iphicrates the Athenian
Captain visiting the Guards on the walls of Corinth; found one of the watch
asleep, and presently thrust him thorough with his sword, saying: Dead I found
him, and dead I left him; though watchmen slumber and sleep, yet that God that
is present with his People does neither, his seven eyes are always open.
Fifthly, It is the presence of a wise God, of an omniscient Ezech. 3. 9. Psalm.
33. 10, 11. Isa. 46. 10. Cap. 40. 28. Romans 11. 33. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Jonh 1. 5. 1
Kings 14. 6 Matthew. 26. 24, 25
God; God fills all things, he encompasseth all things, and he sustaineth all
things, and therefore he must needs know all things. God can find Jonah in the
bottom of the ship; and Jeroboam's Wife in her disguises; and Judas inhis
Treason, and Demas in his Apostasy: and the Scribes and Pharisees in their
hypocrisy. The 2 Timoth. 4. 10. Matthew. 23. Rev. 4. 6. Heb. 4. 13.
whole world is to him as a Sea of glass: Corpus diaphanum, A clear transparent
body; there is nothing hid from his eyes, so that he that can but find out a
place where God sees not, there let that man sin and spare not. All things are
naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do; (...), naked, as
when the skin is pulled of, and (...), opened as the entrails of a Sacrifice,
cut down the back. The Apostle, say some, uses a Metaphor taken from a sheep,
whose skin is taken off, and he hanged up by the neck, with his back toward
the wall, and all his entrails laid bare and exposed to open view. He alludes,
say others, to the Anatomizing of a Creature, wherein men are very cautious to
find out every little vein or muscle, though they be never so close. They are
naked, therefore God sees their outside, and opened, dissected, quartered, and
cleft asunder through the back bone, so that he sees their inside also. Opened
is more than naked; naked is that which is not clothed or covered; opened is
that whose inwards are discovered, and made conspicuous. Some make it a
Metaphor, from those that lie with their faces upwards, that all Passengers may
see who they are. Is it of such a comfort to have the presence of a wise, and
knowing friend with us, in our greatest troubles, and deepest distresses; what
a transc^ndent comfort must it be, to enjoy the presence of an all-seeing, and
an allknowing God, in all our troubles and distresses. The eye of Heaven sees
all, and knows all, and writes down all thy troubles and trials, thy sorrows
and sufferings, Matthew. 6. 32.
thy losses and crosses; and accordingly will an all-knowing God act for his
own glory and his Peoples good. Sixthly and lastly, It is the presence of a God
of Mercy, a God of Bowels, a God of compassions. Jer. 31. 18, 19, Exodus 33. 7.
8.
20. Hosea 11. 8, 9. Lament. 3. 22. His compassions fail not. Mercy is as
essential to God as light is to the Sun, or as heat is to the fire: He delights
in mercy, as the senses and faculties of the soul do in their Micha 7. 18, 19.
several actions: Patience and clemency, and mercy, and compassion, and peace
are the fruits of his bowels, the offspring which the Divine Nature does
produce; Gods compassions are Fatherly compassions, Psalm 103. 13. They are
Motherly compassions, Isa. 49. 15. They are Brotherly compassions, Heb. 2. 12.
They are Friendly compassions, Cant. 5. 1, 2. O how sweet must the presence of
a God of mercy, a God of compassion be to the Saints in a day of trouble? the
presence of a compassionate Friend in a day of distress, is very desirable and
comfortable; what then is the presence of a compassionate God? Thus you see
that there is no presence to the Divine presence, no presence to the signal
presence of God with his People, in their greatest troubles and deepest
distresses. But

Seventhly and lastly, If God be signally present with his People, in their
greatest troubles and deepest distresses, then let them all know for their
comfort, that this presence will make up the want or loss of all outward 1 Samuel
1. 8.
comforts, this presence will make up the loss of a Husband, a Child, a Friend,
an Estate, etc. Look as all light meets in the Sun, and as all water meets in
the Sea, so all our outward comforts meet in the God of all 2 Cor. 1. 3.
comfort. When Alexander asked King Porus, being then his Prisoner, how he
would be used? He answered in one word, (...), i. e. like a King: Alexander
again replying, Do you desire nothing else? No, says Porus, all things are in
(...), in this one word, like a King; so all things, all comforts are to be
found in this signal presence of God with his People, in their greatest
troubles and deepest distresses; certainly the gracious presence of the Lord is
infinitely better than the presence of all outward comforts, as you know one
Sun is more glorious and comfortable than ten thousand Stars.

But how may a person that has lost this gracious

First, Observe how you lost this presence of God, and by sinful omissions,
then be more active in a way of duty. Did thou lose the presence of God by
neglecting thy watch, or by not walking with God, or by an eager pursuit of the
world, or by closing with this or that temptation, or by letting fall thy
communion with God; take a contrary course, now keep up thy watch, walk close
with God, keep up a daily converse with lively Christians, Psalm. 119. 63. Col.
3. 1. ^.
let thy heart and affections be set upon things above, keep thy ground in the
face of all temptations, maintain a standing communion with God. After Christ
had stood knocking and calling to his Spouse [Open to me my Sister, my Love, my
Dove, my Undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
of the night, Cant. 5. 2, 3, 6.] but found no entrance, he retired and withdrew
himself, because she would not arise, and put on her coat; but when she bestirs
her self, she finds him whom her soul loved, Cant 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then Christ
comes into his garden again, and returns to his Spouse again, and forgets all
former unkindness, Cap. 6. 1, 2. But,

Secondly, Enquire where, when, and why God has withdrawn himself, as we do
when dear Friends absent themselves from us, O the hope of Israel, the Savior
thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the Land,
and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night? Verse 9. Why
should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet
thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy Name, leave us
not.

Thirdly, Stand not with Christ for any thing, not for a right eye, or a right
hand, nor for an Isaac or a Benjamin, don't say this work is too high, and that
too hard, and the other too hot, and the other too dangerous, in order to the
recovery of Gods countenance and presence, thou must not think any thing in the
world too much to do for Christ, or to suffer for Christ; thou will be a happy
man if thou can recover Christ's lost presence, though it be upon the hardest
terms imaginable. But,

Fourthly, Let your hearts lie humble and low under Psalm. 51. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
1 Pet. 5. 6.
the loss of Gods gracious presence: For, 1. It Is the greatest loss. 2. It Is a
loss-imbittering loss, it is a loss that will greatly imbitter all your worldly
losses; I have lost my health, I have lost a hopeful Child, I have lost a
gracious yoke fellow, which was the delight of mine eyes and the joy of my
heart, I have lost a fair estate, I have lost an intimate Friend, I have lost a
brave trade: O but that which imbitters all my losses and puts a sting into
them, is this, that I have lost the gracious presence of God, that once I
enjoyed. 3. It Is a loss that all outward comforts can never make up; when the
Sun is down, nothing can make it day with us. 4. It Is an invisible loss, and no
losses to invisible losses as there are no mercies to invisible mercies, so
there are no losses to invisible losses. 5. It Is a loss that will cost a man
dear before it will be made up again. O the sighs, the groans, the strong
crycs, the earnest prayers, the bottles of tears, that the recovery of the
Divine presence will cost a Christian, upon all which accounts, how well does
it become a Christian to lie humble at the foot of God!

Fifthly, Lift up a mighty cry to Heaven: Thus the Saints of old have done:
consult these Scriptures, Psalm. 51. 6. to 13. Lam. 3. 56, 57. Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
Psalm. 27. 9. Psalm. 38. 21, 22. Psalm. 138. 3. Psalm. 119. 8. O forsake me Suidas
says, Job was clouded and to his sense and feeling forsaken seven ^ears; But
you are not bound to make this an Article of your Faith.
not utterly; Christ was forsaken for a few hours, David for a few months, and
Job for a few years, for the trial and exercise of his faith and patience; but
then they all sent up a mighty cry to Heaven: Leave them, God did to their
thinking, but forsake them he did in regard of vision, but not in regard of
union. The promise is, that God will draw near to us if we draw near to him,
Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God in duty, and he will draw nigh to you in mercy;
Sanctify him, and he will satisfy you. Prayer is the only means to supply all
defects, it gets all, and makes up the loss of all, as a gracious poor women
said in her distress, I have no Friend, but I have prayer, that will get favor
with my God, so long as I can find a praying heart, God will (I am sure of
that) find a pitying heart, and a helping hand. It is not the length, but the
strength of prayer; it is not the labor of the lip, Jer. 29. 12, 13, 14.
but the travel of the heart that prevails with God; it is not the Arithmetic
of our prayers, how many they are, nor the Rhetoric of our prayers, how
eloquent they be; nor the Geometry of our prayers, how long they be; nor the
Music of our prayers, how sweet they be; nor the Logic of our prayers, how
methodical they be, that will carry the day with God, it is only fervency,
importunity in prayer, that will make a man prevalent with God. Fervent prayer
hits the mark, carries the day, and pierces the walls of Heaven, though like
those of Gaza Jam. 5. 16, 17. Luke 18. Isa. 45. 2.
made of Brass and Iron. The Child has got many a kiss, and many a hug by
crying; if God has withdrawn his presence, the best, the surest, and the
readiest way to recover it, is to send up a mighty cry to Heaven. But,

Sixthly, Be sure you don't take up your rest in any Jer. 50. 6.
Creature, in any comfort, in any contentment, in any worldly enjoyment. When
the presence of God is withdrawn from you, say as Absalom, What is all this to
me, 2 Samuel 14. 24, 28, 32, 33.
so long as I am banished my Fathers presence, so long as I cannot see the Kings
face. When the Mother sees that the Child is taken with the baby, the rattle,
the fiddle, she comes not in sight: If you take up your rest in any of the
babies, in any of the poor things of this world, God will certainly keep out of
sight, he will never honor them with his countenance and presence, who take up
in any thing below himself, below his favor, below his presence. I have read
of a devout Pelgrim, who going up to Jerusalem, was very kindly and nobly
entertained in several places but still he cried out, O but this is not
Jerusalem, this is not Jerusalem! So when you cast your eye upon thiis
Creature, or that, O then cry out, This is not the presence of God, this is not
the presence of God; and when you begin to be tickled and taken with this and
that enjoyment, with this or that contentment, O then remember, this is not the
presence of God, this is not the presence of God! Here is a gracious
yoke fellow, here are hopeful Children, here is a pleasant habitation, here is
brave air, here is a gainful trade, etc. but what are all these to me, so long
as my Sun is set in a cloud, and God has withdrawn his presence from me?
Remember this once for all, that the whole world is but a barren Psalm. 63. 1,
2, 3.
wilderness, without the countenance and presence of God. But,

Seventhly and lastly. Patiently and quietly wait upon him in the way of his
Ordinances for the recovery of his Exodus 20. 24. Mat. ^8. 20. Isa. 64. 5. Psalm.
^7 4. Psalm. 65. 4. Revel. 2. 1. Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 8. 17. Mich. 7. 7, 8,
9. Isa. 26. 8, 9.
presence. Consult the Scriptures in the margin: Here God dwells, here he
walks, here he makes known his glory, here he gives forth his love, here he
vouchsafes his presence; when God is withdrawn your great business is to prize
Ordinances, and to keep close to ordinances, till God shall be pleased to lift
up the light of his countenance, and vouchsafe his presence to you; you will
never recover the Divine presence by neglecting ordinances, nor by slighting
ordinances, nor by turning your back upon ordinances, nor by entertaining low
thoughts of ordinances. He that thinks ordinances to be needless things
concludes, 1. That the taking away of the Kingdom of Heaven from the Jews was
no Mat. 21. 43. Joh. 5. 2. to 10.
great judgment. 2. That the bestowing of it upon other People is no great
mercy. If God be gone, it is good to lay at the pool till he returns: There are
many dear Christians who have lost their God for a time, but after a time they
have found him again in the way of his ordinances; and therefore let no
temptation draw thee off from ordinances, say, here I will live, here I will
lie, here I will wait at the pool of ordinances, till the Lord shall return in
mercy to my soul.

I shall follow this Discourse of the Divine presence with my earnest prayers,
that it may from on high be so signally blessed, as that it may issue in the
furtherance of the internal and eternal good, both of Writer, Reader, and
Hearer.

Thus ends the SECOND PART of the Golden Key.
Soli Deo Gloria in Aeternum.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Of Adam. THAT there was a Covenant of Works, or a reciprocal Covenant, betwixt
God and Adam together with all his Posterity, before Adam sell from his
primitive Holiness, etc. Is proved by five Arguments. page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18
Of Christ's Appearance, Three Reasons of Christ's Appearance in the presence of
the Father for us. page 168, 169
Of the Articles agreed on between the Father and the Son. First, of the
Articles on the Fathers part. Now there are seven Things, which God the Father
promises to do for Jesus Christ, upon his undertaking the work of our
Redemption: 1. First, That he will give him the Spirit in an abundant measure.
page 129, 130, 131, 132 2. Secondly, That he will invest Jesus Christ with a
threefold Office, and that he will anoint him, and furnish him with what ever
was requisite for the discharge of those three Offices. page 132, 133 -- See the
Offices of Christ. 3. Thirdly, That he will give to Jesus Christ assistance,
support, protection, help and strength to carry on the great work of
Redemption. page 142, 143, 144 4. Fourthly, That he shall not labor in vain,
and that the work of Redemption shall prosper in his hand, etc. page 144, 145,
146 5. Fifthly, God the Father promises to Jesus Christ Rule, Dominion, and
Sovereignty. page 146, 147 6. Sixthly, God the Father promises to accept of
Jesus Christ in his Mediatory Office. page 147, 148 7. Seventhly, God the
Father promises highly to exalt Jesus Christ, and nobly to reward him, and
everlastingly to glorify him. page 148, 149, 150, 151, 152
Secondly, of the Articles of the Covenant on Christ's part. Now there are six
observable things on Christ's side, that we are to take special notice of: 1.
First, Christ having consented and agreed with the Father about our Redemption,
accordingly he applies himself to the discharge of that great and glorious work
by taking a body, by assuming our Nature. page 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157 2.
Secondly, Jesus Christ promises to God the Father that he will freely, readily
and cheerfully accept, undertake, and faithfully discharge his Mediatory
Office, to which he was designed by him in order to the Redemption and
Salvation of all his chosen Ones. page 158, 159 3. Thirdly, Jesus Christ
promises and engages himself that he will confide, depend, rely and trust upon
his Father for help and assistance to go through his work, etc. page 159, 160,
161, 162 4. Fourthly, Jesus Christ promises and engages himself to the Father,
that he would bear all and suffer all that should be laid upon him, and that he
would ransom poor Sinners, and fully satisfy Divine Justice by his blood and
death, etc. page 162, 163 5. Fifthly, The Lord Jesus Christ was very free,
ready, willing and careful to make good all the Articles of the Covenant on his
side, and to discharge all the works agreed on for the Redemption and Salvation
of the Elect. page 163, 164, 165 6. Sixthly, Christ having performed all the
Conditions of the Covenant on his part, he now peremptorily insists upon it,
that his Father should make good to him and his the Conditions of the Covenant
on his part, Christ having finished his work looks for his reward. page 165,
166, 167, 168, 169 7. Seventhly and lastly, The whole Compact and agreement
between God the father and our Lord Jesus Christ, about the Redemption of poor
Sinners souls, was really and solemnly transacted in open Court, or as I may
say in the high Court of Justice above in the presence of the great public
Notary of Heaven, viz. the Holy Ghost, etc. page 169, 170
Of Divine Assistance. None can be so against us as to hinder the Assistance of
God at a dead lift. II. Part, page 77, 78, 79

B.
Of special Blessings. Some special Blessings are always annexed to the signal
presence of God. II. Part, page 209, 210
Six several Books mentioned in the Scripture. First, the Book of Nature is
mentioned in the Scripture. page 184, 185 Secondly, there is the Book of
Providence, wherein all particulars are registered, even such as Atheists may
count trivial and inconsiderable. page 185 Thirdly, there is the Book of Men's
afflictions, this some account as an entire Book of it self. page 185, 186, 187
Fourthly, there is the Book of Conscience. page 187, 188 Fifthly, there is the
Book of Scripture, and of all Books this Book is the m^st precious Book. page
188, 189, 190 Sixthly, there is the Book of Life. page 190, 191, 192, 193
Bow. None can be so against us as to bring us to their Bow. II. Part. p. 66,
67, 68
C.
Of the special Care of God. The Saints are a People of Gods special Care. II.
Part, page 143, 144, 145 Of Comfort. The signal presence of the Lord with his
People in their greatest Troubles yields them the greatest Comfort. II. Part,
page 145, 146, 147, 208, 209
Of Communion with God. None can be so against us as to hinder our Communion
with the Father, Son and Spirit. II. Part, page 72, 73, 74 Of the testimony of
Conscience. None can be so against us as to hinder the testimony of our renewed
Consciences. II. Part, page 74, 75, 76, 77 Of Crowns. First, of a Crown of
Righteousness. II. Part, page 95, 96, 97, 98 Secondly, of the Crown of Life;
This Crown of Life signifies six things. II. Part, page 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
103 3. Of an incorruptible Crown. II. Part, p. 103, to 106 4. Of a Crown of
Life. II. Part, 106, 107
Of the two Covenants. First, that God has commonly dealt with Man in the way
of a Covenant. page 1, 2 Secondly, all Men are under a Covenant of Grace, or a
Covenant of Works. page 2 Thirdly, that the Covenant of Grace was so legally
dispensed to the Jews that it seems to be nothing else but the repetition of
the Covenant of Works. page 2, 3 Fourthly, that a right notion of the Covenant,
according to the Originals of the Old and New Testament, will conduce much to a
right understanding of Gods Covenant; the Originals of the Old and New
Testament largely opened. page 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Fifthly, that there was
a Covenant of Works, or a reciprocal Covenant betwixt God and Adam, together
with all his Posterity. page 10, 11 Q. But how may it be evidenced, that God
entered into a Covenant of Works with the first Adam, before his fall, there
being no mention of such a Covenant in the Scripture that we read of? Five
Answers are returned to this Question. page 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
Sixthly, there is a new Covenant, a second Covenant, or a Covenant of Grace
betwixt God and his People. page 18, 19
Of the Covenant of Grace. That the Covenant of Grace is the same for substance
now to us, since Christ was exhibited, as it was to the Jews before he was
exhibited, but the manner of administration is different upon three grounds.
page 3 That there is a Covenant betwixt God and his People, is evinced by 8.
unanswerable Arguments. page 19. to 25 Seventhly and lastly, that it is a
matter of high importance for all mortals to have a clear and right
understanding of that Covenant under which they are. page 25, 26, 27, 28, 29
First, the Covenant of Grace is styled an everlasting Covenant in two respects,
page 31, 32, 33, 34 The Covenant which God makes for himself to us consists
mainly in six things. page 34, 35 The Covenant which God does make for us to
himself, consists mainly in ten things. page 35, 36 Secondly, the Covenant of
Grace under which the Saints stand, is sometimes styled a Covenant of Life.
page 36 Thirdly, the Covenant of Grace under which the Saints stand, is
sometimes styled a Holy Covenant. page 36, 37 Fourthly, the Covenant of Grace
under which the Saints stand, is sometimes styled a Covenant of Peace. page 37,
38, 39 Fifthly, the Covenant of Grace under which the Saints stand, is
sometimes styled a new Covenant, and that in eight respects. page 39, 40, 41
Sixthly, the Covenant of Grace under which the Saints stand, is sometimes
styled a Covenant of Salt. page 41, 42 Seventhly, the Covenant of Grace under
which the Saints stand, is sometimes styled a sure Covenant, a firm Covenant,
etc. p. 42, 43, 44, 45 Three springs, from whence the Covenant of Grace flows,
may assure us that the Covenant of Grace is a sure Covenant. page 45, 46, 47
The sureness of the Covenant is further demonstrated from the blood of the
everlasting Covenant. page 47, 48, 49, 50 Eighthly and lastly, the Covenant of
Grace is styled a well ordered Covenant. page 50, 51, 52 The reason why the new
Covenant is called a Covenant of Grace. page 52, 53, 54, 55 None can make void
our Covenant Relation, our Covenant Interest. II. Part, page 107, 108
Of the Covenant of Redemption. What is the substance of the Covenant of
Redemption. page 66, 67, 68 The Covenant of Redemption defined. page 68, 69
Scripture proofs of the Covenant of Redemption. page 69, to 97 The Covenant of
Redemption differs from the Covenant of Grace in five particulars. page 97, 98
Of the Covenant of Works. The woeful misery of men that live and dye under a
Covenant of Works. page 27, 28, 29 First, the Covenant of Works in the nature
of it, requires perfect, personal and perpetual Obedience, under pain of the
curse and death. 29, 30 Secondly, such as are under a Covenant of Works, their
best and choicest duties are rejected and abhorred for the least miscarriages,
or blemishes that do attend them. page 30 Thirdly, this Covenant admits of no
Mediator. page 30, 31

E.
Of Embracing Christ. Poor Sinners should embrace Christ, as they would have
his signal sense with them in their greatest troubles and deepest distresses.
II. Part, page 155, 156, 157, 158 Of Enemies. The Enemies of the Church are
weak and contemptible. II. Part, p. 212, 213.
F.
Of base slavish Fears. The signal presence of God with his People should arm
them against all slavish Fears of Men. II. Part, page 152 153, 154 Of Fighting
against God. To Fight against God is labor in vain. II. Part, p. 213
G.
Of the Graces of the Spirit. None can be so against us as to deprive us of the
Graces of the Spirit. II. Part, p. 85, 86 Of Growth in Grace. None can be so
against us, as to hinder our growth and increase in Grace. II. Part, p. 108,
109, 110, 111, 112
H.
Of Harming the Saints. None can Harm the Saints. II. Part, p. 61, 62, 63 Of
being Hid in an evil day. None can be so against the Saints as to hinder them
from being Hid in an evil day. II. Part, p. 90, 91, 92
I.
Of Imitating Christ. The Saints should Imitate Christ in visiting of the Lords
People in their greatest troubles. II. Part, p. 150, 151, 152 Of Holy Joy. None
can be so against us, as to hinder the springs of Holy Joy from rising and
flowing in our souls. II. Part, p. 79, to 85 The presence of God with his
People is the true ground of their Joy in all their troubles. II. Part, p. 145,
146, 147
Of the general Judgment. Scriptures that refer to the general Judgment opened.
page 177, to 184
L.
Of Lessons. Six great Lessons the poor Heathen might have learned out of the
Book of Nature. page 184, 185 Of Life. A man in the Covenant of Grace has
three degrees of Life. page 36 Of Losing the presence of God, and of the means
to recover it. First, observe how you lost the Divine presence. II. Part, p.
218, 219 Secondly, enquire where, when and why God has withdrawn himself. II.
Part, p. 219 Thirdly, stand not with Christ for any thing. II. Part, p. 219
Fourthly, let your hearts lie humble and low under the los^ of the Divine
presence, and why? II. Part, p. 220 Fifthly, send up a mighty cry to Heaven.
II. Part, p. 220, 221 Sixthly, take not up your rest in any outward comfort.
II. Part. p. 221, 222 Seventhly, patiently and quietly wait upon him in the way
of his Ordinances. II. Part, p. 222
Of the Fathers Love and the Sons Love. Of admiring the Fathers Love in entering
into the Covenant of Redemption. page 174, 175 Of Christ's matchless Love. page
175, 176, 177 Nothing can separate us from the Fathers or the Sons Love. II.
Part, p. 64, 65, 66 Gods signal presence with his People in their greatest
troubles, speaks out the Lords singular Love to his People, etc. II. Part, p.
149, 150 First, God loves his People with a first Love. II. Part, p. 214
Secondly, he loves his People with a free Love. II. Part, p. 214, 215 Thirdly,
he loves them with an everlasting Love. II. Part, p. 215 Fourthly, he loves
them with an unchangeable Love. II. Part, p. 215 Fifthly, he loves them with a
peculiar Love. II. Part, p. 215 Sixthly, he loves them with the greatest Love.
II. Part, p. 215, 216

M.
Means to retain the presence of God with us, in our greatest troubles and
deepest distresses. First, take heed of high sinning. II. Part, p. 181
Secondly, take heed of impenitency. II. Part, p. 181, 182 Thirdly, take heed of
neglecting Gospel Worship, or of corrupting Gospelworship. II. Part, p. 182,
183 Fourthly, take heed of a willing, willful and presumptuous running cross to
Divine Commands, to Divine Warnings. II. Part, p. 183, 184 Fifthly, take heed
of carnal confidence, of resting upon an arm of flesh. II, Part, p. 184, 185
Sixthly, take heed of barrenness under Gospel Ordinances. II. P. p. 185, 186
Seventhly, take heed of pride and haughtiness of spirit. II. Part, p. 186, 187
Eighthly, take heed of a slothful, lazy, trifling spirit in the things of God.
II. Part, p. 187, 188, 189 Ninthly, take heed of a covetous worldly spirit,
under the smarting Rod. II. Part, p. 189, 190, 191, 192 Tenthly, take heed of a
cross, froward, irflexible spirit under the R^d. II Part, p. 192, 193 But then
as these ten things are to be avoided, so there are eight things to be put in
p^actice, as ever you would enjoy the signal presence of God with you in your
greatest troubles and deepest distresses: First, be sure that you are brought
under the bond of the Covenant. II. Part, p. 193, 194 Secondly, look to the
practical part of Holiness, keep up the power of Godliness in your hearts and
lives. II. Part, p. 194, 195, 196, 197 Thirdly, keep close to instituted
worship, keep close to your Church state. II. Part, p. 197, 198. 199 Fourthly,
be sure you make much conscience of five things, when you are not in troubles.
II. Part, p. 199 Fifthly, then maintain uprightness and integrity of spirit
with God. II. Part, p. 199, 200, 201 Sixthly, be importunate with God not to
leave you. II. P. p. 201, 202, 203 Seventhly, keep humble and walk humbly with
your God. II. P. 203 204, 205 Eighthly, labor more and more after greater
measures of Holiness. II. Part, p. 205, 206, 207, 208
Of Mercies. God will time his Peoples Mercies for them. II. Part, p. 210, 211
Ten Motives to persuade Christians to keep the signal presence of God with them
in their greatest troubles and deepest distresses, etc. First, consider the
signal presence of God with his People, puts the greatest honor, dignity, and
glory imaginable upon them. II. Part, p. 164, 165 2. Consider that nothing can
make up the want of this signal presence of God. II. Part, p. 165, 166, 167,
162 3. Consider if you don't lab^ur to keep the gracious presence of God with
you, you have high reason to qu^stim whether ever you have really enjoyed this
signal presence of God with you, or no. II. Part, p. 168, 169 4. Consider the
excellent properties of the Divine presence. II. Part, p. 169, 170, 171, 172 5.
Consider in your great troubles and deep distresses you will need most of the
signal presence of God with you, which is evidenced by an induction of six
particulars, ergo. II. Part, p. 172, 173, 174 6. Consider this signal presence
of God will make you Divinely fearless in the midst of you^ great^st tr^ubles
and deepest distresses. II. Part, p. 174, 175 7. Consider that there is in God
a very great unwillingness to withdraw his presence from his People. II. Part,
p. 175, 176 8. Consider that troubles will never trouble you, if you can but
secure the presence of God with you. II. Part, p. 176, 177 9. Consider that the
worst o^ men cann^t fasten a curse upon you, whilst you keep the presence of
God with you. II. Part, p. 177, 178, 179 10. Consider that the Divine presence
will make up the absence of all outward comforts. II. Part, p. 179, 180

O.
Observable things. Eight Observable things from that 53 Isaia. p. 77, to 85 Of
Christ's threefold Office. 1. Of his Priestly Office. p. 133, 134, 135, 136 2.
Of his Prophetical Office. p. 136, 137, 138, 139 3. Of his Kingly Office. p.
139, 140, 141, 142
Of Opposition. The folly and madness of them that make opposition against the
Saints cleared. 2. Part, p. 147, 148 Of the Originals. The Originals of the Old
and New Testament concerning the Covenant, opened at large. page, 3, 4, 5, 6. 7,
8, 9, 10 Three Original Greek Words opened. p 57 Three Original Hebrew Words
opened. p. 58 Two more Original Words opened. p. 59

P.
Of inward Peace. None can be so against us as to deprive us of our inward
Peace. 2. Part, p. 86, 87, 88, 89, 90 Of the Properties of the Divine Pr^sence.
Seven Properties of the Divine Presence. 2. Part, p. 169, 170, 171, 172 No
Presence to the Presence of God. For first, it is the presence of an almighty
God. 2. Part, p. 213, 214 Secondly, it is the presence of a loving God. 2.
Part, p. 214, 215, 216 Thirdly, it is the presence of an active God. 2. Part,
p. 216 Fourthly, it is the presence of a wakeful God, a watchful God. 2. P. p.
216 Fifthly, it is the presence of a wise God. 2. Part, p. 216, 217 Sixthly, it
is the presence of a merciful God, of a compassionate God. 2. Part, p. 217, 218
The presence of God will make up the want, or loss, of all outward comforts. 2.
Part, p. 218
Of the Presence of God. There is a sixfold presence: 1. There is a general
presence of God. 2 Part, p. 5, 6, 7 2. There is a miraculous presence of
Christ. 2. Part, p. 7 3. There is a relative presence of Christ. 2. Part, p. 7
4. There is a Majestical and glorious presence of Christ. 2. Part, p. 7, 8 5.
There is a judicial, or wrathful presence of the Lord. 2. Part, p. 8 6. There
is a gracious, a favorable, a signal or eminent presence of the Lord with his
faithful People, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly
dangers. 2. Part, p. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 Q. How does the Lord manifest his
favorable, signal and eminent presence with his People, in their greatest
troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly dangers? I answer thee 12 ways:
1. By raising their faith to more than an ordinary pitch at such a time: 2.
Part, p. 13, to 21 2. By his teaching and instructing of them under their
greatest troubles. 2 Part, p. 21, 22, 23, 24 3. By raising strengthening, and
acting of their suffering graces. 2. P. p. 24, 25, 26 4. By laying a law of
restraint upon wicked men, upon the enemies of his People. 2. Part, p. 26, 27,
28 5. By guiding and leading them into those paths and ways, which make most
for their own peace, and quiet, safety and security. 2. P. p. 28, 29 30, 31, 32
6. By enc^uraging, emboldning, animating and heartning up of his People, etc.
2. Part, p. 32, 33, 34. 35, 36 7. By preserving them from troubles in the midst
of troubles, from dangers in the midst of dangers. 2. Part, p. 36, to 45 8. By
frustrating and disappointing the plots, designs, counsels, and contrivances of
their most powerful enemies. 2. Part, p. 45, to 53 9. By his sympathizing with
them in all their troubles, etc. 2. P. p. 53, 54, 55 10. By pouring out upon
them a greater spirit of prayer and supplication than formerly they have had.
2. Part, p. 55, 56, 57 11. By drawing the hearts of his People nearer and
closer to himself by all the troubles, etc. that do attend them in this world.
2. Part, p. 57, 58, 59 12. By rendering them invincible and unconquerable under
all their troubles, etc. 2. Part, p. 59, 60, 61
Of Prevailing. None can prevail against the Saints. 2 Part, p. 63, 64 Of the
several Pleas that every sincere Christian may form up, as to the ten
Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, that refer either to the general
Judgment, or to the particular Judgment, that will pass upon every Christian
immediat^ly after death. The eighth plea. p. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63
The ninth plea. p. 65, 66 The tenth plea. p. 170, 171, 172 The eleventh plea.
p. 193, 194
Of private Prayer. None can be so against us as to hinder private Prayer. 2.
Part, p. 74 Of the Father of the Prodigal. The carriage and deportment of the
Father of the Prodigal to his prodigal Son. p. 60, 61, 62 Several Propositions
for the clearing up of the Covenant of Redemption. First proposition, that the
Covenant of Redemption differs from the Covenant of Grace. p. 97, 98 2. That
God the Father, in order to man's Redemption and Salvation, stands stiffly and
peremptorily upon complete satisfaction. p. 98. 99, 100 3. The great business
transacted between God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, was the
Redemption and Salvation of the Elect. p. 100, 101 4. The blessed and glorious
Titles that are given to Christ in the Holy Scriptures, do clearly and strongly
evidence that there was a Covenant of Redemption passed between God the Father
and Jesus Christ. p. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113 5. The work of our R^demption and
Salvation was transacted between God the Father and Jesus Christ before the
foundation of the World. p. 113, 114, 115 6. That God the Father has the first
and chief hand in this great work of saving Sinners by virtue of the Covenant
of Redemption, wherein he and his Son had agreed to bring many Sons to glory.
p. 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 7. It was agreed between the Father and the
Son, that Jesus Christ should be incarnate, that he should take on him the
Nature of those whom he was to save, and for whom he was to satisfy, and to
bring to glory. p. 120, 121, 122 8. That there were Commandments from the
Father to the Son, which be must obey and submit to, etc. p. 122, to 127
Several Propositions, concerning the signal presence of God with his People in
their greatest troubles, etc. 1. Proposition, that Christ is many times really
present, when he is seemingly absent. 2. Part, p. 132, 133, 134, 135 2.
Proposition, that the signal presence of God with his People in their greatest
troubles and deepest distresses, is only to be extended to his Vovenant People.
2 Part, p, 135, 136, 137 3. Proposition, that a sincere Christian may enjoy the
signal pr^sence of the Lord in great troubles supporting and upholding of him,
when he has not the presence of God, quickening and comforting of him. 2. Part,
p. 137, 138 4 Proposition, all Saints have not a like measure of the presence
of the Lord in their troubles and trials, some have more and some have less,
upon five grounds. 2. Part, p. 138, 139 5. Proposition, none of the Saints have
at all times in all troubles and distresses, the same measure and degree of the
presence of the Lord, but in one affliction they have more, in another less. 2.
Part, p. 139, 140 6. Proposition, many precious Christians may have the signal
presence of God with them in their great troubles, and yet fear and doubt, yea
peremptorily conclude that they have not this presence of God with them, the
truth of this proposition is made evident by an induction of ten particulars.
2. Part, p. 140, 141, 142

R.
Reasons, why God will be signally present with his People in their greatest
troubles, etc. First, to render his suffering Children glorious in the very
eyes and consciences, both of Sinners and Saints. 2. Part, p. 112 113, 114,
115, 116 Secondly, because he has in the Covenant of grace an^ by ma^y pr^cious
promises engaged himself to be present with them in a day of trouble. 2. Part,
p 116, 117 Thirdly, because it makes most for his honor and glory in the
World. 2. Part, p. 117, 118 Fourthly, because then his People stands in most
need of his presence. 2. Part, p. 118, 119 Fifthly, because he dearly l^ves
them. 2. Part, p. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123 Sixthly, because of his propriety and
interest in them, and his near and dear Relation to them. 2. Part, p 123, 124
Seventhly, because commonly such times are times of great and sore temptations.
2 Part, p. 124, 125 Eighthly, because he highly prizes them, and sets an
honorable value and esteem upon them. 2. Part, p. 125, 126 Ninthly, because
they will not leave him, but stick close to him, and to his interest. 2. Part, p.
126, 127, 128, 129 Tenthly, that they may be joyful and cheerful under all
their troubles. 2. Part, p. 129, to 132
Of the Covenant of Redemption. Of the substance of the Covenant of Redemption
p. 66, 67, 68 Of the excellent properties of that Redemption we have by Jesus
Christ. First, it is a great Redemp^ion. p. 101, 102, 103, 104 2. It is a free
and gracious Redemption. p. 104 3. It is a full and plentious Redemption. p.
104, 105 4. It Is eternal, it is permanent, it is a lasting, yea an everlasting
Redemption. p. 105, 106, 107, 108 5. It is an enriching Redemption. p. 108, 109
6. It is a Redemption sweetning Redemption. p. 109
Of Remembering. God has engaged himself to remember the sins of his People no
more. p. 58, 59, 60 To Remember implies a fourfold act. p. 60

S.
Of the Scriptures. Several choice ones opened and cleared. The first choice
Scripture that is opened and cleared is Genesis 3. 15. p. 69 2. Is Isa. 42. 6. p.
69, 70, 71 3. Is Isa. 49. 1. p. 71, to 75 4. Is Isa. 52. 13, 14. p. 75, 76, 77
5. Is Isa. 53. p. 77, to 84 6. Is Isa. 59, 20, 21. p. 84, 85, 86 7. Is Zach. 6.
12, 13. p. 86, 87 8. Is Psalm 40. 6, 7, 8. Compared with Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. p.
87, to 95 9. Is Psalm 89, 28. p. 95, 96 10. Is Zach. 9. 11. p. 96, 97
By these ten Scriptures it is most clear and evident, that there was a
Covenant, a Compact and Agreement between God the Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ, concerning the work of our Redemption: Signs of the gracious presence
of God with us. Four signs of the gracious presence of God with us. II. Part,
p. 168, 169 Of Suffering for Christ. The Covenant of Redemption should greatly
encourage us in Suffering for Christ. p 173, 174, 175
T.
Of the Text. The Text opened. II. Part, p. 3, 4, 5 Of Thankfulness. The People
of God should be very Thankful to God for his presence with them in their
greatest troubles, etc. II. Part, p. 160, to 164 Of the Transaction between God
and Christ. The manner and quality of the transaction between God the Father
and Jesus Christ was by mutual engagements and stipulations, each Person
undertaking to perform his part in order to our recovery and eternal felicity.
p. 127, 128, 129 Of outward Troubles. There is no such great evil in outward
troubles as men conceive and imagine. II. Part, p. 154, 155
V.
Of Union with Christ. None can be so against us as to hinder our Union with
Christ. II. Part, p. 92, to 95 Of Universal Redemption. The Covenant of
Redemption looks sowerly upon the Doctrine of universal Redemption. p. 172 Of
Unbelief. Unbelief does very ill become the Saints in a day of trouble. II. P.
p. 158, to 160
W.
All things shall Work for the Saints good. Nothing shall hinder the operation
of all things for the Saints good. II. Part, p. 68, to 72
FINIS.
BOOKS sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry.
Folio.
THE History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most illustrious King
Edward the First; wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all Causes, is asserted and vindicated: with an
exact H^story of the Popes intolerable Usurpation upon the liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the ancient Records
in the Tower of London, by W. Prin, Esquire. of Lincoln's Inn, and Keeper of his
Majesty's Records in the Tower of London.

A Description of the four Parts of the World, taken from the works of Monsieur
Sanson, Geographer to the French King, and other eminent Travelers and
Authors; To which is added the Commodities, Coyns, Weights, and Measures of the
chief Places of Traffic in the World, illustrated with variety of useful and
delightful Maps and Figures. By Richard Bl^me, Gent.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of those excellent
Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in our late
intestine Wars, from the year 1637. to 1666. with the Life and Martyrdom of
King Charles the First. By David Lloyd.

A Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles
the Second in Holland.

Mores hominum, the Manners of Men, described in sixteen Satyrs, by Juvenal,
together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, and the Latin and
Greek histories. By Sir R. Stapleton, Knight

A Treatise of Justification. By George Downham, Dr. of D.

Bentivoglio and Urania, in six Books, by Nathanael Ingelo, D. D. The third
Edition, wherein all the obsc^re words throughout the Book are interpreted in
the margin, which makes this much more delightful to read than the former.

De Jure Vniformitatis Ecclesiasticae, or three Books of the Rights belonging
to an U^iformity in Church^s, in which the chief things of the Laws of Nature
and Nations, and of the Divine Law concerning the consistency of the
Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, are unfolded, by Hugh Davis, Ll. B. Late
Fellow of New College in Oxon.

An English, French, Italian, Spanish Dictionary, by James How^l.

Observations on Military and Political Affairs, by the Honorable Ge^rge, Duke
of Albemarle.

The manner of Exercising the Infantry, as it is now practiced in the Arm es of
his most Christian Majesty.

The Exact Politician or C^mpleat Statesman, briefly and methodically resolved
into such principles whereby Gentlemen may be qualified for the management of
any public Trust, and thereby rendered useful in every Station, to the
establishment of the common welfare. Written by Leonard Willan, Esquire.

Christianography, or a Description of the multitude and sundry sorts of
Christians in the World, not subject to the Pope, with unity, and how they
agree with the Protestants in the principal points of Difference between them
and the Church of Rome; To which is added a Treatise of the Religion of the
ancient Christians in Brittanny, with certain Letters and Confessions of the
Eastern Churches, and others. By Ephra^im Pagit, DD.

Quarto.
A Letter from Dr. Robert Wild to his Friend Mr. J. J. upon occasion of his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, together with his Poetica
Licentia, and a friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist.

The Dutch Remonstrance, concerning the Proceedings and Practices of John de
Wit, Pensionary, and Ruwaert van Putten, his Brother, with others of that
Faction; Translated out of Dutch.

Index Publicus, or, an exact Concordance to the holy Bible according to the
last Translation, by John Jackson, Minister of the Gospel at Moulsea in Surrey.

The Christian Mans-Calling, or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious Duties, Natural
Actions, particular Vocations, Family Directions, and in his own Recreations,
in all Relations, in all Conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the
choice of his Company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from
morning to night, in visiting the sick, and on a Dying-bed, by Geo. Swinnock.

Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel-Remission, or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs.

An Exposition of the Song of Solomon. By James Durham, late Minister in
Glasgow.

The Real Christian, or a Treatise of effectual Calling, wherein the work of
God in drawing the Soul to Christ being opened according to the Holy
Scriptures; some things required by our late Divines, as necessary to a right
Preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: To which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles Firmin, sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah, or a prospect of Heaven, being an Exposition of the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians By Tho. Case.
sometimes Student in Christ-Church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel.

The Virtue and Value of Baptism. By Za. Crofton.

The Quakers Spiritual Court proclaimed* being an exact Narrative of a New high
Court of Justice; also sundry Errors and Corruptions amongst the Quakers, which
were never till now made known to the World. By N. Smith, who was conversant
among them fourteen years.

A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence, occasioned by the twelve Months fasting
of Martha Tailor, the famed Darby-shire Damsel; proving, that without any
miracle the texture of Humane Bodies may be so altered, that life may be long
continued without the supplies of Meat and Drink. By John Reynolds.

A Grave for Controversies, between the Romanist and the Protestant, lately
presented to the French King.

Jacksons Recantation, or the Life and Death of a notorious Highway-man,
wherein is truly discovered the whole Mystery of that wicked and fatal
profession of Padding on the Road.

A S^rmon delivered at the Funeral of the right Honorable Charles, Earl of
Warwick, Sept. the 9. 1673. by Anth. Walker, Rector of Fyfield.

The Retired man's Meditations, or the Mystery and Power of Godliness,
presenting to view the riches and fullness of Christ's Person as Mediator, or the
Natural and Spiritual man in their proper distinctions, etc. By Henry Vane,
Knight.

Choice and practical Expositions on the Ten Commandments, preached by James
Durham, late Minister in Glasgow.

Peace and Love recommended and persuaded in two Sermons, preached at Bristol
Jan. 31th. 1675. by Th. Jekyl, A. M. and Vicar of Rowd in the County of Wilts.

A Golden Key to open hidden Treasures, or several great Points which refer to
the Saints present blessedness and their future happiness, with the Resolution
of several important Questions, the Active and Passive obedience of Christ
vindicated and improved, II. serious singular Pleas, which all sincere
Christians may safely make to those 10. Scriptures which speak of the General
Judgment and of the Particular Judgment that must certainly pass on all, etc.
the first and second part. by Tho Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at
Margrets New Fish-street.

The Saints Triumph over the last Enemy in a Sermon, preached at the funeral of
that zealous and painful Minister of Christ James Janeway, unto which is added
his Character, his sore conflict before he dyed, and his triumphant manner of
departing from Earth to the Heavenly inheritance. By Nath. Vincent.

Panorgan^n, or a Universal Instrument, performing all such Conclusions
Geometrical and Astronomical as are usually wrought by the Globes, Spheres,
Sectors, Quadrants, Semi-spheres, etc. By IV. ^eybourn.

Large Octavo.
A sober enquiry into the nature, measure and principle of Moral Virtue, its
distinction from Gospel Holiness, with reflections upon what occurs
disserviceable to Truth and Religion in this matter, in three late Books, viz.
Ecclesiastical Policy, Defense and Continuation, and Reproof to the Rehearsal
Transprosed, by R. Ferguson.

A Collection of Sermons, preached at the Morning Lecture in Southwark, and
elsewhere: By N. Blakie.

G^ammatica Quadrilinguis, or brief instructions for the French, Italian,
Spanish and English Tongues, with Proverbs of each Language, fitted for those
who desire to perfect themselves therein: By J. Smith, M. A.

The Works of Mr. James Janeway, containing these six following Treatises,
Heaven upon Earth, or the best of Friends in the worst of Times; Death Vnstu^g;
a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mosely, an A^^the^ary, with a
Narrative of his life and death; also the manner of Gods dealm^ with him,
before and after his Conversion. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas
Savage. Invisible Realities demonstrated in the holy Life and triumphant Death
of Mr. John Janeway. The Saints encouragment to Diligence in Christ's Service,
with Motives and Means to Christian Activity.

Mr. Janeway's l^st Legacy to his Friends, containing twenty seven famous
instances of Gods Providence in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eyewitnesses to many of them; whereunto is
added a Sermon on the same subject.

The Life and Death of that excellent Minister of Christ Mr. Joseph Allin* Also
his Christian Letters, full of spiritual instructions. Published by several
Ministers.

Memorials of Gods Judgments, Spiritual and Temporal: or, Sermons to call to
remembrance. By Nich. Lockier, Minister of the Gospel.

A Plat for Mariners, or the Seamans Preacher, delivered in several Sermons
upon Jonah's Voyage. By R. Ryther, Preacher of Gods Word at Wappin.

The Gentle-womans Companion, or a guide to the Female Sex, containing
Directions of Behavior in all Places, Companies, Relations and Conditions,
from their childhood down to old age, with Letters and Discourses upon all
occasions. Whereunto is added a Guide for Cook-Maids, Dairy-Maids,
Chamber-Maids, and all others that go to service: The whole being an exact Rule
for the Female Sex in general.

The present state of Russia, in a Letter to a Friend at London, written by an
eminent Person, residing at the Great Tzars Court at Mosco, for the space of
nine years, illustrated with many copper Plates.

The fulfilling of the Scriptures, or an Essay showing the exact accomplishment
of the Word of God in his Works of Providence, performed and to be performed,
for confirming the Believers, and convincing the Athe^^ts of these present
times: Containing in the end a few rare Histories of the works and Servants of
God in the Church of Scotland.

The Morning Seeker, showing the benefit of being good betimes, with Directions
to make sure work about early Religion. By John Rither.

A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church peace and Unity, with the
Occasions and Reasons of present Differences and Divisions about things Sacred
and Religious. By John Owen, D. D.

Saints Memorials or Words fitly spoken like Apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver, being a collection of Divine Sentences, written or delivered by those
late Reverend and Eminent Ministers of the Gospel Mr. Edm. Calamy, Mr. Joseph
Caryl, Mr. R. Vening, Mr. James Janneway, etc.

The interest of Reason in Religion, with the import and use of Scripture
Metaphors, and the matter of the union betwixt Christ and Believers, with
Reflections on several late writings, especially Mr. Sherlock's Discourse
concerning the Knowledge of Christ, mod^stly enquired into and stated.

The true way to the Tree of Life, or the Natural Man directed unto Christ, by
F. Roberts, D. D. Pastor of the Church of Christ at Wrington, in the County of
Sommerset.

Dyers Cabinet of Jewels. -- Christ's Voice to the City.

Heaven Realized in the Life and Death of a Famous Christian Gentlewoman.

Small Octavo, and Twelves.
The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Wilson, Minister of Maidstone, in the County
of Kent. Drawn up by Mr. George Swinnock.

Hier agonisticon, or Corahs Doom, being an Answer to two Letters of Enquiry
into the Grounds and Occasions of the contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

The Comparison of Plato and Aristotle, with the Opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrine, and some Christian Reflections, together with judgment on
Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch and Petronius, out of the
French.

Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil, a Discourse representing the
excellency of those Works, and the perfection in general of all Heroic
Actions, out of the French.

Mysterium Pietatis, or the Mystery of Godliness, wherein the mysteries
contained in the Incarnation, Circumcision, wise Men, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension of the Son of God, and coming of the Holy Ghost, are unfolded and
applied. By W. Annand.

Fellowship with God, or 28. Sermons on the first Epistle of John, chap. first
and second. By Hugh Binning, late Minister in Scotland.

A Token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway.

The Mercury Gallant, containing many true and pleasant Relations of what
passed at Paris, from the first of January 1672. till the Kings Departure
thence.

An Explanation of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, wherein all the Answers
are taken abroad in, under Questions and Answers, the Truths explained, and
proved by Reason and Scripture, several cases of Conscience resolved, some
chief controversies in Religion stated, etc. By Th. Vincent.

The Experience of Gods gracious declining, with Mrs. Elizabeth White, as they
were written with her own hand, and ^ound in her closet after her decease.

A serious Caution against Impenitency, under Gods correcting providence. By
James Sharp.

The Christians great Interest, or the Trial of a saving interest in Christ,
with the way how to attain it. By W. G^thry, late Minister in Scotland.

The History of Moderation, or the life, death, and resurrection of moderation,
together with her nativity, country, pedigree, kindred, and character, friends,
and also her enemies.

A Guide to the true Religion, or, a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion men venture their salvation upon. By John Clappam.

A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul. By W.
Cooper, Bishop of Galloway.

Justification only upon a Satisfaction, or the Necessity and Verity of the
Satisfaction of Christ, as the alone ground of Remission of sin, asserted and
opened against the Socinians. By R. Ferguson.

The Canons and Institutions of the Quakers, agreed upon at their general
Assembly, at their new Theater in Grace Church street.

A Synopsis of Quakerism, or, a collection of the fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. By Th. Danson.

Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative of that late horrid murder committed
by Mary Cook upon her child. By Nath. Partridge, with a Sermon on the same
occasion*

Six several Treatises. By Nich. Lockier, Minister of the Gospel.

A Discourse wri^ten by Sir G. Downing, the King of Great Brittain's Envoy
extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces, vindicating his Royal
Master from the Insolences of a Scandalous Libel, printed under the Title of
[An Extract out of the Register of the States General of the United Provinces,
upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Env^y, etc.] And delivered by the
Agent de Heyde for such to several public Ministers. Whereas no such
Resolution was ^ver communicated to the said Envoy, nor any answer returned at
all by their Lordships to the said Memorial.

Whereunto is added a Relation of some former and latter Proceedings of the
Hollanders: By a meaner hand.

The Assemblies works in 12. with the large and smaller Catechisms.

Scotch Psalms alone, or with the Bible.

The Weavers Pocket book, or Weaving spiritualized; in a Discourse wherein men
employed in that occupation are instructed how to raise Heavenly meditations
from the several parts of th^^^ work, to which also are added some few Moral
and Spiritual Observations, relating both to that and to other Trades. By I. C.
D. D.

The character of a weaned Christian, or the Evangelical art of Selfdenial,
being an Essay alluding to the severities and advantages of Infant-weaning both
pleasant and profitable. By S. S. formerly Fellow of S. John Baptist's College
at Oxon, now Minister of the Gospel in London.

The Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven expounded, or an exposition of the first
thirteen Verses of the 25. Chapter of Matthew. By Han. Knollis.

A new Discovery of an excellent method of Bee-houses and Colonies, to free the
Owners from the great charge and trouble that attends the swarming of Bees, and
delivers the Bees from the evil reward of Ruin for the benefit they brought
their Masters, advantaging their Owners manyfold above what ever any method
heretofore practiced does, experienced seven years by John Geddes, Gent.
Inventor, and aproved by the Royal Society at Gresham College.

A true Relation of the sad estate of the Reformed Churches in France, and
several Passages of the great Persecution they lie under, Collected out of the
several Addresses and Speeches in print made unto the King of France, as also
in some parts of Germany and Hungary.

Conversion exemplified in the Instance of a gracious Gentlewoman now in Glory,
written from her own mouth and appointment by her dearest Friend, and published
in pursuance of her desires for common Benefit, but especially for her near
relations in the flesh.

THese are to give Notice, that the Psalms of David in Meter are newly
Translated, a^ d Diligently Compared, with the Original Text and former
Translations, more smooth and agreeable to the Text than that of Tho.
Sternh^ld, John Hopkins, or any other Extant in English; and do run with such a
fluent Sweetness, that the Ministers whose Names are here*under Subscribed,
have thought fit to Recommend it to all with whom they are Concerned; some of
them having used it already with great Comfort and Satisfaction: These Psalms
are to be sold by Dorman New^an, at the King's Arms in the Poultry, at One
snilling Four pence Price.

J^hn Owen, D. D. Thomas Manton, D. D. William J^nkyn. James Innes. Thomas
Watson. Thomas Lie. Ma^thew Po^le. Jo. Milward. John Ch^^ter. George Co^k^yn.
Matthew M^ade. Robert Franklin. Richard Mayo. Henry Langley, D. D. Thomas
D^^little. Thomas Vincent. Nathana^l Vincent. John Ryther. William Thompson.
Nic^^l^s Blakey. Charles Morton. Edmund Calamy. William Carslake. Jam^s
Janeway. John Hicks. John Baker.


FINIS.

