John Dro^shout scuplsst
frontispiece

A DESCRIPTION OF AN Annual World OR, BRIEF MEDITATIONS UPON ALL THE
HOLY DAYS IN THE YEAR. With certain Brief Poetical Meditations of the day
in general and all the days in the week.

By E. B.

O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the World. Psalm. 8. 1. Teach
us (O Lord) so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom,
Psalm. 9. 22. Sol illuminat mundum printer's device of Edward Griffin

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Ley, and are to be sold at his shop at
Paul's Chain, going down to Doctors Commons. 1641.

TO THE Right Honorable Edmund Wright, Lord Major of the City of London: AND
To the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and Sheriffs His Brethren: Health and
prosperity in this life, and eternal felicity in the life to come.
WOrthy Senators; I (though far unworthy) having patched and peeced the
Fine-spuncloath of the Prince of Poets, Divine Du-Bartas smooth eloquence, with
my home-spunne rags and course materials, and framed thereof a piece of rough
Poetry, for my retired thoughts to repose in; presented the same in private to
my judicious loving Master, the right Worshipful Sr. James Cambell the senior
Alderman of this famous City; which I had no sooner brought forth, but this
Annual World so closely followed those Poetical Meditations, that I could not
rest satisfied in my mind, till I had likewise produced it: and so after some
pleasing labor and travel in diverse Authors, I brought it to this maturity,
and because they are as Twins, joined them both together, and placed the younger
before the elder, even as Jacob was by his father preferred before his brother
Esau. But being conscious of mine own inabilities I was unwilling and very
fearful to come into public view, especially now in these curious times,
wher^in many strive to vent the froth of their own Inventions into the press.
Therefore I did intend to stifle and smother these abortive Notions in the
womb that bore them, and keep them for mine own private use. But it so
happened that some friends of mine having had the perusal of them persuaded
and so overswayed me with their importunate solicitations that to satisfy
their desires I am even compelled to put them into print. Yet fearing to meet
with some envious Momus, who thou^h he do no good himself, delights to mock
and deride others, or some carping Zoylus, who to get himself fame and credit,
will disparage other men's labors; I am bold for the safeguard of this little
Cottage, which I erected for my own retired thoughts and recreation (as by the
frame thereof may app^are) to seek for shelter against the blustrous storms
of such Calumniators tongues and pens under the roof of your Honor and
Worships protection* because I am not unknown to most of you, by reason of my
a^tendance upon my said Master; who, as God has prolonged his life to be
called Pater Civitatis, so I do humbly acknowledge he has been Nutritious
meus for the space of 17. years and upward. Therefore in confidence of your
favorable acceptance of these worthless expressions of my affections, I shall
^ver remain,

Humbly devoted to your Honor and Worships service, EDW. BROWN.
3. Junii 1641. Dies Ascentionis Dom. nostri and salvatoris in Coelis.
An Epigramme, On the modest Author of these Poems.
Stolen Water's sweet: How have thou then,
Sweetened our sweet Du-Bartas with thy Peu!
An Epigramme To his Critic.
Did not thou buy this Book? The Merchant gave it
Into thy hand: Did not thy hand receive it?
Thou callst the Author Thief? It Is true: However,
The Thief is not so bad as the Receiver.
To the Reader.
Will thou condemn the Heavens bright lamp, because
The mist that falls, is but the mist it draws?
Or will thou tax the Empress of the Night,
Because she shines but with her brothers light?
Or count him worthy to be styled a cheat,
That shall verbatim, for thy sake, repeat
A well preached Sermon? Or present thy view
With a fair Copy? Come, there is nothing new:
There Is nothing spoke, that was not spoke before:
We are but desperate debtors, and restore
To present times, what we took up on trust
From those of former ages, and now, dust.
What if our Florist, to supply the wants
Of his young Garden, borrow some few Plants
From rare Tr^deskin; or procured from France,
Some new-bred Tulip? shall it disadvance
The credit of his labors, or disprize
The glory of his Garden? shall thine eyes
Pick quarrels with his Flowers because it is known
They came from foreign parts, and not his own?
Reader, be gentle; whether his flowers be
Borrowed or stoll'n, they yield themselves to thee.
F. Q.

To his much esteemed good friend and Brother, Edward Brown in due
commendation of his Annual-World and Po^ticall-daies.
WHen with much pleasure I bad viewed and s^ene
Thine Annuall-world and sweet Poetick-daies,
I surely thought, I had transported been
Into Elysium, Paradise of praise;
Into Another-World of rare Delight,
Full fraught with various sweets to sense and sight.
Methought I saw a stately Structures frame.
With Rooms and Posts, and Porches beautified;
Whence passing, I into a Garden came,
Where walking, with delight, I each-where eyed
Such choice of pleasant Plants, and fragrant Flowers
As de^k and trick Parnass^^s beauteous Bowers,
Wherein (I say) I saw with full content.
Thou, like a prudent Gard^^, did provide
Out of best Neighbour-Gardens ^pulent
Choice Sp^igs and Plants, set thick on every side:
Thus, justly made ^hine own by transplantation,
For thine and for thy Readers recreation.
Go on therefore (dear friend) with full ^ffect,
To plant more such rare Gardens with fair Flowers:
More such substantiast Structures to erect,
For holy Meditations wel-spent hours:
That Christians, all their da^es, may learn of thee,
To make each day Souls Holy Days to be.
Your assured loving friend and brother, JOHN VICARS.

To his judicious friend the Author, E. B.
OUr famous Drake and Candish, Magellan
And Vander-Noort have sailed the earth about,
And by adventures great much honor wan,
And in their travels have new worlds found out;
Yet they did compass only Sea and Earth,
Thine Annual-World shows those, and heavens great worth.
Archymedes did make a Sphere of Glass,
And Ferdinand a silver heaven had framed,
But such a world as thine the like never was.
For I could never yet once hear it named,
That the whole World should be transposed in days;
And that so various in unusual ways.
It makes me muse how thou should come to know
The hidden secrets of Astronomy.
Thou say, that learned Flowers do not grow
In thine own garden, yet wise Ptholomy
(By thy transplanting skill) is hither brought;
His planets are (to speak) divinely taught.
For thou have metamorphos'd natures sense,
And Saints for stars thou highly do commend:
And in a holy spiritual excellence
Do write of planets well, industrious friend,
Glean on, pluck here and there, bind up thy flowers
In several posies, that they may be ours.
Jo. Booker.

Liber ad Lectorem.
SPiders suck poison from the sweetest flowers,
But Bees draw Honey out of driest bowers;
I mean from bitterest things the honey fly
Does suck much sweet, Spiders in Roses lie,
Therefore though prying critics prate their sill,
And think by envious words good deeds to spill;
And Momus-like, to mock, to flout and jeere
At me with envy 'cause I do appear
In simple plainness; yet I hope to be
By wise Mecoenas liked, who out of me,
Though in my self I barren am and bare,
Will araw delicious and delightful fare.
But what need I to fear detractors bent?
To none of those, I hope, I shall be sent
Because my Author will not have me pressed
In any print, but what his Pen has dressed,
Except he be enforced thereunto,
Then what he would not, that he must needs do:
For he thinks me unworthy to be shown,
To none but such as are ingenious known,
Cause as a Nosegay for his private use,
From famous Gardens he did me produce
To give sweet sent and beautify each part
Of this rough work and his affected heart.
And therefore if in Print you do me see,
Blame not my Author, nor put fault in me.
The Pourtraiture of a Pious Man.
BEhold a Godly man that has in heart
True saving Faith. Also in every part
Of his affections is true and sincere,
Void of hypocrisy, and slavish fear.
From out his mouth does gracious words proceed:
His eyes do chiefly heavenly objects heed:
His hands discharge his stewardships reckoning right
His feet to walk in godly ways delight.
He^'s mindful of his death, therefore his days
He takes account of how and in what ways
He spends his time, least that his godly light
Should faintly blaze, or be extinguished quite:
And people do delight to see his ways
So full of good deeds to Gods glorious praise:
Yet is he humble, for the good that he
Does do, he knows to be a Gift most free
Of Gods mere love* and therefore does despise
The world, the flesh and devil* so the prize
Of heavenly bliss h^ gains, that is the Reward
God gives the Saints; for he does most regard
The pensive heart whose hope in Heaven does rest.
Thus is the man that is truly Godly blessed.
A preparatory prayer.
O Holy and everliving Lord God, Infinite in Essence, Glorious in Majesty,
terrible in Judgment, and wonderful in all thy ways; how dare I (a worm and
no man) of shallow judgment, dull invention, and brainsick wit, being as an
Aerie meteor in respect of those glorious stars, men full-growne, deep
judgments, quick inventions and ripe wits) presume to write, or speak of
such holy mysteries in such unusual terms, as I here take in hand?
Certainly, I must acknowledge it is thy only work in me, and nothing in my
unlearned self, that has induced me to undertake such a hard task. Therefore
as thou have thus graciously begun this work in me, so I hope and pray, thou will magnify thy power in my weakness, and so strengthen and enable me in
the performance hereof; that those who are more learned seeing and perusing
this imperfect work of mine, may be induced to enfor^e all their knowledge and
skill to frame a more excellent work, to the praise of thy Name, the ^difying
of thy Church, and salvation and consolation of thy chosen. O Lord, I pray Thee
pardon and forgive as well the errors and faults that I have committed in this
Book, as all the grievous sins I have heretofore committed against thee from
time to time, in thought, word, and deed: Give me, I humbly beseech thee, a
true sight and feeling of them, that the consideration thereof may drive me to a
serious hearty and timely Repentance for them. O Lord increase my faith, make
it lively and operative in good works: for that purpose perfect thy love in
me, and my love to thy members; make me now and ever thankful for all
blessings spiritual and temporal, continually bestowed upon me, and that for
Jesus Christ his sake thy only Son my alone Savior: to whom with Thee holy
Father, and thy blessed Spirit, three Persons, and one God, be ascribed and
given as most due is, by me, and all creatures, all honor, glory, praise,
adoration, obedience, and thankesgiving, from everlasting to everlasting.

Amen.
Let the words of my mouth and the Meditations of my heart, be (now and ever)
acceptable in thy sight O Lord; my strength, and my Redeemer.
Salomons Temple

depiction of Solomon's Temple

The figure of the Heavens and Elements
10 The first moveable Heavene

9 The Christa^ine Heaven.

8 Leo * 4 Cancer * Gemini * 2 taurus * 1 Aries * 12 Pis^e * 11 Aq^*ar 10 Capri
* 9 Sagita * 8 Scorp * 7 libra * 6 virgo * 5

7 Saturn could and dry malevolent Lead

6 Jupiter hott and moist Benevolent Tynne

5 Mars hott and dry Malevolent Iron

4 The son hott and dry Benevolent Gould

3 Venus Could and moist Benevolent copper

2 Mercury such as he is joined with Quick silver

1 The Moon could and moist Benevolent silver

EARTH

diagram

A general Survey of this Annual World.
THis ensuing discourse may not unfitly be compared unto the Temple of the
Lord which King Solomon builded: and would very well beseem the head and hand
of such a workman for finishing thereof: for if he that was wisest that ever
was or shall be, did not disdain to write of Trees, from the Cedar in Lebanon
to the Hisop on the wall, would never have thought it any disparagement to (and
for ought I know, did) write of all the works of God from the base Center of
this earthly Tabern^cle, to the highest Mansion of the heavenly Spheres. For I
do ingenuously confess, and humbly acknowledge, that this work rather
requires the skillful Pensill of a rare Apelles to draw to the life, or the
learned quill of an eloquent Cicero to demonstrate to the full, than my
unworthy illiterate Pen or dull invention to describe. Yet having by Gods
enablement upon my weak endeavors framed this rare structure in my mind, I
could not rest satisfied, till I had writ what I had so rudely formed. And so I
have been bold to compare it to King Solomon's Temple: for as in that rare
Fabric, there were three courts, the Outward, Middle, and Sanctum Sanctorum;
so likewise in this work I do observe three kinds or Species of Meditations
The first as the outward Court, are Meditations of the four seasons of the
Year, the four Elements and their effects: The second as the middle Temple,
are Meditations of the seven Planets, on those days that commemorate the
meritorious works of our Savior Christ: And the third, as Sanctum Sanctorum,
are Meditations of the starry Christalline and first moving heaven, on diverse
festival days in the year. Now as in Solomon's Temple there was a porch or
gate, where being entered, you might discern the spaciousness of the outward
court, and the decent behavior of the people attending upon the royal High
Priest therein, the solemn offices and services performed by the Priests and
Levites in the middle Temple, and the beauteous luster of Sanctum Sanctorum: So
likewise this work or building has a porch or door, which is this brief
Survey of this Annual World; for I have set it here in this place as a Preface
or Introduction to the following Meditations, wherein you may take a short view
of this outward square court in brief descriptions of the four Seasons of the
year, and four Elements, which are as the four corners thereof. The first,
is the Spring and Air; the second Summer and Fire; the third Autumn and
Earth; and the last is Winter and Water. As the four sides of the court you
shall find four pleasant Meditations. The first is of a Flower opening with
the Sun ( Christ) which is a Meditation on the Purification of the Virgin
Mary. The second is a Tree set with the Sun ( Christ) which is a meditation on
Palme-sunday; on the third side you shall find a Rainbow, as on the South,
which is a meditation on Great Britains Feast, the fifth of November; and on
the last side, you shall behold the Equator, or Aequinoctiall line, as on the
North, which is a meditation on the Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary. After you
have taken a view of this outward court, you may behold the glory of the true
High Priest Christ Jesus, in the inner Temple. First, how he prepares an
Immaculate Lamb, his innocent self (to become a Man) for a Sacrifice for the
sins of the people, on Christmasse day, under the Metaphor of the Sun. Then
how he sprinckles the precious blood of the Covenant on New years day, under
the Metaphor of the Moon. Then how he dresses and trims the Sacrifice on
Ashwednesday under the Metaphor of Mars. After how he lays the Lamb thus
prepared on the Altar of the Cross on Good friday, under the Metaphor of
Saturn. Then how he distributes or communicates the Sacrifice to the people on
Easterday, under the Metaphor of Jupiter. Then how the sweet incense thereof
ascends up to heaven on Ascension day, in the Metaphor of Mercury. And lastly,
how the fire from heaven consumes the Sacrifice on Whitsunday, in the Metaphor
of Venus. After you have seen the priest execute his Office, you may behold
the Glory of Sanctum Sanctorum, where first you may take a view of the Ark,
wherein the Law of God was put, the precious Manna kept, and Aarons flourishing
Rod preserved, on All Saints day, under the Metaphor of the starry heaven. And
as there were three things in the Arc, so Astrologers note three things in the
starry firmament: First, the North Pole, which I name the East-pole, on the
Epiphany. Then the Southpole, which I fix on Innocents day: and lastly, the
Zodiake with which I encompasse all the particular Saints days in the year.
Then you may behold the glorious Cherubins that look toward the Mercy-seat, on
the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell, in the Metaphor of the Christalline
heaven. And last of all you may have a glimpse of the glorious Propitiatory or
Oracle, from whence God revealed himself to the children of Israel, on Trinity
Sunday, in the metaphor of Primum mobile. Thus having seen the out side of
this goodly Fabric, Now let me demonstrate the reasons which induced my fancy
to call this Book A description of an Annual World. And they are but two:
First, because, as the World is round, so is the Year likewise: Secondly, as
the World consists of the four Elements, and the firmament of the heavens; so
does the Year also consist of elements and celestial bodies. To show that the
world is round, I shall only write what the Geographers, who are the describers
of the Earth, say, that the Earth and Waters make one entire Globe; and what
the Mathematicians or Astrologians (who bend their study in the nature of
celestial bodies) affirm, That this Globe of Earth and Water is encompassed
round about with the Elements of Air and F^re, and that those elements are
circled about with the seven Planets in seven several Spheres, and that those
Planets are embraced with the starry Firmament, and that included within the
circuit of the Christallin Heaven, which is comprehended in the Primum mobile,
or first moving heaven: which three first are in three proper Orbs, beyond
which is Coelum Empyreum, which they, nor no man is able to describe. And all
these do show, that the compass of the world is round as a bowl or circle,
which is signified by the several terms of Globes, Spears and Orbs. And that
the Year likewise is round, the very name thereof does import; for the Latin
name Annus signifies a Ring or Circle. But besides the Name, the Nature of the
year does show its Annual or circular Motion, for times and seasons in the
year swiftly whirle round about; and still where it last ended, there it
begins again. As in a cart wheel the several spokes follow one another in
their round or winding motion: that as that spoke which was but now upon the
earth, is presently ascended up in the air, and so comes to the earth again:
so the seasons of the year follow one another. The Spring follows the Winter,
the Summer succeeds the Spring; and Autumn follows the Summer, and so comes
to be Winter again. Secondly, as the world consists of four Elements, seven
Planets* the starry Firmament, Christallin and first moving heaven, so I have
showed, and by the assistance of the Almighty, I do intend in this following
treatise to make manifest, that the seasons of the year may have an equivalent
correspondence with the elements, the days which our Church has ordained to
be solemnly kept, in remembrance o^ the meritorious acts of our Savior may
well be compared to the Planets, and the particular Saints days, and other
Festivities to the other three celestial Spheres. Now I will conclude this
Proeme with a prayer to God: that it would please him so to assist, direct, and
guide me in this work, and all other godly resolutions and enterprises that I
shall take in hand, that as the year keeps and continues in its annual or
circular course, so I likewise may be never weary of well doing, nor give over
my heavenly race of piety, but hold out to the end; that still as I end, so I
may begin again in new obedience, and new ways of godliness: that so having
lived the life of grace here on this globe of earth and water; I may hereafter
live the life of glory, in that most glorious Orb or Sphere of the highest
heaven, whose circumference is past all humane capacity. Amen.

A brief description of the four Quarters of the Year.
AS in man's body there are four humors, Sanguine, Choler, Mel^ncholy, and
Phlegm; and as all compounded bodies consist of four elements, Air, Fire,
Earth, and Water; so likewise in the year agreeable to these are four
seasons; the Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter; or as the Earth is divided
into four parts, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America: And as in the World are
four corners, commonly called the four winds, East, West* North, and South;
so accordingly the year is divided into four parts, which I term the four
corners of the outward court of this rough hewed building, to wit, Ver, Aestas,
Autumnus and Hyems.

First, Ver, or the Spring, like a young lively youth, of a sanguine
complexion, rosy cheeks, smooth face, of light and nimble motion, casts a
cheerful and lovely look upon the face of the earth, and with a green,
fragrant, and lightsome mantle, clothes her gross body, in variety of
wholesome herbs, sweet flowers, delicious fruit, and nourishing grain, for the
use of Man and all creatures. Now it is that Fowls of the air couple, beasts
of the earth increase, and fish of the water multiply in abundance, and leave
the deep to live in more shallow places. The country life is most pleasant,
and the air most pure and wholesome: to which element this season is
resembled: For as the nature of the air is hot and moist, so is the Spring or
sanguine complexion of a cheerful and comfortable condition. Therefore I
conclude this season with a prayer to God, that (as in the spring all
vegetative and sensitive creatures begin to grow and increase upon the face of
the earth and waters; so) it would please him to sow in my heart such saving
seed, that now I may begin to grow and increase in spiritual knowledge, and
bring forth the pleasant fruit of a holy life and righteous conversation, to
the glory and praise of God, the good of my neighbor, and salvation of my own
soul.

Secondly, Aestas or Summer, like a man of full growth, strong and lusty, in
the prime of his strength, with a fierce and fiery aspect parcheth and
withers grass and grain: for now hea^ is at the highest, floods at the
lowest, the seas most patient, and the winds most calm, the earth suited in her
richest imbroidery distributeth her bounty to the use of living creatures;
flowers are now in their bravery, fruits in their prime, and all creatures in
their luster. The Sun is now in his chiefest strength, and is as hot as fire,
which is the Metaphor to which I compare this quarter of the year: for as the
element of fire is hot and dry, so is the quality of Summer, or humor of
choler. The lesson that I gather from hence is, that as the Summer ripens all
grains and fruits, so do I desire of God to send down the Son of
righteousness into my soul, to quicken, inflame, and ripen the graces of his
Spirit sown therein by the seed of his sacred Word, that I may seem
beautiful and lovely as a burning and shining lamp in the midst of a froward
generation, that others of greater gifts seeing some little spark of goodness
in me, may be incited thereby far to exceed and excel me, in virtuous
qualities and commendable works.

Thirdly, Autumnus or Harvest, like an ancient man with a white head and gray
beard, of a ripe age, full of good works in his youth and strength, performed
with an austere, solid, melancholy and sage countenance* looking upon the face
of the earth with a favorable aspect, renders to the toyling Husbandman the
fruits of his former labors: for now grass is mowne, corn reaped, fruits
gathered, leaves fall, flowers fade, and the earth loses her former beauty;
floods increase, springs decrease, and all creatures lose their strength and
vigor, and the most part of sensible creatures seek shelter against the
stormy ensuing Winter: and therefore well compared to the earth, being cold and
dry, of a solid temper, gross body, and lumpish disposition, (though the
natural quality of this quarter is cold and moist as water.) Now the use that
I learn from hence is, to pray to God to send his illuminating Spirit into my
heart, that I may seriously consider, and wisely ponder all my former actions,
and from thence gather and receive the comfortable fruit of the good God has
enabled me to perform, and truly, heartily, and unfeinedly repent of those
things I have done that I should not, against God, my neighbor, or my self:
that thereby I may prepare and labor to make my self ready with such strong
and approved furniture as may be able to defend me against the blustrous and
stormy assaults of the flesh, the world, and the devil, at the winter of pale
faced death.

Fourthly, Hyems or Winter, like an angry old man worn out with cares,
perplexed with grief, and impatient in suffering, with a waspish, fretfull,
and phlegmatic countenance, looks upon the face of the earth: for now the
blustering winds break forth, causing the billows of the Ocean to swell,
threatening to swallow the sea-tost Mariner: floods are up; and the cold air
takes away the strength and vigor from all creatures. The pores of the earth
are shut by the extreme coldness of the air; beasts and cattle seek for
shelters; Monsters, Serpents, and ravenous creatures for dens, fowls betake
themselves to the warmest regions, and fishes to the deepest waters: so that
whatsoever the cheerful Spring, and comfortable Summer did bring forth and
nourish, this quarter does destroy and vanish. In nature it is cold and moist
as the waters (yet the true natural quality of this quarter is cold and dry as
earth) and well likened thereto, because of their roaring and turbulent
motions; for the Winter is for the most part tempestuous and stormy, in mighty
winds, slabby rain, thrilling haiel and snow, nipping frost, and chilling cold.
Now the use that I draw from hence, is, the consideration of old age; that I
having by the enablement of Gods Spirit finished the delightful and pleasant
flower of my age in the growth of piety, the flourishing Summer of my days in
virtuous and commendable actions, and the fruitful contemplation and
meditation of the good I have performed, may by Faith and Love seek and
provide for my poor soul a safe harbor in the Merits of my blessed Savior,
against the approaching winter of old age, when the sun of natural heat
declineth, the frost of chilling griefs perplex me, and the blustrous storms
of slanderous tongues backbite me. And so laying and bequeathing my body
quietly and comfortably in the bed of the grave, my soul may with joy and
alacrity ascend to receive a new growth in eternal glory, with God and the
rest of his chosen vessels.

A Flower, or a Meditation on the Purification of the Virgin MARY.
THus having shaped the four corners of the outward Court of this building, I
should now let you take a view of the four sides thereof. Therefore as on the
East you may be pleased to behold a fragrant and glorious Flower, on which, or
rather in which the Sun of Righteousness did arise: Now that I may with more
pleasure demonstrate the virtues thereof, as a praeludium to the following
discourse, I am bold to make relation of this fancy. As I lay musing in my bed,
me thought I was upon the sudden wrapped into the element of fire, and looking
about me, I saw no living creature therein. And being much scorched by the
fervent heat thereof, I descended from thence into the cool air, and there I
beheld a glorious Rainbow, upon which I was going to sit down, but me thought
Jove seeing my insolency and pride, cast me into the sea, where I swimming like
a fish in troubled waters, could not meet either fish or any other creature; so
being weary with swimming, got on shore. And as soon as I arrived on the land,
I beheld a glorious Tree, under the branches whereof I thought to repose my
self and rest; but being cold and wet, I was enforced to go into the fresh
air, to receive the comfortable heat of the Sun to dry and warm me. And
walking in a garden I beheld the fairest flower that ever was seen; and being
ravished with the sight thereof, but much more with the smell, I had a desire
to pluck it up by the roots, and as I was taking hold on it, presently the
Gardener came to me, and told me that I must take heed that I do not too
rashly touch it, lest I might dearly pay for it, for that it was set there for
show and savor, but not to be touched by me nor any; which threatening I fearing
presently awaked, and understood the moral thereof to be to this effect; that
I having undertaken to make a description of the whole Universe in the
Holidays of the year, and having according to my d^ll fancy in the former
Meditation demonstrated the four parts thereof, my mind was much troubled to
find some days in the year equivalent to the effects of the elements. And
having examined every Festival day throughout the year, I could not find any
one day to make a fit resemblance either of fish in the water, or of the Worm
Piransta in the fire, but only found a delightful Flower and a flourishing
Tree, which came from the element of the earth, and a glorious Rainebow, an
effect of the air The Flower I found on this days solemnity in the life of
the Virgin Mary. And to show that she was a blessed Flower sprung from the root
of Jesse, Nazareth which was the place of her Nativity signifies a Flower; and
our Savior that sprung from her is called The flower of the field: So here we
have a Flower (Christ) sprung from a Flower (Mary) in a Flower Nazareth. Now as
a Flower is fragrant for smell, and delightful to look upon; so was the Virgin
Mary odoriferous in bearing the sweet savor of life unto life in her womb,
and much more pleasant for our imitation, in the variety of her beautiful and
excellent virtues, bearing Christ in her heart by faith. Therefore I will write
of this blessed Flower, as she is learnedly compared to King Solomon's Throne,
in these particulars. First, that Throne was the royal Seat of a King, and
she, the royal Mother, the receptacle of the King of Kings. Secondly, in that
Throne none but the King only sat: and in her womb, Christ only lay. Thirdly,
in that seat, Solomon sat to judge all the people; and in that flesh which
Christ took of her, shall he sit to Judge all the people, even the quick and
dead. Fourthly, that Throne was made of Ivory (a part of a most chaste beast:)
and she of the most purest Ivory, even Chastity it self, being an Immaculate
and perpetual Virgin. And, as long kept Ivory turns red, so long kept
Virginity (as in her) turns into martyrdom. Fifthly, that Ivory was covered
over with the best gold; and her chaste body was gloriously enriched with the
beams of the Godhead, when the Holy Ghost came upon her. Sixthly, the top of
the Throne was not covered, but round (the most perfect figure:) And she, all
round; without any base corners of iniquity: a most perfect and good woman.
Seventhly, this Throne had six steps, that made it high; and Mary had six
graces, that made her eminent, grace upon grace. A modest woman is a ladder of
graces. The first step whereof in her was her wisdom, Luke 1. 29. when the
Angel came unto her, and declared a blessed message, she thought what manner
of salvation that might be: And in the Chapter following, verse. 19. she
pondered and considered: And in the 52. verse after, she kept these sayings in
her heart; she thought, she pondered, and laid to heart the Contents of the
Gospel. A great sign of wisdom: nay indeed, the truest wisdom of all. The
second d^gree, is her modesty; like a good Maid, she feared, or was abashed at
the presence of a man. And she answered the Angel in very few words: this
sweet silence is a great virtue, in a woman kind. And she was troubled at the
manner of the salutation, to hear her own commendations from the Angel. The
more that goodness is commended, the more it fears. Thieves steal our goods;
and commendations our virtues: therefore she was troubled; a great sign of
modesty. The third degree, is her chastity, she was a Virgin; we have proofs
enough of it, she her self says so, I have not known man. And the Angel
finds her where a Virgin should be: she was not gadding abroad: he found her
at home, and within. The fourth degree is her Faith: she doubts not of the
great mystery of that wonderful conception, nor requires a sign, (as Zachary
did at the conception of John Baptist;) her, How can this be, is not like his,
Whence shall I know this? She only enquires of the means; since she knows not
man; she had read in the Law, and believed, that a virgin should conceive, but
she never read of the means, that was never before revealed to man, but
reserved for the mouth of an Angel Zachary doubted of the Angel Gabriels
words, even in the ordinary course of nature; and required a sign, therefore
he was dumb, and sung not his Benedictus, till his son John was born: She
asked no sign; but admiring a work above nature, believes the same Angel,
and was made a sign her self. ( Behold a Virgin shall conceive, was a sign
to Ahaz.) And she sings her Magnificat, before her son was borne. And a
further demonstration of her strong Faith, was at the Marriage in Canaan; in
that she was assured whatsoever Christ commanded, should be accomplished:
though it was against the ordinary course of nature, to turn water into wine.
The fifth degree was her obedience; she consents, and becomes readily obedient
to the will of God, in saying, Be it unto me according to thy word. The last
degree is her h(...)ity: which is the adjunct to her obedience: the last words
before the Act of the Incarnation (the ^e it unto me) are* behold the
Hand-maide of the Lord. That is her profession, to be a servant, in humility:
what sublime humility is this? she is made the Mother of God, and yet she calls
her self an Handmaid. This made one say, that the humility of the Virgin was
the heavenly Ladder, by which our God descended to the Earth. Had she not been
humbled to the Handmaide of the Lord, she had never sung, He has done great
things. Virginity would not serve the turn, despised humility is above
magnified virginity: S. Bernard was of that mind. To virginity (says he) you
are invited, to humility you are compelled. Of Virginity it is said, Let him
that is able receive this: but of humility, except you become as one of these
little ones, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: without virginity you
may be saved, without humility, you cannot. And in this very point, he
concludes, and is bold to say, that without humility, the virginity of the
blessed Virgin Mary her self had never been acceptable. You (says he to the
proud virgins of his time) forget humility, and glory in your virginity: But
Mary, forgetting her virginity, glories in her humility. Be not proud of
virginity: for in the Parable of the Ten, there was as many foolish as wise.
These six virtues were in her, as six steps in Salomons Throne, which once got
over, Solomon, or rather a greater than Solomon reposed in it, where, after he
was set, he had the Duae Manus, the supporters of each side the Throne, (the
Father and the Holy Ghost) that never left, nor utterly faild him. And at his
descent, the twelve Lions (the twelve Apostles) that shall hereafter sit on
twelve Thrones themselves, and judge the ^welve Tribes of Israel. And as the
Queen of Saba came to see, and offer Gifts to Solomon, sitting in his Throne:
So came the Eastern Sages to adore, and offer to Christ, sitting in his
Throne, even in the Lap of this blessed Virgin Mother; where Solomon in all his
royalty was not like him. Such was this Paradise, which God prepared to make
our second Adam in. Yet how gloriously soever she be compared, the burden of
her song is, He has respect to the humble, and all that she professes, is,
that she is the Handmaid of the Lord.

Now should I write the Story of her life, according as it is related in the
blessed Gospel, or as I find it written by other learned Authors, I should
only show you a Map of misery and mirror of patience. As her very name, if it
be derived from Ma^ah, signifies, a person that is oppressed with carfulness
and grief, exposed to all misery and calamity, and pressed with continual
vexation and mourning; so her whole life related by the learned, demonstrates
that she was continually molested and overwhelmed with penury, ^xcessive
travail, and unsupportable perplexities. For though she came from the noble
stock of many famous Kings of Israel and Juda, being the daughter of Eliakim,
of the house of David; yet by reason of the mutation of worldly felicity, she
was possessed with no great wealth. And so according to her estate a man of
mean condition, Joseph, a Carpenter of the same lineage of the Tribe of Judah,
the son of Jacob (who was the brother of Heli) whose wife the said Jacob,
according to the Leviticall Law, after his said brothers decease, married; so
raising up seed unto his brother, Joseph the son of Heli (according to Saint
Lukes Gospel) made choice of her for his spouse. And their poverty is more
evident, in that they were not of ability (when they were called to the
general taxation) to get room in an Inn, but feign to take up their lodging
in a poor, cold, and comfortless manger. For her laborious travel, first she
went to Jerusalem, being threescore and four miles from Nazareth, to which
place, of necessity she was to pass over diverse high and steep hills, as
Mount Gilboa, whereon King Saul killed himself, Mount Gerizim and Hebal, upon
which the blessings and curses were denounced, and Mount Ephraim upon which
Ehud killed Eglon King of the Moabites. Then when her Child was two years old,
with whom she and Joseph, to accomplish the Word of the Lord, Hosea 11. 1. and
for fear of Herod's cruelty, were constrained to fly into Egypt, and
continued all the days of Herod's cruel reign at Hermopolis, one of the
chief Cities of Egypt, three hundred and four miles from Jerusalem, to which
place of necessity they were to pass through a barren and unfruitful
wilderness, full of rocks and sands, destitute of waters, and subject to many
dangers, inhabited by a rude and barbarous people, called Saracens, who take
their beginning from Ishmael, and as he, so they are very cunning in shooting
and hunting, and live upon robbery and spoil. In so much as Merchants at this
day are constrained to go in great companies, lest they should be endangered by
them and savage beasts which abound in those places. And by reason of the
winds and sands, they are enforced to guide their journey by the Compass, as
men do that sail by Sea. Yet through this wilderness did Joseph and Mary
pass, with the Child Jesus, out of Judea into Egypt; where they were in
danger of thieves, subject to be smothered by the sands, constrained to travel
over high rocks and mountains, and to rest in fear of Lions, Bears, and
other beasts of prey, that greatly abound there: besides, other discommodities
were incident unto them, as want of meat, drink, and other necessaries, there
being little water to be found there. After, when they came from thence to
Nazareth, she with Joseph went every year to the Passover at Jerusalem, for
the space of fourteen years together, about which time Joseph dyed, when
Christ was sixteen years old, and her self thirty. And as I find related,
during her pilgrimage in this world, which was nine and fifty years, she
traveled 3506. miles, besides petty journeyes not worth relation. And last of
all for her perplexity and vexation of spirit; behold and see if the prophecy
of Simeon was not fully accomplished in her, that a sword should pass through
her soul. Besides the miseries which she sustained in her travel into Egypt,
as is above specified, when she had carefully brought up her Son for the space
of twelve years, by remissness and neglect, she with Joseph thought him lost,
and were feign to seek him three days sorrowing. After, losing her loving
Associate, (yet I believe without any ca^nall knowledge) in the prime of her
days, it was no small vex^tion to her mind. But last of all, when her blessed
Son was to sustain the wrath of God and punishment for the sinn^ of man, to
see him reviled by the accursed Priests Scribes and Pharisees nailed to the
cross by the merciless Jews, and his side pierced with a Spear by the
cruel Soldier, sorrow and grief did even cut her heart a sunder, but that
she was armed with invincible patience, and comforted by her Son and Saviors
glorious Resurrection and Ascension. And so from the Passion of Christ to her
death, which was twelve years, she lived with the beloved Disciple S. John the
Evangelist in Jerusalem, and was buried in the Garden called Gethsemane.

Thus having described the beautiful luster of this pleasant Flower, and felt
the odoriferous savor of this heavenly Plant; look on I pray you, one slip
more sprung from this fragrant Flower, which I had almost forgot, and that is
her religious care and conformity to the Leviticall Law, or decent order in the
Church of God that then was, viz. her circumcising her Son the eighth day, her
presenting him to the Lord, and purifying her self as on this day, according
as God by Moses prescribed. For as Christ had no original sin, so he needed
not to be circumcised, as shall be showed on Newyeares day; so likewise the
Virgin needed not this outward purifying, which figured our cleansing from
original sin, wherein the child conceived and born, polluteth his Mother;
which was not so in this, for both the conception and birth of Christ was
supernatural, for she is said to have swadled the Child, beyond the ordinary
strength of women, who need a Midwife; neither was she troubled with the usual
flux of other women in their Puerpery, being free from the thing hereby
signified; viz. a sinful child; therefore the common opinion is, that Christ
came forth without any pain, help or pollution, the womb of the Virgin
remaining shut; even as the Sunbeams pierces the solid glass without hurting
it, for she received no humane seed, but was with child by the Holy Ghost. Now
why this ceremony of sanctifying was used unto Christ, by presenting him in the
Temple, and making an oblation for him, is thus answered by ^unius; That Christ
was ever holy from eternity as he was God, and from the very moment of his
conception as he was Man; wherefore he was not presented before the Father, nor
sanctified for himself, but for us, according to the ceremony of the Law. Now
such things as in the Scriptures are said to be sanctified, are either
sanctified indeed, by Institution, or Sacrament. Indeed, in their Nature, or by
declaration: In Nature, when by the grace of God things are made holy, which
were not so before; by declaration, when things before holy, are manifested to
be so. Secondly, by Institution things are sanctified by virtue of Gods
command, and promise of blessing; as the Sabbath is sanctified. Thirdly, by
Sacrament things are sanctified, either absolutely, or relatively, that is,
both by signification, and by the truth of the thing signified. And thus Christ
was sanctified, though he be the truth of the Sacrament. First, because being
Man he would obey the Law, under which he was made: Secondly, that he might
sanctify the Law in his own Person. By Institution, he was sanctified for us,
we receiving the blessing through him, as our first borne, and Priest,
abrogating the Leviticall Priesthood. And by manifestation he was sanctified,
when by observing this Law he was declared holy. Wherefore this act of the
Virgin being voluntary, as I have showed, it was to show her zeal and
conformity to the decent orders of the Church of God. To this might be added
her constant course in keeping the Passover every year, which was a work of
great labor and travel. But now these ceremonial shadows at the presence of
the most glorious bright Sun Christ Jesus, vanishing away, the Christian
Church in all ages since has in place, or in stead of the Jews Purification,
ordained and instituted the purification of the heart, by a true, lively, and
justifying Faith, and the purification of the life, by unfeined and hearty
repentance, in that commendable and decent order of Churching women after their
great deliverance from their pain and peril of childbirth, and enjoyneth them
to bring not (as then) a lamb, or two young pigeons, but (the sum of all
Legal sacrifices) hearty prayer and thanksgiving, which consists not only in
the lips, but in the life and conversation. Therefore every religious and
wise woman will not be so wedded to their own opinion or self conceit, to
think that it is any disparagement to her person (be she never so great) or a
point of Popery, to give public praise to God in his Church, but will be
willing (as Mary here was) to conform themselves to the godly discipline of
the public worship of God in his Church (if ability of body hinder not) as
well as zealous in their own private devotions; for they well know, that one
duty of Piety ought not to justle out another, and that it is very requisite
that our private and voluntary obsequies should give place to public
solemnities. The sacrifice appointed for this solemnity makes this apparent:
for the Turtle and the Dove are both mourners, or if you will, both signify
the divine worship of God; yet ought not the one to hinder the harmony of the
other: for the solitary Turtle, and the associable Dove, do both together set
forth the secret tears, and public meetings of Gods people in divine worship:
for the Turtle signifies chastity, and the Dove simplicity. It being observed,
if the Turtle having once lost his mate, he cares not for seeking any other;
and the simple and chaste conversation of the faithful is an acceptable
sacrifice of righteousness unto the Lord. Now they (says Calvin) are
deceived, that think the Law of Purification to be but a politic law, for God
hereby would set before the Jews eyes the corruption of their nature, and the
remedy of divine Grace, and did not appoint this only for the purifying of the
wife as polluted toward her husband, but this one law does abundantly prove
original sin; it being hereby intimated, that the child comes into the world
so impure, as that the very mother is polluted hereby. The offering was for the
redemption of the firstborn, Levit. 12. 6. And hereby it appears, That
Joseph and Mary were very poor, otherwise they should have offered a lamb.
Whereas the child was before presented with gold, it is not to be thought that
they brought him any great quantity, but some little offering, more for honor
than for enriching. It is to be considered, wherefore a pair of Turtles or two
Pigeons were now offered. The Turtle is most in loquacitie among Birds, and the
Dove in mildness: And such is Jesus become unto us, being most mild: And
Christ as the Turtle by the voice of his Gospel, and the sincere preaching
thereof, allureth the whole world unto him, and fills the Garden of his
Church with his own melodies, as it is seen at this day, The voice of this
Turtle is heard in our Land. For the confirmation of the truth of Christ's
presentation in the Temple, Saint Luke reports, That after forty days from his
Birth, or two and thirty days from the Circumcision; His Mother brought him
thither, according to the Law of Moses, and withal recounteth two strange
things which happened at the same time, to wit, That two grave and reverend
persons, Simeon, surnamed the Just, and Anna the Prophetess, (both of singular
sanctity amongst the Jews) coming into the Temple at the very same time, took
notice of him, and acknowledged him publicly for the Messiah and Savior of
the world, foretelling also, by the spirit of prophecy, diverse particular
things that were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, and especially by his
Mother the blessed Virgin, which things being published at that time, and
confirmed afterward by the event, do well declare, that this narration of
Saint Luke could not be forged; as also the number of particular circumstances
set down about the time, place and persons, most notoriously known to all
Jerusalem; as for Anna, she had lived from her youth until fourscore years of
age in the Temple, and thereby was known to the most part of Jury. And Beda
does from her draw a mystery, and makes of Anna a figure of the Church, which
is by Gods grace, in that she was the daughter of Phanuel, which signifies the
face of God, and of the Tribe of Asser, signifying Blessedness: her age being
fourscore and four years, and her married estate seven; which being applied
unto the days of David's week, the age of man's life, does signify, That the
doctrine of the twelve Apostles should be the rule of the Church in all ages;
for twelve multiplied by seven, makes fourscore and four, the age of Anna,
which signifies Grace. And as for Simeon, he was the Scholar of the most
famous Hillel, and condisciple to Jonathan, maker of the Chaldee Paraphrase;
and the Jews Thalmud confesses, that by the death of these two men,
(especially of Simeon,) failed the great Synagogue, called Sanhedrin: which after
the captivity of Babylon until Herod's time supplied (in a sort) the spirit of
prophecy, that was expressly in Israel before the said Captivity. From both
which persons this among other things is observeable, that Christ came first
unto Simeon, which signifies obedience, an emblem of the Law; who taking hold
on Christ, desired then to die or depart in peace. But when Christ came unto
Anna, a figure of the Gospel, she confessed unto the Lord, and gave thanks,
seeing the Salvation of the World in Israel, and was comforted in Jesus her
redeemer and Savior, who desired to live for ever with Grace. From all which
see the honor that was done to Christ from both sexes; Simeon an old man, Anna
an old widow; Zachary a Priest, Elizabeth a married woman, and Mary a Virgin,
were all insoired with the spirit of prophecy to give testimony unto Christ's
Incarnati^n.

Now I will conclude the Meditation of this day, in contemplation of the rare
graces of Gods Spirit in this Virgin Flower, and pray to God that it would
please him to infuse into my soul by the breath of his Spirit, the sweet
savor thereof, that so I expressing by godly imitation the pleasant fruit
thereof in my life and conversation, may (as she on this day did present the
first fruits of her womb, and offered the legal sacrifice that God by Moses
prescribed) from henceforth consecrate and present the first fruits of the
ensuing pilgrimage I have to run in this miserable world, wholly to the glory
and praise of God, the good of others, and salvation of my own soul. And so
daily offering the Lambs Patience, the Doves Innocence, and the Turtles
Chastity, may grow as a young Plant, flourish as a pleasant Flower, and in a
ripe age be gathered into the Garner of a heavenly habitation. All which I pray
God grant, not for any merits of mine own (for I am in my self unworthy of
the least grain of saving Grace) but for the merits of my All-sufficient
Savior Christ Jesus. To whom with the Almighty Father, and sanctifying Spirit,
three Persons and one only wise God be ascribed all Honor, Glory, and praise,
from henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

A TREE. Or A Meditation on Palm Sunday.
IN the former Meditation you have viewed a fragrant Flower. Now as opposite to
that, you may be pleased to behold a flourishing Tree, upon which the Sun of
Righteousness did set. And as a Tree I consider it, first in its root or
station, secondly, in its fruit or operation. First, for its root or
foundation, to know the reasons why this day is called Palme-sunday, my small
learning cannot fully decide nor determine, for the Gospel appointed or set
apart for the public service of God on this day makes no mention of Palm,
nor any thing that has Reference thereunto: for whereas Palm, is a note of
Victory and Triumph; this days Gospel contrary thereto makes a sad relation
of our Saviors Death and Passion. And the Gospel that seems more to
correspond with the name of this day (and as some affirm) was usually read in
Churches in former times on this day, is not unfitly stated upon the first of
the four Sundays before the day of our Saviors Nativity, called Advent
Sunday, because those Sundays are appointed for us as preparatories to
entertain the benefits of Christ's incarnation into our souls, as the Jews did
his corporal presence into Jerusalem, with great joy and triumph. So the
chief reason (as I conceive) why this victorious Palms Gospel is thus
transplanted from this day to Advent Sunday, and yet that this day should still
retain the name, is (as before is specified) to be as John Baptist was, a
forerunner, or harbinger, to prepare the way for the coming of the great King
Christ Jesus into this Annual World: or thus, the root of this days
denomination springs from these two grounds or causes. First, because that as
this day falls always in the Spring season; and Palm (as some note) is one of
the first Trees that buds: so men that are rational Trees in the Spring of
their age, as soon as they come to knowledge, should prepare themselves for the
entertainment of Christ into their hearts, by striving to grow in piety and
spiritual understanding. 2. Because (as some say) Palm delights and
flourishes most by the rivers side; so Christ and all Christians flourish and
become most victorious by the troublesome waters of persecution and affliction.
To prove the verity hereof: All writers almost affirm this same very day
Christ went to Jerusalem in that triumphant manner, as in the Gospel is
related, five days before his Passion; to show that in suffering he became
victorious over sin, death, and all the Temptation of the Devil, and in dying
he overcame death, which gave the Church (anciently) occasion to go in
procession with Palms in their hands on this day, from whence it was called
Palme-sunday. Thus having briefly demonstrated the radical foundation of this
days denomination, I should now show you the fructification thereof. For
though the Palm (which grows in our Island) bears no fruit at all, but only a
spongie or soft blossom grows upon it, thereby (as I conceive) to show the
vanity of all worldly honor and triumphs, (of which Palm is an Emblem) yet
this Annual Palm (as the Date-tree) will afford as many fruitful
meditations, as there are words in the Gospel, as is learnedly accomplished by
that pious Gentleman Mr. Austin in his divine Meditations, out of whose
pleasant Garden I will only gather this sweet and delightful fruit of
Humility, which grows upon the top of this Tree, and yet it is to be seen in
every branch thereof: for Humility the higher it is, the lower it will stoop:
therefore as it is the conclusion of his, so it shall be the period of my
meditation for this day, on which our blessed Savior by his Humility triumphed
over the Pride of the world, and ascended to true glory, by suffering death
upon the ignominious cross. For better explanation hereof, view the story, and
you shall find, that among all his Pomp, and applause of the people, (when all
the City of Jerusalem was moved at his Magnificent entrance) he himself gave
a great example of Humility, in riding so simply on a poor Ass, with no
better a sa^dle than a cloak, or some such slight thing cast on him: however,
the people triumph round about him he was humble enough himself: he took
small Pride in it: for, while they applauded, he wept; there was Humility
running down his cheeks. Indeed it honored the City, that he would thus
ride into it, but it humbled him: He was never in any great Honor, in all his
life, but twice; at this time, and in the Transfiguration, there he talked with
Moses and Elias concerning his Death; and charged his Disciples to tell no man
of his Glory: And ( here) he is going to his Death, indeed; and Weeps in the
midst of his Glory. And this Honor continued with him but a small time
neither: for, they that thus admired him in the morning, would none of them
give him a lodging at night, he was to go back again to Bethany to bed: and
within less than a week after, they were much worse altered toward him, which
he full well knew, that knew the thoughts of all men; therefore looking on,
and foreseeing them (a sort of false Traitors to his life) he had little
cause to be proud, or Joyful at their acclamations, though he suffered them:
for, will you see what followed? Now they cry Hosanna, to the Son of David;
then they cry, Take him away, take him away: Crucify him, crucifiehim: Now
they cry King of Israel; then they cry, we have no King but Caesar. Now they
cut down boughs, to strew the way for him, to ride on: then, they cut down a
Tree to make a cross to hang him on: Now they cast their garments before him,
then they cast lots for his Garments: Now they cry, Blessed is he that comes
in the Name of the Lord; but then, cursed is he that hangs on the cross. We
see what became of this exaltation, and how it ended. If he were ever truly
exalted indeed, it was his Humility that exalted him: nay, he only took
Humility for his Exaltation; for, when he meant one of his greatest
Humiliations (even that on the cross) he says of it, When the Son of Man
shall be exalted, etc. No exaltation would he admit in this life unmingled with
humility; for which cause the Apostle says, That (after death) God has
exalted: nay, God has highly exalted him. It may well be his Song, as it was
his Mothers, (He has exalted the humble and meek.) But this is not the day of
that Catastrophe, and small exaltation that was an unmingled one, and is an
Argument fit for Easter Day: we are now meditating of the beginning of his
Passion, in Tears, even this day of his seeming Glory, and therefore our
object is principally his humility; his emptying himself even to the bottom,
and becoming of no account; his humility, in going to his death for us: from
which, if I could learn this one short rule, (of Saint Bernard) it will be use
enough, that since the lower he made himself in humility, the greater he
showed himself in Charity, I might say from the bottom of my soul; In as
much as Christ made himself vile for me, so and much more should I make him
precious and dear to me! Mark (O man) that art but earth; see thy God humbled,
and be not Proud; and since he is Joined to thee, be not ungrateful to him; so
shall thou (in the end) be exalted to him, that for his Humility was exalted to
the right hand of God. Thus if I could be as a Tree planted by the waters side,
rooted in Faith, grown up in Humility, spread abroad by Charity, and fruitful
in all kind of good works, I should in due time be transplanted from this
valley of Tears to a Garden of Pleasure, the Paradise of God, where I should
for ever reign in perfect glory with Christ who is gone before to prepare a
place for those that are followers of him in Humility.

OF A RAINBOW, Or, A Meditation on the fifth day of November.
THe third side or wall of this outward Court, is as on the South; in which I
have fixed a delightsome Rainbow: But I am no Astronomer, and therefore cannot
artificially show you how the Rainbow becomes inge^dred in the Air, when the
glorious Sun with his golden and bright beams is just opposite against a
waterish cloud, which presently causes its moist Timpany to power out and
empty it self upon the place from whence it receives its borrowed liquor:
neither do I intend to show you the variety of colors that are to be found
therein. But I will briefly write thereof, as it is a sign or token of Gods
love and mercy to mankind, Genesis 9. 13. Behold (says God) I set my Bow in the
cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and the earth:
So this day is by Act of Parliament (according to a like president in the Word
of God, Hester 9. 27.) set in the year as a sign or pledge of Gods love and
mercy to us of this Nation, in commemoration of that great and miraculous
deliverance from that unparalled intended Gunpowder Treason, to assure us,
that if we continue in the true Religion, depend and put our whole trust and
confidence in God, and walk in the way of his Precepts, he will never leave
nor forsake us; so that neither of those two merciless enemies of mankind,
Water or Fire, complotted by the accursed crafty inventions of bloody minded
men, shall ever have power to destroy us: For though sometimes he may for our
trial suffer the little Pinace of his Church to be almost covered with waves,
yet in his due time he will arise out of his slumber, to still the raging of
the tempestuous Sea, for the safeguard of his little Bark.

When the proud papistical and presumptuous Spanyard in 88. thought himself
sure of this little Island, and was upon the brinck of victory in his own
imagination; though his ships were many and strong, his warlike provision and
munition great, and his people without number, yet God by one small blast of
his fury, in a moment of time, by weak means, did dissipate and overwhelme his
ships in the narrow Seas, where his strong and warlike provision was
confounded, and his numerous multitude drowned, even as Pharaoh and his Host
in the Red Sea.

So as on this day, when the viperous brood of papisticall Englishmen, for the
extirpation of the true Religion, and overthrow of all policy of the State,
had contrived, and almost brought to effect their intended bloody, monstrous
and prodigious Powderplot: They thinking every thing had been sure, and they
to rule the Land as they pleased; when the King and Queen, Prince, and all the
Flower of the Nobility, the most of the reverend Clergy, Prudent Judges, and
wise Counselors of the Land, should have been with one fatal blow cut off,
and blown into the trembling Air with a horrible thunderclap in a mist of
darkness and cloud of powder, yet even then upon the point of destruction,
Gods all-discerning Eye by the light of an obscure Letter discovered, disclosed
and confounded this devilish design, begotten in hell, and hatched at Rome.
But, God be praised, this Cockatrice was this day broke in the shell, this Brat
was smothered in the cradle; and this fruit never came to perfection, but was
cropped in the bud: And whereas they thought to have swallowed us up quick, when
there was none to help; in the same place they themselves, I mean their limbs,
were set as signs of wonderment and amazement. The particulars of the story be
briefly thus; When that rare Phoenix, of blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth
expired, as soon as that glorious Sun King James, of like happy memory arose
in this Islands Hemisphere; Papists like Locusts swarmed almost in every corner
of the Land, expecting an alteration, or at least a tolleration for their
Religion: But when they saw their hopes frustrated, and being denied the aid
and assistance of foreign Princes (who had made peace with this Land) to effect
their traiterous combination, then most wickedly, divelishly, and unnaturally,
they began to complot this damnable design, in manner following.

In the year of our Lord 1603, in the beginning of the said Kings reign, this
horrible Treason was first of all contrived and invented by Robert Catesby
Esquire, as he confessed at his death, and took all upon himself, excusing the
rest, that they were allured and seduced by him. And as he himself related to
Thomas Winter and John Wright Gentlemen, in these words: I have bethought (said
he) of a way, at one instant to deliver us from all bonds and without any
foreign help to replant again the Catholic religion, which was to blow up
the Parliament house with Gunpowder: for (said he) in that place have they
done us all the mischief; and perchance God has designed that place for their
punishment. This device they all applauded and commended; for this said Winter
struck at the root, and would breed a confusion fit to beget new alternations:
but they were very fearful of the miscarrying thereof, lest if it should not
take effect, the scandal would be so great, which their Catholic religion
should sustain thereby, as not only their enemies, but their friends also
would with good reason condemn them, as Winter himself confessed. Therefore
he went over beyond Sea and acquainted Guido Fawkes therewith, who thereupon
came into England with him; and at the beginning of Easter Term acquainted
Thomas Percy therewith, and about the middle of the said Term they five, to
wit, Catesby, Percy, Winter Wright, and Fawkes, met behind S. Clements Church,
and in a chamber where no body else was, upon a Primer gave to each other an
oath for secrecy, and in the next room heard Mass, and received the Sacrament
thereupon: then they went about the Plot, and for that purpose Percy hired a
house next the Parliament house, of Whyniard keeper of the Wardrobe, and Fawkes
underwent the name of Pe^cyes man, calling himself Johnson. Catesby provided a
house at Lambeth to keep provision of powder, wood, and other materials for
their intended mine, which they made ready there, and in the night conveyed
them by boat to their house by the Parliament to avoid suspicion by often
coming thither, and one Keys was the keeper of Lambeth house, as Fawkes was
of the other; so having all things thus prepared, with fit tools, baked meats,
and other necessaries, the less to need sending abroad, begun to make the Mine
the eleventh of December, 1604. and shortly after took Christopher Wright, and
Robert Winter Esqu. into their fellowship, with like oath for secrecy: and
Fawkes stood as Sentinel to descry any man that came near to give them
warning. And as they were a working, opportunity was given to hire a seller, in
which they laid the powder and left the mine.

Then because they wanted money, they took into their fellowship Sir Everard
Digby, who promised 1500 pounds, and Thomas Tresha^ who promised 2000 pounds,
Percy promised all he could get of the Earl of Northumberlands rents, which
was about 4000 pounds, to provide galloping horses, and other provisions: so
they bought thirty six barrels of Powder, which they covered with wood and
coals, and put them in the said seller. All things sorting thus fit for their
purpose, they had laid the plot thus: that Percy should undertake to c^aze upon
the Duke of York, because of his acquaintance in Court, (for they thought the
Prince would be with his Father at the Parliament) and take him into his
custody, because he with another Gentleman might enter the chamber without
suspicion, and having some dozen others at several doors to expect his
coming, and two or three on horseback at the Court gate to receive him, he
should (the blow being given, until which time he should attend the Dukes
chamber) carry him safe away, for they supposed most of the Court would be
absent, and such as were there not expecting or unprovided for any such matter,
would not make much resistance. For the Lady Elizabeth, It were easy to
surprise her in the country by drawing friends together to a hunting near the
Lord Harringtons. And As^by, Mr. Catesby's house, being not far off, was a fit
place for preparation. Then for money and horses, they thought they could
provide in any reasonable manner (having the Heir apparent) and the first
knowledge by four or five days was ods sufficient. Thus while they thought
all things sure and safe for their intended enterprise, God whose eye sees into
the secrets of all men's hearts, and knows their thoughts long before, by a
strange and miraculous event discovered all this horrible Treason; for the
Saturday, which was but ten days before the Parliament, one of the Lord
Mounteagles Footmen was met by an unknown man of a reasonable tall personage,
and delivered him a Letter, charging him to put it into his Lords hand; which
when the Lord had read, could not tell what construction to make of it, whether
as a foolish Pasquill, or as a thing of consequence; yet concluded not to keep
it secret, but presently that night reveald it to the Earl of Salisbury, who
acquainted three other of the Privy Council therewith, and they upon mature
advice among themselves wondered at the strange contents thereof, would not
make too much inquisition therinto, without first acquainting the King
therewith: so upon Alholland day presented it to his Majesty; the Contents
whereof follow.

My Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of
your preservation: therefore I would advise you as you tender your life, to
devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament, for God and
man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time; and think not
slightly of this advertisement, but retire your self into your country, where
you may expect the event insafety: for though there be ^o appearance of any
stir, ye^ I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet
they shall not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned,
because it may do you good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past, so
soon as you have burnt the Letter: and I hope God will give you the grace to
make good use of it: to whose holy protection I commend you.

The King no sooner read it, but after a little pause, and then reading it over
again, contrary to all Grammatical construction of this sentence in the said
Letter, That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet
should not know who hurt them, and then joining this sentence immediately
following, for the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the Letter,
concluded that the danger mentioned should be some sudden danger: for no other
Insurrection, Rebellion, or whatsoever other private or desperate attempt could
be committed or done in time of Parliament and the Authors thereof unseene,
except it were by Powder, which might be performed by one base Knave in a
corner: And therefore wished that the lower rooms under the Parliament House
should be narrowly searched, or else there should be no going to Parliament:
whereupon the Lord Chamberlain with the Lord Mounteagle made as it were a
careless and racklesse search, where they found in the Vault under the Upper
house great store of Billets, Faggots, and Coals, which gave just cause of
suspicion, and wondered why such extraordinary provision of fuel should be in
that house where Mr. Percy had so seldom occasion to remain: besides viewing
M. Percyes alleged man, they thought him to be a very tall desperate fellow:
but yet in case this Letter should prove but the evaporation of an idle brain,
then a curious search being made, and nothing found, would not only turn to the
general scandal of the King and State, as being suspicious of every light
toy, but lay an ill imputation upon the Earl of Northumberland, this Thomas
Percy being his Kinsman and confident familiar. Therefore upon pretense of
Whyniards missing some of the Kings Stuff, Sir Thomas Knevit a Justice of
Peace in Westminster, with some small company about midnight, the fourth of
November, searching the said house found Mr. Percyes pretended man, standing
without door booted and spurred, and presently apprehended him: then removing
the Coals and Billets found thirty six Barrels of Powder, and other instruments
fit for their purpose; and searching Fawkes, found in his pocket three Matches,
a piece of Touchwood, and a Watch, by which they had tried how long the
Touchwood would continue burning till it came to the train of Powder. When
Fawkes saw this Treason discovered, he instantly confessed, That if he had
been within the house, as he was without, when they first laid hands upon him,
he would have blown up them, himself and all. When the rest of the Traitors
knew for certain that all was discovered, they fled out of the City, and went
to Dunchurch at Sir Everard Digbyes lodging, where they were met by John Grant
one of their Associats, who with others had stolen seven or eight great Horses
out of a Stable in Warwickeshire. And seeing they could not prevail with a
private blow, they went about to practice rebellion, dreaming to themselves
that they had the virtue of a ^nowball, that by running up and down the
country they might increase their company; but as in the other, so in this
also they were deceived: for the greatest company that ever they could get
together was not passing fourscore, and those most of their servants and
Tenants; and much ado they had to keep them from stealing from them. And at
last were all beaten, killed, taken, and dispersed, by the Sheriff of
Worcester, not knowing any thing of the Treason, but only upon their ri^tous
assembly, and stealing the Horses. And see herein Gods judgments, being in the
house of one Stephen Littleton, by chance a spark of fire fell into a Paper of
Powder, and burnt Catesby, Rockwood, and Grant. And in the same house by the
said Sheriff and his company Percy and C^tesby were shot and killed, and their
heads cut off and set on the ends of the Parliament house, and the rest had
trial at Westminster, and were drawn hanged and quartered, their heads fixed
on London Bridge, and their limbs upon the gates of the City.

Thus having seen the true relation of this unparalleled Treason, may I not
very well compare it to the Rainbow an effect of the Air? for it apparently
appears to proceed from the Prince of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, and dwells in utter darkness: And these delight to
work and be in dark vaults with dark Lanthornes, agreeable to their blind
religion.

But if this devilish stratagem of the Prince of Darkness and Miners of
Antichrist had taken effect, which (God be praised) is discovered and defeated,
we should have then seen the Image of the last and terrible day, when the
Sun of man shall descend in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel: we should have heard louder cries and
lamentations, then the mournings of Adadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo. When
Sovereign Majesty and Ecclesiastical and civil authority, and public
justice, and all the honor and digty of the Kingdom should have lain in the
dust, or floted in the Air. The King our Head, the Queen our fertile Mother,
and those young and hopeful Olive Plants, not theirs, but ours, our reverend
Clergy, our honorable Nobility, the faithful Counselors, the grave Judges,
the greatest part of the worthiest Knights and Gentry, as well as of the wisest
Burgesses, the Clerks of the Crown, Council, Signet, Seals, or of any other
principal Judgment feat; all the learned Lawyers, together with an infinite
number of common people.

Nay, their furious rage should not only have lighted upon reasonable and
sensible creatures, without distinction either of degree, sex, or age, but even
the insensible stocks and stones should not have been free of their fury. The
Hall of Justice, the House of Parliament, the Church used for the Coronation of
our Kings, the monuments of our former Princes, the Crown and all other marks
of Royalty. All the Records, as well of Parliament, as of every particular man's
right, with a number of Charters, and such like, should all have been
comprehended under that fearful Chaos: and so the Earth (as it were) opened
should have sent forth such sulphur'd smoke, furious flames, and fearful
thunder, as should by their diabolical doomesday, have destroyed and defaced
in the twinkling of an eye, not only our then living Princes and people, but
even our insensible Monuments reserved for future ages. And so not only we, but
the memory of us and ours, should have been thus extinguished in an instant.

O Lord, what wonderful distractions and dismal confusion would have been
then in the Land! when they who alone could set order in such a time, were all
on the sudden swept away; when the blame of so horrible a Massacre should have
been laid upon the most zealous professors of the truth; when the Popes Bulls
should have been fixed upon the Gates of our chiefest Cities, exposing the
lives and estates of all that had not the mark of the Beast in their forehead,
to spoil, ruin, and destruction.

How would Atheists, Papists, Banckrupts, and all kind of malcontents have
made havoc of all things! how would they have triumphed in the downfall, and
danced in the ashes of the Church and Commonwealth! How soon would they have
turned this most flourishing Island into a desert! Our ancient River, the river
Thames, into the dead Sea, our land into Acheldama, a field of blood, our
strongest Towers, and most magnificent buildings into a Babel of confusion, our
chief Cities into Golgotha's, places of dead men's sculs. Cursed be the wrath
of all traitorous Papists, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was
cruel, nay monstrous and prodigious, to cut off the root and all the branches
at one blow, to remove and overthrow the foundation of Religion and Policy with
one lift, to offer up the royal stem, and the flower of all the Nobility and
Gentry, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Judges, Knights and Burgesses, as a Holocaust or whole burnt offering to the
Moloch of Rome. O let it not be told in Gath nor published in Askalon, lest the
Heathen and Infidels abhor the name of our Nation that bred up such Vipers, or
blaspheme the holy profession of Christians for their sakes. Or if the report
of such a crying or rather thundering sin, cannot but be heard to the
uttermost parts of the Earth, let the authors and actors be descried, to be no
true believers, but Heretics and Miscreants; no servants of Christ, but
factors for Antichrist: and let the Turks, and Mores, and Indians, and all
Pagans, together with seduced Papists in the world know, that thou O Lord whom
we worship in spirit and truth, did miraculously detect and graciously
prevent this bloody design, intrapping the wicked devisers in the work of their
own hands, and taking the Incendiary in his own train. The waters saw thee, O
God, the waters saw, and swelled against the proud Spanish Fleet; the winds saw
thee, O God, the winds saw thee, and furiously blustered at it; and both
winds and Seas obeyed thee, in dissipating and overwhelming it in the narrow
Seas. And now the fire and Powder saw thee O God, and it flew in the eyes and
faces of them that would have put out all the eyes of this Island, and defaced
the whole beauty of this Kingdom for ever.

Death received the word, and destruction observed Law; and confusion it self
kept order in blowing up their estates, and carrying up their quarters, and
fixing them for a terror to all Iesuited traitors over that house, and in the
very place which they would have with Gunpowder sent up all the principal
Members of our body Politic: every eye may now see that dreadful judgment
denounced in thy Word fallen upon the eyes that waited for the destruction of
our Church and Commonwealth, The young Ravens of the valley peck at them, and
the fowls of heaven have eaten them.

Thus have thou hitherto fought for thine anointed and thy dearest Spouse, and
thou art still the same God, with whom there are Issues even out of death it
self. Wherefore we beseech thee, set our affiance in Thee, and fashion our
love more and more unto thee; imprint the memory of this wonderful deliverance
in our hearts, and the hearts of our seed, with the point of a Diamond, that
the children that are yet unborn, may in succeeding ages praise thee for it.
Give us a sight and sense of our crimson and skarlet sins, that brought us so
n^ere even to the brink of so bloody a destruction and utter desolation, and
open the eyes of the Seens of Israel, that they may in this our day look to
those things that belong to our peace; and prevent the danger, and hinder the
growth of that Romish weed; which if it be not cut off by the execution of
wholesome laws (in that kind provided) in time will overrunne the Garden of
thy Spouse, and destroy all her pleasant plants and flowers. Stir them up
seriously to consider that though the match by thy providence be taken out of
the hand of the Traitors, that the danger is not yet past: but that they must
follow the train, and search the lowest and darkest corners of the Vault, and
dig into the Barrels of Powder, and finding that it was dug out of the rock
and foundation of the Jesuits Trent faith, that they ought to bend all their
forces, and by arms and laws suppress it and keep out the grand enemy of
the Truth and our peace, that he never get footing in this Kingdom. Let no
such mysts of fair glosses and pretenses be cast before their eyes, but that
they may clearly see that the Bishop of Rome is the Engineer of these works,
Jesuitical doctrines and persuasions are the train, disloyal hearts the
Vaults, seditious councels and practices the Powder, and idolatrous blind
zeal is the fire, that has heretofore, and is always ready to set all
Kingdoms and States, professing the truth of the Gospel, in a combustion.
Discover O Lord more and more the man of sin, and make him seem as odious to
us, as he is abominable in thy sight. Alter their temper, or spew them out of
this kingdom, who are neither hot nor cold, among us. O let the joyful
Mattens on our fifth of November, and the doleful even-song on theirs,
convince all enemies of the truth, that thou mightily supportest the frame and
fabric of our Sion, but have pulled down the floor, and wilt in due time the
walls of their Babylon.

So let thine enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love thee, be as the
Bunne that goes forth in his full strength. Amen.

A description of the Equator, Or, A Meditation on the Annunciation of the
Virgin Mary.
AS opposite to the foregoing Rainbow, you may behold the Aequinoctiall, which
I have placed as in the North side of this Court. Now the Reasons why I name
this days commemoration, a description of the Equator are first, because as
the Equator or Aequinoctiall is a line drawn in the midst of Heaven, so was
the Virgin Mary at this time (as some Geographers affirm) in the midst of
the earth at Nazareth, a City in the Tribe of Zebulon, three days journey from
Jerusalem.

Secondly, as the Sun coming into the Equator makes the day and night of
equal distance, so also Christ the Son of Righteousness as this day coming
by divine inspiration or semination into the womb of the blessed Virgin; The
cloudy night of the ceremonial Law, and the bright day of the glorious Gospel
were now upon even terms. The law like the Moon having enlightened the world
for almost two thousand years, as some say, gives place to the Sun of the
Gospel to finish his race, to enlighten them that sat in the darkness of
ignorance and shadow of ceremonial figures and types.

But as yet this Sun did not break forth, it was hid under a cloud, as on this
day it newly entered into this blessed Equator. For now it was that the blessed
Virgin by a celestial creature, An Angel of great power, Gabriel by name,
sent from the blessed Trinity, was showed the wonderful conception of her Lord
and Maker, that she should bring him forth, that by his word brought forth all
things; that she should be a Mother, and yet a Virgin; That the Holy Ghost
should come upon her, and the power of the most High should over shadow her.

Here is a wonder above all wonders, for from eternity it was never heard, that
Eternity should enter into the Calendar of Time, that Immensity should be
comprehended, Infinity bounded, Ubiquity enclosed, and the Deity incarnated.
Yet this day the heavenly marriage of the humane Nature with the Divine, by an
unconceiveable hypostaticall union was declared, that it should be consummated
in the undefiled bed of the Virgin Mary.

This contract was long before all time made in heaven, and spoken of by
Prophets ever since the world began. The promised seed of the woman, in Adams
time, typified in the heavenly dew in ^edeons fleece in these particulars.
First, as that fleece, so the Virgin received this heavenly dew, when all the
world was barren, besides her. Secondly, the filling that fleece, was a sign
of the Jews delivery; and the conception of this Virgin a sign, and a
beginning of ours. Thirdly, this fleece received the dew without hurt to the
wool: and this Virgin conceived this immortal dew, without the corruption of
her flesh. Fourthly, Gedeon wrung out this dew, and filled a vessel with it:
And Mary brings forth her Son (that fills this great Vessel, the World, and
all that is in it.) But lastly, in this she exceeds the fleece of Gedeon; for
of the fleece of her body, Christ made himself a Garment (even his own flesh)
which he wears to this day, and will do for ever. This was foretold by Esaias
expressly. Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son: And in a
figurative speech by Jeremy, Behold, says he, the Lord will work a new thing
upon earth, a woman shall compass a man. A strange saying, yet true, for it
was no new thing for one of mankind to be made of another: so was Eve of Adam
long since; for a man to be made without man and woman is older, for so was
Adam; And for one to be made of man and woman, is almost as old, and much more
common; but for one to be made of a woman without man, that is a rare and new
thing indeed. And so was Christ only.

And to show it is a new work, we begin our accounts and reckonings as from
this day, and date the year accordingly. This month the year begins to conceive
and bring forth fruit in the delightful Spring; and some affirm that God
began the worlds creation as on this day, to show that all things become new.

For the confirmation of the truth of this glorious conception, consider the
predictions before rehearsed, and many other, as of the time, Genesis 49. 10. The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet
until Shiloh come; Of the place, Esaias 9. 1. The Land of Zabulon and Nepthalim,
near the way of the sea beyond Jordan and Galilee of the Gentiles, a people
that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, saw a great light; And of
his line and stock, Esaias 11. 1. There shall come a Rod out of the stem of
Iesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots.

The very manner thereof is very observable, and the Message or Annunciation
made unto the Virgin by the Angel, as it is related by the Evangelist; and
Fathers make it apparent and conspicuous: for albeit it depend principally upon
the relation and credit of the Virgin her self, who was only privy thereunto,
and upon the testimony of Joseph, to whom it was revealed by the same Angel
afterward; yet we may consider the circumstances of the thing it self; as
first the simplicity of both the reporters, then how that it is not likely that
Joseph being Just (as is described) would have concealed a thing so much
against himself, and against the Law, if he had not been some way assured of
the truth thereof. Thirdly, the innocent age of the Virgin (who was not past
fourteen years old at that time, as Saint Augustine and some other ancient
Fathers do prove by manifest arguments.) All these things do make it
improbable that she would invent such a thing of her self. And finally, the
strange prophecy which she uttered in her Canticle of Magnificat, and which we
see now fulfilled (albeit at that time very unlikely) to wit, that all
Generations should call her blessed, do make it plainly appear that the
matter must needs be true.

But why stand I thus upon that which is an Article of our Belief, and
requires more the mouth of Faith to receive and apprehend it, then the hand or
tongue of humane reason to demonstrate or describe it: for he is anathematized
that does not believe this Gospel; therefore I will now leave to write any
further of this story, and apply this days work in these uses: First in
contemplation of the Equator (my heart) stated in the midst of my body. Christ
the Sun infused therein by the Spirit of God, making (so long as I live in
this vale of misery, if it were possible) my spiritual and civil actions of
even distance, both in the service of God and duties of my calling, that I may
endeavor truly to worship and serve God in spirit and body, which are both
Gods workmanship. And if on either side it should exceed, not to be as on this
day, the most part in the dark night of men's traditions, and newly entering into
the day of spiritual illumination, but rather that the night of cloudy shadows
should vanish and give place to the day of spiritual verities: Yet I do
conceive it requisite and very fit that in the Church and service of God there
should be decent, comely and reverent comformity and uniformity used and
exercised therein by all, to express and make manifest our profession before
men.

Secondly, in invocation to God, that it would please him to send down into my
heart the messenger of his love (the Holy Ghost) to assure me by manifest
signs and tokens set down in his Word, that Christ is formed in my soul, that
the Lord of life rules in the triangle of my heart, that the Son of God is
conceived in my mind, that so believing the truth of this days commemoration,
and finding in my heart the operation of this heavenly work, I may now (as the
year) begin to spring and grow in all pious and commendable qualities, to the
praise and glory of God, the comfort of others, and endless salvation of my
own soul. Amen.

THE SUN, Or, A Meditation on the Nativity of Christ.
THus (though ruggedly) having finished the outward Court of this beautiful
Fabric, I should now begin to garnish the Inner or Middle Temple, and therein
display the laborious actions of the glorious High Priest. But when I
considered the curious carvings, rare Imbroyderings, and rich materials fit
for such a building: I stood at a stand, not daring further to proceed,
considering my own poverty and insufficiency for the performance thereof,
especially in the very entrance the splendour of this radiant Sun did so dazzle
the eye of my understanding, that I was resolved to rest my self in the door
of this Tabernacle; for I do humbly acknowledge, that I am not enriched with
the pure gold of divine learning, nor the fine silk of sweet eloquence, but yet
(I praise God for it) I am endued with some confused notions, as unhew'd
timber, ragged expressions, as Badgers skins, and rough invention, as Camels
hair, which were of some use in the Tabernacle, as well as gold, purple silk,
and fine linen: therefore having laid the foundation of this work, and reared
it up to the first story, I would not be accounted a foolish builder, to leave
off in the middle of my work: so though I have not such elegant expressions
and learned divisions as the learned, yet I will assay to make a course piece
of work thereof: And though I have not such Eagles eyes as to behold the
Divinity of this glorious Sun, yet being covered with the veil of humanity,
my tender weak eyes may look upon him, and see him as on this day to arise in
the firmament of his Church, as the Sun of righteousness, with healing under
his wings; for Salvation sprung from on high this day has visitedus.

Now as the Sun, I will here write of him in those usual names by which the
Sun is called; which will lively demonstrate the comparative nature of either,
if my dark expressions do not too much eclipse their luster. The natural Sun
is called by four names: Sol, Apollo, Phoebus and Titan. First, he is called
Sol, because he appears alone. All other lights vanish at his presence. There
is but one Sun in the Firmament, so likewise Christ is the only begotten Son
of God by eternal generation: others are the sons of God by adoption. He the
holy one of God, even holiness it self in the abstract; others are holy by
donation in the concrete. He the only Savior of mankind, no salvation but by
him: he the only intercessor and mediator between God and man, excluding Saints
and Angels. He the light that came into the world, without whom is darkness.
In brief he is the only King that governs, defends, and protects the Saints,
the only Priest that offered himself a Sacrifice for the redemption of
mankind, and the only Prophet that shows the way of salvation to his chosen:
so equivalent to Sol.

Secondly, the natural Sun is called Apollo the God of wisdom, knowledge,
and learning. He that was famous in his time for Music, Physic, Poetry, and
Divination: so in like manner Christ is the eternal wisdom of the Father, and
the fountain of al heavenly knowledge, the true Physician of the soul, the
good Samaritan that binds up the broken hearted, heals the afflicted spirit,
and mollifies the hard dispositions of man's depraved nature frozen in sin and
wickedness; he that only can make the sad heart rejoice, and make mercy the
disconsolate soul, whose soule-ravishing parables, answers, and doctrines, were
such as never man spoke, of whose Prophesies and divinations not one jot or
tittle shall fall to the ground without their accomplishment: so the true
Prophet, and so divine Apollo.

Thirdly, the natural Sun is called Phoebus; the spring of light, the
discoverer of all things, and the expeller of darkness: so Christ is the true
light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world: of his fullness
we all receive the light of grace, he is the searcher of the heart, the tryer
of our spirits, he knows our thoughts long before, nothing is hid from his
sight: he shows the vanity of the world, the deceitfulness of riches, the
shame of pleasure, the folly of sport, the danger of greatness, inconstancy of
honor and strickt account to be given for all. At his presence all the gross
darkness of man's ignorance vanishes, he is the fountain of knowledge, for all
the light that all mankind ever had, have, or shall have, is but as a spark to
this Sun, or as a drop to this Ocean, so like Phoebus.

And lastly the Sun is called Titan, for his burning heat, parching nature and
revenging qualities, which he takes upon Grass and grain in the scorching
Summer: so Christ the Sun of righteousness in the hot Summer of the last
judgment, when he shall appear in the clouds with power and great glory,
shall take vengeance upon his enemies, and ease him of his adversaries. Then
shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his hot displeasure.
Then when his wrath shall be kindled, and wax hot, he shall wound even Kings in
the day of his fury with a Scepter of Iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel. Then shall his enemies look upon him whom they have pierced,
and be confounded with shame, and consumed for fear of his heavy displeasure;
for who is able to abide and stand before that consuming fire? so in this
respect as I conceive, agreeable to Titan.

Now having taken a view of this glorious Sun, behold him to arise in the rags
of our nature, out of the cloudy undefiled bed of the blessed Virgin, in this
brief story.

By consent of all writers both Pagan, Jewish, and Christian, Jesus (whom we
believe and confess to be the true Christ, was borne the twenty fifth day of
December, Anno Mundi 4021, in the end of the forty one year of the reign of
the Emperor Octavius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, which was fifteen years
before his reign ended, and in the thirty fourth year of Herod's reign in
Jewry, when the three famous Monarchies of the Assyrians, Persians, and
Grecians, was past over and ended, and the Romans were entered into the fourth,
which was greater than any of the rest according to Daniels Prophecy, five
hundred years before. At this time there was a universal peace over the whole
world: for the said Emperor, after five civil wars waged by himself, and
after infinite broils and blood shed in the world reigned peaceably alone for
many years together, and in token of an universal peace over the whole earth,
he caused the Temple gates of Ianus to be shut, according to the custom of the
Romans in such cases, albeit this happened but twice before from the building
of Rome to that time. And the very same day that Christ was borne in Jury
Augustus commanded in Rome (as afterward was observed) that no man should call
him Lord, thereby to signify the free liberty, rest, joy, and security wherein
all men were after so long miseries, which by continual wars the world had
suffered, to fulfill the Prophecy of Esaias above an hundred years before
Daniel, that at the coming of Christ people should sit in the Tabernacle of
peace in sure dwellings and safe resting places.

And again, he shall be called the Prince of peace, and again, there shall be
no end of peace; and David long before him, in his days shall arise Justice
and abundance of peace.

Now for the particular state of Jewry at Christ's Nativity, thus it was,
according as Josephus the Jew who was borne within five years after Christ's
Passion, describes the same. One Herod a stranger (whose Grandfather was
sexton in Apollos Temple, and his father called Antipater wa^ brought up among
thieves in Idumea) came out of Idumea, was risen to acquaintance and favor
with the Romans partly by his said fathers means, who was (as Josephus words
are) a well monied man, industrious and factious. And partly by his own
diligence and ambition, being of himself both witty, beautiful, and of
excellent rare qualities. By which commendations, he came at length to marry
the daughter of Hyrcanus King of Iewry, that was descended lineally of the
house of David, and Tribe of Judah; and by his marriage, obtained of his father
in law to be Governor of the Province of Galily under him. But Hircanus
afterward falling into the hands of the Parthians, that carried him into
Parthia, Herod run away to Rome, and there by the especial help and favor
of Anthony, that ruled together in company with Octavius, he obtained to be
created King of Jury, without any title or interest in the world, for that not
only his said father in law Hyrcanus was yet alive in Parthia, but also his
younger brother Aristolulus, and three of his sons, named Antigonus,
Alexander and Aristobulus, and diverse others of the blood royal in Iewry.
Herod then by this means having obtained that Kingdom: procured first to have
in his hands the foresaid Hyrcanus, and so put him to death: he also brought to
the same end, his younger brother Aristobulus, and his three sons likewise, he
put to death also his own wife Mariamnes, that was King Hyrcanus daughter, as
also Alexandra her Mother, and soon after two of his own sons, which he had by
the said Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royal of Judah. And a
little after that again, he put to death his third son named Antipater. He
caused also to be slain at one time forty of the chiefest Noble men of the
Tribe of Juda, and as Philo the Jew writes, (that lived at the same time with
him) he put to death all the Sanhedrin, that is, the seventy two Senators of
the Tribe of Juda that ruled the people. He killed the chief of the sect of
the Pharisees. He burned the Genealogies of all the Kings and Princes of the
house of Juda, and caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Historiographer that was
his servant, to draw out a pedigree for him and his line, as though he had
descended from the ancient Kings of Juda. He translated the high Priesthood and
sold it to strangers, and finally, he so raced, dispersed, and mangled the
house of Juda, as not one jot of government, dignity, or principality remained
therein. And when he had done all this, then was Jesus of the same house and
line of Judah, borne in Bethlehem the proper City of David, which David was the
founder and first author of regality in Juda. Now then consider the prophecy
of Iacoh, concerning the particular time of Christ's appearance, almost two
thousand years before these things fell out, Come hither my children, (said
he) that I may tell you the things which are to happen in the latter days,
etc. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet until he come, who is to be sent: The expectation of all Nations. Which
prophecy that it was fulfilled now at Christ's Nativity, when Herod had
extinguished all Government in Judah: no man can deny, that will acknowledge
the things set down before, which are recorded by writers both of that time,
and of the Jewish Nation and Religion themselves. And that it was never
fulfilled from David's days (who began the government of the house of Judah)
until this time, appears plainly by all histories and records both divine
and profane. For that from David, (who was the first King) unto Zedechias that
was the last, and dyed in the captivity of Babylon; the Scripture shows how
all the Kings descended of the house of Judah. And during the time of their
captivity in Babylon (which was seventy years) the Jews were always
permitted to choose themselves a Governor of the house of Judah, whom they
called Resch galuta: and after their deliverance from Babylon, Zorobabel was
their captain of the same Tribe: and so others after him, until you come to
the Macchabees, who were both Captains and Priests: for that they were by the
mothers side of the Tribe of Judah, and by the fathers side of the Tribe of
Levi, as Rabbi Kimchi. And from these men ^owne to Hyrc^nus and Aristobu^us
whom Herod slew, there continued still the same line, as Tosephus declares: so
that by this Prophecy it is evident, that Jesus was borne at the proper time
appointed for the Messiah, when there was neither King nor Captain, nor High
Priest, nor Counselor, nor any one Governor of the house and Tribe of Judah
left in Jury.

For further proof that Christ came incarnate into the world at the time
appointed, here might be showed the destruction of the second Temple, according
to Daniels prophecy, after sixty two weeks Christ shall be slain. The
attestation of Oracles, the observation of Rabbis, and expectation of all the
Jews at that time, but I intend brevity; and this is elsewhere learnedly
described by diverse famous Writers. Therefore I conclude, as Saint Luke
declares it in the second Chapter 1. It was (says he) when Augustus Caesar
caused the whole world to be taxed, by taking of every person in all places a
penny, whereby they might profess themselves subject to the Roman Emperor, and
he might know how many Towns, Cities, and persons were in the whole world
under his dominion, and never till then was the like done. Gods providence
secretly working in this, that it might be the more evident that this was the
time of the Messtah. In whom, as in their common Lord and Head, people of all
Nations throughout the world are united in humble obedience to him their
Sovereign. For the rest of the Nativity of our blessed Savior, it is so
learnedly and divinely written by Mr. Austin, that my weak invention is not
able in the least measure to imitate, much less should this my dim candle show
any light before his bright Sun. Therefore I shut up all with what I find
written concerning the Manger in which Christ was laid, which by consent of
Antiquity, was a place without the City, hewn out of a Rock, and called by
the name of a Manger. Saint Basil says, The Birth of Christ was a common Feast
for all creatures: Angels came singing, the Stars run about the heavens; the
Magi are brought from the Gentiles, and the earth receives him in a Cave.
Justin Martyr says, That because Joseph had no place to turn into Bethlehem,
he went into a Cave near thereunto Origin, There is shew^d in Bethlehem a
cave wherein Christ was born, and in it a Manger. Theo We show no magnificent
things, but a Den, a Manger, and a poor Virgin. Jerome writes of Paula, that
she went into the Den of our Savior, the Virgins Inn. And Brocardus, who
traveled thither, says, It was on the East part of the City. And had it not
been without the City, the Shepherds had not found him, it being late at
night, and the City gates shut. And some affirm that part of it remains to be
seen at this day, cut out of rock, not of marble, but other stone, as many
mangers be in that country. But whether it was an Inn, or a Cave within or
without the City, it is not material: yet this shows the poverty of the
Virgin and her Spouse, that they were not able to make any great provision. Now
I will conclude this days Meditation with that divine Prayer of Doctor
Featley's, in these words: Gracious Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and
Savior of Man, the Joy of Angels, and dread of devils, the Jews Messiah, and
the Gentiles Star, the Hope of the living, and the Resurrection of the dead,
the the Way to all that come unto thee, the Truth to all that know thee, and the
Life to all that believe in Thee: Make good all thy glorious and gracious
Titles unto me. Lord protect me, Jesus save me, Christ my anointed King rule
me, my anointed Priest sanctify me, my anointed Prophet, reveile unto me
the secrets of thy Kingdom. Oh Christ, whose Name is an Ointment powered out;
anoint me with the oil of Gladness, this day above others. This is the day
which the Lord has made, I will rejoice and be glad in it; nay, I dare take
the note higher and sing, This is the day in which the Lord was made, I will
exult and triumph in it. Thou which made al days, were this day made of a
woman, and made under the Law From all eternity, it was never heard, that
eternity entered into the Calendar, of time, supreme Majesty descended into the
womb; Immensity was comprehended, Infinity bounded, Vbiquity enclosed, and the
Deity incarnated: Yet this day it was seen; for this day the Word became
flesh; God became man, and to effect this wonderful mystery, a Virgin became a
Mother: one deep calls upon another; one miracle begets another: the
Sun brings forth all other days, but this day brought thee forth the Sun
of Righteousness; If we set our voices, and instruments, and heartstrings to
the highest strain of joy at the birth of great Kings and Princes; what ought
I to do at this day, on which thou the King of heaven wast borne upon the
earth? At the marriage of great personages, men give full scope to all manner
of expressions of carnal joy, even oftentimes to the very surfeit of the senses
with pleasure: how then should I be ravished with spiritual joy at this time,
when heaven and earth, the divine nature and humane were married? The contract
was in heaven before all times, but the marriage was this day consummated in
the undefiled bed of the Virgin. Lord who this day came down to me, draw me
up to thee, and give me access with more confidence and boldness; for now
thou art become my Brother and Ally by blood. The rays of thy divine Majesty
will not dazzle the eyes of my soul, they being now veiled with thy flesh. This
day thou did unite thy self to me naturally and substantially, and becamest
truly flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone: unite me to thee this day
spi^itually, and make me a true member of thy mystical body, that I may be
flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone. Lord thou did this day participate
of my humane nature, make me this day participate by grace of thy divine, so
far as I am capable thereof; and impart and communicate unto me the merit of al
thyactions and benefit of all thy sufferings in this thy nature. O my Lord and
my God, who by assuming flesh unto thy divine person, have sanctified it, and
highly advanced it far above all creatures, keep me from defiling my flesh
with sinful pollutions; or abasing, or inthralling it to Satan. O Son of God,
who by this incarnate Nature, becamest the Son of Man, make me the sinful
son of man by Grace and Adoption to become the son of God. And as thou this day
according to the words of thine Angel were borne to me, be borne also in
me, that from henceforth I live not, but thou in me. Let thy Spirit quicken
me, thy Flesh nourish me, thy Wisdom guide me, thy Grace sanctify m^, and
thy Word instruct me. Let the Holy Ghost, of Whom thou wast conceived, beget
thee in me, by the Immortal seed of thy Word. Let my Faith conceive thee, my
Profession bring thee forth, my Love embrace thee, and Devotion entertain, and
continually keep thee with me till thy second coming: So come unto me Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

THE MOON, OR, A Meditation on New-yeares day.
AFter you have taken a view of the Sacrifice prepared ( A Lamb slain from the
beginning) you may be pleased to behold how the Priest begins to draw its
blood with the sharp knife of the Ceremonial Law (as on this day) which may
very well be compared to the Moon from her fourfold nomination. First she is
called Lucina, or Luna, because she is a light which appears in the dark
night: so the Ceremonial Law was as a Light in the night of ignorance, when
all the world was in darkness. God separated the Jews to himself, as David
says, God has given Laws unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto
Israel: he has not dealt so with any other nation, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws. Secondly, the Moon is called Cynthia, which was an
high hill in Delos, that shadowed the whole Island: So these Laws were but the
shadows of good things to come, as Saint Paul says: They were all under a
cloud, but now the veil is taken away, the partition wall is broken: The Sun
appears, the shadows vanish, and saving knowledge is apparent to all Nations
in the world, that do not wilfully shut their eyes against that light.
Thirdly, the Moon is called Phoebe, to signify (as I conceive) that all the
splendour and brightness she has it is from the Sun: So these legal
Ceremonies came from the Son of righteousness, the wisdom of the Father, God
Almighty commanded, instituted and ordained them: It also shows that they are
true light, though dim and dark. And last of all, the Moon is called Diana,
the Goddess of Chastity to show her simplicity and purity: so likewise these
ceremonies in themselves were harmless and undefiled, but may be abused as
they are used. Having taken a view of the Metaphor, see it in the thing it
self. Circumcision is the cutting off the foreskin of man's flesh, which in
Latin is called Praeputium, whereby God would have Abraham and his posterity
distinguished from other Nations, and therefore was called the sign of the
Covenant between God and his people; which was to be performed the eight day
after the birth of the child, and they that refused to be circumcised, were to
be out off from the living, Genesis 17. The reason of which Law was to signify,
that all that is begotten of man is corrupt and must be mortified. Now because
Christ, as on this day, subjected himself to this Law. Epiphanius writes, that
the followers of Ebion and Cerinthus gather from hence that Christians ought to
be circumcised, because the disciple ought to be as his master is. But he
confutes them thus: Christ was not circumcised as a mere Man, as they hold,
but being God, he came down from heaven, by taking the true nature of man, and
was circumcised, that this figure might appear to have the spiritual effect
from him, that from thenceforth not figures any more, but the truth might be
divulged by him, and his Disciples. He was circumcised for many causes. First,
that he might show the truth of his flesh against the Manichees. Secondly, that
it might appear, that his Humanity was not consubstantiall with his Divinity,
against Apollinaris. Thirdly, that he brought it not from heaven, against
Valentinus. Fourthly, that he might confirm Circumcision, which did serve as a
figure of his coming. And lastly, that the Jew^s might have no excuse left
unto them: for if he had not been circumcised, they might have said, they could
not receive a Christ uncircumcised. Origin says, As we dye with Christ dying,
and rise with Christ rising; so we are circumcised with Christ's Circumcision,
so that we need not now to be circumcised. Beda renders the reason thus, Christ
was circumcised, to commend unto us the virtue of obedience by his own
example, and that in compassion he might help those, that being set under the
Law, were not able to bear the yoke of the Law, and thus he which came in
the similitude of sinful flesh, does not refuse the remedy, whereby sinful
flesh was wont to be cleansed, there being the same remedy against the wound
of original sin in Circumcision, which is now in Baptism; for as Athanas.
says, Nothing else was figured out by Circumcision, but the spoiling of the
old generation, in that part of the body was cut away which was the cause of
generation: Therefore Christ being without original sin, needed not to be
circumcised, but only to commend obedience by his example, and to take away
the yoke of the Law. For our sakes only he was circumcised in his flesh, that
we in him might be circumcised in spirit; and Cyril says, that Christ was
circumcised the eighth day* and so rose again the eighth day, and intimat^d
unto us the spiritual Circumcision, when he said, Go teach all Nations,
Baptising them etc. At the same time he had the Name JESUS imposed upon him,
which signifies a Savior, because he is the salvation of the whole world,
which he prefigured in his Circumcision, according to which the Apostle says,
Ye are circumcised, not with Circumcision m^de with hands, ^ut with the
Circumcision of Christ. Now it is rende^ed by some of the Rabbis that the name
of the Messiah shall be Jesus for this reason among others, that as the name of
him who first brought the Jews out of bondage into the Land of promise, was
Jesus of Iosuah, which is all one, so must his name be Jesus, that shall the
second ^ime deliver them from the bondage wherein they are, and restore them to
their old and ancient possession of Iewry, which is the chief benefit they
expect by the Messiah: which is true in a spiritual sense. And the express
name of Jesus was prophesied long before Christ, as it is to be seen in the
second book of Esdras; which though it be not canonical, yet it is allowed for
a good book, in these words of God the Father. Behold, the time shall come when
the sign shall appear that I have told, etc. And my son Jesus shall be
revealed, with these who are with him. And after those days my son Christ
shall dye, and the earth shall render those that sleep therein. So now having
taken a view of the old Law, let us look into the new: and the rather, because
this day is called New-yeares-day, the beginning of the Julian year. And the
Sacrament that came in place of the old is called the Sacrament of initiation,
the beginning or entrance into a holy profession. And it is as a most
effectual pledge and witness of our renewing and restoring by Christ, as it
is well set down in our Common Catechism in these words. For we being by
nature borne in sin and the children of wrath, are by the meritorious blood of
Christ made the children of grace; which is lively represented in the element
of water: for as water purifieth the uncleanness of the body, so (says the
Apostle) The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin: for we are buried
with Christ in Baptism. That is, he has by his death so fully satisfied for
our sins, that by his mighty power sin is dead in them that lay hold on him by
a true and a lively faith, which with repentance is required in persons to be
baptized: for the efficacy of Christ's blood signified by the element of water
in Baptism, is not only to set before our eyes the expiation and purgation
from sin, but also to demonstrate our livelihood and growth in grace; for so
says the Apostle, that like as Christ was raised from the dead to the glory of
the Father, so we also should w^lke in newness of life. Now here are the great
benefits we receive by Christ at our initiation, mortification, and
vivification; the casting off the old man, and the putting on of the new. The
death of sin, and the life of grace And the duty on our part, that we may be
fitted for this great benefit, is a godly resolution joined with an earnest
endeavor to consecrate our selves to the forsaking of sin and wickedness; and
a lively faith, whereby we lay hold and feel the power of this inward washing
by the Holy Ghost. Therefore I conclude with the prayer for the day, which I
find excellently framed to my hand in these words. Most tender and
compassionate Lord, now first known by thy name Jesus, who being the true Vine
which yeeldest the wine that gladdeth the heart, wast pruned this day with the
sharp knife of circumcision, and b^eddest for me, have pity and compassion on
me, who with weeping eyes and a bleeding heart come unto thee; beseeching thee
that these drops of blood which fell from thee this day may satisfy for the
sin of my Birth, and the whole stream that ran from all the parts of thy body
in the Garden, and on the Cross, may expiate all my numberless actual sins;
whether they be sins of lighter tincture, or of a skarlet dye: sins like
beams, or sins like moats: sins conceived in the heart only, or sins brought
forth into act: sins in my belief, or sins in my life: sins once committed, or
sins often repeated; sins before or after my calling; sins of impiety against
thee, or sins of Iniquity against my neighbor, or sins of impurity against my
own flesh: for of all these I have a great load, they are more in number then
the hairs of my head, they are a burden too heavy for me to bear; they lie
upon my conscience like so many Talents of lead, and would press me downc to
hell, did not thy mercy take hold of the hand of my faith to support me in hope
even above hope. How should I hope if I think upon thy greatness* how should I
not hope, i^ I think upon thy goodness? How should I hope, if I weigh my sins?
How should I not hope, if I weigh thy Merits? How should I hope, if I consider
my Actions? How should I not hope, if I consider thy Passions? How should I
hope, if I number my Transgressions? How should I not hope, if I number thy
Blessings and favors toward me? How should I hope, if I remember how often I
have refused grace after it has bin offered unto me? How can I but hope, if I
remember how often Grace has been offered unto me after I refused it? And still
hope I will, as long as thou retainest thy Name JESUS, which this day thou
receivedst, when thou offeredst the first fruits of thy blood for my sin,
without which thou could not have been my JESUS; for so foul and festered
were my sores, that nothing could heal them but a bloody knife. But why
should this bloody instrument be applied to thy purest, tenderest Immaculate
flesh, made all of Virgins blood? There was no superfluity to be pared off in
thee, nor rank blood to be let out: the superfluous skin was on me, yet the
knife is on thee: the festered sores were in my body, yet the lance is in thy
flesh. Thou have the pain, I the ease; thou the smart, I the cure: O
wonderful Cure! O more wonderful Love! out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings as thou have ordained, so may thou justly challenge Praise, who in
thy In^ancie made such an assay of my Redemption, and tenderedst the earnest
of thy blood for me. Not nine days old thou sheddest drops of blood for me,
far more precious than so many drops of the richest Balsamum to cure my wounds.
Let all flesh praise thee, who healest it by thy wounds: eternal thanks be
given unto thee for thy Circumcision, whereby thou have abolished Circumcision
it self, and provided me an easier rem^dy of original sin, the sacred Laver
of Regeneration. Water now serves in stead of blood, and a gentle rubbing of
the flesh for cutting and wounding it. By the Circumcision of thy flesh thou
have merited for me the fulfilling of thy Fathers promise, and condition of his
Covenant to circumcise the foreskin of our hearts. By this thy rasor thou have
fitted the Tables of my heart: now write thy Laws and love in them. By
receiving this Seal of the Covenant in thy flesh, thou have sealed to me thy
care of me in thy nonage. First, O Lord, I am everlastingly to praise thee for
taking my flesh upon thee; and next for leaving part of it with me, as a pledge
of thy love thou bear to me from thy Mothers womb. In thy infancy thou
bleddest for me; in thy twelfth year thou arguedst for me; in thy youth thou
obeyedst for me, and in thy ripe and perfect age thou sufferedst and dyedst for
me. To thee therefore, as it is my bounden duty, I offer the buds of my
childhood, the blossoms of my youth, and the fruits of my age. As thou betimes
did set to the work of my Redemption, and on those terms acceptedst the Name
JESUS: So let me betimes give my name to thee, and enter into thy service. Let
me bear thy yoke even from my youth. Lord, who this day were circumcised in
the flesh; Circumcise me in the heart, that I may in purity, sincerity and
uprightness of heart walk before thee all the days of my life: neither
circumcise my heart only, but my ears, eyes, hands, head, and feet, that no
superfluity of maliciousness, nor impurity remain in me. Now thou have renewed
the face of the earth, renew this day, and repair thy decayed Image in me.
Thou have begun a new year, begin in me a new Reformation, make me, I beseech
thee, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me. The year like the
Serpent has cast off his old skin, and put on a new; so let me also cast off
my old Man, and put on the new Man; and from this day to my old age and death
walk in newness of life. That I may be a fit guest to be admitted into the
new heaven, where dwell^^h Righteousness, and to be entertained at thy Table,
and drink new Wine with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom for evermore.

Amen.
MARS, or a Meditation on Ashwednesday.
IN time of the ceremonial Law, the Paschall Lamb was commanded to be roasted
with fire, dressed and prepared with sour herbs, to be a fitting sacrifice to
God for the people. And Christ the true Paschall Lamb in accomplishment
thereof, throughout the whole course of his life was continually broyled in the
fire of affliction, and seasoned with the sour revilings and bitter taunts of
malicious men, that he might become a pleasant sacrifice to God his Father. Now
as the Planet Mars is three years before he accomplish or fulfill his
celestial race, so likewise Christ in the race or circuit of his ministerial
office was three years, viz. from the one and thirtieth year of his age to
his death. And as Mars, though in himself inoffensive, yet opposed by contrary
aspects, proves fatal; so Christ, if well placed in pious hearts, governes his
chosen with the sweet influences of his grace but if opposed by malicious
wicked hearts, he turns into a consuming fire. He is as a good Captain over
his soldiers to keep them in good order, as a shepherd over his flock, to
bring those that obey him into a safe harbor and pleasant pastures; But proves
a severe Judge against those that will not be governed by him. And lastly,
though the Planet Mars be never so much opposed, does not give over his race,
but holds out to the end; so Christ notwithstanding all opposition that ever
could be made against him by men, as Jews, Priests, and Herod, or devils, as on
this day; yet he continued his course, and vanquished and run over all, even
sin, death and hell. For the Fast of Christ at this time is so well and
learnedly written by many, that should I adventure to write any thing thereof,
or any thing else but what I find writ in learned Authors, I should too much
blaze my own ignorance. Therefore I will briefly write of the Life and Actions
of Christ, as they are learnedly described for the confirmation of the Truth,
in these words. And first touching the things done by him after his coming out
of Egypt, (which might be about the sixth or seventh year of his age) until
his Baptism by Saint John, (which was the thirtieth, and as some affirm upon
the seventh of October in the middle of the last week spoken of by Daniel,
cap. 9.) there is little recorded, either in Profane or Ecclesiastical
Writers: for that as Saint Iustine, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Augustine and
others do write, he bestowed that time in the common exercise and labors of
man's life; thereby to show himself true Man, and give demonstration how much
he detested and hated idleness. But after his Baptism, viz. when he was past
thirty years of age, (for he was full thirty the twenty five of December)
because it was not lawful for any to be admitted into the ministry before they
were so old, Number. 4. he began to preach in the month of January and February,
and his whole doctrine was directed to the manifestation of his Fathers will,
and amendment of man's life. It tends all to this one ground and principle,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy
self. It was plain, easy, perspicuous and evident, though it treated of most
high mysteres. It had neither pomp nor pride of rhetorical words, nor
flattering of man's wickedness, as the doctrine of many Philosophers had,
neither consisted it in unprofitable external ceremonies, (as the later
observation of the Jewish Law did) nor was fraught with carnality and spirit of
this world; as the Turkish Alcoran, and other sectaries doctrine is. But all
was simplicity, all was spirit, all was truth, all was honesty, all was
humility, all was charity. It took away or disanulled no one perfect or
spiritual point of Moses Law, but rather revived, interpreted, fulfilled and
made perfect the same. For whereas that commanded external observance, this
adds also internal obedience: whereas that said, Love your friends; this
adjoyneth, Love also your enemies: whereas that commanded we should not kill,
this further commands to speak no angry words: whereas that prohibited
actual adultery; this also forbids to coyet in the mind: whereas that said,
Take no interest or usury of a Jew that is thy country man; this says, take it
of no man whatsoever: whereas that accounted every Jew only to be thy
neighbor; this teaches every person living to be thy brother: whereas that
taught thee to offer up a calfe, a sheep, or an ox for thy sins; this
instructs thee, to offer up a contrite heart by faith in the blood of him
that dyed for all, with a firm and resolute purpose of amendment of life. And
finally, this doctrine tends wholly to the true, sincere, and perfect service
of God thy Lord, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of his only
Name, Power, Goodness and Glory; to the depression of man's pride, by the
discovering his misery; to the contempt of this world and vain pomp thereof;
to the mortification and subduing of our fleshly appetite; to the true and
unfeigned charity of our neighbor; to the stirring up of our spirit to
celestial cogitations; to peace of conscience, tranquillity of mind, purity of
body, consolation of our soul, and in one word, to reduce mankind again to a
certain estate of innocence, simplicity, and Angelical sanctity upon earth,
with his eye fixed only in the eternal inheritance of Gods kingdom in heaven.

This was the doctrine delivered by Jesus: which is the same that the Prophets
foretold should be delivered by the Messiah. And for his life and conversation,
by the testimony of his greatest adversaries, it was more admirable then his
doctrine; his life being a most lively table, wherein the perfection of all his
doctrine was expressed, a man of such gravity as never in his life was noted to
laugh: of such humility as being the Son of God, he scarce used in this world
the dignity of a servant; of such sweet and mild behavior, as all the
injuries of his enemies never wrested from him one angry word. Finally he was
such an one as he was described by Esaias many ages before he was borne, in these
words; he shall not cry nor contend, neither shall any man hear his voice in
the streets: a bruised reed he shall not break, nor the smoking flax he will
not quench, etc And as his life and conversation was foretold by Prophets, so
his miraculous works also were foretold by the Prophet Esaias and others, with did
consist of internal, and external acts. For first the calling and retaining
of his Apostles and other followers, who were of diverse callings, states,
conditions, trades, and occupations in the world. And yet all upon the sudden
left both father and mother, wife, children, and other temporal respects, and
followed him who had nothing to give or promise them in this world. A man that
never spoke them fair, or uttered doctrine that was not repugnant to the
sensuality of this life, as may appear by their own writings and testimonies
of him. A man that was contemned by the better sort, as then it might seem;
that is, by the wise and learned of that country, and especially disliked by
them that were in government as a dangerous and troublesome man to the state,
one that had neither friends to bear him out, nor a house to put his head in.
And yet, notwithstanding all this, that worldly men and women and some such
also as were great sinners, and loose livers before should leave all their
worldly hope, stay and condition, to follow such a man, with so great
inconveniences, losses, dangers, and disfavours as they did; and should
continue with him in all his afflictions, and be content to dye and lose their
lives rather then forsake him or abondon his service. This (I say) is such a
miracle, as never in the world fell out the like, and must needs be granted by
his chi^fest enemies to be supernatural. The second point is of external
things and facts done by Jesus, above all power of humane ability, in the sight
and knowledge of all the Jews; which facts were published by our Evangelists,
and especially by Saint Matthew in the Hebrew tongue, while yet the persons
were alive, upon whom they were wrought, or infinite other that might be
witnesses thereof. As for example, the raising of Lazar^s in Bethania, that was
a Village but a mile or two distant from Jerusalem, at whose death and burial,
(being a Gentleman) many Scribes and Pharisees must needs be present (according
to the Jewish custom at that time) and they saw him both deceased, interred,
and the funeral feast observed for him, as also raised again from death by
Jesus, after four days of his burial, with whom they did eat and drink, and
converse after his return to life, and every day might behold him walking up
and down in the streets of Jerusalem. This story could not be feined. So in
like manner the raising of the Archi-Synagogues daughter, whose name is
affirmed to be Iairus, with diverse other circumstances that do make the thing
most notorious. The raising of the widows son before the gate of the City
Naim, in the prefence of all the people that bore the said corpse, and stood
about it; the healing of ^he Cripple in Jerusalem, that had lain thirty and
eight years lame, at the Pooles side or Bath called Probatica, which miracle
was done also in the sight of infinite people. The casting out a legion of
devils from a man that for many years was known to live in the mountains,
the feeding and filling of five thousand men beside women and children at one
time, and four thousand at another, with a small parcel of bread and a few
fishes. The turning of water into wine at a marriage in Cana, in the presence of
all the ghests, the healing of him by a word only that had an incurable
dropsy, and this at the table of a principal Pharisee and in the sight of all
that sat at dinner with him; the giving sight to him that was borne blind
well known to many. These and diverse other such miracles which were done in
the sight and presence of an infinite number of people and recorded by our
Evangelists, at such times when many desired to discredit the same, and might
have done easily by many witnesses and authority. If any one part thereof had
been subject to calumniation; cannot in reason or probability be doubted of.
And last of all (though more occult and secret) yet not the least, but rather
the greatest miracle that ever Christ did in his life is his fasting forty
days and forty nights, typified in the fast of Moses and Elias, recorded by
three Evangelists for confirmation of the truth thereof. And all that while was
tempted of the Devil, as S. Luke expressly says, being forty days tempted
of the devil, yet some think he endured all those sharp temptations in one
day, whom in the end he overcame with his own weapons. And this happened upon him
presently after he was baptized of John Baptist, so says S. Mark, Immediately
the Spirit drives him into the wilderness. And I note it the rather, because
it is the usual custom of Satan now in these days to deal with the
servants as he dealt with the Lord. As soon as they begin to consecrate their
endeavors to the service of God, the devil by the wind of promotion, the
allurements of pleasures, or spur of worldly profit drives them into the
wilderness of worldly affairs, where they remain long ere they can get out
of the entanglements of many thorny cares and anxieties of mind. How this
wilderness was called, the Evangelist does not specify: but it is thought to
bethe desert of Ara^ia P^traea, and that our Savior fasted upon the mountain
of Sinai, where Moses and Elias fasted fo^ty days and forty nights, for there
was no place more fit for S^tl^an to tempt our Savior in then where the Law
was delivered, which is the power of sin: for although the Son of God was
without sin, yet he took upon him the sins of all the world. And so our
Savior Christ according to common computation continued in this desert from
the seventh of October to the sixteenth of November, which was forty days and
forty nights. And upon the seventeenth of November hungered. And then the devil
with an extraordinary boldness carried him from mount Sina with great violence
through the air, and set him upon the top of a pinnacle of the temple, which
was so exceeding high that whosoever looked down from it into the valley of
Cedron, their eyes daz^led and it seemed as though there had been clouds in the
bottom of the valley, for it was six hundred foot from the bottom to the top.
From this place the devil bad our Savior throw himself down, after the
devil set Christ upon an exceeding high mountain: but what hill it was or how
it was called, the Evangelist does not set down, but it is to be thought, it
was the high mountain Nebo, which was also called Pisgah, and stood twenty
four miles from Jerusalem Eastward where God showed unto Moses all the land of
Canaan beyond Jordan. And in this place the devil showed our Savior the
Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them; saying, All these will I give
thee, etc. Now our Church has piously set a part this annual fast to begin as
on this day in commemoration of that fast of our Savior: for by our conformity
we show whose servants we are, even his whose works we imitate, and that
abstinence from usual repast might be a means to quicken our resolutions
against the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at Easter; for
though fasting in it self be no religious act in which the immediate worship
of God consists, For the kingdom of God (as the Apostle says) consists not
in meat and drink, yet it is a religious act as accessory to the worship,
serving as a help or preparative to faith, prayer, etc. And so may be called a
good work. And therefore in all Churches and in all Ages since the Apostles
time, it has been piously observed, as is learnedly demonstrated in diverse
treatises extant in English. Now why this day is called Ashwednesday is, for
that the Christians in the Primitive times retained many of the Heathens and
Jewish ceremonies, as Jobs friends sprinkled dust upon their heads toward
heaven; the King of Nineveh and Queen Esther, with the Jews, sat in ashes to
express their sorrow: so they to express their own vileness and
unworthiness cast ashes on their heads. But this was an unnecessary ceremony,
and therefore in the reformed Churches well dismissed. So now I conclude this
days meditation with that divine prayer of Doctor Featelies in these words. Oh
let not my Lord be angry, that I who am but dust and ashes dare speak unto him:
for my sins cry for vengeance, and shall I be silent for pardon? Gracious God,
either silence them, or hear me. If thou will not hear the voice of my words,
hear the voice of my tears: if thou will not hear them, hear the voice of
thy sons blood which speaks better things then the blood of Abel. I
confess I have sorely displeased thee, but it troubles me that I have so
incensed thee; I have grieved thy Spirit, but it grieveth me that I should be
so graceless as to grieve that Spirit of grace, which seals thy chosen to
salvation. I deserve that thou should even abhor me for my sins, but I
abhor my self for them in dust and ashes. I have offended thee in gluttony,
but I now fast for it; in pride, but I humble my self; in laughter and sports,
but I weep for it; in sinful joys, but I mourn for it; I have wallowed in
filthy pleasures, but I wallow for it in dust and ashes: I have broken all thy
Comman dements, but I have broken my heart in true contrition for it. Thou
did not break a bruised reed, will thou grind to powder a broken heart? What
profit is in my blood O Lord, when I go down into the pit? Nay what profit is
in thy blood O blessed Redeemer, if they for whom it was shed go down into
the pit of destruction? shall the dust give thanks unto thee O Lord, or the
ashes and cinders of hell praise the God of heaven? Hear O Lord and have mercy
upon me, thou that healest those that are broken in heart, and give medicine
to cure their sickness, raise up my prostrate and dejected soul. Why did
thou hunger O Lord, but to satisfy for my gluttony? why did thou thirst, but
to satisfy for my drunkenness? why did thou weep, but to satisfy for my
sinful joys? why did thou endure unspeakable torments, but to satisfy for
my lewd pleasures? why did thou dye an ignominious death, but to satisfy for
my sinful life? why did thou shed thy blood, but to satisfy for my crimson
sins? Adam our first parent did eat the forbidden fruit, and all our teeth are
set on edge, but thy fasting forty days has fully satisfied for his eating.
But I renew my sins daily, and thou renewest thy mercies. The guilt of my sin
is great, but the price of thy blood is greater. I have offended an infinite
Majesty, but satisfaction has been made by an infinite Majesty. My
wickedness cannot exceed thy goodness, for my power of sinning is finite, but
thy faculty of pardoning is infinite. Wherefore since my sins (be they never
so many, never so weighty) fall within the measure of thy mercy, and compass
of thy goodness, and since it is all one with thee to give what I ask, and to
incite me to ask, to heal my wounds, and to make me feel the smart of them;
Lord who have given me the one, deny me not the other: rebuke the surges of
temptations, and quiet my soul. Thou who in the days of thy flesh offeredst
up prayers with strong cries, here the strong loud cries of a penitent sinner.
Thou who tookest upon thee our infirmities, take pity upon them: thou who were
in thine agony stricken with horror, and unutterable grief, allay the troubles
of my affrighted conscience. Thou who fastedst forty days, accept of my
humiliation these forty days; and grant that my stomach may not only fast
from accustomed meats, but all my senses from their usual delights, and most
of all my heart from worldly comforts and contentments. Let no sight delight
me, till I see my sins removed like a mist, and thy countenance shine upon me.
Let no sound or voice delight me, till I hear thee by thy Spirit to speak
peace to my conscience, and say to my soul, I am thy salvation. Let no
pleasant fields and gardens delight me, till I have gathered red flowers out of
that garden which was watered with thy blood. Let no fruit delight me, till I
have fully tasted of the fruit of the tree of thy cross. Let no meat delight
me, till with the sour herbs of sorrow and anguish of heart for my sin, I
have eaten the Christian Passover, the flesh of thee that immaculate Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world. Hear me blessed Redeemer, and as thou
wrotest in dust, when thou tookest the woman in adultery, so I beseech thee
write my sins in dust, and bury them all in the ashes of oblivion. So be it,
Amen.

SATVRNE. OR, a Meditation on Goodfriday.
HAving in the former meditations showed you an immaculate Lamb and the first
fruits of the meritorious blood thereof, then how the said Lamb was prepared
to be a fitting Sacrifice for the expiation of the sins of the whole world, Now
I should according to my promise in the entrance of this work, show you how
this Sacrifice was laid upon the Altar of the Cross as on this day, under the
metaphor of the Planet Saturn. But herein I perceive my own inability and
presumption, that I should dare to adventure upon such holy things in such vile
comparisons, for the expulsion of Saturn out of his kingdom by his brother
Titan, and son Jupiter, is no way equivalent to the malice of the Jews
against our blessed Savior. For Saturn broke covenant with his brother, and
kept three of his male children alive, contrary to the condition which he held
his kingdom by. And therefore Titan had just cause to make war against him,
and recover his inheritance due to the first borne. And Jupiter likewise did
expel his father out of his kingdom, because his father threatened to kill
him. But Christ had done offense to none, he had broken no bonds, but rather
made up the breach; he was so far from destroying that he came on purpose to
save and redeem that which was lost. And what were the troubles of Saturn
King of Creet, to the unsupportable sufferings of Christ the King of glory? Nay
what were all the troubles of all the men that are or ever were in the world,
to the troubles of our blessed Savior? And where is the patience of Saturn,
Job, or any other that was in Christ? For as the light of the natural Sun is
darkness, to the Splendour of the Sun of Righteousness; so all the
excellency and worth that is in all mankind is not able fully to demonstrate
the excellency that is in Christ: yet because Saturn was imprisoned by his
Brother, and driven out of his Kingdom by his own son; I did intend to show
how our blessed Savior, as on this day was bound and imprisoned by the cruel
Jews his brethren according to the flesh, of the Virgin Mary, and driven out of
the Kingdom of this world, by those which should as obedient children to the
commands of God their Father, have kept their hands from killing the innocent.
But being conscious of my own insufficiency for the performance of such a
work, it being excellently described by many famous and learned men; I will
only write the brief story thereof, as I find it in a book entitled
Itinerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, in these words. After that our blessed
Savior had eaten the Paschal Lamb according to the Law, which was the fourth
Passover that he kept with his Disciples; and in stead thereof had instituted
and ordained the Sacrament of his blessed Body and Blood in that his last
Supper, which was about six or seven of the clock in the evening, upon
Thursday the second day of April just at the beginning of the fourteenth day of
the first month Abib or Nisan, which began about the evening of this day, he
washed his Disciples feet, and leaning upon the Table, pointed out Judas that
should betray him: from the ninth hour to the tenth, about the second watch of
the night, Judas that Traitor went from his Disciples. In the mean time Christ
made that long Sermon recited only by John 14. 15, 16. and made that effectual
prayer, John 17. About the tenth hour (after they had sung a Psalm) Christ
went over the brook Kedron, to the Garden of Gethsemane, being somewhat more
than half a mile, there betweeen the hours of eleven and twelve, he sweat
water and blood, and prayed earnestly. About twelve of the clock, it being then
midnight, Christ was betrayed by Judas, who about three days before had sold
him for thirty silverlings, which was worth about three pound fifteen
shillings. From Gethsemane the Jews brought him bound to Jerusalem, and about
one of the clock in the morning carried him to the house of Annas, who was one
of the chief Priests. About two of the clock they led him from thence to
Caiaphas chief Priest, from three of the clock till four (which was about
the Cock's crowing) Peter denied Christ. At the same time Caiaphas and all the
Rulers of the people in Jerusalem, would have condemned the Lord of Glory, the
Son of God. At the same time also the servants and officers of the Priests
beat him and mocked him. About five of the clock in he morning Christ was
condemned by the whole consent of Synedrion of the Jews. All these things
Christ suffered between Thursday and Friday. And whereas the Jews according to
the commandment of God begin their day in the evening, therefore that night
wherein our Savior suffered all these things, belonged to the fourteenth day
of the month Abib; so that just at the same time as the Feast of the Paschal
Lamb was celebrated amongst the Jews, Christ the Lamb of God was made a living
sacrifice on the Cross for the sins of man. Thus we have observed the hours of
the night, so likewise let us observe the hours of the day. Friday being the
third day of April (which, as I have said, began the evening before) was the
fourteenth day of the first month Abib or Nisan, among the Jews, at six of the
clock in the morning, about Sun rising of the same day, our Savior Jesus
Christ was brought unto Pilate, and Judas Iscariot hanged himself, because he
had betrayed innocent blood. About seven of the clock in the same morning, our
Savior was carried to Herod Antipas, that cruel Tyrant, (who the year before
had put John Baptist to death) where he was disdainfully handled; but Pilate
and he were made friends. At eight of the clock our Savior returned to Pilate,
who propounded unto the Jews (because they were to have a capital offender
delivered unto them at the Feast of the Passover) whether they would have
Jesus their King, or Barabbas, who had been a murderer, let loose unto them?
But they condemned Jesus, and chose Barabbas, whose name signifies the son of
the Multitude, or a seditious man. About nine of the clock in the morning
(which the Jews commonly call the third hour of the day, because it succeeded
the morning, and continued till noone) our Savior Christ was whipped and crowned
with thorns. About ten of the clock Pontius Pilat in the place called
Gabbatha, publicly condemned Christ to be crucified, and washed his hands in
token of innocence. Pontius signifies cruel and inhumane, Pilat a man armed
with a Roman dart. Between ten and eleven our Savior Christ carrying his
Cross, was brought to the place called Golgotha. About eleven of the clock
(the third hour of the morning being not yet fully finished) our Savior
Christ was fastened upon the Cross, where he hung four hours, viz. from
eleven till about three of the clock in the afternoon. And he spoke before
that supernatural eclipse of the Sun three memorable sayings: First, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do: Secondly, he said to his Mother,
Woman behold thy Son: And to John being converted, Behold thy Mother.
Thirdly, to the Thief: Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. About twelve of the clock (in that meridian which the Jews call
the sixth hour, that is, the sixth hour from the rising of the Sun) that
supernatural eclipse of the Sun happened, of which you may read in Dionysius,
the Areopagite, and Eusebius. About three of the clock in the afternoon,
which the Jews call the ninth hour (the Sun now beginning to receive his
light) our Savior spoke these four sayings, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Secondly, I thirst. Thirdly, when he had taken the spong, he said,
It is finished: and last of all, crying out with a loud voice, he said, Futher
into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and so dyed. At which time there were many
wonderful miracles wrought, as you may read, Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luke 23. John
19. About four of the clock in the afternoon our blessed Savior was pierced
through with a lance, and there issued out of his side water and blood. About
five of the clock (which the Jews call the eleventh hour of the day) our
Savior Christ was buried by Joseph of Arimathea and Nichodemus. About the
sixth hour there was an eclipse of the Moon, which was natural, and not
miraculous; neither is it observed by any of the Evangelists.

Upon the fifteenth of the first month, which answers to the fourth of April
(being justly called the great and holy Sabbath of the Jews, for that Christ
this day rested in the Sepulcher) the Priests and Pharisees being partly
joyful, because (as they thought) the disturber of the common peace, and one
that opposed their authority was dead, and partly careful how they might
prevent his Resurrection, went to Pilate and obtained of him a band of
soldiers to watch the Sepulcher, and to put his seal upon the stone. Now as
at the Birth of Christ I writ what I found concerning the manger, in which
Christ was laid, when he was borne: so I thought it not amiss to set down
the description of the Sepulcher, in which he was laid, when he was dead, as I
find it in the forenamed book in these words: The sepulcher of Christ stood
upon the west side of Jerusalem, close by Mount Golgotha, in the garden of
Joseph of Arimathea: for it was the custom of the Jews to build their tombs
or sepulchers in their Orchards and gardens, and beautify and adorn them with
Lillies, Roses, and other flowers, on purpose to put them in mind of their
mortality, according to that of David, The days of man are like grass, as a
flower of the field so flourishes he; for the wind goes over it, and it is
gone, and the place thereof knows it no more. And for this cause the Jews
(but especially the Kings) would be buried in their gardens. So Joseph, a good
and just man, following this custom, had hewn for himself out of a Rock a
new monument, in which there had been no man laid; that so when he walked into
the garden to take the air, he might be put in mind of his mortality. In
this Monument our Savior was buried, and from this place upon the third day
early in the morning, he rose; to the terror and astonishment of such as
watched the Sepulcher. From whence may be gathered, that as our first Parents,
Adam and Eve trespassed against God, and lost felicity in a garden, so Christ
the Son of God in a garden made satisfaction for that sin, restored us again
to grace, and made us capable of heavenly felicity. This Sepulcher (as it is
described by Saint John, when he went with Saint Peter to see if that notable
miracle of the Resurrection were true) was like a little chapel, the door
thereof being upon the outside, and but one room without any division, so that
a man might see all that was within it. For he says, that Saint Peter did not
go in, but looked in and saw the linen clothes where they lay wrapped up: from
whence may be concluded, that the Sepulcher which is now extant (howsoever
perhaps it may stand in the same place) is not the same Sepulcher wherein our
Savior Christ was buried: for it is described to be fouresquare, to be open
at the top, to have within two vaults, (an inward and an outward) and that you
descend to it by stairs: which description does not agree with Saint John, for
he says, that they rouled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, but did
not lay it upon the top of it. And Venerable Bede, who was a Doctor of
Divinity, and lived in England seven hundred years after Christ, describes the
holy Sepulcher after this manner: This Sepulcher overhead was something round,
and so high that a man could scarce touch it with his hand, standing in that
Rock which extends it self from Mount Calvary into the garden of Joseph of
Arimathea: representing in form a little chapel; the entrance therinto was
toward the East. And further he adds, That they which went into the veil
found on the right hand toward the North, a stone Tomb, which resembled a
coffin situated in the pavement, joining to the wall, which stone coffin was
of a mixed color, that is, white and red, being seven foot long and three
handfulls high. This description Venerable Bede records from certain Monks
that went upon devotion to Jerusalem to visit this Sepulcher; but since it
has been diverse times destroyed, and polluted by the Turks and other Heathen
people. From whence may be gathered, that the Sepulcher which is now standing
and showed unto Pilgrims, is some new device, to get money of strangers, and
procure a kind of blind devotion in the hearts of ignorant people. Wherefore,
as the Angel said, Let us not seek Christ any longer amongst the dead, or in
the grave, but in his Holy Church, where the lively portraiture of his divine
presence is set forth unto us; that so we may be made partakers with him
hereafter in that place of eternal glory. For the confirmation of the truth of
Christ's passion, besides the true relation thereof set down by the four
Evangelists, the Prophecy of the Sibels, and consent of the Rabbis, the holy
Scriptures long before set down, that the Prophets prophesied of every
particular thing in our Saviors Passion. First, that all his Disciples should
forsake kim. Zachary told, That the Shepherd should be smitten, and the sheep
scattered, that one of his own Disciples should betray him. David in the
person of Christ says, It was my familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, that lift up his heel against me. And Zachary makes relation of
the thirty pieces of silver the price of him that was valued, which the
children of Israel valued, and gave for the Potters field, as the Lord
appointed. Esaias in the person of Christ relates the Jews spiteful usage of him
in the high Priests Hall, and before Pilat, I gave my back to the smiters, my
cheeks to the nippers, and hid not my face from shame and spitting. David
likewise in the person of Christ lamentably complains, That they pierced his
hands and his feet, so that he might tell all his bones; they stood staring and
looking upon him, they parted his ganments among them, and upon his vesture did
they cast lots. All that go by have him in derision, they mow and nod the
head, saying, He trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have him. And
in another place he complains that they gave him gall to eat, and vinegar to
drink. And another Prophet cries, That they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced. Finally, the whole relation thereof is set down by the Prophet Esaias in
his 53. Chapter, which begins with this preface, Who will believe our report?
or to whom is the arm of the Lord revea^ed, etc. to the end of that Chapter,
where you may behold his deplorable condition upon the Cross, from the first
verse to the fourth, from thence to the eleventh verse, you may see the cause
why all this punishment was inflicted upon him. And lastly, from the eleventh
verse to the end of the Chapter, you may take a view of the plentiful increase
of his Kingdom after his resurrection. And as it was foretold by Prophets,
some a thousand, others six hundred, and the least three hundred years before
Christ was borne; so it was typified and prefigured in Abraham's time, by the
sacrifice of his son Isaac, by the brazen Serpent set up by Moses in the
wilderness, and by all the Sacrifices that were in the Leviticall Law.
Therefore I will close all with that of the Prophet Jeremy.

Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his wrath.

And this divine prayer for the day in these words, Dearest Redeemer, the
Mediator of Heaven and Earth, who this day wast placed on the cross between
them both, with thine Arms stretched abroad to embrace, and thy head bowed
down (as it were) to kiss all that come unto thee; I humbly prostrate my
self at thy feet, desiring in unfeined repentance, with my tears to wash
those thy wounds that bled for my sins, and in a lively faith to touch the
print of thy na^les, and thrust my finger into the hole of thy side, thereby to
take real and corporal possession of thee, that I may with Thomas truly call
thee, My Lord, and my God; my dread, and my love, my surety and my ransom; my
sacrifice, and my Priest, my Advocate and my Judge, my desire, and my
contentment; the life of my hope here, and the hope of my life hereafter.
Before I was thine (for thy hands made and fashioned me) but since thou have
offered thy self to be my pledge, and thy blood for my ransom, thou art truly
mine. My Lord and my God, O let the spear which ran thee through fasten my
heart to thy cross, let the nails which printed thy flesh, imprint thy love
in my soul. Let the thorns which pricked thy temples, not suffer the temples
of my head to take any rest in sin: let the vinegar which was given thee melt
my adamantine heart into sorrow: let the Sponge which was offered thee on the
Cross, wipe out all my debts out of thy fathers tables. Let others go on
forward, if they please, I will stay still at thy cross, and take no other
lesson. For I desire no other Pulpit then that tree, no other Preacher then thy
crucified body; no other text then thy death and passion; no other parts then
thy wounds, no other amplification then thy extension; no other notes then thy
marks; no other points then thy nails; no other book then thy opened side.
The first Adam did eat the fruit of the forbidden tree. Therefore thou the
second Adam hangedst upon a tree. By his fall all mankind was so sorely
wounded, that the whole head was sick, and the whole heart faint; from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there was nothing but wounds and
bruises, and sores full of corruption; therefore thy whole head was pained,
that whole heart wounded: from the sole of thy foot, which was gored with
nails, to the crown of thy head which was pricked with thorns, there was
nothing but cuts, and stripes, and marks, and scars, and sores, and wounds, in
thy whole body. Because our heads plotted and devised wickedness, on thy head
was platted a crown of thorns. Because our eyes burned with lust, thy eyes
were bedewed with tears: because we belched out blasphemies against thy
father, thy face was spitted upon: because our bodies have been stretched
wantonly upon our soft beds, thy body was stretched upon the hard cross. O
Lord, our ears have offended thee by listening to wanton music, profane
speeches and songs, therefore thou sufferedst in thine ears by hearing
scoffs, and blasphemous taunts; we have offended in our smell by luxurious
perfumes, and sweet odours, therefore thou sufferedst in thy smell by the
stench of Golgotha: our taste has offended in gluttony and drunkenness,
therefore thou sufferedst in thy taste by gall and vinegar: because our feet
were swift to shed blood, thy feet were nailed to the cross: because our hands
were defiled, thy hands were bathed in blood: Because all parts of our bodies
offended, thou wast punished in all parts. In thy temples with thorns, on thy
cheeks with buffets, in thy joints with strains, in thy flesh with stripes.
Lastly, because our hearts most grievously offended in unchaste, malicious,
covetous, ambitious thoughts, desires, and affections, and piercing our selves
with worldly cares; therefore thou wast most grievously pained in thy heart,
which was run through with a spear. If all the sufferings of Martyrs since the
world began were put in one skale, and thine in the other; thy passion would
bear them all down: for thou barest the full weight of thy Fathers heaviest
hand.

Never were there sufferings like thy sufferings, because never such a
sufferer, the torments being infinitely improved by the bearer. Never sweat
like thy sweat, because never any had a burden like thine. Never tears like
thy tears, because shed for them who thirsted for thy blood. Never torments
like thy torments, because never flesh so pure and tender as thy flesh. Never
horror like thy horror, being forsaken of thy father; because never love like
thy love of him; nor sorrow like thine, because never sense and apprehension
like thy sense and apprehension of the infinite displeasure of thy father, for
the sins of ma^kinde. O my most bountiful Redeemer, who bestowedst largely,
and wast bestowed liberally for me, It concerns me to know how much I stood
thee in: for how should I estimate thy love, if I cannot cast the total of thy
debt thou did discharge for me? But no heart can conceive what sorrow thou
conceivedst: no tongue can express what grief thou did express by thy
bloody tears, and these thy strong cries, when thou complain'dst that thy
soul was heavy unto death, and prayedst thy Father ( if it were possible) to
let this cup pass from thee. I am appaled at thine agony, I am astonished at
thy fear, I am amazed it thy patience, I am ravished at thy love. My heart
rises, my veins swell, my blood boyles within me against thy persecutors. If
it were in my power, I would put them all to millions of torments. I would
inflict a thousand deaths upon Judas that betrayed thee, and Pilate that
condemned thee, and the envious Scribes and Pharisees that laid snares for
thee, and the perjured witnesses that gave false evidence against thee; and
that execrable rout that preferred a murderer before thee, and the barbarous
soldiers that spit upon thee, and buffeted thee, and the bloody executioners
of the Iew^sh malice and Roman cruelty, that banged, nailed, and goared thee.
But when I dive into thy bloody passion, I find my self as deep in thy
bloodshedding as they. They were in that but instruments, but I by my sins was
a principal in the death of thee the Lord of life. My sins by their tongues
and hands did all this villainy and outrage upon thee. Their nails and* spears
pierced but thy flesh, but my sins pierced thy very soul. My sins, my sins,
O Lord, by their hands crucified thee; wherefore I condemn mine eyes to
continual tears, my heart to perpetual sighs, and my thoughts to
everlasting pensiveness. What shall I do to wash away the guilt of thy blood,
which alone can take away the guilt of my sins? verily I should be utterly
swallowed up in this gulf, but that the price of thy blood has satisfied (as
for all other sins) so for the guilt of spilling it self. And now my anger,
and fear, and trouble, and anguish, are all turned into joy, and comfort, and
love, and admiration of the infinite wisdom of thy Father in providing such a
remedy; and his justice in requiring such a satisfaction; but most of all for
all thine infinite love, making so full a payment of the infinite debt of my
sins. What can I do, what can I suffer enough for thee? gracious God, to all
the rest of thy blessings spiritual and tempor^ll conferred upon me, purchased
by thy sufferings, ad this one above the rest, the special gift of remembrance
of these thy sufferings, that wheresoever I am, whatsoever I do, I may have
thy passion in my heart, and thy wounds bleeding a fresh in my mind, with an
infinite hatred of sin that procured them, and love of thy goodness who
enduredst them for me. Thy Church, since thou leftest her is a widow, and I am
as one of her dead children, not (as the Samaritan was) h^lfe dead but wholly
dead in my sins and transgressions. Thou Lord art the true Elias who raisedst
and do raise from death this widows children to life, by stret^hing thy
body over them. O my gracious Lord, apply thy body stretched this day on the
cross to me. Lay thy head to my head, thy hands to my hands, thy feet to my
feet, and thy heart to my heart, that I may receive warmth from thy blood, and
ease from thy stripes and health from thy wounds, and spirit from thy breath,
and strength from thy grace, to stand up from the dead, and walk with thee
henceforth in newness of life. So be it. Amen.

IVPITER, OR a Meditation on Easter Day.
WHen I did first compose this Annual world, my thoughts were so presumptuous
as to promise to my unlearned self a power and faculty to fit every days
meditation to the resemblance which I first propounded in the entrance into
this Tabernacle: but as I have come far short in the precedent expressions,
so I fear I shall come much more behind in the subsequent meditations. Yet I
will adventure to show that the Sacrifice which was offered unto God upon the
Altar of the Cross on Goodfriday for the expiation of the sins of mankind, is
truly exhibited to every worthy receiver in the blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist or Lords Supper. And therefore the Christian Church in all ages has
piously appointed this yearly feast of Easter to be by every one of her
members solemnly observed instead of the Jews Passover, whereby every
believing soul may be assured, that if he find the blood of that most
immaculate Lamb sprinkled upon the door post of his heart, the destroying
Angel shall have no power to enter therein.

Which assurance that he may obtain first before he receive these sacred
mysteries, he ought to be fitted with the preparing graces of true sorrow and
hearty contrition of spirit for sins past, joined with penitent resolutions
and endeavors to lead a new life in time to come; perfect love and charity
with all men joined with longing desires to participate the benefits of Christ's
passion; and humility of spirit joined with holy rev^rence and godly devotion.

Secondly, in receiving, he ought to be endued with the comprehensive grace of
a true, lively, and justifying faith.

And last of all, he ought to have the reteining graces of hearty praise and
thanksgiving for all Gods inestimable benefits, especially for the Word and
Sacraments joined with joy and cheerfulness in the service of God, and
constant perseverance in all these heavenly graces to his lives end.

The man that is thus qualified for the reception of this heavenly repast, may
with aged Simeon take into his hands, his Lord and Savior, yea and see him
with the eye of his faith, take with a pure hand, eat with a clean mouth, and
keep in a sanctified heart this sacred bread, this chosen Manna, the word of
life and food of Angels: for by and with the sacred elements, (though not in,
or under them) he does partake of the flesh of God spiritually, (for his words
are spirit and life) yea truly and in very deed, for he is the living bread
that came down from heaven; his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed.

As at sumptuous feasts where curious services are, we see the proportion and
shape of the Deer or Foul set out in gold and colors on the outside or lid of
those baked meats which are truly contained under it, and to be eaten: so (if
we may draw a resemblance of so high and divine a mystery from an earthly and
humane repast) under the figures of bread and wine, as it were the printed lid
or cover, thou O devout soul, feedest on the meat of Angels, the dainties of
heaven, and flesh of thy Savior, who is there described in thy sight, and
before thee crucified. That which is represented in the sign to the eye of the
body, is presented in the thing signified to the eye of the soul and hand of
thy faith: what is shadowed in the Sacrament is truly also exhibited by it. If
thou beleevest that thou eatest, thou eatest that thou beleevest. Let no
heretical Harpies pluck from thee this heavenly dish or meat, as Celaeno did
Aeneas's.

Beware of two sorts of heretics, especially those that seek to beguile thee
in the Sacrament, or rather of it, viz. The Sacramentaries and Papists: the one
denying the sign, the other the thing signified; the one offers thee a
shadow without the body, the other the body without the shadow or resemblance;
and consequently neither of them gives thee the true Sacrament, to whose
nature and essence both are requisite. The Sacramentaries would rob thee of the
Jewel, the Papists of the Casket. Lay thine hands on both, hold both fast; as
thou see the one, so believe the verity and substance of the other: as thou
take the one receive the other, as thou handlest the one, apprehend the
other; as thou feedest with thy mouth on the one, feed in thy heart on the
other. And as truly as the one nourishes thy body to a temporal, the other
shall preserve thy soul to eternal life. For it is the tree of life, which
grows in the midst of the Paradise of God, his Church on earth.

The way to the mystical tree in Paradise was guarded by an Angel waving a
flaming sword: the way to this in like manner is fenced: there stands an Angel
at the Table, Gods minister, brandishing the sword of the Spirit, and
forbidding (under pain of death) any to eat of this fruit that have their
teeth set on edge with the Apples of Sodom, and Grapes of Gomorrah.

Other fruits and meats are prepared for us, but we must be prepared for this
before we eat it: the bread of the earth cannot feed when thou eatest it, till
it be changed into thy body, because thou art more excellent then it; but this
bread which came down from heaven, is more excellent then thou art, and
therefore thou must be changed into it, before it nourish thee. All other meat
is received as it is in it self, and no otherwise; but this is diverse as it is
received: other meat affects and alters the taste, but here the taste
alters the meat, for if it be worthily received, it is the body and blood of
Christ; if unworthily, it is but bare bread and wine. If it meet with a
spiritual taste, and appe^ite and stomach purged and prepared, it proves the
food of life, nay of immortality; if otherwise, it turns into deadly poison:
for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body.

Now the only reason why I do compare the meritorious action of our blessed
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, on this day to Jupiter (who as the Poets feine
him, was Lord of Heaven and Earth) is, for that as he overcame the malicious
and revengefull Titan, and all those monstrous and cruel Giants his sons,
called the Titanes, and victoriously triumphed over the^; so likewise Christ,
the Lord of glory, and King of Kings, as on this day being then the fifth of
April* and first day of the Jewish week, having overcome the dreadful and
spiteful Serpent the old Dragon in the Revelation, according as it was
prophesied of him, Genesis 3. 15. and all those fiends that follow him, sin,
death, and hell, according to another prophecy in Hosea, and having by his
divine power raised himself from death to life, as David long ago foretold,
that God would not leave his soul in hell, nor suffer his holy one to see
corruption; but that according to another prophecy of Hosea in the person of
the children of Israel, After two days he will revive, and in the third day
raise up, that we may live in his sight; which is the same with the Sybils in
these words, He shall end the necessity of death by three days sleep, and
then returning from death to life again, he shall be the first that shall show
the beginning of the resurrection to his chosen, for that by conquering death
he shall bring us life. And last of all having according to his own promise
which he often times made to his Disciples ( That as Jonas was three days and
three nights in the whales belly, so should he be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth: destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise
it up, are his own words: in another place meaning the temple of his body. And
that the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, and they shall
kill him, but the third day he shall rise again; in another place, fast bound
the Dragon in the bottomless pit, and taking away the sting of death which is
sin, gloriously triumphed over the enemies of man's salvation, and rising out
of the Sepulcher of death confounded the soldiers that were his guard with
amazement, caused the earth to quake, and the Angels of God to descend from
heaven to attend upon his triumphs, did forty days walk upon the earth in
this triumphant manner, and made twelve apparitions to his Disciples and others:

The first was to Mary Magdalen alone, John 10. 14.

The second to all the women together as they returned homewards, Matthew. 20. 9.

The third was to Simon Peter alone, about noone, 1 Cor. 15. 5. Luke 24. 34.

The fourth was in the afternoon to the two Disciples as they went to the
Castle of Emaus, which was some eight miles from Jerusalem; the ones name was
Cleophas, and brother of Joseph, who brought up our Savior, and the other (as
may be gathered by the circumstance of the story) was Luke, because he has set
it down so exactly, Luke 24.

The fifth was after he returned invisibly from Emaus to Jerusalem where when
the doors were all shut, and his Disciples were assembled together for fear
of the Jews, he came and stood in the midst of them, John 20 19. And all these
apparitions were in one day, which was called the first day of the week.

The sixth apparition was eight days after his resurrection, being the twelth
of April, to all his Disciples, Thomas being then present, and the doors
shut. That he might make evident that his omnipotency was not tied to any
secondary causes, or hindered by the property of any natural bodies, which
according to S. Austine, was so much the more wonderful, because he appeared
unto them substantially and effectually, not as a phantasma or shadow which
vanishes away, and is without any corpor^all substance, but did eat and drink,
and suffered his body to be handled by his Disciples.

The seventh apparition was to Peter, Thomas, Nathaneel, the sons of Zebedeus
and other two Disciples, as they were fishing upon the shore of Tiberias, which
stood 36 miles from Jerusalem Northward between Bethsaida and Capernaum, John
21.

The eighth was to the eleven Apostles on Mount Tabor in Galilee.

The ninth was to more then five hundred brethren at one time, as S. Paul
witnesses.

The tenth was to James the son of Alpheus, for he had been seen before by
James the son of Zebedeus, but the certain time of these four last
apparitions is not set down.

But on the fourteenth day of May which was forty days after his resurrection,
he appeared to all his Apostles, Disciples, and friends together on Mount
Olivet. And in their sight with great triumph and joy he ascended into Heaven.

And last of all after his ascension, he appeared to S. Paul, as himself
relates. Thus (as Luke affirms) he showed himself alive by many arguments,
for the space of forty days together and reasoned with them of the kingdom of
his father.

Why then should any man mistrust the testimony of these men which saw him, ate
with him, drank with him, touched him, and heard him speak, and whose entire
estate and welfare depended wholly of the certainety thereof?

For what comfort had it been or consolation to those men to have devised of
themselves those former apparitions; what encouragement might they have taken
in these doleful times of desolation and affliction, to have had among them
the dead body of him, on whose only life their universal hope and confidence
depended?

The Scribes and Pharisees being astonished at the sudden news of his rising
again, confirmed unto them by their own soldiers that saw it, found no other
way to resist the fame thereof, but only by saying (as their posterity do at
this day) that his Disciples came by night and stole away his body, while the
soldiers slept. But what likelihood or possibility can there be in this? for
first it is evident to all the world, that his Apostles themselves (who were
the heads of all the rest, were so dismayed, discomforted, and dejected at that
time, as they durst not once go out of the door; for which cause only those
silly women, who for their sex esteemed themselves more free from violence,
presumed alone to visit his Sepulcher, which no one man durst do for fear of
the soldiers: until by those women they were informed, that the foresaid band
of soldiers were terrified and put to flight by Christ's resurrection.

And then how was it likely, that men so much amazed and overcome with fear
should adventure to steal away a dead body from a guard of soldiers that kept
it? or if their hearts had served to adventure so great a danger? what hope or
probability had there been of success? especially considering the said body
lay in a new Sepulcher of stone shut up, locked and fast sealed by the
Magistrate? how was it possible I say, that his Disciples should come thither,
break up the monument, take out his body, and carry away the same, never after
to be seen or found without espiall of some one amongst so many that attended
there? or if this were possible (as in reason it is not) yet what profit, what
pleasure, what comfort could they receive hereby?

We see that these Apostles and Disciples of his who were so abandoned of life
and heart in his passion, after two days only they were so changed, as life
and death cannot be more contrary: for whereas before they kept home in all
fear, and durst appear no where, except among their own private friends; now
they came forth into the streets and common places, and avouched with all
alacrity, and irresistible constancy, even in the faces and hearing of their
greatest enemies, that Jesus was risen from death to life; that they had seen
him, and enjoyed his presence, and that for testimony and confirmation hereof,
they were most ready to spend their lives. And could all this proceed only of
a dead body, which they had gotten by stealth into their possession? Would not
rather the presence and sight of such a body, so torn, mangled and deformed,
as Jesus body was, both upon the Cross and before, have rather dismayed them
more, than given them any comfort? Yes truly.

And therefore Pilate the Governor, considering these circumstances, and that
it was unlikely that either the body should be stolen away without privity of
the soldiers, or if it had been, that it should yield such life, heart,
consolation and courage to the stealers, began to give ear more diligently to
the matter; and calling to him the soldiers that kept the watch, understood by
them the whole truth of the accident, to wit, that in their sight and presence,
Jesus was risen out of his Sepulcher to life; and that at his rising, there was
so dreadful an earthquake, with trembling and opening of Sepulchers round
about, such skriches, cries and commotion of all elements, as they durst not
abide longer, but ran and told the Jewish Magistrates thereof, who being
greatly discontented (as it seemed) gave them money to say that while they were
sleeping, the body was stolen from them by his Disciples.

All this wrote Pilate presently to his Lord Tiberius, who was then Emperor of
Rome. And he sent withal, the particular examinations and confessions of
diverse others that had seen and spoken with such as were risen from death at
that time, and had appeared to many of their acquaintance in Jerusalem,
assuring them also of the resurrection of Jesus.

Which information when Tiberius the Emperor had considered, he was greatly
moved therewith, and proposed to the Senate, that Jesus might be admitted among
the rest of the Roman Gods, offering his own consent, with the privilege of
his supreme royal suffrage to that decree: But the Senate in no wise would
agree thereunto.

Whereupon, Tiberius being offended, gave license to all men to believe in
Jesus that would, and forbid upon pain of death, that any officer or other
should molest or trouble such as bare good affection, zeal, or reverence to
that Name. Thus much testifies Tertullian against the Gentiles, of his own
knowledge: who living in Rome a learned man, and pleader of causes diverse
years before he was a Christian (which was about 180. years after our
Savior Christ's Ascension,) had great ability by reason of the honor of his
Family, learning, and place wherein he lived, to see and know the Records of
the Romans.

Neither only diverse Gentiles had this opinion of Jesus Resurrection again
from death, but also sundry Jews of great credit and wisdom, at that time,
were enforced to believe it; notwithstanding it pleased not God to give them so
much grace as to become Christians.

This appears plainly by the learned Josephus, who writing his Story not
above forty years after Christ's Passion, took occasion to speak of Jesus,
and of his Disciples. And after he had showed how he was crucified by Pilate at
the instance of the Jews, and that for all this, his Disciples ceased not to
love him still, he adjoyneth forthwith these words. For this love of his
Disciples, he appeared unto them again the third day, when he had resumed
life unto him.

Which express, plain and resolute words, we may in reason take not as the
confession only of Josephus, but as the common judgment, opinion and sentence
of all the discreet and sober men of that time, laid down and recorded by this
Historiographer. In whose days there were yet many Christians alive, that had
seen and spoken with Jesus after his Resurrection; and infinite Jews, that
had heard the same protested by their fathers, brethren, kinsfolk and friends,
who had been themselves eyewitnesses thereof. And thus much for the story of
Christ's Resurrection, which I conclude with this divine Prayer.

Glorious Son of Righteousness, who this morning did prevent the dawning of
the day, by sending forth the beams of thy glorified body out of the Pit of
darkness and shadow of death, shine upon my soul by the light of this grace.
Inlighten my dark apprehension of the mysteries of thy Resurrection: Inflame my
cold affections, and revive my heart even deaded with pensive thoughts upon thy
bitter passion. O how did the surest ground of Faith shake, the safest Ancor of
hope loosen, at the earthquake at thy death! What smiting together of knees,
what wringing of hands, what knocking of breasts, what fainting of hearts, what
hanging down of heads were there at giving up of thy ghost, when thy head hung
down on the Cross? With thee the faith, with thee the hope, with thee the joy,
with thee the life of thy dearest Disciples might seem to expire. What should
or could the prisoners of death ever expect, when they saw him whom they
thought to have been their Redeemer, the Lord of life arrested by death, and
kept close prisoner in the grave so long? O death, how sharp was then thy
sting? O grave, how fearful was thy seeming Victory? But blessed be the Angel
which removed the stone, and thereby made way, that the stone which the
builders refused, might be preferred to be the head stone in the corner.
Blessed be the right hand of thy Father, who in raising thee out of the grave,
raised our hope out of the dust: for where is our hope? Our hope is even in
thee, O Christ, and thy Resurrection. Thou art the life and the Resurrection of
all that believe in thee. Death (like a Hornet) by stinging thee has lost his
sting, and now may make a buzzing noise to affright me; but can thrust out no
sting to hurt me. The grave by thy lying in it is turned to a bed, and a
withdrawing room to retire my self a while, to put off this ragged flesh, and
attire my self with roabs of glory. Now dare I insult over Death and Hell,
since thy triumph over them. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? O my soul, where is all thy comfort? If in this life, thou art most
miserable; If thy life be hid with Christ in God, then, when Christ which is
thy life shall appear, thou shall also appear in glory.

What though I mourn here? I shall be comforted: what though I fast here? I
shall be satisfied: what though I be disgraced here? I shall be glorified. What
though I am here trampled under feet? I shall be there crowned. What though my
flesh be eaten with worms, and these worms turned into dust* and that dust
blowed by the wind over the face of the earth? yet after thou turnest man to
destruction, Again thou say, Come again ye children of men. I know thou
my Redeemer live, and shall stand up at the last day, and I shall see th^e in
my flesh with these eyes, and none other. Lord establish this belief in me:
beat down all the forts that natural reason reareth against it. Grant that I
may every day more and more feel as the power of thy birth in my regeneration,
and of thy death in my mortification, so also of thy Resurrection in my rising
from the death of sin to the life of grace. Lord thou restoredst life to
three men, to one in his bed, to another on the bear, a third in the grave.
They who conceive sin in their hearts, are like him that was dead in his bed,
they who bring it forth into action, are like him that was brought forth dead
on the bear; but they that continue in sin and all impurity, and putrify in
the custom thereof, are like him that was four days dead and stanke in the
grave: such a one or worse am I; for I have lain not four days, but many
years in this loathsome grave, and am even devoured of the worm of conscience.
Yet Lord, this day of thy glorious Resurrection, say unto me, as thou did to
him. Come forth, awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and I
will give thee light. Make this day of thy Resurrection from the death of
nature, the day of my rising from the death of sin and corruption, first to the
life of Grace, and after to the life of Glory.

Amen.
MERCVRY. OR, A Meditation on Ascension day.
ACcording to my proposed method, I should in this place show how the sweet
Incense of the blessed Sacrifice Christ Jesus ascended into heaven, to be as
the Leviticall Sacrifices were, an Oblation of a sweet savor unto the Lord;
for as God after the universal Deluge smelled a pleasant savor of Rest in the
offering of Noah; so likewise God the Father after the inundation of sin
overflowing the whole world for the space of 4000. years and upwards, did smell
a sweet savor of Pacification, Reconciliation and satisfaction in this last
meritorious act of our blessed Savior, which I compare to the flight of winged
Mercury, who by Poets is fained to descend and ascend to keep unity and
concord between their fained gods (being their observant Messenger.) And Christ
the Angel or Messenger of the everlasting Covenant descended from heaven in
the day of his Nativity, and brought those blessed tidings of Salvation
revealed in the Gospel to mankind, and as this day ascended into heaven, to
accomplish the work of man's redemption: but this glorious Act of our Savior is
so divinely, pathetically, and excellently accomplished by Mr. Austin in his
divine Meditations, that though I, like foolish Icarus (because as on this day
I first drew breath and received the common air) do strive with waxen wings
to take an higher flight than my learning is able to perform, am so melted
with the rays of the scorching heat of his devotions, that I am forced to dash
out my dim taper before his bright Son, and conclude with Master Doctor
Featleyes divine Prayer, saying, Glorious and gracious Redeemer, Lord Jesus
Christ, who hu^bledst thy self, and did become obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross, and therefore thy Father highly exalted thee above the
Grave in thy Resurrection, above the earth in thy Ascension, above the heavens
in thy session at his right hand, and then He gave thee a Name above all names,
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven and
in earth, and of things under the earth. I humbly bow the knees, not only of my
body, but of my heart and soul unto thee. I never hear of thee, or remember;
never think, or speak of thee, but with greatest reverence and love that heart
can conceive, or tongue express. I admire the mystery of thy Incarnation; I
tremble at the horror of thy passion; I adore the power of thy Resurrection,
and triumph in the glory of thy Ascension. My God and my Lord, make me wholly
thine, as thou art mine: Thy birth was my life; thy life my merit, thy death my
ransom; thy Resurrection my delivery out of the prison of death (where thy
Father laid thee for my debt) thy Ascension my assurance and taking possession
of an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance reserved in the heavens. O
Savior, if thou had not been borne I never had been born a new; if thou
had not d^ed for my sins, I had dyed in my sins: If thou had not risen
from the dead, my soul might have been with thee in Paradise, but my body
should not have rested in hope, neither should I have seen God in my flesh. If
thou had not ascended, I might have been freed from hell, but I should never
have had a place prepared for me in heaven. O Lord, when thou came to us on
earth. John was thy forerunner, but thou were my forerunner in thy return
into heaven. John prepared the way before thee on Earth; but thou preparedst a
way before me into heaven. That way, and those Regions in the air which
Lucifer defiled and cursed by his fall through them from heaven, thou have
cleansed and blessed by thy marching triumphantly through them into heaven.

O blessed Creator, and Repairer of nature, in thee not only all the kindred
of the Earth, but all creatures under the cope of heaven are blessed, and
therefore they sigh and groan together with us, desiring fervently thy second
coming. The earth was blessed and sanctified by thy birth, and thy treading
upon it. The water by thy descending into the River Jordan at thy Baptism, and
walking on the Seas.

Now the Air likewise and fire expected an honor and a blessing from thee,
and both received it: the Air by thy Ascending through it; the Fire by sending
down the Holy Ghost in the likeness of fiery cloven tongues.

O Lord my Redeemer, how excellent is thy Name in all the world! Creatures
without voice praise thee, as the Heavens and Earth; without understanding know
thee, as the Star that lighted the Sages to thee: without will obey thee, as
winds and Seas, without ^ares hearken to thee; as the Fig Tree which thou
cursedst, and it withered; without natural affections bemoane thee, as the
stones that clave, the veil that rent, and the earth that quaked at thy
Passion: without will voluntarily offer thee service, the Foale to bear thee,
the Dove to manifest thee, the Fish to discharge thee, the Sun to hide thy
ignominy among men, and here the Cloud to veil thee from mortal eye, and
transport thee into heaven. O Lord my Redeemer, how excellent is thy Name in
all the world! Thou make the Light thy Garment, the Angels thy Messengers,
the Air thy race, the Clouds thy Chariot, and flyest upon the wings of the
wind into heaven. Thou art ascended up on high, thou have led Captivity
captive. In thy Passion thou wast Deaths death, and killedst it. In thy burial
thou wast the Graves grave, and destroyedst Destruction. And now in thy
Ascension thou conqueredst Conquest it self, and ledst Captivity captive, and
receivedst Gifts for men, for the whole Church and every believer.

O Lord, bestow these Gifts liberally upon me, that I may grow in grace, and
the knowledge and love of thee: This day thou liftedst up thy body from the
earth; lift up my heart from it. This day thou transportedst thy body to
heaven; transport my desires thither. This day thou setledst thy self in thy
Throne at the right hand of thy Father; fix my thoughts, and settle mine
affections on thee in heaven, and on heaven for thee.

Amen.
VENUS, OR A Meditation on Whitsunday.
IN the old Testament I find that two several times fire descended from heaven
upon sacrifices prepared for offerings of a sweet smelling savor unto the Lord.
The first was, when Manoah, the father of Sampson, at the commandment of the
Angel, offered a Kid upon a stone. Then did he whose name is mavelous do
wondrously and ascended in the flame up into heaven, for the strengthening of
Manoahs faith, and for the confirmation of the truth of his promise.

The other was, when Eliah for confirmation of the true religion and
extirpation of idolatry called for fire from Heaven, which consumed the
sacrifice and licked up the water in the Trench round about the Altar.

Then did* the Lord manifest himself to be the only God, and that all
superstitions; and will worship is the invention of man's brain. And in the New
Testament I read that as on this day, the Holy* Ghost the third person in the
blessed Trinity, descended from heaven and sat upon the heads of 120 men and
women assembled and prepared as a sacrifice acceptable to God, with unity,
charity, and devot^on, in the likeness of cloven, fiery tongues; then did God
the Son work wonderfully in performing his promise by sending his dejected
Disciples a holy Comforter, by whose coming, besides the internal joy and
incredible alacrity and exultation of mind, they received also fortitude and
audacity to go forth into the world. They received the gift of tongues,
enabling them to converse and deal with all sorts of people. They received
wisdom and learning, with most powerful illumination in highest mysteries,
whereby to preach, to teach, and convince their adversaries. They received the
gift of prophecy to foretell things to come, together with the power of
working signs and miracles, whereby the whole world remained astonished; and for
a taste or earnest penny of that which should ensue, concerning the infinite
increase of that little congregation, they saw 3000 of their adversaries
converted to them in one day, by a Sermon of S. Peter.

But all the par^iculars of this story is so divinely performed by M. Austin,
that in his work (as in a glass) I perceive my gifts of learning and devotion
are as far inferior to his, as the frothy, filthy, and carnal love in Venus
is inferior to the holy Spirit of Gods love. Yet because I have often found in
Scripture, that the Lord is pleased for the illumination of man's dark
understanding to speak of himself, as of a man attributing to himself, eyes,
nose, mouth, arms, hands, feet, etc. And affections also, as anger, zeal,
joy, love, etc. whereas these qualities are not properly in God, for he is
void of corporeal habit being of an infinite and incomprehensible essence.
Therefore I was so presumptuously bold as in my former expressions to
demonstrate the meritorious actions of our blessed Savior by those forenamed
Planets, so in this day to write of this blessed spirit of Gods love as it has
correspondency with man's, but finding my ability to be insufficient for such a
work, I conclude with the prayer for the day in these words.

Incomprehensible Spirit, the third person in the blessed and glorious Trinity,
who after the Father had manifested himself to the world in the works of
creation, and the son in the works of Redemption, finished in the flesh,
did manifest thy self on this day in a wonderful manner by the sound of a
^ushing wind, and the light of fiery tongues; manifest thy self most
powerfully and gloriously in the universal Church, by enlarging her bounds,
and making up her breaches, by hallowing her assemblies. and furnishing her
Pastors, and knitting the hearts of all her members in true love, the bond of
perfection: perfect the work of sanctification in thine elect; manifest thy
self also gloriously this day, and declare thy gifts in the tongues of thy
Preachers, and ears of the hearers, and the hearts of all the congregation.
Direct the mouths of thy Preachers, that they may skilfully sow the seed, and
open the ears, and mollify the hearts of the hearers, that they may receive
it profitably, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit abundantly, which are
love, joy, peace, long* suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, etc.

O eternal and infinite Holy Ghost, the love of the Father and the Son, who
did descend upon our Savior in the likeness of a Dove, without Gall,
purge out of my conscience all gall of malice and bitterness, and grant that
with meekness, I may receive the ingrafted word which is able to save my soul.

O holiest Spirit, eternal breath of the Father and the Son, and former of
the word in the womb, who came with a sound, come down upon me in the sound
of thy word preached, though not in extraordinary gifts of Prophecy, tongues
and he ling, yet in the ordinary graces of faith, hope, and charity, the spirit
of supplication and prayer, of wisdom and spiritual understanding, of power,
and ghostly comfort*

O heavenly Spirit proceeding* from* the Father and the Son; who descendedst
from* H^aven* like a mighty rushing wind, throw me down to the ground
inhumility and prostrate my heart and soul before thee. B^at down all strong
holds of (...)nall maginati(...) and worldly thoughts* resisting thy grace:
chase away all clouds of error out of my understanding: clear my will from all
fogs of noisome desires, cool and refresh me in the heat of persecution, fill
the sails of my affections, and drive me speedily into the fair haven where I
would be. O divine fire, burning continually in the hearts of the faithful,
and consuming all our spiritual sacrifices, who this day did descend and
appear in the likeness of fiery tongues, be a fire in my heart and tongue,
that I may be fervent in my meditations and prayers, and zealous in the
profession and defense of thy truth. Inlighten the darkness of my
understanding, inflame the coldness of my affections, purge out the dross of
my corruptions, direct me in all affairs of this life, assist me in all
exercises of devotion, strengthen me in all assaults of temptations, comfort me
in all miseries of affliction, seal all the gracious promises of thy Gospel
unto me, and seal me unto the day of redemption. So be it, Amen.

Into my mind descend O Dove, gall purge clean out of me:

With silver wings raise me above, my Savior Christ to see.

The STARRY HEAVEN, OR a Meditation on All-Saints-day.
IN the general survey of this work I compared this latter part to the beauty
of Sanctum Sancto^um in Solomon's Temple, for as King Solomon set the Arc of
the covenant in that place, which Ark was covered with the propitiatory or
Mercy-seat, and made two Cherubims in the said room; so I likewise in this
work have placed the resemblance of the Arc as on this day, the Cherubins on
S. Michael the Archangell, and the propitiatory on Trinity Sunday But properly
this Metaphor belongs to the middle part which treats of the meritorious
actions of our blessed Savior. For he and he only is the Holy of Holies; and
Saints as Stars receive and derive all the light of sanctity that is in them,
from Christ the Sun of Righteousness. Therefore seeing I have raised this
work to this hight, I will not fear to show that as Noah's Ark was a manifest
symbol of the Church before and since the Law, upon the troublesome waters of
persecution and affliction: so this Ark likewise may be a figure of Christ's
Church in the haven of prosperity and peace, since the Gospel; for first as
the Law of God was put into the Ark for a memorial of Gods covenant between
him and the children of Israel, so the Law or Gospel of Christ has been
preserved in his Church, for the confirmation of the faith, and direction of
the lives of us Christians. Secondly, as Manna was kept in the Ark for a
remembrance of Gods mercy and power in preserving the lives of the Children of
Israel forty years in the wilderness with Angels food, so likewise the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as chosen Manna, has been kept in Christ's
Church for the spiritual livelihood of the worthy receiver for ever. And
lastly, a^ Aarons fruitful rod was kept in the Arc for a testimony of the
chosen Priesthood, so the fruitful examples of the Saints lives is annually
kept in the Church as on this day, which I compare to the starry firmament: for
as poor way faring men receive a great deal of comfort and direction in the
light of the stars in a dark night, when the Sun and Moon are extinct; so
a poor Christian in the pilgrimage of this world receives a great deal of
solace and j^y in the consideration of those glorious Saints, that have walked
in the said steps before him.

And therefore the Church knowing the power of examples upon men's nature, that
they are more apt to be led by example then by precept or reason, and are more
apt to follow a multitude in sin, then the light of any one Saint in virtue;
has set this day apart to let us understand, that it is better to follow one
Noah in the race of righteousness, then a whole world drowned in sin and
wickedness, and that for our souls salvation it is better to be like one just
Lot, then a City full of wicked Sodomites: but it is a very hard matter to walk
uprightly in the midst of a crooked generation.

Now as the number of fixed Star^^s are past all Arithmeticall expression, so
the total of all the Saints that are and have been in the Church of God are
without number. Yet as Astrologers note a certain number of Stars for an
uncertain, in affirming that there are 1205 in the Northern Hemisphere, the
Zodiac and Southern Constellations besides the Seven Planets; so S. John in
his Revelations notes a certain number of Saints for an uncertain, in saying
that in every Tribe were sealed 12000 besides the 24 Elders and 4 Beasts which
by expositors are the 24 writers of the Old Testament, and the four
Evangelists writers of the New. But it is not for their number, but for their
virtues that we commemorate their lives on this day. Therefore I will pray to
God that it would please him to grant that I may seriously call to mind and
wisely consider on this day the sincerity of Abel in my sacrifice of Praise the
piety of Enoch in my walking with God, the righteousness of Noah, the faith of
Abraham, the chastity of Joseph, the meekness of Moses, the zeal of Phineas,
the patience of Job, the devotion of David, the wisdom of Solomon, all the
rare graces of Gods Spirit in the holy Patriarchs, in the sweet fellowship of
the Prophets, the constancy and fortitude of the Noble Army of Martyrs, and all
those imitable virtues in my blessed Savior: that I endeavoring my self to
walk after their godly example in the Church militant upon earth, may after
this life ended together with them in the day of the resurrection reign for
ever in the kingdom of heaven, which is the Church triumphant,

Amen.
The North Hemisphere. OR a Meditation on Twelfe-day.
AS I am enforced to alter the name of the North pole on this day and call it
the Eastern Hemisphere, because the Magi came from the East, and not from the
North, so I am compelled to write little of this days commemoration because it
is so excellently performed by M. Austin in his divine Meditations. But as in
the North Hemisphere there are 21 Constellations, and in every one of them a
certain number of Stars, in all 332, so, for ought I know, being it is not
set down in the Gospel, there might be 21 Wisemen as well as 3, 12 or 14 (as
some conjecture) which came to worship our blessed Savior, and by every one of
them a certain number of converted Saints brought into the Hemisphere of the
Christian Church. But because I am ignorant in all these things, I conclude
with this divine prayer, saying,

Father of light, who did guide the Heathen Sages by a Star, to seek after,
and find thy Son, the true light which enlightneth every man, that comes
into the world; give me grace to give ear to the more sure word of prophecy in
the Scripture, till the day dawne, and the day star arise in my heart. As
thou calledst the Wisemen observers of the stars by a sta^re; the Shepherds
lying abroad by an apparition in the fields Zachary the Priest, by a vision in
the Temple, Peter the Fisher by a draught of fishes, Matthew the Publican at
the receipt of custom; and S Austin enamoured with eloquence by the luster of
S. Ambroses sti^e and intising eloquence. I beseech thee take advantage of such
seasons, and apply such means for my unfeined conversion unto thee as are most
agreeable to my inclination, disposition, and condition. So will I come unto
thee, and fall down before thee, and present unto thee gold, frankincense, and
Myrrh: gold in acknowledgement of thy kingdom, frankincense of thy Pri^sthood,
and Myrrh, of thy death. I will offer willingly and freely unto thee incense of
praise and thanksgiving for thy benefits; the Myrrh of bitter tears for my
sins, and gold (according to my ability) for the maintenance of thy service,
and adorning thy Temple.

Lord, who by this rich present providedst for the Virgins wants, to supply
them in her journey to Egypt, extend thy goodness to me in all necessities;
and establish my faith and confidence in all dangers and difficulties
whatsoever, for thou have promised never to leave nor forsaken them that trust
in thee. The stony rock shall yield a fountain of water; and the dry cruse a
spring of oil: the loaves shall multiply by spending: nay the clouds shall be
storehouses of bread, and the wind serve in foul, and the Ravens bring in
provision; the fishes pay tribute of money, and Heathen sages from the East,
(by the conduct of a star) bring in costly presents and new years gifts,
before thy children shall want their necessary maintenance or sustenance.
Blessed Babe, who at thy birth did presage thy death, and assayedst the
cross in thy cratch, and being excluded (as it were) from all men, wast
constrained to take up thy lodging with beasts in a stable, teach me what I am
to look for in this world. If it give me course and base, and beastly
entertainment, it gave thee worse: and the servant is not to expect better
respect then the Master.

O King of glory, who had no Palace, but an Inn, no chamber of presence but
a Stable; no Tapestry but straw; no chair of estate, but a Cratch; no Scepter
but a Reed, and no Crown but a wreath of Thorns, work in me a holy
highmindednesse to despise this world, which so despised thee. Make worldly
greatness seem small, honor base, estimation vile, and pomp vain unto me:
let not the glittering show of gold, silver, and precious stones, or the luster
of eminent condition, dazell the eyes of my mind, but let the beams of this
star light and guide me rather to honor thee in a stable, then leave thee to
follow Herod in his palace upon any hopes whatsoever.

The wise men after they had seen thee, never returned back to Herod, but went
another way to their own home: so let me, after thou have called me to the
knowledge of thy truth, and redeemed me from my vain conversation, never
return back to my worldly courses, but take another way to my true home in
Heaven. The wise men when they saw thy star in the air, were exceeding glad:
I see thy star in Scriptures, nay, I see the bright morning star in my
heart: O let my joy exceed theirs, as my knowledge does. The star still
lighted them till they came to the place where thou layest, and entered into thy
bedchamber: So O Lord, let the light of faith guide me all the way of this
life, even till I come to see thee, not in a stable on earth strewed with
litter and dung, but in a Palace in Heaven built with S^phyrs, and founded upon
Pearls, not receiving a present of gold from men, but wearing a crown of glory
put upon thee by thy Father; not having a quantity of frankincense or Myrrh in
thy hand, but a golden Censor full of sweet odours which are the prayers of
Saints. Among which I beseech thee offer up the prayers of me a sinner, that I
may be a Saint after thou have purged me from all filthiness in the royal
bath of thy blood.

Amen.
The Southern Hemisphere, OR a Meditation on Innocents-day.
THe reason why I fix the Stars of the Southern Pole on this day, is, because
as those innocent Doves, those harmless Lambs* those glorious Star^e^, that
first appeared in the Christian firmament, the infinite number of sucking
infants under two years old that were as this day slain by the appointment of
cruel Herod, were borne, and soon after dyed in the place of Christ's Nativity
Bethlehem Ephrata, which was a City which stood upon a hill some six miles from
Jerusalem toward the South. But for the number of the stars noted by
Astronomers in this Hemisphere 15 Constellations which are 293 are not the
third part of the tithe of 14000 which is the number of those blessed martyred
Infants, if it be true which the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians and Calends of the
Greeks affirm.

But all this was done, as S. Matthew testifies, to perform the word of the
Lord spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet saying, In Rama was heard a voice of
lamentation weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they were not. That it was prefigured by
Rachels weeping is evident. For Rachel, Jacobs wife dyed in childbed, and was
buried about a quarter of a mile from this place, on the right hand toward
Jerusalem. The monument that Jacob set upon her grave (as some affirm) was
twelve stones pitched an end, which ceremony the ancient Fathers used to
testify their hope of the Resurrection to come, which was not generally
reveiled. And by reason of this grave all the country ther^bouts ever since was
called by the name of Rachel. And for this cause these Infants were called her
children, albeit she were dead above 2000 years before they were slain, and
1500 years before Jeremy writ the prophecy.

Having thus taken a view of the truth of the story, I will insist a little
further in the description of this ambitious Tyrant Herod, who being of mean
parentage, though of an ambitious spirit, by fair pretenses and subtle
demeanor, obtained the daughter of a King for his wife; then having one foot
in the stirrup of preferment and worldly honor, he further hunting after his
prey (the Crown of the Kingdom of Jewry) depos^d his father in law, and s^ew
him and all his sons: he stayed not there, but killed his own wife and all
the Nobility of Juda. And so fearful was he that any should rob him of his
honor, when he heard that a King was borne from the Magi, and could not find
the particular party, that he did not only cause an infinite number of innocent
babes to be slain, but for more assurance killed his own son, because, as
Philo says, he descended by his mothers side of the line of Juda, which
cruelty coming to Augustus's ears, he said (as Macrobius reports) That he
had rather be Herod's Swine then his Son, for that he being a Jew was
forbidden by his religion to kill his swine, though not ashamed to kill his
son. But what became of him after all these bloody Tragedies by him committed
Eusebius out of Josephus relates a most loathsome and shameful disease of
which he most miserably dyed: From which I observe, that miserable and
wretched is their condition, that for obtaining of a little fading and
transitory honor in this world (which indeed is but the shadow of true honor)
trouble and perplex both their bodies and minds, while they live in this life,
loose the true substantial and everlasting felicity in the world to come, and
sometimes receive double punishment both here on earth, and hereafter in hell
for ever, as Herod and others.

But leaving him, now I will once more take a view of these blessed innocents,
these Protomartyrs, these first fruits of martyrdom, these seeming Christ's of
the same age of Christ, these that suffered for him while he was safe in his
cradle or in his mothers arms. The cause was his, and these silent advocates
make answer: he was the agent, and they the patient; he was sought for, and
they were found, for his fact they were slain: he the Isaac that was intended
for the sacrifice, and these the innocent lambs that were sacrificed in his
stead.

O Lord, in what had these offended? how had they broken thy statutes, that
could neither go nor speak? their hearts had no knowledge to think, their
hands too feeble to work, and their tongues unable to utter any thing that was
ill. Now they were bewailing the miseries that their original sin did expose
them unto, and thou by the hand of Herod sent the messenger of death to invite
them to eternal joy.

Grant I beseech thee, that as they were two years bewailing their miseries,
and thou thy self two days in the bed of the grave, and in the third raisedst
thy self, and restoredst them to joy in the third year; so I likewise having
been in the bed of sin for the time past of my life, bewailing my sin for the
time to come, may now live the life of grace, and hereafter partake of eternal
joys in glory for ever.

Amen.
The Zodiake.
IN which Astrologers note 12. Constellations or houses for 280. Stars, which
they call the twelve signs. And in the year we commemorate the lives and
virtues of the twelve Apostles, and with them the day Star, Saint John the
Baptist; the evening Stars, Saint Paul and Barnabas, and three other Stars of
like splendour, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint Steven. That the Saints, and
especially these, spread the light of their heavenly doctrine over the whole
world, is evident by Dan. 12. 3. where the Prophet affirms that they which be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many
to righteousness shall shine as the stars. And they are not only stars which
enlighten the spiritual Jerusalem, the Spouse of the Lamb, Christ's Church on
earth, which John in a vision saw come down from heaven, but precious stones
are rare jewels to adorn and beautify her, as is excellently paraphrased upon
the twelve foundations of that City, which were the twelve Apostles, in these
words.

The first Apostle from the Indies gathered in all these green Iaspers, who
abode ever green and unwithered from the true faith, to found with these the
first foundation of this heavenly habitacle: another Apostle to make up the
second course of this foundation, brought in those celestial Saphires, who
endued with heavenly hewes and qualities, respected no earthly shows. The
third Apostle for the third course of this foundation, gathered in from among
the Egyptians, the victorious and fiery Chalcedonies, even the zealous
Professors, and victorious Teachers of the Truth. Some fourth Apostle, to build
the fourth foundation even from the Scythians and Bactrians brought in the
green and glancing Smaragdes, even the flourishing, unwithered, and sincere
Christians of those Countries. For the fifth course of this foundation, some
Apostles gathered in from among the Arabians their meek, lowly, and chaste
people, comparable to the simple and chaste nature of the Sardonyx. The sixth
Apostle gathered in these mollified people, in whose soft hearts are engraven
the seals of salvation, even the continual memory of Christ's Passion,
represented by the bloody and fleshly color of the Sardius. The seventh
Apostle for the seventh ground and foundation, the wise and constant
Chrysolites. The eighth Apostle for his course and foundation, gathered in all
diligent Christians and peacemakers, comparable to the precious Berill. The
ninth Apostle to found his course with, gathered in the patient people, and
restrainers of their affections, represented by the nature of the Topaze. The
tenth Apostle brought into the tenth course of this foundation, the golden
green Chrysoprasus, even those Christians, that renouncing avarice, glory in
that golden Treasure of heaven, that never withers nor decays. The eleventh
Apostle to found his eleventh course, gathered in the golden purple and
princely Hyacinths, even those magnificent and princely professors, who being
richly decored with spiritual blessings, overcame all temptations. Finally, for
the twelfth course, and to complete the foundation of this holy work, the last
Apostle brought in, even from Armenia, the pure and temperate Amethysts, to
wit, those Christians, who detesting gluttony and drunkenness, are endued with
Sobriety and temperance.

O Lord, grant that in the day thou make up thy Jewels, I may be found a
precious stone in this building, having in this life shined as a wandering Star
in grace, I may for ever rest a fixed Star in glory.

Amen.
A short Meditation of the Feast of Saint John Baptist.
THis glorious Star was the first that appeared in the Evangelicall
Hemisphere. At the luster whereof, the shadow of the Law began to withdraw and
vanish, that the spiritual sense might appear through the literal. He
concluded the Law and the Prophets, and prepared the way for the Sun of
Righteousness, the day spring from on high.

And now the letter of the Law spiritually understood, is turned into Gospel:
yet the owle-eyed Jews that loved darkness better than light, when John shone
in the Pulpit (like a taper on a candlestick) could scarce endure him burning
longer than a farthing candle, an hour was the utmost of their patience. This
is that Star that gave an heroical rise of jubilation in the womb of his
blessed Mother.

At the first approach of this Sun, or at the first dawning of the day of
Salvation, as the glorious Sun entered into the blessed Equator, the Virgin
Mother, and began to show forth his spiritual rays by heavenly ejaculations
in Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual Songs; from Mary, the Mother of our Lord,
from Zacharias the father of his Harbenger, and old Simeon, that waited for his
Salvation. This is that Elias that was to come, the Prophet of the Highest, and
more than a Prophet; so much the more that a greater than he was not borne of
a woman in natural generation. The voice of the Crier in the wilderness, such
a voice as David speaks of in the 29. Psalm: that made the stout soldiers to
bow their heads in humility, the fruitless and barren Publican to bear the
fruit of Charity, and all the common people to cry out with an unanimous
consent, What shall we do? This is the Angel of the Lord sent as a Messenger
before his face, to prepare his ways: he that was borne after a supernatural
manner, lived an austere angelical life, clad in course and rough habit, fed
with spare diet. And after one year in his ministerial office, for testifying
the truth to fulfill the wicked desires of a lewd stru^pet, prompt by her
bloody mother, when he was little more than one and thirty years of age, by
the commandment of cruel Herod, was beheaded in the Tower of Macherus, which
was a Town of Peraea beyond Jordan, twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the
East, situated on a high Mountain; which Towns name being derived from
Machera signifies a sword, and John dyed by a sword. Thus was this light
withdrawn, this lamp extinguished, and this star clouded.

But all this is so excellently performed by Mr. Austin, that the luster of his
bright Sun has eclipsed this my star; which inforceth me to conclude as he
does in the Collect of the Church, saying,

Almighty God, by whose providence thy servant John Baptist was wonderfully
borne, and sent to prepare the way of thy Son our Savior, by preaching of
Penance; make me so to follow his doctrine and holy life, that I may truly
repent according to his preaching, and after his example constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truths sake, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
On the Feast of Saint Matthew.
THe next light after the Baptist, in the Evangelical firmament, I place the
first of the Evangelists, for which it may be some of the upholders of the
universal Bishops Sovereignty will cavil with me, because I do not set the
prime Apostle S. Peter in the first place: For though Saint Matthew was the
first Writer, yet it may be said, Saint Peter was the first Preacher after the
Ascension of our Lord, as is evident in the first and second of the Acts. And
there has been as glorious lights, Preachers as Writers. But yet for that the
History of the Gospel is the foundation of all writing and preaching, I will
begin with Saint Matthew, who wrote his Gospel before the other three, as is
evident by Revel. 6. 1. For when Christ (which is the Lamb there mentioned) had
opened the sealed doctrine of our redemption in the first year of his
ministerial office, to the six and thirtieth year after his birth, one of the
four Beasts, which by interpretours is Matthew, writes his Gospel in the
Hebrew tongue, and in the* mighty style of Gods thundering Spirit, set out the
same, willing all Nations to come and see, viz. approach and consider it. About
which time in accomplishment of the second verse Christ and his Apostles pass
out and preach to all the testimony of the Gospel, shooting the arrows of
zeal to pierce all godly hearts: which is prefigured in him that sat on the
white horse crowned with victory, and triumphantly conquering and overcomming
the world.

And that S. Matthew is one of the four beasts is evident, for both Ezekiel in
his first chapter, and S. John in his fourth makes mention, that one of the
beasts had a face like a man, which by all interpreters is applied to Matthew,
because he begins his first face or leaf with the genealogy of Christ, as he
is man of the seed of David by the Virgin Mary.

And the Prophet Ezekiel writing in Hebrew to the Hebrews; says, the first
face of one of the four beasts was as the face of a man, meaning S. Matthew
wrote first in Hebrew. But the Prophet S. John writing in Greek to the
Grecians says, the first beast had the face of a Lion, meaning S. Mark who
wrote first in Greek; and S. Matthew was the third whose Gospel when S. John
wrote his, was translated out of Hebrew into Greek.

Another reason why S. Matthews Gospel is set first, is because he being an
Apostle was to give light and open the way to the rest, as S. John's Gospel is
set last, because being an Apostle he might give authority and confirm the
former: two which were Disciples and writ their Gospel; Saint Mark by the
instruction and approbation of S. Peter, and S. Luke by the authority of S.
Paul.

Saint Matthew setting down his own story is so far from flattery that he
calls himself Matthew the Publican, and tells how he was called to be an
Apostle, as he was sitting at the receipt of custom, which text is excellently
expounded in M. Austins divine Meditations. And as some report, it was in
Caesarea Philippi, where likewise Christ cured the woman afflicted with the
bloody issue 12 years by the touch of the hemme of his garment. It is likewise
related that S. Matthew having writ his Gospel, and delivered it to James the
Lords brother then Bishop of Jerusalem, preached the Gospel in Aethiopia now
called the Kingdom of Presbyter-Iohn, and was entertained by the Eunuch
Chamberlain to the Qu^ene Candace, whereof there is mention in the Acts. He
prevailed so much, that Aeglippus the King of Aethiopia and his people came to
baptism. But there reigned after him, one Hyrtacus which hated the Apostle,
and commanded him to be run through with a sword. But some say he was run
through with a spear at Hierapolis in Parthia, where he was honorably buried:
so that he did not only write the Testament of his Lord, but for confirmation
of the truth thereof sealed it with his blood.

What may be further writ concerning this blessed Apostle I leave to the
learned, and conclude with the prayer for the day as the Church has set it in
her Liturgy, saying:

Almighty God, which by thy blessed Son did call Matthew from the receipt
of custom to be an Apostle and Evangelist; grant me grace to forsake all
covetous desires, and inordinate love of riches, and to follow thy said son
Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and thy holy Spirit, three
persons and one God, now and for ever.

Amen.
On S. Markes-day.
THe next fundamental light that appeared in the Evangelicall Sphere, was S.
Mark, as appears in the third. and fourth verses of the sixth of the
Revelation. For when the second Beast or Gospel began to invite men to the
perusal thereof, then there went out another horse which was red, and power
was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another, and there was given unto him a great sword, which is
thus paraphrased, At that time proceeded tyrannous and bloody magistrates,
sitting in the seat of tyranny to whom power was given to persecute Gods Saints
on earth, and to deprive them of peace by causing all men to kill them, abusing
so the sword of Justice, that God had given them. And this was accomplished at
that time, when S. Steven suffered martyrdom, and James the brother of John
was beheaded for Christ's sake: for even then and from thenceforth the Roman
Magistrates, and Synagogue of the Jews never stinted from persecuting and
putting to death all true Christians.

That Mark is the second Beast spoken by Ezekiel, and the first by S. John,
that had a face like a Lion, is plain, because he begins his first face or
leaf at the voice (like a roaring Lion) in the wilderness, prepare the way of
the Lord, etc.

S. Mark is noted by Dorotheus to be one of the seventy Disciples, and was
very attentive unto the preaching of S. Peter, from whom at the earnest
persuasions of many zealous Christians, he wrote his Gospel in Greek. And S.
Peter makes mention of him in the last Chapter of his first Epistle, in these
words, the Church of Babylon, elected together with you saluteth you, and Mark
my son, and yet this Evangelist is most copious in setting down particularly
how S. Peter thrice denied his Lord and Master. He was the first Bishop of
Alexandria, and preached the Gospel in all the bordering Regions from Egypt
unto Pentapolis, and (as some affirm) in the reign of Trajan the Emperor,
others (and they more probably) in the beginning of the reign of Nero, had a
Cable rope tied about his neck, and by that drawn through the streets of
Alexandria, that his flesh was rent in pieces, the stones colored with his
blood, and in the end he burned to ashes by those furious Idolaters, and was
buried at Bucolus a place in the said City. For what may be written more
concerning Mark I leave to the learned: and conclude with the prayer for the
day, saying.

Almighty God, which ha^t instructed thy holy Church with the heavenly doctrine
of thy Evangelist S. Mark, give me grace that I may not be like a little
child carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, but be firmly
established in the truth of thy Gospel, through Jesus Christ my Lord,

Amen.
On S. Lukes day.
THe third fundamental light that showed the history of Christ is S. Luke. And
that he was the third is plain by the 6 Revel. 5. 6. For after the third
sealed week which was the 43 after the birth of Christ, S. Luke the third
Beast wrote his Gospel, and published it, that all men might come and see. At
which time there fell a great universal famine of corn* which Agabus
prophesied and foretold should come to pass among the Apostles, Disciples and
the whole Church.

In this dearth the bushel of wheat was sold for five accustomed prices, and
the bushel of barley for three. All which was prefigured by him that sat on
the black horse with balances in his hand, and the voice that spoke in the
midst of the four beasts, saying, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three
measures of barley for a penny. So that this agrees with S. Luke in three
respects.

First, in that he is the third Beast in Ezekiel, and the second in S. John,
with a face like a Bull, because he begins his face or first leaf at
Zacharias offering incense (as it were a bullock) at the Altar.

Secondly, Because he wrote at this time.

And thirdly, because he makes relation of the famine that then happened, 11 Acts
28, 29, 30.

He was a follower of all the Apostles, in their Peregrination, but especially
of S. Paul, who makes mention of him in two of his Epistles, once to the Col.
4. chap. and 14. verse, Luke the beloved Physician saluteth you, and in 2 Timothy
4. 11. only Luke is with me.

By birth he was of Antioch, but by profession a Physician, and he has left us
proofs of his skill in two volumes medicinable for our souls health: one of
the Gospel, which he reports to have published according as he records it of
them which from the beginning were beholders and ministers of this doctrine; so
that he searched all from the original. The other of the Acts of the Apostles,
where he compiled not only the things that he heard with his ears, but also the
things which he saw with his eyes. And of Paul some say that he accustomed to
mention the Gospel of S. Luke when he spoke as of his own, saying, according
to my Gospel, 2 Timothy 2. 8.

And though S. Luke was scholar and dependant of S. Paul, yet he alone of all
others, makes mention of the differences of Paul and Barnabas, and in the story
of Saint Stephens death, after all his narration ended, he added a clause which
in humane judgment might have been left out, to wit, Saul was cons^nting and
culpable of Stephens death: whereby we may perceive most perspicuously, that
as these Evangelists were plain, sincere, and simple, and f^rre from presuming
to devise any thing of themselves; so were they religious and had scruple to
pass over or leave out any thing of the truth in favor of themselves or any
other whatsoever.

Whether S. Luke dyed a natural death or a violent, I cannot find; only
Dorotheus says, he died at Ephesus, and was there buried. Therefore I leave
the further luster of him (as of the rest of those glorious stars) to the
curious search of the learned, and conclude with the prayer for the day, saying:

Almighty God which calledst Luke the Physician, whose praise is in the
Gospel, to be a Physician of the soul; it may please thee by the wholesome
medicine of his doctrine, to heal all the diseases of my soul, through thy
son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
On S. John the Evangelist.
SAint John was the last fundamental light that shined in the Evangelicall
Hemisphere, as is manifest by the forecited place of his Revelations. For when
he set forth his Gospel which was between the 50 years and 57 after Christ's
Nativity, the pale Horse (which by Interpreters signifies heresies among the
people, bringing therewith the death of the soul, and procuring hell and
eternal damnation) began to arise, who spoke against the divinity of Christ.
Wherefore S. John for the suppressing and conviction of the heresies of
Cerinthus, Nicholaus, Ebion, Elymas the Sorcerer, and other certain
Pharisaicall Heretics, wrote his Gospel, which begins at the description
of Christ's divinity.

But they not forsaking their heretical opinions, God sent his plagues against
Judea and other parts of Asia, the quarter of the earth where these heresies
reigned.

That S. John is the fourth beast that had a face like an Eagle, is likewise
evident, because he begins his first face or lease at the high and divine
essence of Christ's Godhead, flying so high in his style, that he is compared
to an Eagle.

Saint John was the brother of James, who were both the sons of Zebedeus, who
was a Fisherman; and were called by Christ, when they were in the ship with
their Father mending their nets. At which time (as some relate) Saint John was
but one and twenty years of age.

This Apostle was so beloved of Christ, that he was suffered to lean on Christ's
bosom when he was at Supper.

He, his brother and Peter were permitted to see Christ's Transfiguration on
Mount Tabor, and they three were taken from the rest to behold his Agony in the
Garden. Wherefore, the Mother of John dreaming that Christ should be a
temporal King, presuming so much upon the love which she saw in Christ
toward her children, boldly asked, That they might have the greatest honor,
viz. one to sit at the right hand, and the other at the left in his Kingdom.
(Yet though this is noted by Saint Matthew to be the Mothers desire, Saint
Mark relating the same story, Chap. 10. 35. says, That it was the desire of
James and John, for which the other Disciples disdained them two; to show that
it was their ambition to solicit their Mother to make such a petition; which
Gospel though it touched Saint John who then lived, and had the perusal
thereof, never denied it, nor took it il, but approved that, and the other two
Evangelists to be true; so sincere, simple, and without all art of flattery or
rhetorical amplification was all their writings, that they do not spare Christ
himself, whom they adore and acknowledge to be their God and Savior, but
show the infirmities of his flesh as he was a man; as his hunger and thirst,
his being weary, and how he wept, his passions of fear, anger, love, etc.
(therefore much less would they favor the Apostles or themselves) And last of
all, Christ upon the Cross to express the great love that he bare this
Apostle, called the blessed Virgin his Mother, and him her son. And from that
day to her death she lived with him. Presently after the feast of Pentecost,
when he with the rest had received the holy Ghost, he with Peter was cast into
prison for healing the cripple, Acts 4. And a while after, he with Peter was
sent by the Apostles to preach the Word of God in Samaria, Act. 8.

Four years after the death of the Virgin Mary, he was present at the
Apostolical Council in Jerusalem. Now James his brother who was called the
elder, was beheaded two years before, for this Council was celebrated in the
presence of James the younger, Peter, John, Paul and Barnabas, etc. about
sixteen years after the Resurrection of Christ, and fourteen after the
Conversion of Paul, Gal. 2. Act. 15.

After the death of Paul he governed the Churches of Asia minor, where he wrote
his Gospel. And in the 86. year of his age being cast into a vessel of
boiling oil, and coming out unhurt, by the command of Domitian the Emperor,
he was banished into the I Will of Pathmos, where he wrote his Revelation to the
seven Churches in Asia. It is related of him, that he turned certain pieces of
wood into gold, and stones by the sea side into Margrits, to satisfy the
desire of two whom he persuaded to renounce their riches, and after they
repenting that for worldly treasure they had lost heaven, changed them into the
same substance again. That he raised up a widow and a young man from death to
life. That he drunk poison, and it hurt him not, and raised up two to life,
which had drunk the same before: and that he called a young man to repentance
that was captain of thieves.

After the death of Domitian, he came to Ephesus, wh^re (as Saint Austin
relates) he caused his grave to be made, and in the presence of diverse went in
alive, and being no sooner in, and to their seeming dead, they covered him:
which kind of Rest (says he) was rather termed a sleep than death; for that
the earth of the grave bubbleth or boyleth up after the manner of a Well, by
reason of John resting therein and breathing, a sign of his slumbering
therein. And thus he dyed, when he was (as some relate) an hundred and twenty
years old: others say ninety nine, and some ninety one; the truth of all
which, I leave to the dilig^nt search of the learned, and conclude with the
prayer for the day, saying:

Merciful Lord, I beseech thee to cast the bright beams of light upon thy
Church, that it being lightened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist Saint John, may attain to thy everlasting Gifts, through Jesus
Christ my Lord

Amen.
Saint Peter's day.
HAving made a brief relation of the lives and deaths of the four
Evangelists, who writ the Gospel of our Lord and Savior, Now I should set
forth the glorious luster of those Stars, which were equal, and some before
them in the order of Apostleship.

The first in order is Simon, whose surname was Peter, the son of Iona of
Bethsaida in Galilee. The order of his precedence is noted by three Evangelists
in four places, where all the Apostles are nominated, viz. Matthew. 10. Mark. 3.
Luke 6. and Act. 1. But whether he were the first that was called to be an
Apostle or no, I cannot certainly determine, for though Saint Matthew and Mark
make relation, that he with his brother Andrew were first called, yet Saint
John affirms, that two of John's disciples followed Christ, of which one was
Andrew, who went and told his brother Simon that he had found the Messiah; But
whether he were first or second that was called to the Apostleship, I leave to
the learned.

The Evangelists make more mention of him, than of any one Apostle besides; as
first they show that Christ coming to his house, healed his wives mother of a
fever. Then they show how ready he was to walk on the sea at the command of
Christ; and yet because of a little tempest his strong courage failed him, and
he ready to sincke.

Then again his noble confession that he made of Christ, for which Christ so
highly commended him: but presently after they show his carnal fear, for
which Christ checked him. Then they show Christ's love to him, in making choice
of him, and the two sons of Zebedeus to be spectators of his glorious
transfiguration and bitter agony in the Garden: and in the first they say, he
spoke he knew not what, being overcome with joy; and in the second they show
his carelessness, for which Christ checked him by name, because he could not
watch one hour. Then they show how inquisitive he was to ask questions, how
often shall I forgive my brother in one place? do thou wash my feet? in
another; and, what shall this man do? in a third etc. And last of al, before
his Passion they declare his strong resolution, Though all men fo^sake thee,
yet will not I. And yet presently after they show how basely he denied his
Lord Christ* All the particular relations that the Evangelists make of this
Apostle are so many, that it would make a little volume to make rehear^all of
them. And I have intended brevit^: Therefore will I make a short story of his
life after the Passion of Christ, as it is related in the Acts and other
Authors.

After the Ascension of Christ he made the first Oration to the eleven for the
choice of an Apostle in the place of Judas. And after the feast of Pentecost,
he made the first Sermon, by which 3000 souls were added to the Church. After
that he healed the lame man at the Temple gate, for which he and John were
brought before the Council.

Then is showed in the fifth of the Acts how God by him punished the hypocrisy
of Ananias and Saphira. After is declared how he was sent by the Apostles with
John to preach in Samaria, where (for ought I know) he withstood Simon Magus,
and not at Rome (as some affirm.)

In the sixth year after the Resurrection of Christ he went to Lidda, and
cured Aeneas, who had bin sick of the Palsy eight years. From thence he went
to Ioppa, and raised Tabitha from death. And in the seventh year after the
Resurrection, he came to Cesarea Strato, where he preached the Gospel to
Cornelius the Centurion, and baptized him and his whole family.

In the eleventh year after the Resurrection, he was cast into prison, and
set at liberty by an Angel.

About five years after, he was at the council of the Apostles in Jerusalem.
And the year following went into Antioch, of which place he was the first
Bishop, and the Disciples there the first Christians: and being at Babylon writ
his first Epistle to the strangers that dwelt in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia; Yet it is reported in Ecclesiastical histories, that Peter
came from Antioch to withstand Simon Magus at Rome, and there kept the Chair
25 years, 12 under Claudius, and 13 under Nero.

He opposed Simon Magus once in restoring a Noble man to life, and another time
when he was going to fly into the Air, Peter brought him down with his wings
headlong to the ground; by which fall his legs and joints were broken, and he
thereupon dyed.

But there are diverse of the learned, that affirm that Peter never came to
Rome at all, as may be gathered out of those five Epistles which S. Paul writ
from Rome, being there a Prisoner, and in the conclusion of them names all his
friends, but never makes mention of Peter in any one of them, which were
written about the fifth year of the reign of Nero. And when he writes to the
Romans, (which was the second year of Nero) he never makes mention of any
salutation to Peter, which (if he had been then Bishop of that place) he would
not have omitted. And if ever Peter were at Rome at all, he came thither after
the last imprisonment of S. Paul, and a few days before his martyrdom: but
whether it was that he was martyred at Rome by the command of Nero, or at
Jerusalem by the appointment of King Agrippa, or (as some say) at Babylon, it
is not material But certain it is that he was crowned with the wreath of
martyrdom, and was crucified with his head downward, and his feet upward,
which death he chose, because he confessed himself to be unworthy to suffer
in the same manner and form as his Lord suffered. And it is reported by some,
when his wife was led to suffer martyrdom, as he hung upon the cross (others
say, as he went out of doors) he greatly rejoiced and encouraged her, calling
her by name, saying, Be of good comfort, and remember the Lord Jesus.

The truth of all which stories I leave to the consideration of the learned,
and conclude with the prayer for the day.

Almighty God, which by thy Son Jesus Christ have given many excellent gifts
to thy Apostle S. Peter, and commandedst him earnestly to feed thy flock: Make
(I beseech thee) all Bishops and Pastors diligently to follow the same, to
preach thy holy word, and the people obediently to follow the same, that they
may receive the crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Saint Andrew.
SAint Matthew and Saint Luke place this Apostle next to his Brother S. Peter,
(because as some affirm) they were first called to the Apostleship. Yet this
blessed star, for many other rare graces related of him by the Evangelists
and other authors, may well have precedence before others.

First, for his earnest desire to draw other men to the knowledge of Christ:
for when he heard it of John the Baptist, he presently called his Brother
Simon, John 1 40. After when the Grecians desired to see Christ, he with Philip
made him acquainted therewith: and last of all he spent much labor and time in
preaching Christ to the barbarous Scythians, Saxons, and other Aethiopians.

Secondly, for his ready willingness to follow Christ, and be his Disciple:
for as Jesus passed by the Sea of Galilee, he saw him with his brother casting
a net into the sea, for they were fishers. And he no sooner called them, but
they left their nets and presently followed him.

And lastly, for his constant perseverance in the ministerial office, he
deserved this priority of place: for having a long time preached the Gospel to
diverse barbarous nations, was threatened by Aegeas King of the Edessians, that
if he would not surcease preaching Christ, he should be crucified as his Lord
was, on the cross. To whom he gave this answer, and boldly said, That he
would not have preached the honor and glory of the cross, if he had feared
the cross. And seeing the cross afar off, with a lively and cheerful
countenance said, O cross most welcome and long looked for, with a willing
mind joyfully and desirously I come to thee, being the Scholar of him who did
hang on thee; because I have been ever thy lover, and coveted to embrace thee:
so being crucified gave up the ghost, fell a sleep, and was buried in Patris a
City in Achaia.

And this is all the description that my search in Antiquity can make of this
star. The further amplification thereof I leave to the learned, and conclude
with the prayer for the day saying: Almighty God, which did give such grace
unto thy Apostle Saint Andrew, that he readily obeyed the calling of thy Son
Jesus Christ, and followed him without delay; grant that I being called by thy
holy word, may forth with give over my self to follow thy holy Commandment,
through the same Jesus Christ my Lord.

S. Philip and James.
THe reason (as I conceive) why the luster of these two stars are by the
order of the Church conjoined together on this day is, because they and S.
Peter only are not displaced in their order by all the Evangelists: for Peter
is the first, Philip the fifth, and James the ninth in the nomination of them
together. And as it is very plain, that Peter and Andrew, James and John the
sons of Zebedeus, were the four Apostles that were first called: so it is
likewise conspicuous that Philip was the fifth, for the twice two brethren were
called in one day, as Matthew and Mark note; but Philip was called the day
after, as S. John says expressly, the day following Jesus found Philip, and
said unto him, follow me. Therefore as the fifth Apostle I fix him in this
starry firmament.

He was of Bethsaida the City of Andrew and Peter, and was no sooner called
himself, but he went and found out Nathaneel, and said unto him, we have
found him of whom Moses did write in the Law and the Prophets, Jesus the Son
of Joseph of Nazareth.

A rare example of a godly mind! that being converted labors, to convert
others, and though he himself (as some note) was unlearned, yet does adventure
to draw and allure the learned to the knowledge of Christ: for some affirm
that Nathaneel was a learned man: and also this shows, that by weak means God
can work great miracles, and by the foolishness of preaching work faith in the
heart, which only saves a soul from eternal damnation.

After it is related by John, that the Greeks that came up to worship at the
feast, came to Philip and said, Sir we would see that Jesus; who told Andrew,
and they two told Jesus; for it seems Philip durst not tell him alone, lest
Christ should ask him some question which he could not well answer, as he had
tried him before by this question, (when he saw a great multitude about 5000
follow him into the wilderness) whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
yet not long after he of himself showed his own simplicity and ignorance: for
Christ having spoken of the knowledge of God the Father, he interrupts him, and
bursts out with this question, show us thy Father, and it suffices. In the
sixth of the Acts is related, that he was chosen one of the seven Deacons: in
the eighth of the Acts is showed how he preached the word of God, wrought
wonders, and healed diverse diseases among the people in Samaria, how he
baptized Simon Magus, and converted the Ethiopian Eunuch. And in the 21 of the
Acts it is declared, that he had four Daughters Virgins and Prophetesses, and
that Paul abode in his house at Cesarea Philippi for many days: and some write
that he was crucified at Hieropolis, where he and his daughters were honorably
buried.

Thus having described what I find concerning the first of these Stars, I
should now show the luster of the second: the ninth Apostle S. James Alpheus
Brother to Simon and Jude, and called the brother of the Lord: for it was
usual with the H^brewes to call their kinsmen brethren: so Lot being the son
of Haran, Abraham's brother, was by Abraham called brother, Genesis 13. 8. And
Jacob being the son of Rebecca, Labans sister, was called brother by Laban,
Genesis 20. 15. And so this James and Joses and Simon and Judas being the Virgin
Mary's sisters son, was by the Jews called Christ's brethren in a scornful
manner, Mat. 13. 55. And S. Paul in 1 Gal. 6. makes mention of this Apostle,
saying, I saw none of the Apostles, save James the brother of the Lord.

He was by the Apostles chosen to be Bishop of Jerusalem, for so says an
ancient Father, Peter, James, and John after the assumption of our Savior
though they were preferred by the Lord, yet challenged not this prerogative to
themselves, but appointed James the Just Bishop of Jerusalem. He continued in
the said See 30 years, and wrote the Canonical Epistle which bears his name.
And at the last wore the crown of Martyrdom. The story of whose life and
death I find exquisi^ely written after this manner following. James the brother
of Christ took in hand the government of the Church after the Apostles, termed
a just and a righteous man of all men from the time of our Savior unto us: for
many other were called James besides him, but this man was holy from his
mothers womb.

He drank neither wine, nor strong drink, neither ate any creature wherein
there was life. He was neither shaven, neither anointed, neither did he use
bath: unto him alone was it lawful to enter into the holy places; he used no
woollen vesture, but wore a Sindone, and alone frequented he the Temple, so
that he was ofttimes found prostrate on his knees praying for the sins of the
people.

His knees were after the guise of a Camels knee, benumbed and bereft of the
sense of feeling by reason of his continual kneeling in supplication to God,
and petition for the people.

For the excellency of his righteousness he was called Just, and Oblias, which
sounds by interpretation the bulwark or defense of the people in
righteousness, as prophesies do go of him.

When diverse asked him touching the Heresies among the people, which was the
gate or door of Jesus, he answered, the same to be the Savior; by whose means
they believed Jesus to be the Christ: but the foresaid heresies acknowledge
neither resurrection, nor the coming of any Judge, which shall reward to every
one according to his works; for as many as believed, they believed by means of
James.

When many of the Princes were persuaded, there arose a tumult of the Jews,
Scribes, and Pharisees, saying: It is very dangerous, lest the whole people
look after this Jesus, as though he were Christ: and being gathered together
they said to James: we pray thee stay this people, for they err in Jesus, as
though he were true Christ. We pray thee persuade this people, which frequent
to the feast of the Passover, concerning Jesus, for we all obey thee; yea, we
and all the people testify of thee, that thou art just, and respectest not the
person of any man, persuade therefore this multitude, that they err not in
Jesus: for the whole multitude and we obey thee: stand therefore upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple, that thou may be seen aloft, and that thy word my
be heard plainly of all the people; for because of this Passover all the
Tribes are met together with the Gentiles.

The foresaid Scribes and Pharisees place James upon the Pinnacle of the Temple,
and shouted unto him, and said, Thou just man, at whose commandment we all are
here, in so much as this people is seduced after Jesus, who was crucified,
declare unto us which is the way or door of Jesus crucified? And he answered
with a loud voice: Why ask ye me of Jesus the Son of Man, when as he sits
at the right hand of the great power in Heaven, and shall come in the clouds of
the Air?

When as he had persuaded many, so that they glorified God at the testimony of
James, and said, Hosanna in the highest to the Son of David: then the Scribes
and Pharisees said among themselves, we have done very ill in causing such a
testimony of Jesus to be brought forth; but let us climb up and take him, to
the end the people being stricken with fear, may renounce his faith.

And they shouted again, saying, O, O, and the Just also is seduced: and they
fulfilled the Scripture, which says in Esaias; Let us remove the Just, for he
is a stumbling block unto us: wherefore they shall gnaw the buds of their own
works.

They climbed up, and threw Iustus down headlong, saying; let us stone James
Iustus: and they began to throw stones at him, for after his fall he was not
fully dead, but remembering himself, fell on his knees, saying, I beseech thee,
Lord God, and Father, forgive them, for they wot not what they do. And as they
were a stoning him, one of the Priests, the son of Rechab, the son of Charabim
(whose testimony is in Jeremy the Prophet) cried out, cease, what do you? this
Just man prays for you. And one of them that were present, taking a Fullers
club, (with which they pounce and purge their clothes) struck Iustus on the
head, and brained him, and so he suffered martyrdom, whom they buried in that
place.

His Pillar or Picture as yet remains hard by the Temple, graven thus: This
man was a true witness both to the Jews and Gentiles, that Jesus was Christ.
And Vespasianus immediately, having over-runne Judea, subdued the Jews.

And these things says Josephus, happened unto the Jews in way of revenging
the death of James the Just, which was the brother of Jesus, whom they call
Christ, for the Jews slew him, when he was a very just man. With whom I
conclude this days Meditation with the Prayer for the day, saying:

Almighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life, grant me perfectly to
know thy Son Jesus Christ to be the way, the truth, and the life, as thou have
taught Saint Philip and other Apostles, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Saint Bartholomew.
THree Evangelists in their nomination of all the Apostles, note S. B^rtholomew
the sixth only. S. Luke, in the Acts, names him the seventh, and Thomas the
sixth. Therefore I in this place will follow both, and swim with the stream,
and against it, for with the Gospellers I set him on the sixth Apostolical
day, but with S. Luke I remember him as the seventh Apostle. By some he is
thought to be Nathaneel, because, as I said before, he is three times named
with Philip, who first called Nathaneel unto Christ: others say that he was
Nephew to the King of Syria, and show some reason for it. But whether he was
the one or the other, or neither, It is reported that he suffered martyrdom as
well as the rest of the Apostles, and preached the Word of God to the barbarous
Indians, where he continued a long time, and translated the Gospel of Saint
Matthew into their language. Where it was preserved many years: yet having
sincerely preached the Word of God, and wrought many miraculous works among
them, was at the last (as some relate) beaten to death with cudgels, others
say, that he was crucified and flein alive, and some affirm that he was
beheaded at the command of Polemus King of India. But these differences are
thus reconciled.

The first day of this Apostles martyrdom he was beaten with cudgels, the next
day he was crucified and fleine alive, as he was fastened to the cross; and
last of all, while breath remained, he was beheaded: But because the Spirit of
God, by the Evangelists, does only name him with the rest of the Apostles,
without any other addition or story, And for that Mr. Austins sun has so
learnedly shined on this day, I am enforced to conclude with the Collect for
the day, saying:

O Almighty and everlasting God, which have given grace to thy Apostle
Bartholomew, truly to believe and preach thy Word: Grant, I beseech thee, unto
thy Church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he taught,
through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Saint THOMAS.
THe eighth Apostolical Star, by Mark and Luke, so gloriously shines in Mr.
Austins Meditations, that I am persuaded my dim taper can give but little
light. Yet what I find by the Church Historians concerning him, I will adventure
to set down here in this place for his immortal memory, as I have done in the
rest of the Apostles; leaving the further consideration thereof unto others.

It is reported by Eusebius and others, that this Apostle after the Ascension
of Christ sent his Brother Thaddeus, one of the seventy disciples unto Agbarus
King of Edessa, according as Christ by his letter had promised the said King.
Where the said Thaddeus cured the King of his disease, and many of the people
of their infirmities, working many great signs and wonders, and converting
many from their Idolatry to the knowledge of Christ.

And this Apostle (as Dorotheus witnesses) preached the Gospel of the Lord to
the Parthians, Medes and Persians, Caramans, Hircans, Bactrians and Magicians.
And after much labor in his ministerial office, was slain by an Idol Priest
with a dart, which they call a spear or javelin. But (as others say) at the
Heathen Kings commandment four soldiers run him through with darts at
Callamina, a City in India, where he was honorably buried. Concerning his
incredulity, it is divinely commented on by Master Austin: Therefore I conclude
with the Prayer for the day, saying:

Almighty and everlasting God, which for more confirmation of the Faith, did
suffer thy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy Sons Resurrection; grant me so
perfectly, and without all doubt, to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, that my
faith in thy sight may never be reproved. And that for Jesus Christ his sake,
to whom with thee and the holy Spirit be all honor, etc.

Saint JAMES.
THe ninth Apostle is S. James Alpheus; and because I will not alter the name,
I will fix Saint James the son of Zebedeus, a fisherman, and Brother of John in
this place.

He it was that with Peter and his Brother the beloved Disciple, had the
prerogative to see the glorious Transfiguration on Mount Tabor, and the bitter
agony of our blessed Savior in the Garden of Gethsemani, had not drowsinesse
and sleep withheld them; and under Claudius the Emperor, an. Dom. 36. (as I
receive it from the Ancient) Herod Agrippa being then King of Iudaea, who
persecuting the Church of God, beheaded James with the sword.

Of this Apostle I read this story, That the man that accused him, when he saw
that James would willingly suffer martyrdom, was therewith so moved, that he
voluntarily confessed himself to be a Christian; for which he was adjudged
to be slain with the Apostle: and by the way, going to receive the crown of
their martyrdom, he requested the Apostle to pardon him, who after he had
pawsed a little upon the matter, turning unto him answered, Peace be unto thee
brother, and kissed him. So they were both beheaded together. And this is all
the description that I can find of this Apostolical Star. Therefore I
conclude with the Prayer for the day, saying:

Grant, O most merciful God, that as thine holy Apostle S. James leaving his
father and all that he had, without delay was obedient to the calling of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and followed him; so I forsaking all worldly and carnal
affections, may be evermore ready to follow thy Commandments.

S. Simon and Jude.
THese are the holy brethren, the Gemini in this Apostolical Zodiak: for (as
some write) they and James the younger, were the sons of Mary Cleophas and
Alpheus. Of the first, which is Simon (called by Luke, Zelotes, and by Matthew
and Mark, Simon the Canaanite) Dorotheus maks this short story: that he
preached Christ throughout Mauritania and Afric the less, at length was
crucified at Britannia, where he was buried: but others affirm him to be that
Disciple which was called Cleophas, and was one of the two that Christ met
going to Emaus, and (according to Dorotheus) one of the 70 Disciples, who
succeeded his brother James in the Bishopric of Jerusalem. After he had
preached Christ in diverse places, being 120 years of age; he was by some
Heretics accused to be lineally descended of the stock of David, and a
Christian, unto Atticus the Consul under Trajan the Emperor, for which he was
cruelly scourged, (so that his persecutors wondered that a man so old could
endure so much torment) and at last was crucified. And so according to the
opinion of some he dyed at Bethania near Jerusalem, and not in this Isle of
Britan (as others would have it) neither as others, that say, he and his
brother Judas were slain together by a tumult of people in Suanyr a City of
Persidis.

For Jude (whom S. Matthew calls Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus, and S.
Mark terms him only Thaddeus) wrote the Epistle which bears his name, where
he terms himself, as Luke in his Gospel and Acts of the Apostles does, the
Brother of James. But whether he was that Thaddeus which S. Thomas sent to
cure King Agbarus, I am not able to determine: yet it is very likely that it
was this Judas. For the learned do write that he preached to the Edesseans, and
throughout Mesopotamia, and was slain at Berytus, where in the time of Agbarus
King of Edessa he was honorably buried. But whether this be true or false, I
only take it as a historical description of this star, as I do of the rest,
and leave the further search thereof to the learned, concluding with the
collect for the day, saying: Almighty God, which have builded thy congregation
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head
Corner stone; grant me so to be joined together in unity of Spirit by their
doctrine, that I may be made a holy temple acceptable unto thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

S. Matthias.
WHile Christ was in his ministerial Office, Judas Iscariot Simons son
seemed to bear the luster of an Apostolic star, followed Christ, was
numbered with the twelve, and was entrusted with the bag, of which he was so
good a steward and saving a husband, that he was very unwilling that any thing
should fall out or pass beside the same, for any charitable or pious use, as
appears plainly by the text, John 12. and so covetous was he of money, that he
betrayed his Master for thirty pieces of silver. And Christ knew what he said,
when he utt^red those words, that he had chosen twelve, and one was a devil;
for it is reported of this Judas, that he slew his father, married with his
mother, and betrayed his Master, and in the end hanged himself, and falling
down, his bowels gushed out. But he ought to have no place in this Apostolic
Zodiake, except as an Airy Comet or sign of wonderment and caution, to fear
us, from following his steps. Therefore instead of him, Matthias one of the 70
Disciples was chosen by lot cast between him and Joseph, called Barsabas,
whose surname was Iustus.

This Apostle first preached the Gospel in Macedonia, then in Aethiopia, about
the haven called Hyssus and the River Phasis, unto barbarous nations and
ravenous of flesh. He dyed at Sebastopolis, where he was also buried near the
Temple of Sol. But others write, that he afterward came into Iudaea, where the
Jews stoned him, and beheaded him with an axe, after the Roman manner.
Therefore I conclude with the prayer for the day, saying. Almighty God, which
in the place of the traitor Judas, did choose thy faithful servant Matthias
to be of the number of the twelve Apostles, grant that thy Church being always
preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and guided by faithful and true
Pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
S. Stephen.
HAving thus briefly described the luster of the twelve Apostles, and three
prime stars annexed unto them, I should in the last place show the luster of
three other famous lights that bare them company. And the first is the
Protomartyr S. Stephen, who was ordained the first of the seven approved men
that were chosen Deacons, for they through prayer and imposition of the
Apostles hands for the public administration of the Church affairs, were
joined with Stephen: and he (as the ringleader of all the rest) as soon as he
was ordained, as though he was appointed for this purpose, was stoned unto
death of them that slew the Lord. And for this cause as the first triumphing
martyr of Christ according to his name he bears a Crown. A Crown of grace,
full of faith and power, and filled with the Holy Ghost. A Crown of
Martyrdom, and in the midst of a shower of stones, grace broke out of his lips
in a heavenly prayer for his persecutors, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge. And a Crown of glory, having in this life time received the first
fruits of a glorified body, his face did shine as it had been the face of an
Angel, and the first fruits of a glorified soul, in the vision of the blessed
Trinity, for he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand.
Wherefore I will pray to God to fill me with the Spirit of grace, that I may
love mine enemies, and pray for them that persecute and despitefully use me,
after the example of this blessed Martyr, that having received a Crown of grace
here on earth in this life, I may for ever wear a Crown of glory in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Amen.

S. Paul.
ALthough our Astronomers in their Almanacks note not this Saint in golden or
red letters, as they do the former, and although our Church has not expressly
observed a festival day to be kept holy in memory of him, yet I hold it not
fit that I should exclude him out of this starry heaven, for he was as glorious
a light as ever shined in the Firmament of the Church: and as himself
confesses, was not inferior to the chief of the Apostles, neither has our
Church quite excluded him out of her Liturgy, for there is an Epistle and
Gospel with a Collect appointed for this day. And to show that he was a chosen
vessel, a glorious star, he was called to his Apostleship after a wonderful
manner, for he was cast down to the earth, and a light shone about him, and he
heard a voice from Heaven, and became three days blind, till Ananias laid his
hand upon him. He was (as himself relates) of the Tribe of Benjamin, and (as
others report) he was borne in a town of Iewry called Giscalis, which Town
being taken of the Romans, he and his parents fled to Tharsis a Town in
Cilicia, but he himself confessed that he was borne in Tarsus, after he was
sent to Jerusalem, and brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, of whom you may
read in Acts 5. 34. and Acts 22. 3. Some say that after he was the Disciple of
Simeon the Just, who took Christ in his arms, and blessed him, and being but a
young man, he was one of those that kept the garments of the martyr S. Stephen,
who was martyred in the year of Christ's nativity 35. About the same time he
was made an Inquisitor for private heresies and became a cruel persecutor of
the Gospel; the next year he went to Damascus, where by the way he was
converted, and of a persecutor was made a glorious confessor, and was baptized
of Ananias in Damascus.

He confounded Elimas the Sorcerer, and one Sergius Paulus Proconsul of Cyprus
to the faith of Christ: of whom (as some say) he took the name of Paul: for
after that, he is called no more Saul.

In the 25 year after the Passion of Christ, which was An. Dom. ^8. when
Festus ruled in Iewry, he was sent bound to Rome. And in the 14 year of Nero,
the same day that Peter was crucified (though not the same year, as some
write) he was beheaded at Rome, and buried in the way that goes to Ostia, Anno
Domini, 60.

He wrote nine Epistles to seven Churches, and four to three of his Disciples,
but it is doubtful whether he wrote the Epistle to the Hebrews or no. Now
were I able to write of all this blessed Apostles labors and travels from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, Italy, and Spain, I should then show you how he was
persecuted from City to City, how he was beaten with rods here, how he was
stoned with stones there: how he labored with his hands in one place, how he
fasted and prayed in another. And as himself confesses in the 2 Cor. 11. That
he was in labors more abundant than any of the rest, in stripes above measure,
in prison more plenteously, in death often; of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one, I was thrice beaten with rods, I was once stoned, I
suffered thrice shipwreck, night and day have I been in the sea, in journying
often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of my own nation,
in peri^s among the Gen^iles, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in
weariness, and painfulnesse, in watching often, in fastings often, in cold and
in nakedness, beside the things which were outward, I am incombred daily and
have the care of all the Churches: but I knowing my own insufficiency for the
performing of such a work, conclude with the Collect for the day, saying, God
which have taught all the world, through the preaching of thy Apostle S. Paul,
grant I beseech thee, that I who have his wonderful conversion in remembrance,
may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine that he taught, through Jesus Christ
my Lord.

Amen.
S. Barnabe.
THis is that Ioses who was of the Apostles also called Barnabas (which is by
interpretation the Son of Consolation) being a Levite, of the country of
Cyprus, whereas he had land sold it and brought the money and laid it down at
the Apostles feet, whose praise is in the 11 Acts, 24 verse, that he was a good
man and full of the Holy Ghost and faith, and much people in Antioch (where
they were called the first Christians) by his powerful preaching joined
themselves unto the Lord. This was Paul's yoke fellow, who by the commandment
of the Lord were joined together, Acts 13. 3. And their names are no less then
twelve times coupled together in three Chapters, viz. from the 12 to the latter
end of the 15 Chapter of the Acts, where the relation of the division that was
between them is set down. I read that he first preached the Word of God in
Rome, but was afterward made Bishop of Millaine; and at the last had a rope
tied about his neck, and was therewith drawn to the stake where he was burned
to ashes, and so dyed a noble Martyr, as many other stars in this firmament
did, as the Phoenix by death, gained life eternal. Therefore I conclude with
the Collect for this day, saying, Lord Almighty, who have endued thy holy
Apostle Barnabas with singular gifts of the Holy Ghost, let me never be
destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of grace to use them always to thy
honor and glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Amen.
S. Michael the Arch-Angell.
IN this place (according to my intention at the beginning) I should show the
glorious Cherubins that look toward the Mercy Seat in Salomons Temple, under
the Metaphor of the Chrystalline Heaven: but as in all the rest, so in this
likewise, I find my self far unable to perform such a hard task: though my
mind is willing, yet my skill is weak. But the reason why I compare this day
to the Chrystallin heaven is conspicuous, because as Crystal is of a pure
bright and clear substance, so the glorious Angels, of whom S. Michael the
Arch-Angell is one of the most eminent, for whose memorial the Church has
appointed this Festival, are pure, sublime and heavenly creatures, created (as
some affirm) with the light, which is nearest their nature, being one of the
three invisibles, which never any mortal eye is able to behold in their simple
existence, to wit, God, Angels, and the souls of men, for they are void of all
corporeal substance. But what substance they are of we are ignorant. And as we
do not know their nature, so we cannot tell their number: yet some have
observed, that there are nine orders of them in three Hierarchies opposed
against nine orders of evil Angels.

In the first order are Seraphin, Cherubin, and throns, opposed by Pseudothei
spiritusmendacii, and Vasa iniquitatis.

In the second Hierarchy are Dominations, Potestates and Virtates, opposed
against ultores soelerum, Prestigiatores, and Aereae Potestates.

In the third Hierarchy are Principatus, Archangeli and Angeli, opposed against
Furiae Criminatores and Tentatores.

From Angels we receive power to receive and declare the will of God; from
Archangels, to rule all creatures put under us; from Principalities, to subdue
all we ought to rule; from Virtues, to obtain the reward we strive for; from
powers, help against our enemies; from dominations, to subdue our own bodies,
from Thrones, to collect, and settle our memories on eternal objects; from
Cherubin, light to apprehend heavenly things; And lastly, from Seraphin, ardent
Affection, whereby we cleave to God: but to leave these curious speculations of
the schools; These heavenly creatures (whether they be of these names, orders,
and operations, or not, as is hard to prove) were most certainly, in the
beginning made to this end, viz. for the glory of God and good of man. And
although they ever glorify God by flying about his Throne, and crying day and
night, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; yet since his delight is in
mercy, which is above all his works, they glorify him most, when they reveal
his care of us, In being his ministers for our preservation from the face of
ourenemies. Therefore howsoever we are unsure of their substance, form,
number, or influences, David has assured us, that they are ministering spirits
for our good, where he says, God has given his Angels charge over us to keep
us in all our ways. And S. Paul confirms it in the first to the Hebrews. But
how these heavenly soldiers take charge of all Gods chosen in general, and of
every Saint in particular, I refer them to the learned, such as is M. Austins
Essay of telar Angels upon this day, from whom I borrow what I have here writ,
and conclude as he des^an^s, saying: As God in Seraphin loves, in Cherubin
discerns, in Thrones judges, in dominations shows Majesty, in
Principalities governs, in Powers is omnipotent, in virtues does miracles, in
Archangels reveals, and in Angels assisteth; so let us strive by assisting
our brethren, and protecting the feeble and indigent, to become like Angels.
Let us by learning divine and high mysteries, and revealing them to our
brethren (for their edification) become like Archangels. And since Miracles,
Omnipotence, Government, Majesty, Judgment, and discerning, are chiefly Gods:
Let us above all, seek to get ardent love and affection, the virtue that shall
last remain, and the property of the highest order, whence all the rest are
inspired; that in fiery zeal, and love to the glory of God, we may not only
burn our selves, but both (by our writings and discourses, and all our
actions) inflame our brethren, and therein (being nearest joined unto God)
become like the bright fiery Seraphins, flaming continually in pure and ardent
affection about his Throne, and next unto him above all other inferior orders.
And so we shall be sure to have all the rest attend upon us. But this virtue of
love, only the God of love can grant, neither can he give it, unless he give
himself; for he is love. Which we beseech him grant us, for the love of him,
that for love of us gives us all these protections and mercies together with
himself,

Amen.
Trinity Sunday.
NOw I come to the conclusion of the whole matter, for on this day I should show
you a glimps of the Propitiatory or Oracle, from whence God has revealed
himself in the Trinity of the Persons, and unity of Essence. The Majesty of
God the Father, the Wisdom of God the Son, and the Love of God the Holy
Ghost.

But I am as insufficient for such a work, as I am to lade all the water out of
the Sea with a spoone, for this is the mystery of all mysteries a hidden
secret, and better apprehended by faith, than demonstrated by reason. Then why
should I strive by base comparisons of one Sun, yet three effects of Light,
Heat, and Motion; of one man consisting of a body, soul and spirit, or of one
soul in three principal faculties, Understanding, Will, and Memory: to show
that which is evident by Scripture, that there are three Persons in the God
head, and yet but one Essence. That there is an infinite power in the Father,
an infinite Action in the Holy Ghost, and an infinite Subject in the glorious
Son, and yet all three make but one infinite Being. This Tri-unity is so
plainly and excellently laid down in the Ath^nasian Creed, that I shall not
need (though I could) further to dilate. Therefore I will conclude all with
hearty thankesgiving to this ever blessed and glorious Triunity, for all
favors from time to time bestowed upon me, for temporal blessings, as health,
wealth, and liberty, for preservation from many eminent dangers, that I might
have fallen into, if not defended by his mighty power, for spiritual favors of
Election, Redemption, Sanctification, and hope of Glory, for the inablement of
his holy Spirit in me, in the accomplishment of this work, and I pray God
grant it may be to his glory, my souls comfort, and good of others. Amen.

O thou glorious Lord God, who art the true Primum mobile, which movest all
things by thy power, but art in thy self immovable, move my heart toward
thee; stir up my drowsy soul in good desires; touch my lips, that my tongue
may speak of thy praise: direct my hand, that I may write to thy Glory; make my
feet swift to run in the ways of thy Commandments; open my eyes, that I may
see the wondrous things of thy Law.

O thou that art the Alpha and Omega, let thy praise and glory be still the
beginning and end of all my actions: And grant that as I do acknowledge the
mystery of the Trinity of three glorious persons, so I may ever be willing and
ready to worship the Unity of thy Infinite Essence, though Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

