A COMPENDIOUS AND PATHETICALL RETRACTATION FOR Book-Making. Very useful for
these Distracted Times: By Edward Brown, sometime servant to Sir James Cambell
Knight, and Alderman of London.

Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy might:
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. London, Printed in the Year, MDCXLIII.

A Compendious and Patheticall Retractation for Booke-making.
Solomon says, There is no new thing under the Sun, for the thing which has
been, is that which shall be, and the thing which is done, is that which shall
be done, Eccles. 1.9. Yet the Apostle Saint Paul says, That all things are
become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. Which contradiction, between the wisest of men, and
divinest Apostle, next S. John, according to my understanding, may be thus
reconciled: To earthly minded men there is no new thing in this terrestrial
Globe, except God work a miracle, and create a new heaven and a new earth,
which the heavenly minded man looks after, 2 Pet. 3.15. Whence it is, that God
says by the Prophet, Ezechiel 3.15. That he will make them a new heart, and a
new spirit, yea, a new creature: according to the meaning of that in the 2 Cor.
5.17. Therefore our Savior says, That such a man will bring out of his
treasure things new and old. In consideration whereof, I having little
learning, but what I have gathered from modern and ancient Writers, have been
bold to turn many of their divine Doctrines, and histo^ica^l Narrations, into a
new mould, and made thereof An Annual world. And not content therewith, I made
a new heaven, and placed therein the Sun, Moon, and a Star, of such refulgent
luster, that it darkened the eyes of many earthly minded men. Whereupon, there
arose such a cloudy mist out of my seeming gross ignorance, that those
heavenly illuminations were wrapped up in a cloud of self-conceit. The meaning
whereof, is more plainly thus: I having in my private devotions conversed with
many rare men's works, framed a Book of brief Meditations upon all the Holy
days in the year, according to our Church Liturgy, which I intuled, An
Annual world, or the world in the year; and therein showed, how those days
may fitly have a correspondence with the seven Planets, fixed Stars and
Elements, fit for private devotion. Which work I compared to the Sun, for as
Sol illuminat Mundum, so those Festivities enlighten and stir up the devotion
of all true zealous godly men. Whereto, I annexed brief Poetical Meditations
upon the Day in general, and all the Days in the Week; which Book, I
compared to the Moon, for I do humbly acknowledge, some expressions therein
are borrowed from the radient Sun of divine Du Bartas his Weekly Days. But
before these I had fixed a Star (entitled, Liber Amoris) in a seeming bright
firmament of favor, which was transformed into a Meteor of discontent;
whereupon, arose flashes of lightening, with terrible thunder, from the
countenance, gesture, and tongues of some maliciously instigated, and others
malignantly affected to my honest endeavors. Wherefore, seeing the best of
men, such as the Prophet David, a man after Gods own heart, does acknowledge,
That sometime he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. And Austine, Origin, and
other learned men, have made large Volumes of Retractations, which formerly
they had spoke or writ; I that have little learning, and no way qualified with
such spiritual gifts as those men were, may not think it any disparagement to
make recantation of what I have done publicly amiss. And therefore, first, I
confess it was not wisely done in me, to seek the favor and good will of a
young Damsel to be my wife, by making good Books. But for that folly, I have
lost two or three hundred pounds, besides other worldly goods, which otherwise
I might have had by the favor of great personages. Yet as I was foolish in
that, so I know I did not amiss to show my honest intentions, and industrious
endeavors in the good or well spending of spare time. Secondly, the matter of
my Books consist in Divinity, Morality, and Fancy. For my Divinity, though it
is not so exquisitely performed, as by a learned quill it might have been, yet
it shows the devotion of my soul; which was disesteemed by some maliciously
affected to my honest endeavors, and such malignant parties at this time do
abundantly multiply, and oppose themselves against all good order in Church and
Commonwealth. Secondly, for the Morality in my Meteor, I do acknowledge, it
seems to be too satyrically ridged in the applicatory part thereof privately
exhibited, but if you would be pleased to consider the occasion as well as the
thing, you shall not find it altogether so fault-worthy. In publishing the
Abstract of all Sir James his Legacies, I do acknowledge that I have given my
Lady and the Executours just cause to be offended, especially my Lady, who
forewarned me to do the same. And because, that it may come to the hands of
some who know them not, and therefore may imagine, that there was some great
strife between my late judicious Master and his virtuous Lady, because he
therein has bequeathed her little more then what was agreed upon at the time
of their Matrimonial Contract: which some say is a great disgrace to them
both. But I would entreat them to be pleased to consider, That though therein
my Master seemed to be over just, yet with the plentiful overplus of his
estate, he has showed himself to be so truly charitable, that what is
defective in the one, may be supplied in the other. And therefore, in the
opinion of all godly, judicious, learned men, such a famous Testament ought not
to be smothered in oblivion, to stir up all rich men's hearts to make this
their president for them to follow, according to my Pattern of Justice, and
Mercy, and Apology: for his charitable Legacies, though I doubt not of the
performance thereof by the worshipful Executours, yet I fear they may be
overswayed by others, that seek to expulse me out of the service where I have
been employed in the most troublesome business above the space of a year, and
in a close manner disgrace me for revealing the secrets of the Executours,
whose actions ought to be so even and equal without partiallity, that they may
endure the trial of the most nicest and sharpest Satyricall quill. And
therefore, I think my late honored Master knew well what he did, when he left
no Overseer but God, and consciences of the Executours, in the disposal of
those Legacies; for he knew my spirit was such, that, if I was so bold with
him, on whom my livelihood and welfare in this world did depend, and whose
goodness toward me then, I had as little cause to suspect, as I have of my
Ladies now, having tasted thereof in such a measure, as my printed labors and
manuscripts declare, I would not fear his Executors, though never so potent.
Then why should I fear the greatest Lord in the Land or most Potent hypocrite
in this City which shall find fault with any of my fantastical or rather
satyricall labors; for I have in that manner named none but such as will apply
it to themselves.

But if some will be maliciously quarrelsome, and take it to themselves: Let
them understand that I fear none of them; for I shall then prove them to be
much more hypocritical, then my late judicious honored Master was like Laban
or Nabal, and so far from Scandalum magnatum, that it shall appear verbum
veritatis, for if they seek utterly to abolish the Book of Common Prayer and
then to erect an Aristocraticall or Democraticall Jurisdiction in this Kingdom
which has been so long governed under many Royal Monarchs, or at least shall
find fault with my industrious labor in my making of Books which was only
to clear my self of what I had writ in my Meteor, I protest and affirm that
they are a company of hypocrites that do such acts: and therefore I thought good
to mark them which so cause divisions in Church and State, according as is
related in his Majesty's Declarations and other men's writings, for many of them
are such as the Apostle speaks of: 2. Timothy 3.6. Who creep into houses and
lead captive silly women laden with sins led away with diverse lusts ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And truly I
fear it is this kind of people that endeavor now as they did when my Master
was living, to seek my utter ruin, merely for doing good as well to themselves
as others, if they were not maliciously minded: for these my works of Christian
fortitude, Pitety and devotion in my Annual World and Sacred Poems. In my
Pattern of Justice and Mercy, with my Star and Meteor, and in my Disaster;
Paradox and Vindication for Book making, is approved and commended by two that
are Knight Baronets, nine Knights and Aldermen of London, fifteen that are
Aldermen, and others judicious and able Citizens of London, and eight or nine
that are learned Divines Scholars and writers of Books in print, as by two
Certificates under their hands may appear, which in justice and charity they
would not deny: Yet I do believe if they had known I would have put them in
print they would have refused their subscription, because these dangerous times
they would not be seen to animate or encourage my angry and satyricall quill:
And for my Reverend Patron he was so far from advising me, that he did utterly
dislike and diswade me from it as by his letter may appear; for since I have
made my Disaster, I have not seen him, which grieves me to the very heart, that
such men as he should be kept in obscurity, and not suffered to preach and
write the word of God as in former times. For my Lady and other my friends have
been so far for encouraging me, that they have threatened me to put me out of
their service, and tell me in the words of Samuel, that obedience is better
then sacrifice; and to hearken then the fat of Rams: for who has required
these things at my hands: And who ever rejected the council of the wise and
did prosper, with other such like exhortations which I did very well consider:
But yet being continually upbraided for my works which my conscience telling me
is well done, and therein is no wrong to any but such galled backs as found
themselves pricked to the quick, I was not careful to answer them in verbal
expressions, but in print for which I was wronged: And sure I think I am
divinely called thereunto, and therefore it is better to obey God then man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, and in time of danger or necessity like a
broken reed, will rather grieve then help the spirit of the afflicted, as
experience of this time makes too manifestly appear: for if God has put a
seasonable word into my heart that aims at his glory and good of other: shall
I not write it? if God has stirred up my spirit as he did the Prophet Daniels
in the 45. and 46. verses of Susannas Story, shall I fear to say that I am
clear of, or from all the innocent blood that has been shed in this unnatural
Civil War? No I will not: for with Balaam the word that the Lord has put into
my heart that will I write though I might gain a house full of Gold, nay all
Sir James his Legacies, I will not leave till I have vanquished all my
malicious adversaries: And therefore to those that wish me to desist I speak in
the words of our Savior, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest of the
things of men and not of God. And to my friends I speak in the words of Saint
Paul, what mean you to weep and to break my heart; for I am ready not to be
bound only but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And
therefore entreat them only to pray that God would send me a quiet mind, for
if they be righteous I am sure their prayer will prevail with God. And in time
I shall have good success. And I could wish all England especially London
would take my satyricall labors as a warning piece discharged from a good
conscience but not from the Cannon oath, etc. nor ordinances Illegal, etc. For
though they may seem to be fancies, dreams or Chymera's of my own brain, yet
they may prove as fatal to some as Pharaohs Bakers did, and to others
succesfull as his Butlers. For I would that all people in the land did
seriously consider, not only mine, but the resolved conscience of all true
godly learned men such as Saint Paul, Romans 13.1. That it is utterly unlawful,
nay damnable to resist, much more oppose the higher powers, who are as Saint
Peter describes them, First the King and those that are sent by him, and not
those that set up themselves against him; Then there would not be such warlike
preparations and bloody massacres against Parliamentary proceedings, free
speaking, as now there is on both sides; for now an honest man, may not speak,
much less write his mind freely according to the word of God, and the
Protestation which I have taken, unanswerable by argument, as I praise God my
works are, but he shall be counted a Malignant, and threatened to be plundered,
pillaged or imprisoned, as by woeful experience it is too manifest. But I with
Saint Paul having fought with beasts after the manner of men and overcome all
my malicious adversaries: As barking of Dogs, grumbling of Cats, hissing of
Serpents, and with David freed my self from the paw of the angry Lion, and
ravenous Bear, do not fear nor care for the crafty slights of the Fox, the
malicious subtilty of the Wolf or tyrannical jurisdiction of any cruel Tiger;
but hope in time to overcome even great Goliath himself. And if I come into
trouble for this my fancy, I am confident that the Lord in good time, will
deliver me, according to that of the Psalmist, Though many are the troubles of
the righteous, the Lord will deliver him out of them all; he keeps all his
bones so that not one of them is broken, evil shall slay the wicked, and they
that hate the Righteous shall be desolate: But the Lord redeemeth the soul of
his servant, and none that trust in him shall perish, Psalm. 43.19.20. And
therefore conclude with this heavenly Soliloquium of the prophet David, whose
actions of conquest I desire to imitate, 1. Sam. 17.37. Why are thou cast down,
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me, hope thou in God, for I will
yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God, Psalm. 42. ult.
The Lord grant us right understanding in all things.

FINIS.

