Arthur Brown A Seminary Priest, His Confession after he was Condemned to be
hanged, at the Assizes holden at Dorchester the sixteenth day of August.

After which sentence of death pronounced he fell upon his knees, asking God
forgiveness, railing upon the Jesuit, for said he, they, and none but they are
the Plotters of mischiefs, and seducers of His Majesty's Subjects, and have
brought Him to this confusion.

Humbly praying this Honorable Bench to pardon him, and he would unfold a
great part of their villainy which in secret he has bin sworn unto.

August 25. Printed at London for George Tomlinson. 1642.

Arthur Brown a Seminary Priest his Confession, after he was condemned to be
Hanged at the Assizes holden at Dorchester the 12. day of August, after which
Sentence of death pronounced, etc.
MY Lord, and this honorable Bench, I am here condemned to dye for a seducer
of his Majesty's Subjects. True it is, my actions deserve no less, for I have
bin carried, and have misled others contrary to my conscience for lucre of
respect and service far beyond my deserts.

Now my Lord, and the rest of this Honorable Bench, I have bin in those
Western parts ever since the Rebellion in Ireland first sprung up, and
privately hid in Catholic houses, being sent by command from the whole company
of Jesuits in the University of St. Thomas in Flaunders, for my own part I
never affected the Romish Religion, but having bin sworn to secrecy, and so
many watches over my carriage, I could not invent without great danger or
hazard of my life to leave those Popish projects, which God has since brought
to light.

May it please this Honorable Bench, there is not such diligent search in this
Kingdom as ought to be, nay there is not one County in this Kingdom according
to the number of Papists in that County, but they have of all Orders to serve
them according to their abilities; lesuits, Friars and Seminaries, two
sometimes in one Papists house by turn to read Mass.

There is too too many in all Shires more like Knights in habit, and swaggerers
in their carriage to avoid suspicion, than bald-pated Priests and Jesuits, and
these are the only Cavaliers of the times, and the causers of these present
distempers, and divisions in the Kingdom; and if you shall find the thoughts
of these Popish Projectors, full of horrid conspiracies and treacheries, their
mouths of falsehoods and lies, their hands defiled with blood, and all their
pates tracked with Rebellion: wonder not at it, for it is no new thing, and he
must needs be a stranger in the world that cannot produce multitudes of the
like presidents before, nay they are so barbarous as all Heathen Turkish story
is to seek for.

Here is a great motive that stir them to be paineful in their callings, for
could they bring the Kingdom under subjection of the Pope, as in Queen Mary's
days, they would be in the way of being a Cardinal, if not a Pope, and if a
man should ask them the reason of their conspiracy, they will tell you they
hope to see the King and Q. have the same privileges and prerogatives as their
predecessors before them, a false suggestion of the devil, it is rather to
root out the Protestant Religion and bring in popery, and great reason they
have to seek it, they have for these many years laid dormant, and as I may
compare them to a hive of Bees, which if a man trouble they will fly about to
sting him, it is so with them, the Parliament does daily search out their
habitations, and fellows them so close too and fro, that they have not a place
to rest in, but wander up and down like pilgrims every where, and now is their
time of prey in seeking to set his Majesty and Kingdom at variance.

There is another motive which moves them to sow sedition amongst us, for in
Queen Mary's days the government of the Kingdom was wholly in their hands,
disarmed the Protestants, and made them incapable of any Office or place of
trust or profit to the great and extraordinary decay of the Protestants in
their estates, education and learning, and in the said Queens Reign, the
Protestants were not allowed to have any arms or ammunition as papists, but
stood like dead men not able to def^nd themselves in such desperate dangers.
But God whose usual time is then to help, when all other help and hope
fails, releeved us with the safe coming of a virtuous Princess Queen
Elizabeth whose courage and valor the world adores, whose virtue and piety her
Subjects honored and at her last days governed her people in a most happy and
peaceable union one to another.

The impudency of the Papists and their religion is to be wondered at, yea their
bold assertions and presumptuous hopes in matters of religion is unsufferable
which I will not now run so far out of the way as to relate it but in brief
thus.

First they wear the picture of our Savior about their necks, and the measure
of the wound of the side of our Lord Jesus (and say they) it has such a virtue
that no fire water, knife or sword can destroy them, nay the devil cannot hurt
them.

Secondly, if they carry this picture or measure of the wound about them, it
has an especial power against the devil, for they are forced to fly out of
the bodies of men, and whosoever carries this grain about him, needs not to
fear any evil and it has a most powerful ver^ue against wild fire (fit to be
used in these times) against the tempest of the Sea, and against all manner of
infirmities incident to the soul and body of man, and especially against the
fever, pestilence, the temptation of the devil, and of heresies, and they
have the virtue of the Agnus Dei.

Thirdly, Pope Adrian the 3d did give such virtue unto this grain, that when
you shall say your Paternoster, you shall redeem a soul out of purgatory, and
when you confess and repent your fins on the Sunday, you obtain forgiveness
of all your unperformed oaths, and if upon Wednesday, Friday and Satterday,
that then you get remission of all your sins, or the sins of any other you pray
for. This grain ye see is good for all diseases, preserves us from all manner
of evil, especially from the temptation of the Devil, but yet not their feet
from being so swift to shed innocent blood, their hands from theft, their
tongues from lying and such like, which are near enough a kin to the Devil.

Thus you may see this grain is the next door to Hell, absolves you from
perjury, and if you have any part or parcel of those grains about you, you
cannot miscary diverse other wicked practices, as whoring, committing of rapes,
and such other laciviousnes, which I omit to relate, being unfit for any chaste
ear to be defiled with, and yet all their designs forsooth pretends under the
cloak of holiness and religion, which God grant in his goodness to prosper
all his Majesty's and Parliaments designs, for the reducing of this and other
his Majesty's Kingdoms to due obedience refining and enlarging of our Church
and the returning to a more settled peace to this Kingdom of England, for which
to him only be raised a monument of everlasting praise, and thanksgiving from
us and ours, from one generation to another.

The Judge after his Confession asked what Papists house he most frequented in
this County or other, who answered and nominated about 15. or 16.

Mr. Gouge. Mr. Winter Mr. Ford. Mr. Wray, etc. Sir. Saintleger.

The Judge gave order for his repreeve till the next Goal delivery.
FINIS.

